Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


O N L INEAR R EPRESENTATIONS AND P RETRAINING
DATA F REQUENCY IN L ANGUAGE M ODELS
    Jack Merullo♢    Noah A. Smith♡♣        Sarah Wiegreffe∗♡♣        Yanai Elazar∗♡♣
 ♢
  Brown University, ♡ Allen Institute for AI (Ai2), ♣ University of Washington
 ∗
  Co-senior authors.
 jack merullo@brown.edu, {noah, sarahw, yanaie}@allenai.org



                                            A BSTRACT

         Pretraining data has a direct impact on the behaviors and quality of language mod-
         els (LMs), but we only understand the most basic principles of this relationship.
         While most work focuses on pretraining data’s effect on downstream task be-
         havior, we investigate its relationship to LM representations. Previous work has
         discovered that, in language models, some concepts are encoded ‘linearly’ in the
         representations, but what factors cause these representations to form (or not)? We
         study the connection between pretraining data frequency and models’ linear rep-
         resentations of factual relations (e.g., mapping France to Paris in a capital predic-
         tion task). We find evidence that the formation of linear representations is strongly
         connected to pretraining term frequencies; specifically for subject-relation-object
         fact triplets, both subject-object co-occurrence frequency and in-context learning
         accuracy for the relation are highly correlated with linear representations. This
         is the case across all phases of pretraining, i.e., it is not affected by the model’s
         underlying capability. In OLMo-7B and GPT-J (6B), we discover that a linear
         representation consistently (but not exclusively) forms when the subjects and ob-
         jects within a relation co-occur at least 1k and 2k times, respectively, regardless
         of when these occurrences happen during pretraining (and around 4k times for
         OLMo-1B). Finally, we train a regression model on measurements of linear rep-
         resentation quality in fully-trained LMs that can predict how often a term was
         seen in pretraining. Our model achieves low error even on inputs from a different
         model with a different pretraining dataset, providing a new method for estimat-
         ing properties of the otherwise-unknown training data of closed-data models. We
         conclude that the strength of linear representations in LMs contains signal about
         the models’ pretraining corpora that may provide new avenues for controlling and
         improving model behavior: particularly, manipulating the models’ training data to
         meet specific frequency thresholds. We release our code to support future work.1


1     I NTRODUCTION

Understanding how the content of pretraining data affects language model (LM) behaviors and per-
formance is an active area of research (Ma et al., 2024; Xie et al., 2023; Aryabumi et al., 2025;
Longpre et al., 2024; Wang et al., 2025; Seshadri et al., 2024; Razeghi et al., 2023; Wang et al.,
2024). For instance, it has been shown that for specific tasks, models perform better on instances
containing higher frequency terms than lower frequency ones (Razeghi et al., 2022; Mallen et al.,
2023; McCoy et al., 2024). However, the ways in which frequency affects the internal representa-
tions of LMs to cause this difference in performance remain unclear. We connect dataset statistics to
recent work in interpretability, which focuses on the emergence of simple linear representations of
factual relations in LMs Hernandez et al. (2024); Chanin et al. (2024). Our findings demonstrate a
strong correlation between these linear representations and the frequency of terms in the pretraining
corpus.
  1
    Code is available at https://github.com/allenai/freq, and for efficient batch search at
https://github.com/allenai/batchsearch.


                                                  1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Linear representations in LMs have become central to interpretability research in recent years (Rav-
fogel et al., 2020; Elazar et al., 2021; Elhage et al., 2021; Slobodkin et al., 2023; Olah et al., 2020;
Park et al., 2024; Jiang et al., 2024; Black et al., 2022; Chanin et al., 2024). Linear representa-
tions are essentially linear approximations (linear transforms, directions in space) that are simple
to understand, and strongly approximate the complex non-linear transformations that networks are
implementing. These representations are crucial because they allow us to localize much of the be-
havior and capabilities of LMs to specific directions in activation space. This allows for simple
interventions to control model behaviors, i.e., steering (Todd et al., 2024; Subramani et al., 2022;
Hendel et al., 2023; Rimsky et al., 2024).
Recent work by Hernandez et al. (2024) and Chanin et al. (2024) highlight how the linearity of dif-
ferent types of relations varies greatly depending on the specific relationships being depicted. For
example, over 80% of entities in the “country-largest-city” relation, but less than 30% of entities
in the “star-in-constellation” relation can be approximated this way (Hernandez et al., 2024). Such
findings complicate the understanding of the Linear Representation Hypothesis, which proposes
that LMs will represent features linearly (Park et al., 2024) without providing when/why these form.
While Jiang et al. (2024) provide both theoretical and empirical evidence that the training objec-
tives of LMs implicitly encourage linear representations, it remains unclear why some features are
represented this way while others are not. This open question is a central focus of our investigation.
Whether linear representations for “common” concepts are more prevalent in models or simply
easier to identify (using current methods) than those for less common concepts remains unclear. We
hypothesize that factual relations exhibiting linear representations are correlated with higher mention
frequencies in the pretraining data (as has been shown with static embeddings, see Ethayarajh et al.,
2019), which we confirm in Section 4. Our results also indicate that this can occur at any point in
pretraining, as long as a certain average frequency is reached across subject-object pairs in a relation.
In order to count the appearance of terms in data corpora throughout training, we develop an efficient
tool for counting tokens in tokenized batches of text, which we release to support future work in
this area. We also explore whether the presence of linear representations can provide insights into
relation term frequency. In Section 5, we fit a regression model to predict the frequency of individual
terms (such as “The Beatles”) in the pretraining data, based on metrics measuring the presence of a
linear representation for some relation. For example, how well a linear transformation approximates
the internal computation of the “lead-singer-of ” relation mapping “John Lennon” to “The Beatles”
can tell us about the frequency of those terms in the pretraining corpus.
Our findings indicate that the predictive signal, although approximate, is much stronger than that
encoded in log probabilities and task accuracies alone, allowing us to estimate the frequencies of
held-out relations and terms within approximate ranges. Importantly, this regression model gen-
eralizes beyond the specific LM it was trained on without additional supervision. This provides a
valuable foundation for analyzing the pretraining corpora of closed-data models with open weights.
To summarize, in this paper we show that:

      1. The development of linear representations for factual recall relations in LMs is related to
         frequency as well as model size.


      2. Linear representations form at predictable frequency thresholds during training, regardless
         of when this frequency threshold is met for the nouns in the relation. The formation of
         these representations also correlates strongly with recall accuracy.


      3. Measuring the extent to which a relation is represented linearly in a model allows us to
         predict the approximate frequencies of individual terms in the pretraining corpus of that
         model, even when we do not have access to the model’s training data.


      4. We release a tool for accurately and efficiently searching through tokenized text to support
         future research on training data.



                                                   2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                   Pretraining Corpus                                               Measuring linear structure in LMs

                                                                                 Miles Davis              trumpet

                                                                                    Bill Evans            piano

                                                  Cat Stevens                                             guitar
             token_cooccurrence(
                corpus,             Frequency v. Eﬃcacy of LRE. r=0.82
                “Miles Davis”,   Frequency v. Eﬃcacy of LRE. r=.82
                “trumpet”


                                              (LRE quality)
                                                               1

                                    (2128, 0.8)               0.9

             ) = 2128


                                            Causality
                                                              0.8

                                                              0.7


                                    Causality
                                                              0.6

                                                              0.5

                                                              0.4
                                                                    4     6     8      10   12     14

                                                                    LogLog
                                                                        Subj-Obj Co-Occurence
                                                                           Subj-Obj Cooccurrence



Figure 1: Overview of this work. Given a dataset of subject-relation-object factual relation triplets,
we count subject-object co-occurrences throughout pretraining batches. We then measure how well
the corresponding relations are represented within an LM across pretraining steps, using the Linear
Relational Embeddings (LRE) method from Hernandez et al. (2024). We establish a strong relation-
ship between average co-occurrence frequency and a model’s tendency to form linear representations
for relations. From this, we show that we can predict frequencies in the pretraining corpus


2     BACKGROUND

2.1   L INEAR R EPRESENTATIONS

Vector space models have a long history in language processing, where geometric properties of these
spaces were used to encode semantic information (Salton et al., 1975; Paccanaro & Hinton, 2001).
When and why linear structure emerges without explicit bias has been of considerable interest since
the era of static word embeddings. Work on skipgram models (Mikolov et al., 2013a) found that
vector space models of language learn regularities which allow performing vector arithmetic be-
tween word embeddings to calculate semantic relationships (e.g., France − Paris + Spain = Madrid)
(Mikolov et al., 2013b; Pennington et al., 2014). This property was subject to much debate, as it
was not clear why word analogies would appear for some relations and not others (Köper et al.,
2015; Karpinska et al., 2018; Gladkova et al., 2016). Followup work showed that linguistic regular-
ities form in static embeddings for relations under specific dataset frequency constraints for relevant
terms (Ethayarajh et al., 2019), but does not clearly relate to how modern LMs learn. More recently,
there has been renewed interest in the presence of similar linear structure in models with contextual
embeddings like transformer language models (Park et al., 2024; Jiang et al., 2024; Merullo et al.,
2024). As a result, there are many ways to find and test for linear representations in modern LMs,
though the relationship to pretraining data was not addressed (Huben et al., 2024; Gao et al., 2025;
Templeton et al., 2024; Rimsky et al., 2024; Todd et al., 2024; Hendel et al., 2023; Hernandez et al.,
2024; Chanin et al., 2024). Many of these share similarities in how they compute and test for linear
representations. We focus on a particular class of linear representations called Linear Relational
Embeddings (LREs) (Paccanaro & Hinton, 2001).

Linear Relational Embeddings (LREs) Hernandez et al. (2024) use a particular class of lin-
ear representation called a Linear Relational Embedding (Paccanaro & Hinton, 2001) to ap-
proximate the computation performed by a model to predict the objects that complete common
subject-relation-object triplets as an affine transformation. This transform is calculated
from a hidden state s, the subject token representation at some middle layer of the model, to o, the
hidden state at the last token position and layer of the model (i.e., the final hidden state that decodes
a token in an autoregressive transformer) within a natural language description of the relation. For
example, given the input sequence “Miles Davis (subject) plays the (relation)”, the goal is to
approximate the computation of the object “trumpet”, assuming the model predicts the object cor-


                                                                               3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


rectly. It was found that this transformation holds for nearly every subject and object in the relation
set (such as “Cat Stevens plays the guitar”) for some relations. This is surprising because, despite
the nonlinearities within the many layers and token positions separating s and o, a simple structure
within the representation space well approximates the model’s prediction process for a number of
factual relations. In this work we study LREs under the same definition and experimental setup,
because it allows us to predefine the concepts we want to search for (e.g., factual relations), as well
as use a handful of representations to relate thousands of terms in the dataset by learning linear
representations on a per-relation level.
Hernandez et al. calculate LREs to approximate an LM’s computation as a first-order Taylor Series
approximation. Let F (s, c) = o be the forward pass through a model that produces object represen-
tation o given subject representation s and a few-shot context c, this computation is approximated
as F (s, c) ≈ W s + b = F (si , c) + W (s − si ) where we approximate the relation about a specific
subject si . Hernandez et al. propose to compute W and b using the average of n examples from the
relation (n = 8 here) with ∂F∂s representing the Jacobian Matrix of F :
                            "               #                "                        #
                               ∂F                                        ∂F
                W = Esi ,ci                   and b = Esi ,ci F (s, c) −    s                  (1)
                               ∂s (si ,ci )                              ∂s (si ,ci )

In practice, LREs are estimated using hidden states from LMs during the processing of the test
example in a few-shot setup. For a relation like “instrument-played-by–musician”, the model may
see four examples (in the form “[X] plays the [Y]”) and on the fifth example, when predicting e.g.,
“trumpet” from “Miles Davis plays the”, the subject representation s and object representation o are
extracted.

2.2   I NFERRING T RAINING DATA FROM M ODELS

There has been significant interest recently in understanding the extent to which it is possible to infer
the training data of a fully trained neural network, including LMs, predominantly by performing
membership inference attacks (Shokri et al., 2017; Carlini et al., 2022), judging memorization of
text (Carlini et al., 2023; Oren et al., 2024; Shi et al., 2024), or inferring the distribution of data
sources (Hayase et al., 2024; Ateniese et al., 2015; Suri & Evans, 2022). Our work is related in that
we find hints of the pretraining data distribution in the model itself, but focus on how linear structure
in the representations relates to training data statistics.


3     M ETHODS

Our analysis is twofold: counts of terms in the pretraining corpus of LMs, and measurements of
how well factual relations are approximated by affine transformations. We use the OLMo model
v1.7 (0424 7B and 0724 1B) (Groeneveld et al., 2024) and GPT-J (6B) (Wang & Komatsuzaki,
2021) and their corresponding datasets: Dolma (Soldaini et al., 2024) and the Pile (Gao et al.,
2020), respectively. To understand how these features form over training time, we test eight model
checkpoints throughout training in the OLMo family of models (Groeneveld et al., 2024).

3.1   L INEAR R ELATIONAL E MBEDDINGS (LRE S ) IN LM S

We use a subset of the R ELATIONS dataset Hernandez et al. (2024), focusing on the 25 factual
relations of the dataset, such as capital-city and person-mother (complete list in Appendix B).2
Across these relations, there are 10,488 unique subjects and objects. Following Hernandez et al.
(2024), we fit an LRE for each relation on 8 examples from that relation, each with a 5-shot prompt.
We use the approach from this work as described in Section 2.1.
    2
      For the analysis, we drop “landmark-on-continent” because 74% of the answers are Antarctica, making it
potentially confounding for extracting a representation for the underlying relation. Factual relations are much
easier to get accurate counts for, so we leave non-factual relations for future work (e.g., although LMs associate
the “pilot” occupation with men, this relation does not map to the word “man” the way “France” maps to
“Paris”; see §3.2).


                                                        4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Fitting LREs Hernandez et al. (2024) find that Equation 1 underestimates the optimal slope of
the linear transformation, so they scale each relation’s W by a scalar hyperparameter β. Unlike the
original work, which finds one β per model, we use one β per relation, as this avoids disadvantaging
specific relations. Another difference in our calculation of LREs is that we do not impose the
constraint that the model has to predict the answer correctly to be used as one of the 8 examples used
to approximate the Jacobian Matrix. Interestingly, using examples that models predict incorrectly to
fit Equation 1 works as well as using only correct examples. We opt to use this variant as it allows us
to compare different checkpoints and models (§4) with linear transformations trained on the same 8
examples, despite the fact that the models make different predictions on these instances. We explore
the effect of example choice in Appendix B and find that it does not make a significant difference.
We also explore the choice of layer in Appendix C.


Metrics To evaluate the quality of LREs, Hernandez et al. (2024) introduce two metrics that mea-
sure the quality of the learned transformations. Faithfulness measures whether the transformation
learned by the LRE produces the same object token prediction as the original LM. Causality mea-
sures the proportion of the time a prediction of an object can be changed to the output of a different
example from the relation (e.g., editing the Miles Davis subject representation so that the LM pre-
dicts he plays the guitar, instead of the trumpet). For specifics on implementation, we refer the
reader to Hernandez et al. (2024). We consider an LRE to be high ‘quality’ when it scores highly on
these metrics, as this measures when an LRE works across subject-object pairs within the relation.
In general, we prefer to use causality in our analysis, as faithfulness can be high when LMs predict
the same token very often (like in early checkpoints).


3.2   C OUNTING F REQUENCIES T HROUGHOUT T RAINING

A key question we explore is how term frequencies affect the formation of linear representations.
We hypothesize that more commonly occurring relations will lead to higher quality LREs for those
relations. Following Elsahar et al. (2018); Elazar et al. (2022), we count an occurrence of a relation
when a subject and object co-occur together. While term co-occurrence is used as a proxy for the
frequency of the entire triplet mentioned in text, Elsahar et al. (2018) show that this approximation
is quite accurate. We now discuss how to compute these co-occurrence counts.


What’s in My Big Data? (WIMBD) Elazar et al. (2024) index many popular pretraining datasets,
including Dolma (Soldaini et al., 2024) and the Pile (Gao et al., 2020), and provide search tools that
allow for counting individual terms and co-occurrences within documents. However, this only gives
us counts for the full dataset. Since we are interested in counting term frequencies throughout
pretraining, we count these within training batches of OLMo instead. When per-batch counts are
not available, WIMBD offers a good approximation for final checkpoints, which is what we do in the
case of GPT-J. We compare WIMBD co-occurrence counts to the Batch Search method (described
below) for the final checkpoint of OLMo in Appendix D, and find that the counts are extremely close:
The slope of the best fit line for BatchCount against WIMBDCount is .94, because co-occurrence
counts are overestimated when considering the whole document.


Batch Search Data counting tools cannot typically provide accurate counts for model checkpoints
at arbitrary training steps. Thus, we design a tool to efficiently count exact co-occurrences within
sequences of tokenized batches. This also gives us the advantage of counting in a way that is highly
accurate to how LMs are trained; since LMs are trained on batches of fixed lengths which often split
documents into multiple sequences, miscounts may occur unless using tokenized sequences. Using
this method, we note every time one of our 10k terms appears throughout a dataset used to pretrain
an LM. We count a co-occurrence as any time two terms appear in the same sequence within a
batch (a (batch-size, sequence-length) array). We search 10k terms in the approximately 2T tokens
of Dolma (Soldaini et al., 2024) this way. Using our implementation, we are able to complete this
on 900 CPUs in about a day. To support future work, we release our code as Cython bindings that
integrate out of the box with existing libraries.


                                                  5
                                                                                                                                                  2   4


                                                                                Causal
                                                                                             0.6
                                                                                                                                                      Log S
                                                                                             0.4

                                                                                             0.2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025
                                                                                                   0       2     4    6       8    10   12   14

                                                                                                               Log Subj-Obj Cooccurrence


                                                                                Figure 2: TODO: What to do about awkward spacing (maybe take GP
  OLMo-7B 0424 Development of LREs over Training Time                           features form consistently across relations
                                                                                                   41B Tokens (10k steps)
                1                                                                                  Final Model

                                                                                                                 Co-Occurrence Threshold
Causality
            0.8
                                                                                     Model
            0.6                                                                                                  (Mean Causality >.9)
            0.4
                                         1,998                                       GPT-J (6B)                  1,097
            0.2                                                                      OLMo-7B                     1,998
                    0   2      4   6     8    10     12   14
                                                                                     OLMo-1B                     4,447
                            Log Subj-Obj Cooccurrence
  OLMo-1B 0724 Development of LREs over Training Time                             GPT-J Development of LREs over Training Time

                1                                              160              31 Frequency of Subject-Object Co-Occurrences Aligns
                                                                                   Linear Features
Causality


                                                                   Causality
            0.8                                                                0.8
                                                               161
            0.6
                                                                               0.6
            0.4

            0.2                              4,447             162
                                                                               0.4                1,097
                                                                               TODO: I was going to define causality and faithfulness here.
                    0   2      4   6     8    10     12   14                             2             4         6        8       10    12

                            Log Subj-Obj Cooccurrence                                                  Log Subj-Obj Cooccurrence

                                                               163              4 Linear Features Help Predict Pretraining Corpus Fr
Figure 2: We find that LREs have consistently high causality scores across relations after some
average frequency threshold is reached (table, top right). In OLMo models, red dots show the
model’s LRE performance at 41B tokens, and blue dots show the final checkpoint performance
( 550k steps in 7B). Gray dots show intermediate    164  5 Related
                                                       checkpoints.  We Work
                                                                         highlight Even at very early
training steps, if the average subject-object cooc. count is high enough, the models are very likely to
already have robust LREs formed in the representation
                                                    165
                                                         space. Symbols
                                                         TODO:            represent
                                                                  make more         different
                                                                              concise,         relations.
                                                                                       fill in other sections
Highlighted relations are shown in darker lines.5
4               F REQUENCY OF S UBJECT-O BJECT C O -O CCURRENCES A LIGNS WITH
                                                    5.1 Linear Features
                E MERGENCE OF L INEAR R EPRESENTATIONS
                                               166



In this section, we explore when LREs begin to appear167   Linearity
                                                            at trainingoftime
                                                                           features  in LMs
                                                                               and how    thesehas
                                                                                                 arebeen heavily
                                                                                                     related to studied in recent years b
pretraining term frequencies. Our main findings are that (1) average co-occurrence frequency withinLM generation. Therefore,
                                                     168   shown    in understanding     and intervening    on
a relation strongly correlates with whether an LRE169 will we  could
                                                           form;   (2) have  used in our
                                                                       the frequency       study.
                                                                                        effect     For example, Sparse Autoencoders (SA
                                                                                               is independent
of the pretraining stage; if the average subject-object
                                                     170   in recent years for
                                                           co-occurrence      for aautomating   much ofsome
                                                                                    relation surpasses     the interpretability work [Hube
threshold, it is very likely to have a high-quality LRE,
                                                     171   Thesefornetworks
                                                           even                 work through
                                                                      early pretraining   steps. sparse dictionary learning [Olshausen
                                                     172   2006] on the residual streams of LMs and extract latent feature vectors
                                                     173   interpretable concepts. We choose not to use these for our study because
4.1 S ETUP                                           174   is not always straightforward, training costs, and it is not clear whethe
                                                     175   features across checkpoints/models.
Using the factual recall relations from the Hernandez et al. (2024) dataset, we use the Batch Search
method (§3.2) to count subject and object co-occurrences within sequences in Dolma (Soldaini
et al., 2024) used to train the OLMo-1B (v. 0724) and 7B (v. 0424) models (Groeneveld et al.,                        5
2024). The OLMo family of models provides tools for accurately recreating the batches from Dolma,
which allow us to reconstruct the data the way the model was trained. We also use GPT-J (Wang
& Komatsuzaki, 2021) and the Pile (Gao et al., 2020) as its training data, but since we do not have
access to accurate batches used to train it, we use WIMBD (Elazar et al., 2024) to count subject-
object counts in the entire data. We fit LREs on each relation and model separately. Hyperparameter
sweeps are in Appendix C. OLMo also releases intermediate checkpoints, which we use to track
development over pretraining time. We use checkpoints that have seen {41B, 104B, 209B, 419B,
628B, 838B, 1T, and 2T} tokens.3 We use the Pearson coefficient for measuring correlation.

4.2                 R ESULTS

Our results are summarized in Figure 2. We report training tokens because the step count differs
between 7B and 1B. Co-occurrence frequencies highly correlate with causality (r = 0.82). This
            3
     In OLMo-7B 0424, this corresponds to 10k, 25k, 50k, 100k, 150k, 200k, 250k, 409k pretraining steps
            5
     These are: ‘country largest city’, ‘country currency’, ‘company hq’, ‘company CEO’, and ‘star constella-
tion name’ in order from best to worst performing final checkpoints.


                                                               6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


is notably higher than the correlations with subject frequencies: r = 0.66, and object frequencies:
r = 0.59 for both OLMo-7B and OLMo-1B, respectively.
We consider a causality score above 0.9 to be nearly perfectly linear. The table in Figure 2 shows the
co-occurrence counts above which the average causality is above 0.9 and is shown by dashed black
lines on the scatterplots. Regardless of pretraining step, models that surpass this threshold have very
high causality scores. Although we cannot draw conclusions from only three models, it is possible
that scale also affects this threshold: OLMo-7B and GPT-J (6B params) require far less exposure
than OLMo-1B.

4.3   R ELATIONSHIP TO ACCURACY

Increased frequency (or a proxy for it) was shown to lead to better factual recall in LMs (Chang
et al., 2024; Mallen et al., 2023). However, it remains unknown whether high accuracy entails the
existence of a linear relationship. Such a finding would inform when we expect an LM to achieve
high accuracy on a task. We find that the correlation between causality and subject-object frequency
is higher than with 5-shot accuracy (0.82 v.s. 0.74 in OLMo-7B), though both are clearly high. In ad-
dition, there are a few examples of high accuracy relations that do not form single consistent LREs.
These relations are typically low frequency, such as star constellation name, which has 84% 5-shot
accuracy but only 44% causality (OLMo-7B), with subjects and objects only co-occurring about 21
times on average across the full dataset. In general, few-shot accuracy closely tracks causality, con-
sistent with arguments that in-context learning allows models to identify linear mappings between
input-output pairs (Hendel et al., 2023; Garg et al., 2022). We find that causality increases first in
some cases, like “food-from-country” having a causality of 65% but a 5-shot accuracy of only 42%.
This gap is consistently closed through training. In the final model, causality and 5-shot accuracy are
within 11% on average. We report the relationship between every relation, zero-shot, and few-shot
accuracy for OLMo models across training in Appendix F.
A fundamental question in the interpretability community is under what circumstances linear struc-
tures form. While previous work has shown that the training objective encourages this type of
representation (Jiang et al., 2024), our results suggest that the reason why some concepts form a
linear representation while others do not is strongly related to the pretraining frequency.

5     L INEAR R EPRESENTATIONS H ELP P REDICT P RETRAINING C ORPUS
      F REQUENCIES
In this section, we aim to understand this relationship further by exploring what we can understand
about pretraining term frequency from linearity of LM representations. We target the challenging
problem of predicting how often a term, or co-occurrence of terms, appears in an LM’s training data
from the representations alone. Such prediction model can be useful, if it generalizes, when applied
to other models whose weights are open, but the data is closed. For instance, such predictive model
could tell us whether a model was trained on specific domains (e.g., Java code) by measuring the
presence of relevant LREs. First, we show that LRE features encode information about frequency
that is not present using probabilities alone. Then, we show how a regression fit on one model
generalizes to the features extracted from another without any information about the new model’s
counts.

5.1   E XPERIMENTAL S ETUP

We fit a regression to the Relations dataset (Hernandez et al., 2024) using OLMo-7B LRE features
and log probabilities. We fit 24 models such that each relation is held out once per random seed
across 4 seeds. We train a random forest regression model with 100 decision tree estimators to
predict the frequency of terms (either the subject-object frequency, or the object frequency alone;
e.g., predicting “John Lennon” and “The Beatles” or just “The Beatles”) from one of two sets of
features. Our baseline set of features is based on likelihood of recalling a fact. Given some few-shot
context from the relations dataset (“John Lennon is a lead singer of”) we extract the log probability
of the correct answer, as well as the average accuracy on this prompt across 5 trials. The intuition
is that models will be more confident about highly frequent terms. The other set of features include
the first, as well as faithfulness and causality measurement.


                                                  7
                                 Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                             Subject-Object
                               Subject-ObjectCo-occurrence
                                              Co-occurrence
                                                                         Object
                                                                      Object    Occurrences
                                                                             Occurrences                             Subject-Object
                                                                                                                   Subject-Object   Co-occurrence
                                                                                                                           Subject-Object Co-occurrence
                                                                                                                                  Co-occurrence
                                                                               trace
                                                                                trace00
           0.7 0.7                                                             Random Baseline
                                                  0.8 0.8                       Random Baseline
                                                                                            trace trace
                                                                                                   0    0                                       trace 0
                                                                                                                                                trace 0
                                                                                                                                                          trace 0
                       0.6                                                     Mean Baseline  0.7
                                                                                        0.7 RandomRandom
                                                                                                        0.7
                                                                                                           Baseline                              Random Baseline
                                                                                                                                                         Random Baseline
           0.6                                    0.7 0.7                      Mean Baseline
                                                                                                      Baseline
                                                                                                                                                Random Baseline
            Accuracy


                                                                                          0.6 Mean 0.6
                                                                                                   Baseline                                      Mean Baseline
                                                                                                                                                         Mean Baseline
                       0.5                                                                       0.6 Mean Baseline
Accuracy


                                                  0.6 0.6                                                                                       Mean Baseline

                                                   Accuracy


                                                                                                  Accuracy


                                                                                                                   Accuracy
           0.5                         Accuracy                                                              0.5              0.5


                                                                                      Accuracy
                       0.4                        0.5 0.5                                        0.5
                                                                                                             0.4              0.4
           0.4 0.3                                0.4 0.4                                        0.4
                                                  0.3 0.3                                                    0.3              0.3
           0.3 0.2                                                                               0.3 0.2                      0.2
                                                  0.2 0.2
           0.2 0.1                                0.1 0.1                                        0.2 0.1                      0.1
                                                    0         0                                  0.1          0                0
           0.1          0                                        LREs+LM
                                                              LREs+LM           LM only
                                                                             LM only                                  LREs+LM
                                                                                                                            LREs+LMLM onlyLM only
                             LREs+LM                              LM only                          0
            0                                                                                                  LREs+LM              LM only
                         LREs+LM           LM only
                              Figure 3: Within-Magnitude accuracy (aka the proportion of predictions within one order of mag-
                                 nitude of ground truth) for models predicting object and subject-object co-occurrences in heldout
                                 relations. Using LRE features outperforms LM only features by about 30%. We find that it is
                                 much easier to predict object frequencies; the subj-obj. prediction models with LRE features only
                                 marginally outperform baseline performance.

                                 We use Faithfulness and Causality as defined in Hernandez et al. (2024) as well as two other metrics:
                                 Faith Prob., which is the log probability of the correct answer as produced by an LRE, and Hard
                                 Causality, which is the same as the “soft” variant, but only counts the proportion of times the
                                 causality edit produces the target answer as the number one prediction. We use every example from
                                 the relations for which there are more than one object occurrence or subject-object co-occurrence.
                                 We do not provide an explicit signal for which relation an example comes from, but due to the bias of
                                 subjects/objects having similar frequencies within a relation, we train multiple models and evaluate
                                 on held out relations and average performance. In all settings, the held out set objects and relations
                                 are guaranteed to not have been in the training set.

                                 5.2   LRE M ETRICS ENCODE F INE - GRAINED F REQUENCY I NFORMATION

                                 Because of the difficulty of predicting the exact number of occurrences, we report accuracy within
                                 one order of magnitude of the ground truth. This measures whether the predicted value is within a
                                 reasonable range of the actual value. Results are shown in Figure 3. We find that language modeling
                                 features do not provide any meaningful signal towards predicting object or subject-object frequen-
                                 cies, and are only marginally above the baseline of predicting the average or random frequencies
                                 from the training data. On object frequency predictions, we find that LRE features encode a strong
                                 signal allowing for accurate predictions about 70% of the time. Mean absolute error of the pre-
                                 dictions (in natural log space) for LRE features (LM-only features) are 2.1, (4.2) and 1.9, (2.3) on
                                 object prediction and subject-object prediction tasks, respectively. We find that subject-object co-
                                 occurrence frequency is likely too difficult to predict given the signals that we have here, as our
                                 predictions are higher than, but within one standard deviation of the mean baseline.

                                 Feature Importance: How important are LRE features for predicting the frequency of an item?
                                 We perform feature permutation tests to see how much each feature (LRE features and log probs)
                                 contributes to the final answer. First, we check to see which features used to fit the regression are
                                 correlated, as if they are, then perturbing one will leave the signal present in another. In Appendix E,
                                 we show that only faithfulness and faith probability are strongly correlated, so for this test only, we
                                 train models with a single PCA component representing 89% of the variance of those two features.
                                 We find that hard causality is by far the most important feature for generalization performance,
                                 causing a difference of about 15% accuracy, followed by faithfulness measures with 5% accuracy,
                                 providing evidence that the LRE features are encoding an important signal.

                                 5.3   G ENERALIZATION TO A NEW LM

                                 Next, we test the ability to generalize the regression fit of one LM to another, without requiring
                                 further supervision. If such a model could generalize, we can predict term counts to models for
                                 which we do not have access to their pretraining data. We keep the objective the same and apply


                                                                                                               8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Table 1: Within-Magnitude accuracy for different settings of train and test models. Overall, we find
that fitting a regression on one model’s LREs and evaluating on the other provides a meaningful
signal compared to fitting using only log probability and task performance, or predicting the average
training data frequency. The metric here is proportion of predictions within one order of 10x the
ground truth. Here, Eval. on GPT-J means the regression is fit on OLMo and evaluated on GPT-J.
  Model                   Predicting Object Occs.              Predicting Subject-Object Co-Occs.
                          Eval. on GPT-J     Eval. on OLMo      Eval. on GPT-J    Eval. on OLMo
    LRE Features          0.65±0.12          0.49±0.12          0.76±0.12         0.68±0.08
    LogProb Features      0.42±0.10          0.41±0.09          0.66±0.09         0.60±0.07
    Mean Freq. Baseline   0.31±0.15          0.41±0.17          0.57±0.15         0.67±0.16

the regression model, fit for example on OLMo (“Train OLMo” setting), to features extracted from
GPT-J, using ground truth counts from The Pile (and vice versa, i.e., the “Train GPT-J” setting).
We again train a random forest regression model to predict the frequency of terms (either the subject-
object frequency, or the object frequency alone; e.g., predicting “John Lennon” and “The Beatles” or
just “The Beatles”) on features from one of two models: either OLMo-7B (final checkpoint) or GPT-
J, treating the other as the ‘closed’ model. We test the hypothesis that LRE features (faithfulness,
causality) are useful in predicting term frequencies across different models, with the hope that
this could be applied to dataset inference methods in the future, where access to the ground truth
pretraining data counts is limited or unavailable.

Results Our results are presented in Table 1. First, we find that there is a signal in the LRE features
that does not exist in the log probability features: We are able to fit a much better generalizable model
when using LRE features as opposed to the LM probabilities alone. Second, evaluating on the LRE
features of a heldout model (scaled by the ratio of total tokens trained between the two models)
maintains around the same accuracy when fit on exact counts from OLMo, allowing us to predict
occurrences without access to the GPT-J pretraining data. We find that predicting either the subject-
object co-occurrences or object frequencies using LREs alone is barely better than the baseline. This
task is much more difficult than predicting the frequency of the object alone, but our model may just
also be unable to account for outliers in the data, which is tightly clustered around the mean (thus
giving the high mean baseline performance of between approx. 60-70%). Nevertheless, we show
that linear structure for relations within LM representations encode a rich signal representing dataset
frequency.


5.4    E RROR A NALYSIS

In Table 2 we show example predictions from our regression model that we fit on OLMo and evaluate
on heldout relations with LREs measured on GPT-J. We find that some relations transfer more easily
than others, with the star constellation name transferring especially poorly. In general, the regression
transfers well, without performance deteriorating much (about 5% accuracy: see Figure 3 compared
to the evaluation of GPT-J in Table 1), suggesting LREs encode information in a consistent way
across models. We also find that the regression makes use of the full prediction range, producing
values in the millions (see Table 2) as well as in the tens; The same regression shown in the table
also predicts 59 occurrences for “Caroline Bright” (Will Smith’s mother) where the ground truth is
48.


6     D ISCUSSION

Connection to Factual Recall Work in interpretability has focused largely around linear repre-
sentations in recent years, and our work aims to address the open question of the conditions in
which they form. We find that coherent linear representations form when the relevant terms (in this
case subject-object co-occurrences) appear in pretraining at a consistent enough rate. Analogously,
Chang et al. (2024) show that repeated exposure encourages higher retention of facts. Future work
could investigate the connection between factual recall accuracy and linear representations.


                                                   9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Table 2: Examples of a regression fit on OLMo LRE metrics and evaluated on GPT-J on heldout
relations, demonstrating common error patterns: 1. Predictions are better for relations that are
closer to those found in fitting the relation (country related relations), 2. Some relations, like star-
constellation perform very poorly, possibly due to low frequency, 3. the regression model can be
sensitive to the choice of subject (e.g., William vs. Harry), telling us the choice of data to measure
LREs for is important for predictions.
                      Predicting Object Frequency in GPT-J, Regression fit on OLMo
    Relation                  Subject          Object           Prediction    Ground Truth      Error
    landmark-in-country       Menangle Park    Australia        2,986,989     3,582,602         1.2x
    country-language          Brazil           Portuguese       845,406       561,005           1x
    star-constellation name   Arcturus         Boötes          974,550       2,817             346x
    person-mother             Prince William   Princess Diana   5,826         27,094            4.6x
    person-mother             Prince Harry     Princess Diana   131           27,094            207x

Linear Representations in LMs The difficulty of disentangling the formation of linear represen-
tations from increases in relation accuracy, especially in the few-shot case, is interesting. Across
24 relations, only the “star-constellation-name” and “product-by-company” relations have few-shot
accuracies that far exceed their causality scores (and both are low frequency). Thus, it is still an open
question how LMs are able to recall these tasks. The fact that few-shot accuracy and causality seem
so closely linked is consistent with findings that ICL involves locating the right task (Min et al.,
2022) and applying a ‘function’ to map input examples to outputs (Hendel et al., 2023; Todd et al.,
2024). The finding that frequency controls this ability is perhaps unsurprising, as frequency also
controls this linear structure emerging in static embeddings (Ethayarajh et al., 2019). Jiang et al.
(2024) prove a strong frequency-based condition (based on matched log-odds between subjects and
objects) and an implicit bias of gradient descent (when the frequency condition is not met) encour-
age linearity in LLMs; our work empirically shows conditions where linear representations tend to
form in more realistic settings. If LMs are ‘only’ solving factual recall or performing ICL through
linear structures, it is surprising how well this works at scale, but the simplicity also provides a
promising way to understand LMs and ICL in general. An interesting avenue for future work would
be to understand if and when LMs use a method that is not well approximated linearly to solve these
types of tasks, as recent work has shown non-linearity can be preferred for some tasks in recurrent
networks (Csordás et al., 2024).


Future Work in Predicting Dataset Frequency The ability to predict the contents of pretraining
data is an important area for investigating memorization, contamination, and privacy of information
used to train models. In our approach, we show it is possible to extract pretraining data signal
without direct supervision. Without interpretability work on the nature of representations in LMs, we
would not know of this implicit dataset signal, and we argue that interpretability can generate useful
insights more broadly as well. Extensions on this work could include more information to tighten the
prediction bounds on frequency, such as extracting additional features from the tokenizer (Hayase
et al., 2024). We hope this work encourages future research in other ways properties of pretraining
data affect LM representations for both improving and better understanding these models.


7     C ONCLUSION

We find a connection between linear representations of subject-relation-object factual triplets in LMs
and the pretraining frequencies of the subjects and objects in those relations. This finding can guide
future interpretability work in deciphering whether a linear representation for a given concept will
exist in a model, since we observe that frequencies below a certain threshold for a given model will
not yield LREs (a particular class of linear representation). From there we show that we can use
the presence of linear representations to predict with some accuracy the frequency of terms in the
pretraining corpus of an open-weights, closed-data model without supervision. Future work could
aim to improve on our bounds of predicted frequencies. Overall, our work presents a meaningful step
towards understanding the interactions between pretraining data and internal LM representations.


                                                   10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

This work was performed while JM was an intern at Ai2. We thank the anonymous reviewers and
members of the Aristo and AllenNLP teams at Ai2 for valuable feedback.


R EFERENCES
Viraat Aryabumi, Yixuan Su, Raymond Ma, Adrien Morisot, Ivan Zhang, Acyr Locatelli, Marzieh
  Fadaee, Ahmet Üstün, and Sara Hooker. To code or not to code? exploring impact of code in pre-
  training. In The Thirteenth International Conference on Learning Representations, 2025. URL
  https://openreview.net/forum?id=zSfeN1uAcx.

Giuseppe Ateniese, Luigi V Mancini, Angelo Spognardi, Antonio Villani, Domenico Vitali, and
  Giovanni Felici. Hacking smart machines with smarter ones: How to extract meaningful data
  from machine learning classifiers. International Journal of Security and Networks, 10(3):137–
  150, 2015. URL https://dl.acm.org/doi/10.1504/IJSN.2015.071829.

Sid Black, Lee Sharkey, Leo Grinsztajn, Eric Winsor, Dan Braun, Jacob Merizian, Kip Parker,
  Carlos Ramón Guevara, Beren Millidge, Gabriel Alfour, and Connor Leahy. Interpreting neural
  networks through the polytope lens, 2022. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2211.12312.

Nicholas Carlini, Steve Chien, Milad Nasr, Shuang Song, Andreas Terzis, and Florian Tramèr. Mem-
  bership inference attacks from first principles. In 2022 IEEE Symposium on Security and Pri-
  vacy (SP), pp. 1897–1914, 2022. URL https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/
  9833649/.

Nicholas Carlini, Daphne Ippolito, Matthew Jagielski, Katherine Lee, Florian Tramer, and Chiyuan
  Zhang. Quantifying memorization across neural language models. In The Eleventh International
  Conference on Learning Representations, 2023. URL https://openreview.net/forum?
  id=TatRHT_1cK.

Hoyeon Chang, Jinho Park, Seonghyeon Ye, Sohee Yang, Youngkyung Seo, Du-Seong Chang, and
  Minjoon Seo. How do large language models acquire factual knowledge during pretraining? In
  The Thirty-eighth Annual Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems, 2024. URL
  https://openreview.net/forum?id=TYdzj1EvBP.

David Chanin, Anthony Hunter, and Oana-Maria Camburu. Identifying Linear Relational Concepts
  in Large Language Models. In Kevin Duh, Helena Gomez, and Steven Bethard (eds.), Proceed-
  ings of the 2024 Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association for Computa-
  tional Linguistics: Human Language Technologies (Volume 1: Long Papers), pp. 1524–1535.
  Association for Computational Linguistics, 2024. doi: 10.18653/v1/2024.naacl-long.85. URL
  https://aclanthology.org/2024.naacl-long.85.

Róbert Csordás, Christopher Potts, Christopher D Manning, and Atticus Geiger. Recurrent neural
  networks learn to store and generate sequences using non-linear representations. In Yonatan Be-
  linkov, Najoung Kim, Jaap Jumelet, Hosein Mohebbi, Aaron Mueller, and Hanjie Chen (eds.),
  Proceedings of the 7th BlackboxNLP Workshop: Analyzing and Interpreting Neural Networks for
  NLP, pp. 248–262, Miami, Florida, US, November 2024. Association for Computational Lin-
  guistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2024.blackboxnlp-1.17. URL https://aclanthology.org/
  2024.blackboxnlp-1.17/.

Yanai Elazar, Shauli Ravfogel, Alon Jacovi, and Yoav Goldberg. Amnesic Probing: Behavioral
  Explanation with Amnesic Counterfactuals. Transactions of the Association for Computational
  Linguistics, 9:160–175, 03 2021. URL https://doi.org/10.1162/tacl_a_00359.

Yanai Elazar, Nora Kassner, Shauli Ravfogel, Amir Feder, Abhilasha Ravichander, Marius Mos-
  bach, Yonatan Belinkov, Hinrich Schütze, and Yoav Goldberg. Measuring causal effects of data
  statistics on language model’s ‘factual’ predictions. arXiv preprint arXiv:2207.14251, 2022. URL
  https://arxiv.org/abs/2207.14251.


                                               11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Yanai Elazar, Akshita Bhagia, Ian Helgi Magnusson, Abhilasha Ravichander, Dustin Schwenk,
  Alane Suhr, Evan Pete Walsh, Dirk Groeneveld, Luca Soldaini, Sameer Singh, Hannaneh Ha-
  jishirzi, Noah A. Smith, and Jesse Dodge. What’s in my big data? In The Twelfth International
  Conference on Learning Representations, 2024. URL https://openreview.net/forum?
  id=RvfPnOkPV4.
Nelson Elhage, Neel Nanda, Catherine Olsson, Tom Henighan, Nicholas Joseph, Ben Mann,
  Amanda Askell, Yuntao Bai, Anna Chen, Tom Conerly, et al. A mathematical frame-
  work for transformer circuits. Transformer Circuits Thread, 2021.   URL https://
  transformer-circuits.pub/2021/framework/index.html.
Hady Elsahar, Pavlos Vougiouklis, Arslen Remaci, Christophe Gravier, Jonathon Hare, Fred-
  erique Laforest, and Elena Simperl. T-REx: A large scale alignment of natural language with
  knowledge base triples. In Nicoletta Calzolari, Khalid Choukri, Christopher Cieri, Thierry De-
  clerck, Sara Goggi, Koiti Hasida, Hitoshi Isahara, Bente Maegaard, Joseph Mariani, Hélène
  Mazo, Asuncion Moreno, Jan Odijk, Stelios Piperidis, and Takenobu Tokunaga (eds.), Proceed-
  ings of the Eleventh International Conference on Language Resources and Evaluation (LREC
  2018), Miyazaki, Japan, May 2018. European Language Resources Association (ELRA). URL
  https://aclanthology.org/L18-1544.
Kawin Ethayarajh, David Duvenaud, and Graeme Hirst. Towards Understanding Linear Word
  Analogies. In Anna Korhonen, David Traum, and Lluı́s Màrquez (eds.), Proceedings of the
  57th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics, pp. 3253–3262. As-
  sociation for Computational Linguistics, 2019. doi: 10.18653/v1/P19-1315. URL https:
  //aclanthology.org/P19-1315.
Leo Gao, Stella Biderman, Sid Black, Laurence Golding, Travis Hoppe, Charles Foster, Jason
  Phang, Horace He, Anish Thite, Noa Nabeshima, et al. The pile: An 800gb dataset of di-
  verse text for language modeling. arXiv preprint arXiv:2101.00027, 2020. URL https:
  //arxiv.org/abs/2101.00027.
Leo Gao, Tom Dupre la Tour, Henk Tillman, Gabriel Goh, Rajan Troll, Alec Radford, Ilya Sutskever,
  Jan Leike, and Jeffrey Wu. Scaling and evaluating sparse autoencoders. In The Thirteenth Inter-
  national Conference on Learning Representations, 2025. URL https://openreview.net/
  forum?id=tcsZt9ZNKD.
Shivam Garg, Dimitris Tsipras, Percy Liang, and Gregory Valiant. What can transformers learn
  in-context? a case study of simple function classes. In Alice H. Oh, Alekh Agarwal, Danielle
  Belgrave, and Kyunghyun Cho (eds.), Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2022.
  URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=flNZJ2eOet.
Anna Gladkova, Aleksandr Drozd, and Satoshi Matsuoka. Analogy-based detection of morpholog-
  ical and semantic relations with word embeddings: what works and what doesn‘t. In Jacob An-
  dreas, Eunsol Choi, and Angeliki Lazaridou (eds.), Proceedings of the NAACL Student Research
  Workshop, pp. 8–15, San Diego, California, June 2016. Association for Computational Linguis-
  tics. doi: 10.18653/v1/N16-2002. URL https://aclanthology.org/N16-2002/.
Dirk Groeneveld, Iz Beltagy, Evan Walsh, Akshita Bhagia, Rodney Kinney, Oyvind Tafjord, Ananya
  Jha, Hamish Ivison, Ian Magnusson, Yizhong Wang, et al. OLMo: Accelerating the science of
  language models. In Lun-Wei Ku, Andre Martins, and Vivek Srikumar (eds.), Proceedings of
  the 62nd Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Pa-
  pers), pp. 15789–15809, Bangkok, Thailand, August 2024. Association for Computational Lin-
  guistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2024.acl-long.841. URL https://aclanthology.org/2024.
  acl-long.841/.
Jonathan Hayase, Alisa Liu, Yejin Choi, Sewoong Oh, and Noah A. Smith. Data mixture inference:
  What do BPE tokenizers reveal about their training data? In The Thirty-eighth Annual Confer-
  ence on Neural Information Processing Systems, 2024. URL https://openreview.net/
  forum?id=EHXyeImux0.
Roee Hendel, Mor Geva, and Amir Globerson. In-Context Learning Creates Task Vectors. In
  Houda Bouamor, Juan Pino, and Kalika Bali (eds.), Findings of the Association for Computational


                                               12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


  Linguistics: EMNLP 2023, pp. 9318–9333. Association for Computational Linguistics, 2023.
  doi: 10.18653/v1/2023.findings-emnlp.624. URL https://aclanthology.org/2023.
  findings-emnlp.624.
Evan Hernandez, Arnab Sen Sharma, Tal Haklay, Kevin Meng, Martin Wattenberg, Jacob Andreas,
  Yonatan Belinkov, and David Bau. Linearity of relation decoding in transformer language models.
  In The Twelfth International Conference on Learning Representations, 2024. URL https:
  //openreview.net/forum?id=w7LU2s14kE.
Robert Huben, Hoagy Cunningham, Logan Riggs Smith, Aidan Ewart, and Lee Sharkey. Sparse
  autoencoders find highly interpretable features in language models. In The Twelfth International
  Conference on Learning Representations, 2024. URL https://openreview.net/forum?
  id=F76bwRSLeK.
Yibo Jiang, Goutham Rajendran, Pradeep Kumar Ravikumar, Bryon Aragam, and Victor Veitch.
  On the origins of linear representations in large language models. In Forty-first International
  Conference on Machine Learning, 2024. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=
  otuTw4Mghk.
Marzena Karpinska, Bofang Li, Anna Rogers, and Aleksandr Drozd. Subcharacter information in
 Japanese embeddings: When is it worth it? In Georgiana Dinu, Miguel Ballesteros, Avirup
 Sil, Sam Bowman, Wael Hamza, Anders Sogaard, Tahira Naseem, and Yoav Goldberg (eds.),
 Proceedings of the Workshop on the Relevance of Linguistic Structure in Neural Architectures
 for NLP, pp. 28–37, Melbourne, Australia, July 2018. Association for Computational Linguistics.
 doi: 10.18653/v1/W18-2905. URL https://aclanthology.org/W18-2905/.
Maximilian Köper, Christian Scheible, and Sabine Schulte im Walde. Multilingual reliability and
 “semantic” structure of continuous word spaces. In Matthew Purver, Mehrnoosh Sadrzadeh, and
 Matthew Stone (eds.), Proceedings of the 11th International Conference on Computational Se-
 mantics, pp. 40–45, London, UK, April 2015. Association for Computational Linguistics. URL
 https://aclanthology.org/W15-0105/.
Shayne Longpre, Gregory Yauney, Emily Reif, Katherine Lee, Adam Roberts, Barret Zoph, Denny
  Zhou, Jason Wei, Kevin Robinson, David Mimno, and Daphne Ippolito. A pretrainer‘s guide
  to training data: Measuring the effects of data age, domain coverage, quality, & toxicity. In
  Kevin Duh, Helena Gomez, and Steven Bethard (eds.), Proceedings of the 2024 Conference of
  the North American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Lan-
  guage Technologies (Volume 1: Long Papers), pp. 3245–3276, Mexico City, Mexico, June
  2024. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2024.naacl-long.179. URL
  https://aclanthology.org/2024.naacl-long.179/.
Yingwei Ma, Yue Liu, Yue Yu, Yuanliang Zhang, Yu Jiang, Changjian Wang, and Shanshan Li.
  At which training stage does code data help LLMs reasoning? In The Twelfth International
  Conference on Learning Representations, 2024. URL https://openreview.net/forum?
  id=KIPJKST4gw.
Alex Mallen, Akari Asai, Victor Zhong, Rajarshi Das, Daniel Khashabi, and Hannaneh Hajishirzi.
  When not to trust language models: Investigating effectiveness of parametric and non-parametric
  memories. In Anna Rogers, Jordan Boyd-Graber, and Naoaki Okazaki (eds.), Proceedings of
  the 61st Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long
  Papers), pp. 9802–9822, Toronto, Canada, July 2023. Association for Computational Linguis-
  tics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2023.acl-long.546. URL https://aclanthology.org/2023.
  acl-long.546.
R Thomas McCoy, Shunyu Yao, Dan Friedman, Mathew D Hardy, and Thomas L Griffiths. Embers
  of autoregression show how large language models are shaped by the problem they are trained
  to solve. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 121(41):e2322420121, 2024. URL
  https://www.pnas.org/doi/abs/10.1073/pnas.2322420121.
Jack Merullo, Carsten Eickhoff, and Ellie Pavlick. Language models implement simple Word2Vec-
  style vector arithmetic. In Kevin Duh, Helena Gomez, and Steven Bethard (eds.), Proceedings
  of the 2024 Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association for Computational


                                               13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


  Linguistics: Human Language Technologies (Volume 1: Long Papers), pp. 5030–5047, Mexico
  City, Mexico, June 2024. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2024.
  naacl-long.281. URL https://aclanthology.org/2024.naacl-long.281.
Tomas Mikolov, Kai Chen, Greg Corrado, and Jeffrey Dean. Efficient estimation of word represen-
  tations in vector space. arXiv preprint arXiv:1301.3781, 2013a. URL https://arxiv.org/
  abs/1301.3781.
Tomas Mikolov, Ilya Sutskever, Kai Chen, Greg S Corrado, and Jeff Dean.          Dis-
  tributed representations of words and phrases and their compositionality.   In C.J.
  Burges, L. Bottou, M. Welling, Z. Ghahramani, and K.Q. Weinberger (eds.), Ad-
  vances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 26. Curran Associates, Inc.,
  2013b. URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper_files/paper/2013/
  file/9aa42b31882ec039965f3c4923ce901b-Paper.pdf.
Sewon Min, Xinxi Lyu, Ari Holtzman, Mikel Artetxe, Mike Lewis, Hannaneh Hajishirzi, and Luke
  Zettlemoyer. Rethinking the role of demonstrations: What makes in-context learning work? In
  Yoav Goldberg, Zornitsa Kozareva, and Yue Zhang (eds.), Proceedings of the 2022 Conference on
  Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, pp. 11048–11064, Abu Dhabi, United Arab
  Emirates, December 2022. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2022.
  emnlp-main.759. URL https://aclanthology.org/2022.emnlp-main.759/.
Chris Olah, Nick Cammarata, Ludwig Schubert, Gabriel Goh, Michael Petrov, and Shan Carter.
  Zoom in: An introduction to circuits. Distill, 5(3):e00024–001, 2020. URL https://
  distill.pub/2020/circuits/zoom-in/.
Yonatan Oren, Nicole Meister, Niladri S. Chatterji, Faisal Ladhak, and Tatsunori Hashimoto. Prov-
  ing test set contamination in black-box language models. In The Twelfth International Confer-
  ence on Learning Representations, 2024. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=
  KS8mIvetg2.
Alberto Paccanaro and Geoffrey E Hinton. Learning Hierarchical Structures with Linear Rela-
  tional Embedding. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 14. MIT
  Press, 2001. URL https://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2001/hash/
  814a9c18f5abff398787c9cfcbf3d80c-Abstract.html.
Kiho Park, Yo Joong Choe, and Victor Veitch. The Linear Representation Hypothesis and the Geom-
  etry of Large Language Models. In Forty-First International Conference on Machine Learning,
  2024. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=UGpGkLzwpP.
Jeffrey Pennington, Richard Socher, and Christopher Manning. GloVe: Global vectors for word
   representation. In Alessandro Moschitti, Bo Pang, and Walter Daelemans (eds.), Proceedings
   of the 2014 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP), pp.
   1532–1543, Doha, Qatar, October 2014. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.
   3115/v1/D14-1162. URL https://aclanthology.org/D14-1162.
Shauli Ravfogel, Yanai Elazar, Hila Gonen, Michael Twiton, and Yoav Goldberg. Null it out: Guard-
  ing protected attributes by iterative nullspace projection. In Proceedings of the 58th Annual Meet-
  ing of the Association for Computational Linguistics, pp. 7237–7256, Online, July 2020. As-
  sociation for Computational Linguistics. URL https://www.aclweb.org/anthology/
  2020.acl-main.647.
Yasaman Razeghi, Robert L Logan IV, Matt Gardner, and Sameer Singh. Impact of pretraining
  term frequencies on few-shot numerical reasoning. In Yoav Goldberg, Zornitsa Kozareva, and
  Yue Zhang (eds.), Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: EMNLP 2022, pp.
  840–854, Abu Dhabi, United Arab Emirates, December 2022. Association for Computational Lin-
  guistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2022.findings-emnlp.59. URL https://aclanthology.org/
  2022.findings-emnlp.59/.
Yasaman Razeghi, Hamish Ivison, Sameer Singh, and Yanai Elazar. Backtracking mathematical
  reasoning of language models to the pretraining data. In NeurIPS Workshop on Attributing Model
  Behavior at Scale, 2023. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=EKvqw9k3lC.


                                                 14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Nina Rimsky, Nick Gabrieli, Julian Schulz, Meg Tong, Evan Hubinger, and Alexander Turner. Steer-
  ing llama 2 via contrastive activation addition. pp. 15504–15522, August 2024. doi: 10.18653/
  v1/2024.acl-long.828. URL https://aclanthology.org/2024.acl-long.828/.

G. Salton, A. Wong, and C. S. Yang. A vector space model for automatic indexing. Commun.
  ACM, 18(11):613–620, November 1975. ISSN 0001-0782. doi: 10.1145/361219.361220. URL
  https://doi.org/10.1145/361219.361220.

Naomi Saphra and Sarah Wiegreffe. Mechanistic? In Yonatan Belinkov, Najoung Kim, Jaap
  Jumelet, Hosein Mohebbi, Aaron Mueller, and Hanjie Chen (eds.), Proceedings of the 7th Black-
  boxNLP Workshop: Analyzing and Interpreting Neural Networks for NLP, pp. 480–498, Miami,
  Florida, US, November 2024. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2024.
  blackboxnlp-1.30. URL https://aclanthology.org/2024.blackboxnlp-1.30/.

Preethi Seshadri, Sameer Singh, and Yanai Elazar. The bias amplification paradox in text-to-image
  generation. In Kevin Duh, Helena Gomez, and Steven Bethard (eds.), Proceedings of the 2024
  Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics:
  Human Language Technologies (Volume 1: Long Papers), pp. 6367–6384, Mexico City, Mexico,
  June 2024. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2024.naacl-long.353.
  URL https://aclanthology.org/2024.naacl-long.353/.

Weijia Shi, Anirudh Ajith, Mengzhou Xia, Yangsibo Huang, Daogao Liu, Terra Blevins, Danqi
 Chen, and Luke Zettlemoyer. Detecting pretraining data from large language models. In
 The Twelfth International Conference on Learning Representations, 2024. URL https://
 openreview.net/forum?id=zWqr3MQuNs.

Reza Shokri, Marco Stronati, Congzheng Song, and Vitaly Shmatikov. Membership inference
  attacks against machine learning models. In 2017 IEEE Symposium on Security and Privacy
  (SP), pp. 3–18, 2017. doi: 10.1109/SP.2017.41. URL https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/
  stamp/stamp.jsp?tp=&arnumber=7958568.

Aviv Slobodkin, Omer Goldman, Avi Caciularu, Ido Dagan, and Shauli Ravfogel. The curious case
  of hallucinatory (un)answerability: Finding truths in the hidden states of over-confident large
  language models. In Houda Bouamor, Juan Pino, and Kalika Bali (eds.), Proceedings of the 2023
  Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, pp. 3607–3625, Singapore,
  December 2023. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2023.emnlp-main.
  220. URL https://aclanthology.org/2023.emnlp-main.220/.

Luca Soldaini, Rodney Kinney, Akshita Bhagia, Dustin Schwenk, David Atkinson, Russell Authur,
  Ben Bogin, Khyathi Chandu, Jennifer Dumas, Yanai Elazar, et al. Dolma: an open corpus of
  three trillion tokens for language model pretraining research. In Lun-Wei Ku, Andre Martins,
  and Vivek Srikumar (eds.), Proceedings of the 62nd Annual Meeting of the Association for Com-
  putational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers), pp. 15725–15788, Bangkok, Thailand, August
  2024. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2024.acl-long.840. URL
  https://aclanthology.org/2024.acl-long.840/.

Nishant Subramani, Nivedita Suresh, and Matthew Peters. Extracting Latent Steering Vectors from
  Pretrained Language Models. In Smaranda Muresan, Preslav Nakov, and Aline Villavicencio
  (eds.), Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: ACL 2022, pp. 566–581. As-
  sociation for Computational Linguistics, 2022. doi: 10.18653/v1/2022.findings-acl.48. URL
  https://aclanthology.org/2022.findings-acl.48.

Anshuman Suri and David Evans. Formalizing and estimating distribution inference risks. Proceed-
  ings on Privacy Enhancing Technologies, 2022. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2109.
  06024.

Adly Templeton, Tom Conerly, Jonathan Marcus, Jack Lindsey, Trenton Bricken, Brian
  Chen, Adam Pearce, Craig Citro, Emmanuel Ameisen, Andy Jones, et al.          Scaling
  Monosemanticity: Extracting Interpretable Features from Claude 3 Sonnet. 2024. URL
  https://transformer-circuits.pub/2024/scaling-monosemanticity/
  index.html.


                                               15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Eric Todd, Millicent Li, Arnab Sen Sharma, Aaron Mueller, Byron C Wallace, and David Bau.
  Function vectors in large language models. In The Twelfth International Conference on Learning
  Representations, 2024. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=AwyxtyMwaG.
Ben Wang and Aran Komatsuzaki. GPT-J-6B: A 6 Billion Parameter Autoregressive Language
  Model. https://github.com/kingoflolz/mesh-transformer-jax, May 2021.
Xinyi Wang, Alfonso Amayuelas, Kexun Zhang, Liangming Pan, Wenhu Chen, and William Yang
  Wang. Understanding reasoning ability of language models from the perspective of reasoning
  paths aggregation. In Forty-first International Conference on Machine Learning, 2024. URL
  https://openreview.net/forum?id=dZsEOFUDew.
Xinyi Wang, Antonis Antoniades, Yanai Elazar, Alfonso Amayuelas, Alon Albalak, Kexun Zhang,
  and William Yang Wang. Generalization v.s. memorization: Tracing language models’ capabili-
  ties back to pretraining data. In The Thirteenth International Conference on Learning Represen-
  tations, 2025. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=IQxBDLmVpT.
Sang Michael Xie, Hieu Pham, Xuanyi Dong, Nan Du, Hanxiao Liu, Yifeng Lu, Percy Liang,
  Quoc V Le, Tengyu Ma, and Adams Wei Yu. Doremi: Optimizing data mixtures speeds up
  language model pretraining. In Thirty-seventh Conference on Neural Information Processing
  Systems, 2023. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=lXuByUeHhd.


A        L IMITATIONS
While our approach thoroughly tracks exposure to individual terms and formation of LRE features
across pretraining, we can not draw causal6 claims about how exposure affects individual represen-
tations, due to the cost of counterfactual pretraining. We try to address this by showing the frequency
of individual terms can be predicted with some accuracy from measurements of LRE presence. We
motivate this approach as a possible way to detect the training data of closed-data LMs; however,
we are not able to make any guarantees on its efficacy in settings not shown here, and would caution
drawing strong conclusions without additional information. Furthermore, we find that our method is
relatively worse at predicting subject-object co-occurrences than object occurrences, and our method
fails to account for the harder task. Future work could expand on this tool by incorporating it with
other data inference methods for greater confidence. We also do not discuss the role of the presen-
tation of facts on the formation of LRE features, but following Elsahar et al. (2018) and the strength
of the relationship we find, we speculate this has minimal impact. Note that the BatchSearch tool
we release tracks the exact position index of the searched terms, thus facilitating future work on
questions about templates and presentation of information.

B        E FFECT OF T RAINING ON I NCORRECT E XAMPLES
In Hernandez et al. (2024), examples are filtered to ones in which the LM gets correct, assuming
that an LRE will only exist once a model has attained the knowledge to answer the relation accuracy
(e.g., knowing many country capitals). We find that the choice of examples for fitting LREs is not
entirely dependent on the model ’knowing’ that relation perfectly (i.e., attains high accuracy). This
is convenient for our study, where we test early checkpoint models, that do not necessarily have all
of the information that they will have seen later in training. In Figure 5, we show faithfulness on
relations where the LRE was fit with all, half, or zero correct examples. We omit data for which the
model did not get enough incorrect examples. Averages across relations for which we have enough
data are shown in Figure 4, which shows that there is not a considerable difference in the choice of
LRE samples to train with.

C        LRE H YPERPARAMETER T UNING
There are three hyperparameters for fitting LREs: layer at which to edit the subject, the beta term
used to scale the LRE weight matrix, and the rank of the pseudoinverse matrix used to make edits for
    6
        And thus mechanistic, in the narrow technical sense of the term (Saphra & Wiegreffe, 2024).


                                                        16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


               Average Faithfulness for Diﬀerent Settings of Training Examples                                                                            Average Causality for Diﬀerent Settings of Training Examples


               0.8                                                                                                                                        0.8
               0.7                                                                                                                                        0.7
               0.6                                                                                                                                        0.6
Faithfulness


                                                                                                                                              Causality
               0.5                                                                                                                                        0.5
               0.4                                                                                                                                        0.4
               0.3                                                                                                                                        0.3
               0.2                                                                                                                                        0.2
               0.1                                                                                                                                        0.1
                 0                                                                                                                                         0
                         All Correct                           Half Correct                              None Correct                                                 All Correct                               Half Correct         None Correct



Figure 4: Average Causality and Faithfulness results across relations depending on if the LRE was
fit with correct or incorrect samples. We find no notable difference in the choice of examples.


                            Causality for all Relations for Diﬀerent Settings of Training Examples


                                                                                                                                                                                                                      All Correct

                 0.8                                                                                                                                                                                                  Half Correct
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      None Correct
Causality


                 0.6                                                                                                                                                                                                  Majority Label Baseline
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Majority Frequency Baseline
                 0.4

                 0.2

                     0
                            pla   la      su     fo       pe     la    c        c      c        p       c       p        p       c      c       p p     s      p       p     p       p    s      pr     co
                               ys ndm per od                 rso ndm oun oun oun erso oun erso oke ity in omp erso rod upe erso erso resid erso tar                                                  es    m
                                 pr             he     fr       ns            try   tr       tr        n p try          n       mo                    u
                                                                                                                                        co any n le ct b rher n fa n m              en   n u con iden pan
                                    o s ark       ro om                a
                                                                   po rk o        cu y lar y ca           lay lan occ              n                              o                    t      n     st    t      y
                                       po    in               c
                                                co pers oun rt po n co rren gest pital                        s in gu          up evo untr hq       ad     y
                                                                                                                                                       sin com arch er
                                                                                                                                                                          th    ot
                                                                                                                                                                                   he elec iver ella birt CEO
                                         rt        un      on                            c                                ag     at     lut     y                        n           r     t io   s it  tio    h
                                                                   try   sit      n        y      cit     cit     s tru     e       io      ion           g       pa                           ny y        n n yea
                                                     try                     ion tine                 y      y         m              n                    er
                                                                                                                                                              o      ny eme                      e            am r
                                                                                       nt                                 en                                   f ba          sis                   ar             e
                                                                                                                             t                                      nd


                          Faithfulness for all Relations for Diﬀerent Settings of Training Examples

                 0.9                                                                                                                                                                                                  All Correct
                 0.8
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Half Correct
                 0.7
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      None Correct
Faithfulness


                 0.6
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Majority Label Baseline
                 0.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Majority Frequency Baseline
                 0.4
                 0.3
                 0.2
                 0.1
                   0
                            co    p       f        lan    p       p      c     c      p     la  p     su       p    pr    co    po    pr  co      co     s      s   pr      pe     pe     co
                              un lays ood             dm erso erso ount ity in erso ndm erso             pe ers       e      u          o    u       mp upe tar       es
                                                                                                                                                                         ide rson rson mpa
                                                                                                                  on side ntr kem duc ntr
                                try     p
                                    lar ro s om
                                                fr        ar     n      nu    ry      c    n    a    n      rh                  yc    o           y c any rher cons                        fat ny
                                                            k o pla        niv lan oun lead rk in spo ero p occ nt e                      t
                                                                                                                                   ur n ev by        ap     hq o a     te nt        mo
                                                                                                                                                                                                  CE
                                       ge
                                          st
                                               po
                                                  r
                                                       co             y
                                                         un n co s in ers gua try              sin   c     rt           u
                                                                                                               po erso pat lectio renc olu com ital               rch llat birth ther her           O
                                             cit t           try    nt     s     it     ge        ge oun                    ion             tio      pa    cit       ne ion          ye
                                                y                     ine trum y                    ro    try sitio n              ny y         n      n      y          m       nam r  a
                                                                         nt     en                     fb           n                ea                 y                  es
                                                                                    t                    an                             r                                     is     e
                                                                                                             d


Figure 5: Causality and Faithfulness results for each relation depending on if the LRE was fit with
correct or incorrect samples. Note that relations with only one bar do not have zeros in the other
categories. It means that there was not enough data that the model (OLMo-7B) got wrong to have
enough examples to fit.


                                                                                                                                          17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                               Best Layer Beta vs. Faithfulness

          pokemon evolution                 country currency           country language                city in country         landmark in country
                                 0.8                              1                           1
    0.6                                                                                                                                              41B
                                 0.6                            0.8
    0.4                                                                                                                                              419B
                                 0.4                            0.6                                                      0.5
                                                                                             0.5
    0.2                          0.2                            0.4                                                                                  1.05T
     0                            0                             0.2
                                                                                              0                           0
          0      2       4              0        2      4             0       2        4           0        2      4           0        2      4     2.05T


          superhero person             person sport position              person mother            person university               plays pro sport
    0.8                           1                             0.5                                                       1
                                                                                              1
    0.6                          0.8                            0.4
                                                                                                                         0.8
    0.4                          0.6                            0.3
                                                                                             0.5                         0.6
                                 0.4                            0.2
    0.2
                                                                0.1                                                      0.4
     0                           0.2
          0      2       4              0        2      4             0       2        4           0        2      4           0        2      4


              company hq         person lead singer of band           president birth year             person father      person plays instrument
                                  1                                                                                       1
                                                                0.6                          0.3
    0.6                          0.8                                                                                     0.8
    0.4                          0.6                            0.4                          0.2
                                                                                                                         0.6
    0.2                          0.4                            0.2                          0.1
                                                                                                                         0.4
                                 0.2
     0                                                            0                           0
                                                                                                                         0.2
          0      2       4              0        2      4             0       2        4           0        2      4           0        2      4


              company CEO          landmark on continent          president election year          food from country           product by company
                                  1                               1                           1
                                                                                                                         0.8
    0.4                          0.8
                                 0.6                            0.5                          0.5                         0.6
    0.2
                                 0.4
                                                                                                                         0.4
     0                           0.2                                                          0
                                                                  0
          0      2       4              0        2      4             0       2        4           0        2      4           0        2      4


          country largest city         country capital city       superhero archnemesis            person occupation      star constellation name
     1                                                          0.8                                                      0.6
                                  1                                                          0.8
                                                                0.6                          0.6                         0.4
    0.5                          0.5                            0.4                          0.4
                                                                                                                         0.2
                                                                0.2                          0.2
     0                            0
                                                                                              0
          0      2       4              0        2      4             0       2        4           0        2      4           0        2      4


Figure 6: OLMo 0424 7B per layer faithfulness scores as a function of the choice of layer at which
to fit the LRE. Note we do not use these results to choose the layer for the LRE, instead preferring
the results from the causality sweep.


measuring causality. Beta is exclusive to measuring faithfulness and rank is exclusive to causality.
We test the same ranges for each as in Hernandez et al. (2024): [0, 5] beta and [0, full rank] for
causality at varying intervals. Those intervals are every 2 from [0,100], every 5 from [100,200],
every 25 from [200, 500], every 50 from [500, 1000], every 250 from [1000, hidden size]. We
perform the hyperparameter sweeps across faithfulness and causality, but we choose the layer to edit
based on the causality score. In cases where this is not the same layer as what faithfulness would
decide, we use the layer causality chooses, as it would not make sense to train one LRE for each
metric. We refer the reader to Hernandez et al. (2024) for more details on the interactions between
hyperparameters and the choice of layer. The results of our sweeps on OLMo-7B across layers in
Figures 6 and 7 and across beta and rank choices in Figures 8 and 9.


D    BATCH S EARCH C OUNTS C OMPARED TO WIMBD

In Figure 10, we find that What’s in My Big Data (Elazar et al., 2024) matches very well to batch
search co-occurrences; however, WIMBD tends to over-predict co-occurrences (slope less than 1),
due to the sequence length being shorter than many documents, as discussed in the main paper.


E    F EATURE C ORRELATIONS AND I MPORTANCES

Our feature importance test is shown in Figure 12. This permutation test was done on the heldout
data to show which features contribute the most to generalization performance. We use PCA to


                                                                                  18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                                         Layer vs. Causality

          pokemon evolution                 country currency          country language                   city in country            landmark in country
                                  1                             1                               1                             0.8
                                                                                                                                                           41B
                                                                                                                              0.6
    0.5                                                                                                                                                    419B
                                 0.5                           0.5                             0.5                            0.4
                                                                                                                              0.2                          1.05T
     0                            0                             0                               0                              0
          0     10   20    30           0      10    20   30         0      10   20    30            0     10    20      30         0      10   20    30   2.05T


          superhero person             person sport position             person mother               person university                  plays pro sport
    0.8                                                                                         1                              1
                                                               0.4
    0.6
                                                               0.3
                                 0.5                                                           0.8
    0.4                                                                                                                       0.5
                                                               0.2
    0.2                                                                                        0.6
                                                               0.1
     0                            0                             0                                                              0
          0     10   20    30           0      10    20   30         0      10   20    30            0     10    20      30         0      10   20    30


              company hq         person lead singer of band          president birth year                person father         person plays instrument
    0.6                           1                            0.8
                                                               0.6                             0.2
    0.4                                                                                                                       0.5
                                 0.5                           0.4
    0.2                                                                                        0.1
                                                               0.2
     0                            0                             0                                                              0
                                                                                                0
          0     10   20    30           0      10    20   30         0      10   20    30            0     10    20      30         0      10   20    30


              company CEO          landmark on continent         president election year             food from country              product by company
                                  1                                                                                           0.8
    0.6                                                         1                               1
                                                                                                                              0.6
    0.4
                                 0.5                                                           0.5                            0.4
                                                               0.5
    0.2                                                                                                                       0.2
     0                            0                                                             0                              0
          0     10   20    30           0      10    20   30         0      10   20    30            0     10    20      30         0      10   20    30


          country largest city         country capital city     superhero archnemesis                person occupation         star constellation name
     1                            1                             1
                                                                                                                              0.4
                                                                                               0.5
    0.5                          0.5                           0.5
                                                                                                                              0.2

     0                            0                             0                               0                              0
          0     10   20    30           0      10    20   30         0      10   20    30            0     10    20      30         0      10   20    30


Figure 7: OLMo 0424 7B per layer causality scores as a function of the choice of layer at which to
fit the LRE.


                                                                                 19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                             Best Layer Beta vs. Faithfulness

        pokemon evolution                 country currency           country language                city in country         landmark in country
                               0.8                              1                           1
  0.6                                                                                                                                              41B
                               0.6                            0.8
  0.4                                                                                                                                              419B
                               0.4                            0.6                                                      0.5
                                                                                           0.5
  0.2                          0.2                            0.4                                                                                  1.05T
   0                            0                             0.2
                                                                                            0                           0
        0      2       4              0        2      4             0       2     4              0        2      4           0        2      4     2.05T


        superhero person             person sport position              person mother            person university               plays pro sport
  0.8                           1                             0.5                                                       1
                                                                                            1
  0.6                          0.8                            0.4
                                                                                                                       0.8
  0.4                          0.6                            0.3
                                                                                           0.5                         0.6
                               0.4                            0.2
  0.2
                                                              0.1                                                      0.4
   0                           0.2
        0      2       4              0        2      4             0       2     4              0        2      4           0        2      4


            company hq         person lead singer of band           president birth year             person father      person plays instrument
                                1                                                                                       1
                                                              0.6                          0.3
  0.6                          0.8                                                                                     0.8
  0.4                          0.6                            0.4                          0.2
                                                                                                                       0.6
  0.2                          0.4                            0.2                          0.1
                                                                                                                       0.4
                               0.2
   0                                                            0                           0
                                                                                                                       0.2
        0      2       4              0        2      4             0       2     4              0        2      4           0        2      4


            company CEO          landmark on continent          president election year          food from country           product by company
                                1                               1                           1
                                                                                                                       0.8
  0.4                          0.8
                               0.6                            0.5                          0.5                         0.6
  0.2
                               0.4
                                                                                                                       0.4
   0                           0.2                                                          0
                                                                0
        0      2       4              0        2      4             0       2     4              0        2      4           0        2      4


        country largest city         country capital city       superhero archnemesis            person occupation      star constellation name
   1                                                          0.8                                                      0.6
                                1                                                          0.8
                                                              0.6                          0.6                         0.4
  0.5                          0.5                            0.4                          0.4
                                                                                                                       0.2
                                                              0.2                          0.2
   0                            0
                                                                                            0
        0      2       4              0        2      4             0       2     4              0        2      4           0        2      4


        Figure 8: OLMo 0424 7B LRE Beta hyperparameter sweep at highest performing layer.


                                                                                20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                                 Best Layer Rank vs. Causality

          pokemon evolution                 country currency            country language                 city in country             landmark in country
                                  1                               1                             1
                                                                                                                                                             41B

    0.5                                                                                                                        0.5                           419B
                                 0.5                             0.5                           0.5
                                                                                                                                                             1.05T
     0                            0                                                             0                               0
          0    100   200   300          0      100   200   300         0     100   200   300         0     100   200     300         0     100   200   300   2.05T


          superhero person             person sport position               person mother             person university                   plays pro sport
                                  1                                                             1                               1
    0.8
    0.6                                                          0.4
    0.4                          0.5                                                           0.8
                                                                                                                               0.5
    0.2                                                          0.2

     0                                                                                         0.6
                                  0
          0    100   200   300          0      100   200   300         0     100   200   300         0     100   200     300         0     100   200   300


              company hq         person lead singer of band            president birth year              person father          person plays instrument
    0.8                           1                              0.8                                                            1
                                                                                               0.4                             0.8
    0.6                                                          0.6
                                                                                               0.3                             0.6
    0.4                          0.5                             0.4
                                                                                               0.2                             0.4
    0.2                                                          0.2
                                                                                               0.1                             0.2
     0                            0
                                                                  0
          0    100   200   300          0      100   200   300         0     100   200   300         0     100   200     300         0     100   200   300


              company CEO          landmark on continent           president election year           food from country               product by company
                                  1                               1                             1
    0.6                                                                                                                        0.8
                                 0.8                             0.8
                                                                                                                               0.6
    0.4                          0.6                             0.6                           0.5                             0.4
    0.2                          0.4                             0.4
                                                                                                                               0.2
     0                           0.2                             0.2                            0                               0
          0    100   200   300          0      100   200   300         0     100   200   300         0     100   200     300         0     100   200   300


          country largest city         country capital city       superhero archnemesis              person occupation          star constellation name
                                                                  1                             1
     1                            1
                                                                                                                               0.6

    0.5                          0.5                             0.5                           0.5                             0.4

                                                                                                                               0.2
     0                            0                               0
          0    100   200   300          0      100   200   300         0     100   200   300         0     100   200     300         0     100   200   300


     Figure 9: OLMo 0424 7B LRE Rank hyperparameter sweep at highest performing layer.


                                                                                   21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


          WIMBD vs Batch Cooccurrence. slope=0.94, r=0.99

          Batch Cooccurrence

                                          15


                                          10


                                             5


                                             0

                                                        0                                           5                                     10                                      15


                                                                                      WIMBD Cooccurrence


        Figure 10: Comparison between WIMBD and Batch Search subject-object co-occurrences



                                       Feature Correlations OLMo-7B                                                                                           Feature Correlations GPT-J

                                                                                                                         0.7
  faithfulness                 0.28          0.73            0.08           0.40           0.45         0.00                          faithfulness   0.16         0.76            0.18           0.34           0.36         0.00             0.7


                                                                                                                         0.6
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              0.6


hard_causality                 0.58          0.48            0.12           0.18           0.00         0.45                        hard_causality   0.52         0.46            0.18           0.17           0.00         0.36

                                                                                                                         0.5                                                                                                                  0.5


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              0.4
     accuracy                  -0.03         0.43            -0.06          0.00           0.18         0.40             0.4             accuracy    -0.12        0.46            0.00           0.00           0.17         0.34


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              0.3
                                                                                                                         0.3
  lm_log_prob                  0.21          0.09            0.00           -0.06          0.12         0.08                          lm_log_prob    0.16         0.19            0.00           0.00           0.18         0.18

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              0.2
                                                                                                                         0.2


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              0.1
    faith_prob                 0.29          0.00            0.09           0.43           0.48         0.73                            faith_prob   0.18         0.00            0.19           0.46           0.46         0.76

                                                                                                                         0.1

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              0


soft_causality                 0.00          0.29            0.21           -0.03          0.58         0.28             0          soft_causality   0.00         0.18            0.16           -0.12          0.52         0.16

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              −0.1


                                so              fai           lm                ac          ha           fai                                          so             fai           lm                ac          ha           fai
                                  ft_              th            _   log          cu          rd            th                                          ft_             th            _   log          cu          rd            th
                                      ca             _p                             ra          _c            ful                                           ca            _p                             ra          _c            ful
                                        us             ro               _p            cy          au             ne                                           us            ro               _p            cy          au             ne
                                           ali           b                ro                        sa              ss                                          ali           b                ro                        sa              ss
                                              ty                            b                         lity                                                         ty                            b                         lity


Figure 11: Correlations between each feature in our regression analysis. Because of the high cor-
relation between faithfulness metrics, we use a single dimensional PCA to attain one feature that
captures 89% of the variance of both for the purposes of doing feature importance tests. Note that
we zero out the diagonal (which has values of 1) for readability.


reduce the faithfulness features to one feature for the purposes of this test. Correlations are shown
in Figure 11


                                                                                                                               22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                  Permutation Importances
Change in Accuracy

                     0.15

                      0.1

                     0.05

                       0
                             So           Ac            Lm              Fa           Ha
                               ft            c ur            Lo            ithP        rd
                                  Cau            ac             g                         C
                                      s             y               Pro         ca          au
                                       ali                              b                      sa
                                          ty                                                     lity

Figure 12: Hard causality is by far the most important feature for generalizing to new relations when
predicting Object frequencies, causing a change in about 15% accuracy.


F                    R ELATIONSHIP B ETWEEN C AUSALITY AND ACCURACY
In this section, we provide more detail on the relationship between the formation of linear represen-
tations and accuracy on in-context learning tasks. Although the two are very highly correlated, we
argue that accuracy and LRE formation are somewhat independent.
We show this relationship across training for OLMo-1B in Figure 13 and 7B in Figure 14.

G                    E XTENDING TO C OMMONSENSE R ELATIONS
Following Elsahar et al. (2018), we focus on factual relations because subject-object co-occurrences
are shown to be a good proxy for mentions of the fact. For completeness, we consider 8 additional
commonsense relations here. Results for OLMo-7B are shown in Figure 15. We show that fre-
quency is correlated with causality score (.42) in these cases as well, but it is possible subject-object
frequencies do not accurately track occurrences of the relation being mentioned. For example, in
the “task person type” relation, the co-occurrence count of the subject ”researching history” and
the object “historian” does not convincingly describe all instances where the historian concept is
defined during pretraining. Co-occurrences are perhaps more convincingly related to how a model
learns that the outside of a coconut is brown, however (the fruit outside color relation). Therefore,
we caution treating these under the same lens as the factual relations. Nevertheless, we believe these
results are an interesting perspective on how a different relation family compares to factual relations.


                                                        23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Zero Shot, 5 Shot, Causality: OLMo 1B
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  41B Tokens
 1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Zero Shot

0.5                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         N Shot
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Causality
 0
      co                                 co                               co                                   co                             cit                               foo                             pla                            pre                             pe                                pe                           pe                                pre                              lan                                pro                              pe                               pe                              co                           pe                           pe                                sta                                su                         su                               co                             po
           un                                  un                                 un                                un                              y in                              d fr                            ys                             sid                             rso                              rso                             rso                              sid                               dm                                du                             rso                              rso                           m   pa                            rso                       rso                               rc                              pe                         pe                                m   pa                           ke
              tr   y la                           try la                             tr   yc                           tr  yc                              co                             om                               pro                             en                              no                            ns                              np                                  en                                ark                             ct                            n le                             nu                               ny                             n fa                      nm                                   on                             rh                         rh                                 ny                            mo
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             te                                 cc                              po                               lay                             tb                                                                 by                                                               niv                                                                                                                       ste                              ero                         ero                                                            n
                          ng                               rg                                  ap                                urr                            un                                 co                            sp                                                                  up                           rt                                                                                                 in                                                               ad                                                               hq                            th                           oth                                                                 arc                         pe                              CE                             ev
                               ua                               es                                  ita                             en                               try                                un                            ort                          lec                                                                                               s                                irth                                 co                            co                                   sin                         ers                                                           er                             er                            lla                                                                                               O                              olu
                                    ge                              tc                                 lc                                cy                                                               try                                                            tio                            a  tio                         po                                ins                                                                   un                          mp                                                                   ity                                                                                                                     tio                                hn                           rso
                                                                          ity                               ity                                                                                                                                                                ny                               n                        sit                                   tru                           ye                                                                  an                              ge                                                                                                                                                         n                                  em                            n                                                            ti    on
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  ion                              me                               ar                            tr   y                                                              ro                                                                                                                                                             na
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ea                                                                                                                                                                                                 y                                fb                                                                                                                                                                me                     es
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          r                                                                                           n      t                                                                                                                                  an                                                                                                                                                                                     is
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     d
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                104B Tokens
 1



0.5



 0
      co                                 co                               co                                   co                             pre                               foo                             cit                            pla                             pe                                pre                          pe                                pe                               lan                                pro                              pe                               co                              su                           co                           pe                                pe                                 su                         pe                               po                             sta
        un                                     un                                 un                                un                              sid                               d fr                           y in                            ys                              rso                               sid                            rso                              rso                           d    ma                           du                                 rso                           mp                               pe                           m     pa                       rso                               rso                                pe                         rso                              ke                              rc
                try                               try                               try                               try                               e                                 om                                co                             pro                            n le                              en                            np                                 no                                                          ct                                    ns                               an                           rh                                  ny                        nm                                n fa                           rh                          nu                               m   on                         on
                    c                                 la                                   lan                               cu                            nt                                                                                                                                                                   tb                               lay                           cc                               rk                                  by                               po                             yh                         ero                                                                                                                            ero                            niv                                                             ste
                       ap                                 rg                                                                      rre                            ele                               co                          un                                 sp                               ad                                                                                               up                               in                                                                   rt                                                            pe                          C                        oth                                  th                                  arc                                                         ev
                           ita                                  es                               gu                                                                   cti                               un                        tr                                  ort                               sin                          irth                            s                                                                     co                            co                                                               q                                                             EO                             er                            er                                                          e    rsit                           o                              lla
                                    lc                             t                                  ag                              nc                                                                                               y                                                                                                                                 ins                           ati                                    u                             mp                                 po                                                            rso                                                                                                                         hn                                                             luti                              tio
                                         ity                            cit                                e                             y                                 on                              try                                                                                              g  er                           ye                               tr                            o                                     ntr                           an                                   sit                                                           n                                                                                                                             em                          y                                o                               nn
                                                                              y                                                                                                  ye                                                                                                                                 of                           ar                               um                             n                                   y                                                                 ion                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       n                             am
                                                                                                                                                                                       ar                                                                                                                                                                                               en                                                                                        y                                                                                                                                                                                                                               es
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         ba                                                               t                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            is                                                                                              e
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           nd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                209B Tokens
 1



0.5



 0
      co                                 co                               co                                   co                             pre                               cit                             foo                            pla                             pe                                lan                          pre                               pe                               pe                                 co                               su                               pro                             pe                           su                           pe                                co                                 pe                         pe                               sta                            po
        un                                     un                                 un                                un                              sid                               y in                            d fr                           ys                              rso                            dm                                 sid                             rso                               rso                            mp                             pe                                   du                             rso                          pe                           rso                            mp                                    rso                        rso                            rc                            ke
          try                                    try                                try                               try                                  en                                co                           om                               pro                           n                            ark                                    en                              no                                np                          an                                rh                                  ct                              n fa                        rh                            ns                            an                                     nm                         nu                            on                          mo
              la                                         ca                                lan                               cu                                 te                                                                                                                             lea                                                             tb                                 cc                                lay                       y                                  ero                                b                                                            ero                            po                             yC                                                            niv                            s                           n
                          rg                                  pit                                                                 rre                                                          un                                co                               sp                                ds                           in                                                                  u                                                               hq                                  pe                              yc                          th                                 arc                       rt                                                                oth                                                         te                               ev
                             es                                                                 gu                                                                lec                             tr                                  un                             o                                                                co                            irth                                pa                             s in                                                                                                   om                           er                                                                                        EO                                er                          ers                              lla                               olu
                                  tc                               al                                 ag                              n  cy                            tio                              y                                                               rt                               ing                             u                                                                 tio                                                                                                 rso                                                                                           hn                         po                                                                                                 ity                         tio
                                         ity                            cit                              e                                                                 n                                                                try                                                              e                               ntr                             ye                                                                 str                                                               n                              p  an                                                          e                         sit                                                                                                                               nn                              tio
                                                                             y                                                                                                   ye                                                                                                                              ro                                y                             ar                           n                                       um                                                                                                                                                         me                               ion                                                                                                                                am                        n
                                                                                                                                                                                       ar                                                                                                                             fb                                                                                                                                en                                                                                             y                                                                 sis
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          an                                                                                                                                    t                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       e
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            d
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                419B Tokens
 1



0.5



 0
      co                                 co                               co                                   cit                            co                                foo                             pre                            pla                             pe                                pre                          lan                               pe                               pe                                 pe                               co                               su                              pro                          pe                           su                                pe                                 co                         pe                               sta                            po
           un                                  un                                 un                                y in                           un                                 d fr                            sid                            ys                              rso                              sid                              dm                              rso                               rso                             rso                              mp                               pe                               du                             rso                       pe                                rso                                mp                         rso                              rc                          ke
                try                              try                                try                                     co                       try                                  om                                en                             pro                             n le                             en                               ark                          ns                                   np                           no                               an                                rh                                ct                           n fa                        rh                                 nm                              an                            nu                            on                          m      on
                      larg                               ca                                lan                                                              cu                                                                te                                                                                              tb                                                                 po                                 lay                             cc                          y                                 ero                                 by                                                       ero                                                              y                               niv                        ste
                                                            p                                                                 un                               rre                                 co                                                             sp                               ad                                                              in                               rt                                                                 u                                 hq                              pe                                                       th                                 arc                            oth                              CE                                                                                        e
                               es                              ita                               gu                                try                                                                  un                        lec                                  ort                              sin                          irth                               co                                                                s in                            pa                                                                                               co                       er                                                                    er                           O                           ers                               lla                          vo
                                    tc                               lc                               ag                                                           n       cy                              tr                           tio                                                                                                                                un                             po                                    str                           tio                                                             rso                               mp                                                         hn                                                                                              ity                          tio                               luti
                                         ity                              ity                              e                                                                                                    y                            ny                                                            ge                               ye                                                               sit                                                                 n                                                               n                                 a                                                         em                                                                                                                             n                                   on
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 ro                            ar                             tr  y                                 ion                               um                                                                                                                               ny                                                                                                                                                                                        na
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  ea                                                                  fb                                                                                                                                en                                                                                                                                                                                     es                                                                                                                                  me
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    r                                                                      an                                                                                                                                   t                                                                                                                                                                                       is
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             d
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                628B Tokens
 1



0.5



 0
      co                                 co                               co                                   co                             pre                               foo                             pla                            pe                              cit                               pre                          pe                                lan                              pe                                 pe                               su                               co                              pro                          su                           pe                                pe                                 pe                         co                               po                             sta
        un                                     un                                 un                               un                               sid                               d fr                            ys                             rso                            y in                               sid                            rso                          dm                                    rso                             rso                              pe                               mp                              du                        pe                              rso                            rso                                   rso                        mp                            ke                              rc
              try                                 tr   y la                          tr   yc                          tr   yc                              en                             om                               pro                           n                                    co                          en                                ns                       ark                                    no                                 np                            rh                               an                                 ct                          rh                            n fa                          nu                                    nm                       an                            mo                                on
                  la                                                                                                                                         te                                                                                              lea                                                                tb                               po                                                                 cc                              lay                           ero                            y                                    by                          ero                                                             niv                                                      y                             n                                 s
                        rg                                    ng                               ap                                urr                                                               co                            sp                               ds                               un                                                              rt                              in                                  u                                                                 pe                              hq                                                             arc                      th                                                                 oth                          CE                               ev                           te
                            es                                  ua                                  ita                             en                            lec                                   un                          o                                                                try                             irth                                                                co                               pa                             s in                                                                                              co                                                        er                               e   rsit                         er                             O                                olu                         lla
                                tc                                ge                                      lc                          cy                             tio                                    try                        rt                                ing                                                                                             po                                 u                                tio                                str                            rso                                                            m                            hn                                                                                                                                                                                         tio
                                         ity                                                                ity                                                             ny                                                                                               e                                                              ye                             sit                                 ntr                               n                                                                n                                                               pa                         em                                                                 y                                                                                          tion                              nn
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ro                                                                ar                               ion                                y                                                               um                                                                                                ny                            es                                                                                                                                                                                              am
                                                                                                                                                                                  ea                                                                                                 fb                                                                                                                                                                                                en                                                                                                                                 is
                                                                                                                                                                                        r                                                                                                 an                                                                                                                                                                                                    t                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       e
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               d
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                838B Tokens
 1



0.5



 0
      co                                 co                               co                                   foo                            cit                               pe                              co                             pre                             pla                               su                           lan                               pe                               pe                                 pe                               co                               su                              pe                           pro                          co                                pe                                 pe                         sta                              pre                            po
           un                                  un                                 un                               d                               y in                               rso                           un                               sid                             ys                            pe                            dm                                    rso                               rso                             rso                           mp                                 pe                               rso                              du                    mp                                   rso                                rso                        rc                                sid                           ke
              try                                try                                 try                               fro                                 co                               n le                         try                             e                              p                                rh                        ark                                    np                                   ns                              no                              an                            rh                               n fa                            ct                           an                             nu                                    nm                     on                                  en                           m   on
                      larg                               lan                               ca                              m                                                                                                   cu                            nt                               ro                           ero                                                                    lay                            po                              cc                                 yh                         ero                                                               b                              yC                          niv                                                              ste                              tb
                                                                                               pit                               co                             un                                ad                             rre                              ele                              sp                             pe                               in                                                              rt                                    up                                                              arc                          th                             yc                                                                                           oth                                                                                            ev
                             es                               gu                                                                    u                             try                                sin                                                                cti                             ort                                                             co                            s                                                                                                   q                                                                er                             om                         EO                                ers                                er                      lla                                irth                            olu
                               tc                                   ag                               al                               ntr                                                                                            nc                                                                                                rso                                 u                              ins                               po                              a  tio                                                           hn                                                                                                                                ity                                                    ti  on
                                 ity                                     e                                 cit                           y                                                               g   er                         y                                    on                                                           n                                  ntr                                tru                              sit                              n                                                             e                                                           pa                                                                                                                                                              ye                              tio
                                                                                                               y                                                                                                    of                                                             ye                                                                                              y                                 me                               ion                                                                                             me                                                            ny                                                                                                                           na                             ar                               n
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         ba                                                           a   r                                                                                                                                nt                                                                                                                               sis                                                                                                                                                                                    me
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            nd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             1048B Tokens
 1



0.5



 0
      co                                 co                               co                                   co                             foo                               pla                             pre                            pe                              cit                               pe                           su                                pe                               pe                                 co                               lan                              pro                             pre                          su                           pe                                pe                                 co                         pe                               po                             sta
           un                                  un                                 un                                un                              d fr                              ys                              sid                            rso                             y in                            rso                        pe                                     rso                               rso                             mp                              dm                                 du                              sid                      pe                              rso                               rso                              m  pa                        rso                              ke                           rc
              tr y la                             tr   y la                          tryc                              tr   yc                          om                                  pro                             en                            n le                                co                           ns                           rh                                   no                             np                              a   ny                          a                                   ct                                en                         rh                            n fa                              nm                                 ny                         nu                            m   on                         on
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              te                                                                                                po                           ero                               cc                                   lay                                                             rk                             b                                tb                            ero                                                                                                                           niv                                                        s
                        rg                                    ng                            ap                                   urr                             co                                sp                                                            ad                                un                             rt                               pe                               up                                                               hq                                  in                              yc                                                             arc                    th                                   oth                            CE                                                           e                              te
                             es                                    ua                            ita                                en                                un                             ort                           lec                                 sin                           try                                                                                                                                s                                                                     co                              om                           irth                                                       er                                 er                           O                             e rsit                         vo                               lla
                                  tc                                  g                               lc                              cy                                try                                                             tio                                                                                            po                                rso                           a   tio                              ins                                                                  u                                                                                         hn                                                                                                                                                            luti                          tio
                                         ity                             e                                  ity                                                                                                                               ny                           g  er                                                            sit                             n                                    n                                tru                                                               ntr                         pa                                ye                            em                                                                                                                           y                                on                          nn
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   of                                                            ion                                                                                                   me                                                               y                             ny                              ar                          es                                                                                                                                                                                        am
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                ea                                      ba                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                is
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       r                                                                                                                                                                                                    nt                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         e
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              nd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     2T Tokens
 1



0.5



 0
      co                                 co                               co                                   pla                            co                                foo                             pre                            cit                             pre                               pe                           pe                                su                               pe                                 lan                              pe                               co                              su                           po                           pe                                pro                                pe                         pe                               co                             sta
           un                                  un                                 un                                 ys                            un                                 d fr                            sid                          y in                              sid                              rso                        rs                                  pe                                  rso                               dm                           rs                                 mp                           pe                                 ke                        rso                             du                                   rso                        rso                           mp                              rc
              tr                                  tr                                 tr                                   pro                         tr                                                                    en                                                                en                         n le                           on                                rh                                no                               ark                            on                                a                              rh                               mo                        nu                                   ct                              n fa                       nm                            a                              on
                   y la                                y la                               yc                                                               yc                             om                                                               co                                                                                                 sp                             ero                                                                                                    pla                           ny                              ero                            n                                                              b                                                                                            ny                         s
                        rg                                    ng                               ap                                sp                             urr                                co                         te                              un                                tb                               ad                                ort                                                              cc                               in                                 y                            h                                                               ev                         niv                                 yc                           th                             oth                             C                              te
                             es                                    ua                            ita                               ort                             en                                   un                         lec                          try                                  irth                             sin                                                           pe                                up                                   co                             s in                            q                             arc                               olu                         ers                              om                          er                              er                                EO                             lla
                                  tc                                    ge                             lc                                                            cy                                   try                            tio                                                                                                                             po                               rso                               ati                              un                                 str                                                        hn                                                               ity                                                                                                                                                           tio
                                         ity                                                                ity                                                                                                                               ny                                                              ye                            ge                              s   itio                            n                               o  n                                                                                                                         em                               tio                                                        pa                                                                                                                                  nn
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                ar                             r   of                                                                                                                                try                              um                                                                                         n                                                         ny                                                                                                                                        am
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  ea                                                                                                                                  n                                                                                                                                  en                                                             es
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       r                                                                                              b  an                                                                                                                                                                 t                                                               is                                                                                                                                                                                                                         e
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              d


Figure 13: Zero shot, 5-shot accuracies against causality for each relation across training time in
OLMo-1B


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         24
                      Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Zero Shot, 5 Shot, Causality: OLMo 7B
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   41B Tokens
                       1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Zero Shot

                      0.5                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        N Shot
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Causality
                       0
                                co                                 co                                co                               cit                                foo                               co                                 pre                            lan                              pla                                 pe                           pe                               pe                                pro                             co                              pe                                pe                                    pre                           pe                           co                              su                                 su                              sta                         pe                                 po
                                     un                                  un                                 un                              y in                               d fr                             un                                  sid                              dm                             ys                                 rso                              rso                          rso                                  du                         m      pa                         rso                               rso                                     sid                         rso                        m  pa                             pe                              pe                                 rc                          rso                                ke
                                        tr   y la                           try la                             tr   yc                              co                             om                              tr   yc                                en                                ark                           pro                             no                               np                           ns                                     ct                             ny                          n le                              nu                                      en                          nm                           ny                             rh                                 rh                                  on                       n fa                               mo
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            te                                                                                                    cc                            lay                             po                                  by                                                                                                 niv                               tb                                                                                      ero                                ero                              ste                                                          n
                                                    rg                              ng                                   ap                           un                                    co                               urr                                                                  in                                sp                              up                                                               rt                                                             hq                                ad                                                                                                 oth                          CE                                arc                               pe                                                          th                              ev
                                                       es                                    ua                            ita                             try                                   un                             en                               lec                                   co                                ort                                                        s                                                                    co                                                                 sin                              ers                              irth                             er                          O                                                                                             lla                               er                               olu
                                                            tc                                  g                               lc                                                                 try                            cy                                   tio                                  un                                                           ati                             ins                              po                               mp                                                                                                       ity                                                                                                                         hn                           rso                            tio
                                                                 ity                                e                                 ity                                                                                                                                   ny                                                                                               on                             tru                             sit                                   an                                                              ge                                                                 ye                                                                                             em                             n                            n                                                               ti  on
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              try                                                                                                   me                              ion                                                                                             ro                                                                  ar                                                                                                                                                          na
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  ea                                                                                                                                                                                                   y                                                              fb                                                                                                                                                               e     sis                                                         me
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       r                                                                                                                               n   t                                                                                                                                  an
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       d
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                104B Tokens
                       1



                      0.5



                       0
                                co                                 co                                co                               pre                                foo                               co                                 pe                             pla                              cit                                 pre                          pe                               lan                               su                              pro                             pe                                pe                                    co                            pe                           su                              pe                                 pe                              co                          sta                                po
                                  un                                     un                                 un                               sid                               d fr                            un                               rso                                  ys                             y in                                sid                             rso                         d    ma
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      pe                             du                                rso                               rso                                 m    pa                         rso                         pe                               rso                                rso                           m  pa                         rc                                 ke
                                         try                                try                               try                                  en                              om                              try                                   n le                              pro                                co                             en                            np                                                               rh                         ct                                       no                             ns                                      ny                       n fa                          rh                                nm                                 nu                              ny                      on                                  m   on
                                             la                                 c                                    lan                             te                                                                c                                                                                                                                       tb                               lay                            rk                             ero                                 by                              cc                                   po                                                                                       ero                                                                  niv                                                         ste
                                                  rg                                urr                                                                                                     co                               ap                                ad                                 sp                                un                                                                                              in                                pe                                                                up                                   rt                           h                              th                              arc                      oth                                                                 C                                                               e
                                                       es                              en                                  gu                             lec                                    un                               ita                               sin                                ort                             tr                            irth                           s                                    co                                                             co                                                                                                    q                            er                                                               er                             ers                             EO                          lla                               vo
                                                          t                                    cy                               ag                              tio                                                                  lc                                                                                                   y                                                              ins                                u                              rso                              mp                             ati                                    po                                                                                        hn                                                                    ity                                                        tio                              luti
                                                               cit                                                                   e                                ny                            tr     y                              ity                           g  er                                                                                                ye                              tr                               ntr                             n                                an                              o                                     sit                                                                                         em                                                                                                                             nn                                 o
                                                                    y                                                                                                                                                                                                            of                                                                                                ar                              um                             y                                                                                                 n                                     ion                                                                                                                                                                                                                            am                           n
                                                                                                                                                                              ea                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      en                                                                                          y                                                                                                                                                                es
                                                                                                                                                                                r                                                                                                      ba                                                                                                                               t                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   is                                                                                                                                e
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            nd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                209B Tokens
                       1



                      0.5



                       0
                                co                                 co                                co                               co                                 foo                               pla                                pe                             pre                              cit                                 su                           pre                              lan                               pe                              pe                              pro                               pe                                    co                            pe                           po                              pe                                 pe                              co                          su                                 sta
                                  un                                     un                                 un                              un                                 d fr                             ys                                 rso                               sid                            y in                            pe                                  sid                        dm                                    rso                           rso                             du                                rso                                mp                               rso                       ke                                 rso                                rso                          mp                          pe                                  rc
                                    try                                    try                                try                             try                                  om                                 pro                              n                                    en                                co                         rh                                   en                     ark                                    no                               np                                 ct                             ns                                   an                             n fa                   mo                                    nu                                 nm                           an                         rh                                  on
                                        la                                         ca                                lan                             cu                                                                                                    lea                                   tb                                                           ero                               te                                                                  cc                             lay                             b                                   po                                yh                                                  n                                        niv                                                           yC                          ero                               s
                                                    rg                                  pit                                                               rre                               co                               sp                                 ds                                                                  un                              pe                                                              in                                 u                                                              yc                                 rt                                                            th                             ev                                                                oth                                                            arc                            te
                                                         es                                                               gu                                                                     un                               ort                                                              irth                               try                                                            lec                                 co                               pa                            s in                            om                                                                 q                                  er                          olu                               ers                            er                              EO                                                              lla
                                                            tc                                al                                ag                            n     cy                                 try                                                             ing                                                                                               rso                            tio                                 u                                tio                                                                                                  po                                                                                                                              ity                                                                                      hn                                 tio
                                                                 ity                               cit                             e                                                                                                                                       e                                 ye                                                                n                                ny                              ntr                                                            str                                pa                                sit                                                                                         tio                                                                                                                           e                                    nn
                                                                                                        y                                                                                                                                                                    ro                                ar                                                                                                                                    y                          n                                    um                                 ny                                 ion                                                                                     n                                                                                                                                   me                                 am
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     fb                                                                                                                              ea                                                                                                en                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    sis
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          an                                                                                                                           r                                                                                                        t                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            e
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             d
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                419B Tokens
                       1



                      0.5



                       0
                                co                                 co                                foo                              co                                 co                                pre                                pre                            pla                              cit                                 pe                           po                               su                                lan                             pe                              pe                                pro                                   pe                            co                           su                              pe                                 pe                              co                          pe                                 sta
                                     un                                  un                                  d fr                           un                                un                                 sid                                sid                              ys                             y in                               rso                       ke                                  pe                                  dm                            rso                             rso                                   du                                rso                        mp                              pe                              rso                                rso                           m   pa                        rso                                 rc
                                         try                               try                                   om                           try                               try                                    en                                 en                               pro                                co                          n le                      m         on                          rh                                   ark                           ns                           np                                      ct                              no                         an                               rh                                n fa                            nu                               ny                         nm                                 on
                                                larg                               lan                                                               cu                                   ca                             te                                 tb                                                                                                                                                                ero                                                                 po                                 lay                               by                                cc                     y                                ero                                                                 niv                                                                                         ste
                                                                                                                         co                             rre                                  p                                                                                                    sp                                un                            ad                             e                                  pe                               in                                rt                                                                                                  up                            hq                              arc                          th                                                                CE                            oth
                                                         es                              gu                                   un                                                                ita                           lec                                irth                                  ort                             try                             sin                          vo                                                                     co                                                            s                                   co                                                                                                                            er                              ers                               O                              er                             lla
                                                              tc                              ag                                 tr                         n       cy                                lc                            tio                                                                                                                                                                  luti                             rso                                  un                           po                               ins                               mp                                 ati                                                       hn                                                                    ity                                                                                         tio
                                                                   ity                              e                                 y                                                                 ity                               ny                              ye                                                                                                ge                                 on                               n                                                             sit                                  tru                                 an                            on                                                          em                                                                                                                                                               n
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             a   r                                                                                                 ro                                                                                             tr  y                              ion                                me                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             na
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                ea                                                                                                                                   fb                                                                                                                                                                                                      y                                                                                     es                                                                                                                                                                    me
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  r                                                                                                                                        an                                                                                                                                                              n      t                                                                                                                         is
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               d
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                628B Tokens
                       1



                      0.5


                            Data
                       0
                                co                                 co                                co                               foo                                co                                pe                                 pla                            cit                              pre                                 pre                          su                               po                                lan                             pe                              pe                                pro                                   co                            pe                           su                              pe                                 pe                              pe                          co                                 sta
                                    un                                   un                                 un                              d fr                           un                                   rso                                 ys                               y in                               sid                            sid                       pe                               ke                                     dm                            rso                             rso                                   du                             mp                               rso                          pe                              rso                                rso                          rso                         mp                                  rc
                                        try                                 tr   y la                          tr   yc                          om                            tr    yc                              n                                    pro                                co                             en                             en                              rh                         mo                                        ark                           ns                                 np                             ct                                   an                             no                          rh                              n fa                             nu                              nm                       an                                    on
                                            la                                                                                                                                                                          lea                                                                                                     tb                             te                             ero                       n                                                                         po                                 lay                          b                                     yh                            cc                           ero                                                               niv                                                    y                                     s
                                                 ng                                     rg                               ap                               co                               urr                                ds                                sp                               un                                                                                                 pe                              ev                               in                             rt                                                                     yc                                                           up                               arc                          th                                                                oth                           CE                              te
                                                    ua                                    es                                  ita                             un                              en                                                                   o                               try                                irth                           lec                                                                 olu                               co                                                              s in                                om                         q                                                                                              er                               ers                              er                               O                             lla
                                                       g                                       tc                                lc                                 try                         cy                                 ing                               rt                                                                                                 tio                             rso                                                                  un                             po                                  str                                                                                            ati                             hn                                                                 ity                                                                                        tio
                                                               e                                    ity                               ity                                                                                              e                                                                                                       ye                              ny                              n                             ti on                                                            sit                                                                 p    an                                                           on                            e                                                                                                                                                              nn
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              ro                                                                                                  ar                                                                                                                              try                                ion                               um                                                                                                                            me                                                                                                                                                                   am
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   fb                                                                                                                               ea                                                                                                                                                                    e                                  y                                                                                             sis
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         an                                                                                                                               r                                                                                                                                                                   nt                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             e
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           d
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                838B Tokens
                       1



es                    0.5


 vs linear features    0
                                 co
                                     un
                                          try
                                                                     co
                                                                          un
                                                                            try
                                                                                                            pre
                                                                                                               sid
                                                                                                                                            pre
                                                                                                                                                  sid
                                                                                                                                                                               foo
                                                                                                                                                                                   d      fro
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  co
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        un
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          try
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      pe
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           rso
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 n le
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           pla
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 ys
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              cit
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 y in
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              co
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 u  ntr
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               po
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ke
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       m
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                lan
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    d     ma
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     pe
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          rso
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                np
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     pe
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            rso
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 ns
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           pe
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             rso
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   no
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             co
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               mp
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          an
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  pro
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     du
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ct
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               su
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    pe
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      rh
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               pe
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 rso
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          n fa
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 pe
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     rso
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             nm
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  co
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    mp
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              an
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 pe
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     rso
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          nu
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       sta
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            rc
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              on
                                                                                                                   e nt                               e  nt                                   m                                                                                                     p  ro                                 co                              yc                              on                                    rk                                                                                                                                                                                                      ero
                                                larg                                lan                                                                                                                                           ca                                   ad                                    sp                                un                              urr                           e                                                                     lay                               po                              cc                                        yh                            by                                                                  th                            oth                                 yC                       niv                                    ste
                                                                                             gu                               bir                              ele                                co                                    pit                                                                                                      try                                                                vo                               in                                    s in                            rt                                up                                    q                               co                            arc                               er                                                                   EO                             ers                             lla
                                                         es                                        ag                            th                                 cti                              u     ntr                             al                             sin                                     ort                                                             en                                    luti                               co                                                                   po                              a                                                                     m                              hn                                                                 er                                                                                                 ti
                                                              tc                                        e                             ye                                  on                                                                    cit                           g                                                                                                     cy                                                                        u ntr                            str                                   sit                               tio                                                                pa                            e                                                                                                                                        ity                            on
                                                                   ity                                                                      ar                                                                y                                      y                                er                                                                                                                                     on                                                                      um                                 ion                                n                                                                ny                              me                                                                                                                                                                        na
                                                                                                                                                                               ye                                                                                                           of                                                                                                                                                                      y                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   me
                                                                                                                                                                                  a   r                                                                                                          ba                                                                                                                                                                                                     e    nt                                                                                                                                                                     sis
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      nd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            1048B Tokens
                       1


 regressions          0.5



 regressions 2         0
                                co
                                     un
                                                                   co
                                                                         un
                                                                                                     foo                              co
                                                                                                                                            un
                                                                                                                                                                         pla                               co
                                                                                                                                                                                                                un
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              pre                            cit
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     y in
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              pre                                 po
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ke
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               pe
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        rso
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                su
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     pe
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  lan                             pe
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       rso
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  pe
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       rso
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    pe
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         rso
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          pro                           co
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             mp
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     su
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          pe
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     pe
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          rso
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        pe
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             rso
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        pe
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             rso
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    sta                                co
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          m
                                        tr                                  tr                               d fr                              tr                             ys                                   tr                               sid                                                                 sid                               m                                                              rh                          dm                                                                                                                                      du                                                                rh                                                                                                                      rc                                     pa
                                           y la                                  y la                            om                                yc                               pro                                yc                                 en                                co                                en                              on                           n le                            ero                         ark                                ns                                    np                            no                               ct                               a   ny                           ero                            nu                                 nm                           n fa                           on                                  ny
                                                 ng                                     rg                                                               ap                                sp                                urr                            tb                                   un                             te                               e                              ad                                                                                                po                                 lay                        cc                                       by                              hq                                                           niv                             oth                           th                            s   te                              CE
                                                                                                                         co                                   ita                                                                                                irth                              try                                lec                            vo                                                             pe                               in                              rt                                    s in                              up                               co                                                         arc                              e                                                                er                           lla
                                                         ua                                  es                               un                                                                 ort                            en                                                                                                                                       luti                         sin                                 rso                              co                               po                                                                  a                                m                                                           hn                              rsit                            er                                                              tio                         O
                                                                                               tc                                                                lc                                                               cy                                                                                                        tio                                                                                                                               u                                                                                                    tio
nt comparisons
                                                              ge                                 ity                            try                                  ity                                                                                                  ye                                                                    ny                            on                           ge                                n                                  ntr                            sit                             str                                                                   pa                                                         e                                   y                                                                                           nn
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ar                                                                                                                                  ro                                                                y                               ion                               um                              n                               ny                                                             me                                                                                                                          am
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  ea                                                                 fb                                                                                                                                   e                                                                                                                                sis
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         r                                                                an                                                                                                                                  nt                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              e
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             d
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     2T Tokens
                       1

e lres over time

                            Development of LREs over training time
                      0.5



or training            0
                                co                                 foo                               co                               pe                                 co                                pla                                pre                            co                               cit                                 su                           po                               pe                                lan                             pre                             pe                                pe                                    co                            su                           pro                             pe                                 pe                              pe                          sta                                co
                                     un                                  d fr                               un                              rso                               un                                 ys                                 sid                           un                                y in                            pe                            ke                               rs                                    dm                                sid                       rs                                  rso                                 mp                           pe                            du                                rso                                rso                             rso                       rc                                mp
                                        tr                                                                     tr                                n le                            tr                                   pro                                 en                         tr                                                                  rh                          m                                   on                                ark                                   en                        on                               no                                  a                              rh                              ct                            n fa                               nu                              nm                       on                                 a
                                             y la                            om                                   y la                                                              yc                                                                                                      yc                                co                              ero                             on                               sp                                                                                                   pla                                                                ny                           ero                           b                                                                                                                         s                                      ny
                                                  rg                                    co                               ng                              ad                                ap                                sp                             te                                   urr                                un                                                           e                                  ort                              in                            tb                                   y                              cc                                 h                                                           yc                         th                                  niv                                oth                           te                              C
                                                                                                                                                                                             ita                                                                 lec                                                                  try                           pe                               vo                                                                                                 irth                               s in                          up                                   q                           arc                                                      er                                      ers                                                             lla                             EO
on between features
                                                       es                                    un                               ua                              sin                                                                 ort                                                               en                                                                 rso                               luti                             po                               co                                                                                                     ati                                                        hn                            om                                                                                              er                                 tio
                                                          tc                                   try                                  ge                              ge                             lc                                                                  tio                            cy                                                                                                                                     s                               un                                ye                                 str                                 o                                                                                      pa                                                                   ity                                                              nn
                                                                ity                                                                                                      ro                             ity                                                                  ny                                                                                                n                                on                                itio                            try                             ar                                   um                                n                                                     em                              ny
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  ea                                                                                                                                                                   n                                                                                                                                                                                                 es                                                                                                                                                              am
                                [
                                                                                                                                                                              fb                                                                                                       r                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  en                                                                                                is                                                                                                                                                             e
                                                                                                                                                                                   an                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        t
                                                                                                                                                                                     d



ons                                   0 : 100000
                                      1 : 200000
 parison
                      Figure   14: Zero shot, 5-shot accuracies against causality for each relation across training time in
                         2 : 25000
dout
                      OLMo-7B
                         3 : 409000
 causality results                    4 : 10000

esults                                5 : 50000
                                      6 : 150000
essions
                                      7 : 250000
 tions                      ]

 er

ms                          OLMo-7B 0424 Development of Commonsense LREs over Training Time

training time                                                 1                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        fruit inside color

 tching                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                fruit outside color
                                                 0.9
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       object superclass
egressions
                                                 0.8
                            Causality


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       substance phase of matter
kpoint frequency
                                                 0.7                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   task done by tool
g the future                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           task person type
                                                 0.6
heldout rels                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           word sentiment

                                                 0.5                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   work location


s batch
                                                 0.4

                                                                                                    4                                                                                                                  6                                                                                                                    8                                                                                                        10                                                                                                                12                                                                                                       14
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Log Subj-Obj Cooccurrence

                                                                                                     Figure 15: Commonsense relations compared to pretraining time in OLMo-7B.


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          25
