Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


R ETHINKING AUDIO -V ISUAL A DVERSARIAL V UL -
NERABILITY FROM T EMPORAL AND M ODALITY P ER -
SPECTIVES
 ⋆
  Zeliang Zhang1 , ∗ Susan Liang1 , Daiki Shimada1,2 , Chenliang Xu1
 1                            2
  University of Rochester       Sony Group Corporation
 {zeliang.zhang, susan.liang, chenliang.xu}@rochester.edu
 Daiki.Shimada@sony.com



                                                   A BSTRACT

              While audio-visual learning equips models with a richer understanding of the real
              world by leveraging multiple sensory modalities, this integration also introduces
              new vulnerabilities to adversarial attacks. In this paper, we present a comprehen-
              sive study of the adversarial robustness of audio-visual models, considering both
              temporal and modality-specific vulnerabilities. We propose two powerful adver-
              sarial attacks: 1) a temporal invariance attack that exploits the inherent temporal
              redundancy across consecutive time segments and 2) a modality misalignment at-
              tack that introduces incongruence between the audio and visual modalities. These
              attacks are designed to thoroughly assess the robustness of audio-visual models
              against diverse threats. Furthermore, to defend against such attacks, we introduce
              a novel audio-visual adversarial training framework. This framework addresses
              key challenges in vanilla adversarial training by incorporating efficient adversar-
              ial perturbation crafting tailored to multi-modal data and an adversarial curricu-
              lum strategy. Extensive experiments in the Kinetics-Sounds dataset demonstrate
              that our proposed temporal and modality-based attacks in degrading model per-
              formance can achieve state-of-the-art performance, while our adversarial train-
              ing defense largely improves the adversarial robustness as well as the adversarial
              training efficiency.


1        I NTRODUCTION
Audio-visual models, capable of integrating both auditory and visual information, have gained sig-
nificant traction in recent years due to their ability to create a comprehensive understanding of the
surrounding world (Li et al., 2022a; Song et al., 2023; 2024a;b). These models have demonstrated
remarkable success in a wide range of applications, including multimedia analysis (Dimoulas, 2016),
human-computer interaction (Zhen et al., 2023), and autonomous systems (Guo et al., 2023). How-
ever, a critical challenge lies in their susceptibility to adversarial attacks (Zhang et al., 2024b;a;
Yao et al., 2024). These attacks can craft imperceptible perturbations to the input data, causing
audio-visual models to make erroneous predictions (Wang et al., 2022) or interpretations (Han et al.,
2023). Such errors can have disastrous consequences, especially in safety-critical domains like auto-
driving (Kloukiniotis et al., 2022) and identity verification (Zhang et al., 2021).
While prior work has investigated the adversarial robustness of audio-visual models (Tian & Xu,
2021; Yang et al., 2021; Li et al., 2022b), they primarily rely on general adversarial attack methods,
such as FGSM (Goodfellow et al., 2015) and I-FGSM (Kurakin et al., 2017), originally designed for
the single-modality data. These methods are simply adapted to the audio-visual domain without fully
capitalizing on its unique characteristics. A key limitation of such approaches lies in their inability
to consider the inherent properties of audio-visual data. Unlike single modality, audio-visual data
possesses two crucial aspects: temporal consistency and intermodal correlation. For instance, in a
video of a dog barking, we see and hear the barking event unfold over time, not just in a single
frame. These properties play a vital role in human perception of the real world (Sun et al., 2022;
     ∗
         Equal contribution. Listed order is random.


                                                       1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Yang et al., 2023a). However, current attack methods fail to exploit them, potentially limiting their
effectiveness. Conversely, by leveraging these characteristics, we can craft more potent attacks and
develop improved robust learning strategies specifically tailored for audio-visual models.
In this work, we rethink the adversarial vulnerability of audio-visual models through the lenses of
temporal and modality perspectives. We begin with an empirical analysis to assess the vulnerability
of existing models. Our case study experiments reveal several key findings, including the presence
of adversarial transferability within the audio-visual domain, and the significant impact of temporal
consistency and modality correlations on model robustness. Leveraging these insights, we propose
two novel adversarial attacks tailored to the unique properties of multi-modal data: 1) the temporal
invariance attack, which targets robust and temporally consistent audio-visual features by introduc-
ing inconsistencies across consecutive frames, and 2) the modality misalignment attack, which crafts
adversarial examples by inducing incongruencies between the audio and visual streams.
To mitigate the vulnerabilities exposed by these dedicated attacks, we propose a novel audio-visual
adversarial training framework that serves as a robust defense mechanism. Our framework addresses
critical challenges in robust multi-modal learning by incorporating efficient adversarial perturbation
crafting techniques along with an adversarial curriculum training strategy. The proposed defense
aims to significantly improve the robustness of audio-visual models against adversarial attacks with
minimal impact on training efficiency.
Our contributions can be summarized as follows:

      1. We first identify the existence of adversarial transferability in audio-visual learning, and
         introduce two powerful adversarial attacks, namely the Temporal Invariance-based Attack
         (TIA) and the Modality Misalignment-based Attack (MMA), to evaluate the adversarial
         robustness of audio-visual models comprehensively.
      2. We propose efficient adversarial perturbation crafting and adversarial curriculum training
         aimed at enhancing both the robustness and efficiency of audio-visual models.
      3. We validate the effectiveness of both our proposed attacks and defense mechanisms through
         extensive experiments conducted on the widely-used Kinetics-Sounds dataset.

2     R ELATED W ORK
2.1   AUDIO - VISUAL L EARNING

The field of audio-visual learning encompasses a wide range of tasks, including audio-visual event
recognition (Brousmiche et al., 2019; Xia & Zhao, 2022; Brousmiche et al., 2022), separation (Wu
et al., 2019a; Majumder et al., 2021; Majumder & Grauman, 2022; Huang et al., 2023a), localiza-
tion (Wu et al., 2019b; 2021; Huang et al., 2023b), correspondence learning (Min et al., 2020; Zhu
et al., 2021; Morgado et al., 2021), representation learning (Zhou et al., 2019; Cheng et al., 2020;
Rahman et al., 2021), and cross-modal generation (Chen et al., 2017; Hao et al., 2018; Sung-Bin
et al., 2023; Liang et al., 2023a; 2024; Huang et al., 2024; Liang et al., 2023b). Among these, audio-
visual event recognition stands out as a fundamental task (Gao et al., 2024) that has attracted signif-
icant research attention, particularly regarding robustness and security issues (Yang et al., 2023b).
Deep learning models employed in audio-visual event recognition typically comprise three main
components: visual encoder, audio encoder, and fusion layer. Although prior research has exten-
sively focused on optimizing these components to enhance task performance, there has been limited
consideration of their implications for security and robustness.
In this work, we delve into the individual components of these models and examine their respective
impacts on robustness, shedding light on crucial but often overlooked aspects.

2.2   A DVERSARIAL ATTACK & D EFENSE

Research efforts in adversarial robustness for audio-visual models have been relatively limited. Tian
et al. (Tian & Xu, 2021) were among the first to explore the potential of audio-visual integration
in enhancing robustness against multi-modal attacks. Yang et al.(Yang et al., 2021) proposed an
adversarially robust audio-visual fusion layer to defend against single-source adversarial attacks.


                                                  2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Li et al. (Li et al., 2022b) introduced a novel mix-up strategy in the audio-visual fusion layer to
improve the robustness of audio-visual models. Yang et al. (Yang et al., 2023b) proposed a certified
robust training method to boost the multi-modal robustness. However, they primarily focused on
adapting single-modality adversarial attacks to audio-visual scenes. There remains a critical need for
powerful audio-visual adversarial attacks that can serve as benchmarks for evaluating the adversarial
robustness of audio-visual methods and the effectiveness of robust training techniques.
In this work, we address the gap by designing an effective audio-visual adversarial attack method that
facilitates a more comprehensive assessment of model robustness. We further propose an efficient
defense technique to enhance the robustness of audio-visual models against adversarial attacks.

3                                                           E MPIRICAL ROBUSTNESS A NALYSIS OF AUDIO -V ISUAL M ODELS

Notations. Given an audio clip xa and video frames xv , we use an audio network fa (xa ; θa ) to
extract audio features, a visual network fv (xv ; θv ) to extract visual features and a fusion network
fu for modality integration. We denote the complete audio-visual network with F (xv , xa ; θ) :=
fu (fv (xv ; θv ), fa (xa ; θa ); θu ), where θ = (θv , θa , θu ) are the overall network parameters.
Temporal consistency and modality correlation are two fundamental characteristics of audio-visual
learning. On the one hand, these characteristics provide the robustness and generalization capa-
bilities to audio-visual models. The temporal consistency in audio-visual data reinforces learning
across consecutive frames, while the cross-modal correlations between auditory and visual signals
offer mutually complementary information. These properties enable audio-visual models to learn
robust and reliable representations. However, the temporal and cross-modal dependency also para-
doxically create new vulnerabilities. Unlike conventional attack methods, audio-visual adversarial
attacks can exploit these relationships to cause inconsistencies within the model, leading to errors.
This duality underscores the critical need to understand and address adversarial robustness in audio-
visual models from both temporal and modality perspectives.
Corruption Robustness. Here, we provide experiments to support our arguments. We train an
audio-visual model on the Kinetics-Sounds dataset (Arandjelovic & Zisserman, 2017), which takes
the VGG as the vision encoder, the AlexNet as the audio encoder, and the sum operation as the
fusion operation followed by the decision layer. We randomly mask a ratio of ρ of the audio-visual
data along the temporal dimension, where 0% < ρ < 30%, and evaluate the model performance on
the masked audio-visual data. For a comprehensive understanding of how different modalities affect
the audio-visual model’s decision, we set up three groups, namely perturbing the video only (V×),
perturbing the audio only (A×), and perturbing both the audio and visual synchronously (A×⊕V×)
and asynchronously (A×⊗V×).



&ODVVLILFDWLRQ DFFXUDF\


                                                                                                                                                                    $WWDFN VXFFHVV UDWH


                                                                     $×                 A× V×                                                                                                                                                           $×                  A× V×
                                                                     9×                 A× V×                                                                                                                                                         9×                  A× V×

                                                                      7KH UDWLR   RI DXGLR YLVXDO WR EH PDVNHG                                                                         7KH UDWLR   RI DXGLR YLVXDO WR EH PDVNHG


Figure 1: Classification accuracy of the model                                                                                                                      Figure 2: Average black-box attack success rate
when masking the audio and visual data with a                                                                                                                       (%) against 7 black-box models.
ratio of ρ.

We have three observations from the results shown in fig. 1. First, the audio-visual data is relatively
redundant in temporal information. By masking the audio-visual data with certain ranges, e.g.,
ρ < 20%, the model remains at least 50% classification success rate, indicating robustness against


                                                                                                                                                                3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


the temporal perturbation. Second, the model heavily relies on the visual modality to make the deci-
sion, leaving the audio modality less attention. With the same ratio ρ to be masked, the degradation
of model performance caused by perturbing the visual data is significantly greater than perturbing
the audio data only with a clear margin of 12.3%. Third, the correlations between different modal-
ities increase the performance of audio-visual learning. Compared to asynchronous perturbation of
audio and visual data, synchronous perturbation causes relatively larger performance degradation,
indicating the complementary of two modalities in helping the model make decisions.
Adversarial Robustness. For a given audio-visual input (xa , xv ) with ground-truth y, the goal of
the adversarial attack is crafting perturbation δa (audio) and δv (visual) to deceive F into making a
wrong prediction. This process is formulated as follows,
                                   max L(F (xv + δv , xa + δa ; θ), y)
                                                                                                        (1)
                                    s.t. ∥δv ∥p ≤ ϵv , ∥δa ∥p ≤ ϵa ,
where L is an arbitrary loss function, ∥∥p is the p-norm, and ϵv and ϵa are the adversarial perturbation
budgets for visual and audio modalities, respectively.
For a further study of the impact of temporal consistency and modality correlation on the adversar-
ial robustness, we additionally train various audio-visual models on the Kinetics-Sounds dataset to
evaluate the adversarial attack performance. We, respectively, use the VGG and ResNet as the vi-
sion backbone, the AlexNet and ResNet as the audio backbone, and the sum and concat as the fusion
layer, in a total of 8 models. We set the model with VGG as the vision backbone, AlexNet as the
audio backbone, and concat as the fusion layer, as the surrogate model to generate adversarial exam-
ples by FGSM (Goodfellow et al., 2015) under the white-box setting, which is up to 78.3% attack
success rate. Then, we set the other 7 models as black-box models to further evaluate adversarial
transferability.
As shown in fig. 2, we can find that adversarial transferability between different models also exists
in the audio-visual data. Without any precomputed masking operation, the generated audio-visual
adversarial examples have an average attack success rate of 31.7% against the selected black-box
models. By masking different modalities along the temporal dimension adequately with ratio ρ
to generate multiple copies for gradient calculation, the adversarial transferability can be boosted.
Also, a high setting of ρ causes a loss of information, hindering the quality of generated adversarial
examples and degrading the adversarial transferability. Specifically, it can bring up to an improve-
ment of 3.8% by only masking the audio, 9.3% by only masking the video, and 13.8% by masking
both the audio and visual modality. These results uncover that temporal redundancy in audio and
visual data can be naturally used to boost adversarial transferability. Besides, the compensation
function from the modality correlation mitigates the impact of adversarial transferability with up to
1.5%, comparing the synchronous and asynchronous perturbation.
      Takeaways of our empirical study

      (1) The adversarial transferability is also exhibited in audio-visual learning, posing security
      problems in applications.
      (2) Temporal consistency and redundancy bring robustness against corruption but also re-
      main potentially leveraged to improve adversarial transferability.
      (3) The inter-modal correlation compensates against temporal corruptions and alleviates the
      influence of adversarial perturbation.


4     AUDIO -V ISUAL A DVERSARIAL ATTACK
Motivated by previous empirical robustness analysis on temporal consistency and modality corre-
lation, we propose two powerful audio-visual adversarial attacks, namely the temporal invariance-
based attack and the modality misalignment-based attack.

4.1     T EMPORAL I NVARIANCE - BASED ATTACK

Audio-visual data comprises temporally invariant features and time-varying information within each
frame. Our goal is to craft adversarial perturbations that target these invariant features, thereby


                                                    4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


fostering the transferability of adversarial instances. We achieve this by introducing a temporal
regularization term that steers perturbations toward the most significant video features. With this
novel regularization, we ensure that the adversarial perturbations are consistent and coherent across
different frames.
Specifically, we calculate the variation of extracted features along the temporal dimension as a
structure-unrelated statistic of feature consistency. By minimizing this variation for both audio and
visual features, we encourage perturbations to focus on temporally invariant characteristics.
Additionally, leveraging the inherent temporal dependency, we can diversify video inputs to encour-
age the model to learn robust, invariant features. In practice, we apply different input transformations
on temporal inputs, including scaling, masking, blurring, and mix-up on audio or visual modalities,
independently or in parallel, synchronously or asynchronously.
This temporal regularization can be expressed as
                                    h                                   i
                                                                      T
                         LR = Var {E (fa (Ta (xa + δa ) ; θa ) (t))}t=1
                                   h                                    i                                                   (2)
                                                                     T
                             + Var {E (fv (Tv (xv + δv ) ; θv ) (t))}t=1 ,

where we denote fa (xa + δa ; θa )(t) and fv (xv + δv ; θv )(t) as the audio and visual features extracted
at the t-th frame by the audio and visual networks, Ta and Tv as input transformation methods for
audio and visual modalities, respectively. We consider the mean value of the feature at each time
step and compute the variance along the temporal axis.

4.2   M ODALITY M ISALIGNMENT- BASED ATTACK

From the empirical study about the modality correlation in section 3, especially the comparison
between the synchronous and asynchronous perturbation, we notice that aligning semantic changes
across modalities can mitigate the influence of adversarial perturbations and diminish the adversarial
transferability. Inspired by this, we propose a novel attack strategy that disrupts the strong semantic
correlation between audio and visual modalities. We hypothesize that lower semantic correlation
leads to higher adversarial audio-visual transferability.
We conduct experiments to support this hypothesis. To quantify semantic information, we use fea-
ture vectors from both modalities and assess their alignment with cosine similarity. Following the
experimental setting in section 3 (without masking operation), we compute cosine similarities be-
tween feature vectors of adversarial examples generated by FGSM (Goodfellow et al., 2015), I-
FGSM (Kurakin et al., 2017), MI-FGSM (Dong et al., 2018), and NI-FGSM (Lin et al., 2019),
which exhibit progressively stronger attack performance under the white-box setting.
From the results shown in fig. 3, we can see that as the
attack success rate against black-box models (i.e., ad-                                                                100
                                                                              55
versarial transferability) increases, the cosine similar-
ity between audio and visual feature vectors decreases.                       50                                       80
This correlation reinforces our claim that disrupting se-
                                                                              45                                       60
mantic alignment between modalities enhances trans-
                                                                    ASR (%)


                                                                                                                            CS (%)


ferability.                                                                   40                                       40

Thus, to enhance the transferability of adversarial at-                       35                                       20
tacks, we propose an approach that aims to misalign
the semantic correspondence between audio and visual                          30
                                                                                                                       0
                                                                                   FGSM   I-FGSM   MI-FGSM   NI-FGSM
features. Specifically, during each iteration of the ad-
versarial attack, we minimize the feature similarity be-
tween the modalities, ensuring that the perturbations               Figure 3: The average black-box attack
disrupt the semantic alignment at the modality level,               success rate (A.S.R.) and cosine similar-
                                                                    ity (C.S.) of the audio-visual adversarial
            fa (xa + δa ; θa ) · fv (xv + δv ; θv )                 examples generated by different attacks.
   LM =                                               ,       (3)
           ∥fa (xa + δa ; θa ) · fv (xv + δv ; θv )∥2
where fa (xa + δa ; θa ) and fv (xv + δv ; θv ) are the feature vectors encoded by the audio and visual
backbones, respectively.


                                                          5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 4: Overview of the adversarial perturbation crafting in the adversarial training process. Given
an audio-visual data, we randomly segment it into different parts (green and yellow) and sample
frames from each of the segments with ratio α (red). Then, we diversify each sampled frame by
NT̂ copies and employ TIA and MMA to craft the adversarial perturbation. Finally, we map the
generated adversarial perturbation to corresponding segments, creating adversarial examples for
adversarial training.

4.3   ATTACK I NTEGRATION

The temporal invariance-based and modality misalignment-based attacks can be integrated together
with the classification loss to achieve strong adversarial audiovisual attacks. At each iteration, we
optimize the following loss function to conduct the attack,
                            max Lcls (F (T (xv + δv , xa + δa ); θ), y)
                                  − λ1 LR (F (T (xv + δv , xa + δa ); θ))
                                                                                                   (4)
                                  − λ2 LM (F (T (xv + δv , xa + δa ); θ))
                             s.t. ∥δv ∥p ≤ ϵv , ∥δa ∥p ≤ ϵa ,
where Lcls is the classification loss function, T is the input transformation on audio-visual data, and
λ1 and λ2 are two coefficients to balance losses.

5     AUDIO -V ISUAL A DVERSARIAL T RAINING
Having established the powerful audio-visual adversarial attacks, a question naturally arises: How
can we defend these attacks efficiently? In this section, we start with the preliminary adversarial
training method, followed by an in-depth analysis of adversarial perturbations in audio-visual data,
and propose several strategies to fortify audio-visual models against such attacks.

5.1   P RELIMINARY M ETHOD

Adversarial training is one of the most powerful robust training paradigms to defend adversarial
examples, which trains the model on adversarial examples and can be formalized in the audio-visual
context as follows,
                             min max Lcls (F (xv + δv , xa + δa ), θ),                         (5)
                               θ δv ,δa
which optimizes the model parameters to minimize the upper bound of the loss function.
It is challenging to directly optimize the min-max problem in eq. (5). In practice, it is solved by
training models on adversarial examples, in which adversarial examples are used to compute the
values of the inner maximum loss function (Madry et al., 2018).

5.2   D ISCUSSION ON AUDIO -V ISUAL P ERTURBATION

Audio-visual adversarial training presents a unique challenge compared to its uni-modal counterpart
(e.g., perturbating a single image). Here, generating adversarial perturbations across multiple time


                                                  6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


steps in both audio and visual data leads to significant computational overhead. This hinders the use
of strong attacks and advanced mitigation techniques during training. Thus, the key to solving the
challenge is to reduce the computational cost for audio-visual adversarial example crafting.
As shown in section 3, random masking of audio-visual data slightly affects model performance
yet boosts adversarial transferability. Additionally, recent studies (Kim et al., 2023) demonstrate
that the universal adversarial perturbation of a single image model can be used to fool the video
model. These findings indicate that an effective strategy should reduce the computational overhead
of adversarial training by generating temporal universal adversarial perturbations instead of frame-
specific perturbations. However, strong attacks are crucial for effective adversarial training. To
address this, we propose generating universal adversarial perturbations for continuous local regions
in the video and audio data, rather than a single perturbation for all frames. We also employ a bag
of tricks to amplify the impact of these generated perturbations on the model.


5.3   O UR A PPROACH

Efficient adversarial perturbation crafting. Since audio-visual data exhibits strong temporal cor-
relation, adversarial perturbations crafted from a subset of time samples can be propagated to the
remaining samples as well.
To exploit this property and achieve efficient perturbation crafting, we propose the following ap-
proach: We first divide the entire audio-visual data into smaller segments. Within each segment, we
randomly sample a portion of audio and visual frames with a selection ratio of ρ. We then generate
universal adversarial perturbations upon the selected frames and propagate them to the remaining.
The optimization of perturbations δv and δa can be expressed as follows,

                     δv , δa = arg max              E               [L(x̂v + δ̂v , x̂a + δ̂a , y)],   (6)
                                   δ̂v ,δ̂a (x̂v ,x̂a )∼(xv ,xa )


where the (x̂v , x̂a ) is sampled from (xv , xa ), L is the loss we proposed in eq. (4) which encounters
both the temporal invariance-based and modality misalignment-based attacks. The adversarial per-
turbations generated δv and δa are shared with neighboring frames within the same segment. This
design allows us to generate adversarial examples efficiently.
Adversarial curriculum training. Previous studies (Yu et al., 2022; Kim et al., 2021; Rice et al.,
2020) have identified that adversarial training easily gets overfitted to certain attack methods and
settings, leaving the model vulnerable to others. To address this issue and improve the generalization
ability, we propose a randomized adversarial curriculum learning to optimize eq. (5). Concretely,
our proposed randomized adversarial curriculum learning approach incorporates two strategies:

       • Data-level strategy. Temporal redundancy can be leveraged to control the impact of adver-
         sarial examples crafted in adversarial training, leaving the potential to alleviate overfitting.
         We propose to randomly sample ρx of the audio-visual input along the temporal dimension,
         where 0 < ρx < 1. We cyclically vary the value of ρx to generate adversarial examples for
         curriculum learning.

       • Model-level strategy. The over-parameterization of models can be exploited in adversarial
         training to boost the models’ generalization. We randomly drop out the neurons of the
         fusion layer with a ratio of ρf , where 0 < ρf < 1 and the dropout ratio ρf is synchronized
         with ρx .

The curriculum learning approach hinges on a cyclical variation in the data-level masking ratio ρx
and the model-level dropout ratio ρf . This cyclic design offers an advantage: it gradually increases
the training difficulty. During the initial stages of the cycle, both sampling and dropout ratios are
lower and the number of steps to generate attacks is reduced. This translates to a simpler training
task with fewer adversarial perturbations applied to the data. As both ratios and the number of steps
gradually increase, complex adversarial examples are created, resulting in a more difficult learning
task. With this cyclic design, the models are trained on diverse perturbations, thus fully exploring
the loss landscape for the searching minimum and improving the robustness against attacks.


                                                          7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                                    )*60               , )*60                            0, )*60                         0,*                     3$0                        7,$                      00$            70$


         $F9   $V9   $F5   $V5    5F9   5V9   5F5   5V5               $F9   $V9   $F5    $V5      5F9   5V9   5F5   5V5                     $F9     $V9   $F5   $V5     5F9   5V9   5F5   5V5            $F9   $V9   $F5   $V5    5F9   5V9   5F5   5V5

                              D  $F9                                                                        E  $V9                                                                                   F  $F5                                                                      G  $V5


         $F9   $V9   $F5   $V5    5F9   5V9   5F5   5V5               $F9   $V9   $F5    $V5      5F9   5V9   5F5   5V5                     $F9     $V9   $F5   $V5     5F9   5V9   5F5   5V5            $F9   $V9   $F5   $V5    5F9   5V9   5F5   5V5

                              H  5F9                                                                        I  5V9                                                                                   J  5F5                                                                      K  5V5



Figure 5: Attack success rates (%) of eight deep models, where the adversarial examples are gen-
erated on the white-box surrogate model and attack all models (one white-box model and seven
black-box models). TIA, MMA, and TMA are our proposed attack methods.


6        P ERFORMANCE E VALUATION

6.1               E XPERIMENTAL S ETUP

Datasets. We use the Kinetics-Sounds (Arandjelovic & Zisserman, 2017) for evaluation, which
contains 1, 551, 610 second video clips in 27 human action categories. For model training, we split
the dataset into 7 : 2 : 1 for training, validation, and testing. We also conduct experiments on
MIT-MUSIC (Zhao et al., 2018b) for further verification, which is provided in the appendix.
Models. The audio-visual model comprises three modules: the visual backbone, the audio back-
bone, and the audio-visual fusion network. For the audio backbone, we select VGG and ResNet as
candidates. For the visual backbone, we select AlexNet and ResNet as candidates. We can study the
impact of model capacity on the adversarial transferability by this design. Following the previous
work on audio-visual adversarial robustness (Tian & Xu, 2021), we selected the sum and concat
operation as candidates for the fusion layer. There are 2 × 2 × 2 = 8 models in total. For simplicity,
we use the format of “{ visual backbone }-{ fusion layer }-{ audio backbone }” to represent the
audio-visual models, where the initials indicate each backbone and layer. We denote AlexNet as A,
VGG as V, ResNet as R, sum operation as s, and concat operation as c. For example, ResNet as the
visual backbone, the audio-visual model with AlexNet as the audio backbone, and the sum operation
as the fusion layer can be represented by “RsA”.
Baselines. For attack methods, we use FGSM (Goodfellow et al., 2015), I-FGSM (Kurakin et al.,
2017), MI-FGSM (Dong et al., 2018), MIG (Ma et al., 2023), and PAM (Zhang et al., 2023) as
baselines. We compare the baseline methods with our proposed approaches, which encompass the
temporal invariance-based attack (TIA), the modality misalignment attack (MMA), and the integra-
tion of TIA and MAA attacks, namely the temporal and modality-based attack (TMA). For defense
methods, we use the vanilla adversarial training (AT) (Madry et al., 2018), discriminative and com-
pact feature learning (DCFL) (Tian & Xu, 2021), single-source defensive fusion (SSDF) (Yang et al.,
2021), the mix-up strategy for adversarial defense (Mixup) (Li et al., 2022b), and the certified robust
multi-modal training method (CRMT-AT) (Yang et al., 2023b).

6.2               S INGLE M ODEL ATTACK

To validate the effectiveness of our proposed methods, we first compare ours with five popular
attacks selected by previous audio-visual robustness research, namely FGSM, I-FGSM, MI-FGSM,
MIG, and PAM. Among these methods, FGSM and I-FGSM are initially designed for white-box
attacks, while others are designed for transferable adversarial attacks in the image domain. We
generate adversarial examples on a single model and test them on the other models. The attack
success rates, i.e., and the misclassification rates of the victim model in the adversarial examples
crafted are summarized in fig. 5.


                                                                                                                                                                            8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


The figure shows that audio-visual adversarial examples crafted on white-box models can partially
deceive black-box models, confirming adversarial transferability in audio-visual learning. However,
unlike in the image domain, momentum doesn’t always improve performance. For instance, when
using VGG as the audio backbone and AlexNet with a sum fusion layer, FGSM achieves a 31.5%
success rate, while MI-FGSM decreases performance by 2.3%, indicating momentum’s negative
impact on audio-visual transferability. This issue is common with models using sum fusion layers.
In contrast, models with concat fusion layers show better black-box performance (+3.6%). The
results also suggest that improving input diversity with PAM helps momentum perform better over
sum fusion layers. Our proposed methods (TIA, MMA, and TMA) consistently outperform others,
with TIA exceeding PAM by 15.7% and further improving by 5.2% on average. Combining TIA
and MMA achieves a 95.2% success rate across all eight models.

                                                                   )*60                0, )*60            3$0            00$                                                                                 $7            '&)/               0L[XS          &507 $7               2XUV
                                                                   , )*60            0,*                    7,$            70$


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             , )*60      0,*           7,$           70$


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 $YHUDJH RI WKH DWWDFN VXFFHVV UDWHV
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                0, )*60    3$0           00$

                                                                                                                                                    &ODVVLILFDWLRQ 6XFFHVV 5DWH

$WWDFN 6XFFHVV 5DWH


                                                          $F9      $V9      $F5      $V5        5F9   5V9   5F5       5V5                                                                           $F9   $V9        $F5   $V5            5F9   5V9       5F5   5V5                                                                                                                                   1XPEHU RI DWWDFN LWHUDWLRQV



Figure 6: Attack success rates                                                                                                                      Figure 7: Attack success rates                                                                                                                                               Figure 8: Ablation study of
(%) of each of 8 deep mod-                                                                                                                          (%) of each of 8 deep mod-                                                                                                                                                   the number of attack itera-
els under the ensemble set-                                                                                                                         els on the adversarial exam-                                                                                                                                                 tions on the attack perfor-
ting. TIA, MMA, and TMA                                                                                                                             ples crafted under the white-                                                                                                                                                mance.    TIA, MMA, and
are our proposed attack meth-                                                                                                                       box setting with our proposed                                                                                                                                                TMA are our proposed attack
ods.                                                                                                                                                TMA method.                                                                                                                                                                  methods.


6.3                                                            E NSEMBLE M ODEL ATTACK

There have been many works studying using the ensemble uni-modal model to craft the adversarial
example to improve the adversarial transferability (Dong et al., 2018). Here, we conduct experiments
to utilize the ensemble of multi-modal, i.e., the audio-visual models, to boost the performance. We
iteratively select each one of the 8 models as the victim black-box model and use the remaining 7
models as surrogate models to craft the adversarial examples. We use the adversarial attack success
rate against the victim model to evaluate the performance.
As shown in fig. 6, we can notice that the performances of all selected methods are significantly
boosted by the ensemble strategy, even surpassing the performance under the white-box attacks. It
indicates that different audio-visual models also share similar areas of interest. By considering as
many surrogate models as possible in attacks, we can fool the target victim model with a high success
rate. The previous result shows that the audio-visual model with concat operation as the fusion layer
is relatively robust against different attacks. Using the ensemble attacks, the FGSM has an average
attack success rate of up to 79.9% against these models, indicating the dimming performance of the
concat fusion layer on defense. It should be noted that all our proposed methods achieve an attack
success rate of 100% on all victim models, sufficiently demonstrating the effectiveness.

6.4                                                            ATTACKING D EFENSE M ODELS

Our proposed attack methods, including TIA, MMA, and TMA, have achieved the best attack per-
formance on eight normally trained audio-visual models with different backbones and fusion layers.
Recent studies on audio-visual learning proposed to mitigate the threat of audio-visual adversarial
examples. In our work, we also propose a bag of novel tricks to enhance adversarial training for
defense. Here, to validate the effectiveness of these defenses, as well as show the power of our pro-
posed attack method against the defense mechanism, we conduct white-box adversarial attacks on
these eight audio-visual models. For defense methods, we select adversarial training (AT) (Madry
et al., 2018), DCFL (Tian & Xu, 2021), Mixup (Li et al., 2022b), CRMT-AT (Yang et al., 2023b), and


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


the combination of our tricks (Ours). We use our strongest attack TMA to evaluate the robustness.
To align the attack setting, we use 10-step PGD adversarial training as the baseline.
The results are shown in fig. 7. Among the different defense methods, training the models on the
adversarial examples is more efficient. We can see the adversarial training-based methods, including
AT, CRMT-AT, and ours, perform much better than non-adversarial training methods with a clear gap
of 10.9%. By integrating our proposed techniques, including the efficient adversarial perturbation
crafting and curriculum adversarial training, our adversarial training can further boost the robustness
by 2.28% on average versus the runner-up method CRMT-AT.


6.5      A BLATION S TUDY

On the number of iterations for the attack. In experiments, we find that the multistep FGSM,
i.e., I-FGSM, cannot always beat FGSM under both white- and black-box settings. This raises the
question of whether the number of iterations impacts the adversarial transferability in audio-visual
learning. This motivates us to do the ablation study of the number of iterations in attacks.1 As
shown in fig. 8, by generating the adversarial examples on the audio-visual model (AcV), we can
see that the number of iterations greatly impacts the attack performance. With increasing the num-
ber of iterations, the adversarial transferability of I-FGSM is degraded. While the use of momentum
(MI-FGSM) can alleviate the overfitting to the surrogate model, a sufficiently large number of iter-
ations still leads to getting stuck in a local optimum, degrading the performance. The use of input
transformations (PAM) can improve the input diversity for better capturing the robust feature, thus
boosting the adversarial transferability, but still limited. Our proposed temporal invariant and modal-
ity misalignment attack methods sufficiently help the optimization jump over the local optima, thus
significantly boosting the performance.
On the sampling ratio for the adversarial train-
ing. In our approaches, we propose to sample a ra-
                                                             85.0                                50
tio of frames to generate the temporal-universal ad-
versarial perturbation for efficient adversarial train-      82.5
                                                                                                 40
ing. There is a balance between the time consump-            80.0
                                                         Accuracy (%)


tion of adversarial training and the adversarial ro-         77.5


                                                                                                 Time (h)
                                                                                                 30
bustness by selecting different sample ratios. Here,         75.0
we conduct an ablation study on the sampling ratio.                                              20
As shown in fig. 9, with increasing the sampling ra-         72.5
tio in adversarial training, the defense performance         70.0
                                                                                                 10
is improved, but it also leads to more time con-             67.5
sumption, supporting our argument on the balance.            65.0                                0
At the same time, a larger sampling ratio does not                 1     2     3      4      5
improve the adversarial robustness much but intro-                 Scale factor for sampling
duces more time consumption, and a smaller sam-
pling ratio harms defense performance.                  Figure 9: Ablation study of the sampling ra-
                                                        tio on the performance of adversarial training.
                                                        We use our proposed TMA to generate the ad-
7 C ONCLUSION                                           versarial example for adversarial training.

In this work, we developed two efficient audio-visual adversarial attack methods: the temporal
invariance-based attack and the modality misalignment-based attack. We also introduced an adver-
sarial training framework with strategies for efficient perturbation crafting and curriculum training
to reduce time and improve robustness.
Results on the Kinetics-Sounds dataset show that our attacks effectively benchmark audio-visual
model robustness and that our training framework improves both robustness and efficiency. Our
experiments provided new insights, including the importance of temporal consistency, modality
alignment, and the concat fusion layer’s robustness. We hope this research will serve as a benchmark
for audio-visual robustness and inspire further exploration of AI security in multi-modal data.

   1
       With the number of iterations as 1, the MI-FGSM and I-FGSM degrade to the FGSM.


                                                    10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


R EFERENCES
Relja Arandjelovic and Andrew Zisserman. Look, listen and learn. In ICCV, pp. 609–617, 2017.
Mathilde Brousmiche, Jean Rouat, and Stéphane Dupont. Audio-visual fusion and conditioning with
 neural networks for event recognition. In 2019 IEEE 29th International Workshop on Machine
 Learning for Signal Processing (MLSP), pp. 1–6. IEEE, 2019.
Mathilde Brousmiche, Jean Rouat, and Stéphane Dupont. Multimodal attentive fusion network for
 audio-visual event recognition. Information Fusion, 85:52–59, 2022.
Lele Chen, Sudhanshu Srivastava, Zhiyao Duan, and Chenliang Xu. Deep cross-modal audio-visual
  generation. In Proceedings of the on Thematic Workshops of ACM Multimedia 2017, pp. 349–357,
  2017.
Ying Cheng, Ruize Wang, Zhihao Pan, Rui Feng, and Yuejie Zhang. Look, listen, and attend: Co-
  attention network for self-supervised audio-visual representation learning. In Proceedings of the
  28th ACM International Conference on Multimedia, pp. 3884–3892, 2020.
Zesen Cheng, Sicong Leng, Hang Zhang, Yifei Xin, Xin Li, Guanzheng Chen, Yongxin Zhu, Wenqi
  Zhang, Ziyang Luo, Deli Zhao, et al. Videollama 2: Advancing spatial-temporal modeling and
  audio understanding in video-llms. arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.07476, 2024.
Charalampos A. Dimoulas. Audiovisual spatial-audio analysis by means of sound localization and
  imaging: A multimedia healthcare framework in abdominal sound mapping. IEEE TMM, 18(10):
  1969–1976, 2016.
Yinpeng Dong, Fangzhou Liao, Tianyu Pang, Hang Su, Jun Zhu, Xiaolin Hu, and Jianguo Li. Boost-
  ing adversarial attacks with momentum. In CVPR, pp. 9185–9193, 2018.
Junyu Gao, Hao Yang, Maoguo Gong, and Xuelong Li. Audio-visual representation learning for
  anomaly events detection in crowds. Neurocomputing, pp. 127489, 2024.
Ian J. Goodfellow, Jonathon Shlens, and Christian Szegedy. Explaining and harnessing adversarial
  examples. In ICLR, 2015.
Di Guo, Huaping Liu, and Fuchun Sun. Audio–visual language instruction understanding for robotic
  sorting. Robotics and Autonomous Systems, 159:104271, 2023.
Sicong Han, Chenhao Lin, Chao Shen, Qian Wang, and Xiaohong Guan. Interpreting adversarial
  examples in deep learning: A review. ACM Computing Surveys, 2023.
Wangli Hao, Zhaoxiang Zhang, and He Guan. Cmcgan: A uniform framework for cross-modal
 visual-audio mutual generation. In Proceedings of the AAAI conference on artificial intelligence,
 volume 32, 2018.
Chao Huang, Susan Liang, Yapeng Tian, Anurag Kumar, and Chenliang Xu. Davis: High-quality
  audio-visual separation with generative diffusion models. 2023a.
Chao Huang, Yapeng Tian, Anurag Kumar, and Chenliang Xu. Egocentric audio-visual object lo-
  calization. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recog-
  nition, pp. 22910–22921, 2023b.
Chao Huang, Susan Liang, Yunlong Tang, Yapeng Tian, Anurag Kumar, and Chenliang Xu. Scaling
  concept with text-guided diffusion models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2410.24151, 2024.
Hee-Seon Kim, Minji Son, Minbeom Kim, Myung-Joon Kwon, and Changick Kim. Breaking tem-
  poral consistency: Generating video universal adversarial perturbations using image models. In
  Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision, pp. 4325–4334,
  2023.
Hoki Kim, Woojin Lee, and Jaewook Lee. Understanding catastrophic overfitting in single-step
  adversarial training. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, volume 35,
  pp. 8119–8127, 2021.


                                                11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A Kloukiniotis, A Papandreou, A Lalos, P Kapsalas, D-V Nguyen, and K Moustakas. Countering
  adversarial attacks on autonomous vehicles using denoising techniques: A review. IEEE Open
  Journal of Intelligent Transportation Systems, 3:61–80, 2022.
Alexey Kurakin, Ian J. Goodfellow, and Samy Bengio. Adversarial Examples in the Physical World.
  In ICLR, 2017.
Guangyao Li, Yake Wei, Yapeng Tian, Chenliang Xu, Ji-Rong Wen, and Di Hu. Learning to answer
  questions in dynamic audio-visual scenarios. In CVPR, pp. 19108–19118, 2022a.
Juncheng B. Li, Shuhui Qu, Xinjian Li, Bernie Po-Yao Huang, and Florian Metze. On adversarial
  robustness of large-scale audio visual learning. In ICASSP, pp. 231–235, 2022b.
Susan Liang, Chao Huang, Yapeng Tian, Anurag Kumar, and Chenliang Xu. Av-nerf: Learning neu-
  ral fields for real-world audio-visual scene synthesis. Advances in Neural Information Processing
  Systems, 36:37472–37490, 2023a.
Susan Liang, Chao Huang, Yapeng Tian, Anurag Kumar, and Chenliang Xu. Neural acoustic
  context field: Rendering realistic room impulse response with neural fields. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2309.15977, 2023b.
Susan Liang, Chao Huang, Yapeng Tian, Anurag Kumar, and Chenliang Xu. Language-guided
  joint audio-visual editing via one-shot adaptation. In Proceedings of the Asian Conference on
  Computer Vision, pp. 1011–1027, 2024.
Jiadong Lin, Chuanbiao Song, Kun He, Liwei Wang, and John E Hopcroft. Nesterov accelerated
   gradient and scale invariance for adversarial attacks. In ICLR, 2019.
Dong Lu, Zhiqiang Wang, Teng Wang, Weili Guan, Hongchang Gao, and Feng Zheng. Set-level
  guidance attack: Boosting adversarial transferability of vision-language pre-training models. In
  Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision, pp. 102–111, 2023.
Wenshuo Ma, Yidong Li, Xiaofeng Jia, and Wei Xu. Transferable adversarial attack for both vision
 transformers and convolutional networks via momentum integrated gradients. In Proceedings of
 the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision, pp. 4630–4639, 2023.
Aleksander Madry, Aleksandar Makelov, Ludwig Schmidt, Dimitris Tsipras, and Adrian Vladu.
  Towards deep learning models resistant to adversarial attacks. In International Conference on
  Learning Representations, 2018.
Sagnik Majumder and Kristen Grauman. Active audio-visual separation of dynamic sound sources.
  In European Conference on Computer Vision, pp. 551–569. Springer, 2022.
Sagnik Majumder, Ziad Al-Halah, and Kristen Grauman. Move2hear: Active audio-visual source
  separation. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision, pp.
  275–285, 2021.
Xiongkuo Min, Guangtao Zhai, Jiantao Zhou, Xiao-Ping Zhang, Xiaokang Yang, and Xinping Guan.
  A multimodal saliency model for videos with high audio-visual correspondence. IEEE Transac-
  tions on Image Processing, 29:3805–3819, 2020.
Pedro Morgado, Ishan Misra, and Nuno Vasconcelos. Robust audio-visual instance discrimination.
  In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp.
  12934–12945, 2021.
Tanzila Rahman, Mengyu Yang, and Leonid Sigal. Tribert: Human-centric audio-visual representa-
  tion learning. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 34:9774–9787, 2021.
Leslie Rice, Eric Wong, and Zico Kolter. Overfitting in adversarially robust deep learning. In
  International conference on machine learning, pp. 8093–8104. PMLR, 2020.
Luchuan Song, Guojun Yin, Zhenchao Jin, Xiaoyi Dong, and Chenliang Xu. Emotional listener
  portrait: Realistic listener motion simulation in conversation. In 2023 IEEE/CVF International
  Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV), pp. 20782–20792. IEEE, 2023.


                                                12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Luchuan Song, Lele Chen, Celong Liu, Pinxin Liu, and Chenliang Xu. Texttoon: Real-time text
  toonify head avatar from single video. In SIGGRAPH Asia 2024 Conference Papers, pp. 1–11,
  2024a.

Luchuan Song, Pinxin Liu, Lele Chen, Guojun Yin, and Chenliang Xu. Tri 2-plane: Thinking head
  avatar via feature pyramid. In European Conference on Computer Vision, pp. 1–20. Springer,
  2024b.

Zehua Sun, Qiuhong Ke, Hossein Rahmani, Mohammed Bennamoun, Gang Wang, and Jun Liu.
  Human action recognition from various data modalities: A review. IEEE TPAMI, 2022.

Kim Sung-Bin, Arda Senocak, Hyunwoo Ha, Andrew Owens, and Tae-Hyun Oh. Sound to visual
  scene generation by audio-to-visual latent alignment. In CVPR, pp. 6430–6440, 2023.

Yapeng Tian and Chenliang Xu. Can audio-visual integration strengthen robustness under multi-
  modal attacks? In CVPR, pp. 5601–5611, 2021.

Xiaosen Wang, Zeliang Zhang, Kangheng Tong, Dihong Gong, Kun He, Zhifeng Li, and Wei Liu.
  Triangle attack: A query-efficient decision-based adversarial attack. In ECCV, pp. 156–174, 2022.

Jian Wu, Yong Xu, Shi-Xiong Zhang, Lian-Wu Chen, Meng Yu, Lei Xie, and Dong Yu. Time domain
   audio visual speech separation. In 2019 IEEE automatic speech recognition and understanding
   workshop (ASRU), pp. 667–673. IEEE, 2019a.

Xinyi Wu, Zhenyao Wu, Lili Ju, and Song Wang. Binaural audio-visual localization. In Proceedings
  of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, volume 35, pp. 2961–2968, 2021.

Yu Wu, Linchao Zhu, Yan Yan, and Yi Yang. Dual attention matching for audio-visual event lo-
  calization. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF international conference on computer vision, pp.
  6292–6300, 2019b.

Yan Xia and Zhou Zhao. Cross-modal background suppression for audio-visual event localization.
  In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, pp.
  19989–19998, 2022.

Dingkang Yang, Yang Liu, Can Huang, Mingcheng Li, Xiao Zhao, Yuzheng Wang, Kun Yang, Yan
  Wang, Peng Zhai, and Lihua Zhang. Target and source modality co-reinforcement for emotion un-
  derstanding from asynchronous multimodal sequences. Knowledge-Based Systems, 265:110370,
  2023a.

Karren Yang, Wan-Yi Lin, Manash Barman, Filipe Condessa, and J. Zico Kolter. Defending multi-
  modal fusion models against single-source adversaries. In CVPR, pp. 3340–3349, 2021.

Zequn Yang, Yake Wei, Ce Liang, and Di Hu. Quantifying and enhancing multi-modal robustness
  with modality preference. In The Twelfth International Conference on Learning Representations,
  2023b.

Wei Yao, Zeliang Zhang, Huayi Tang, and Yong Liu. Understanding model ensemble in transferable
 adversarial attack. arXiv preprint arXiv:2410.06851, 2024.

Chaojian Yu, Bo Han, Li Shen, Jun Yu, Chen Gong, Mingming Gong, and Tongliang Liu. Under-
  standing robust overfitting of adversarial training and beyond. In International Conference on
  Machine Learning, pp. 25595–25610. PMLR, 2022.

Jiaming Zhang, Qi Yi, and Jitao Sang. Towards adversarial attack on vision-language pre-training
   models. In Proceedings of the 30th ACM International Conference on Multimedia, pp. 5005–
   5013, 2022.

Jianping Zhang, Jen-tse Huang, Wenxuan Wang, Yichen Li, Weibin Wu, Xiaosen Wang, Yuxin Su,
   and Michael R Lyu. Improving the transferability of adversarial samples by path-augmented
   method. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recogni-
   tion, pp. 8173–8182, 2023.


                                                13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Weiyi Zhang, Shuning Zhao, Le Liu, Jianmin Li, Xingliang Cheng, Thomas Fang Zheng, and Xi-
 aolin Hu. Attack on practical speaker verification system using universal adversarial perturba-
 tions. In ICASSP, pp. 2575–2579, 2021.
Zeliang Zhang, Wei Yao, Susan Liang, and Chenliang Xu. Random smooth-based certified defense
  against text adversarial attack. In Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics:
  EACL 2024, pp. 1251–1265, 2024a.
Zeliang Zhang, Wei Yao, and Xiaosen Wang. Bag of tricks to boost adversarial transferability. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2401.08734, 2024b.
Hang Zhao, Chuang Gan, Andrew Rouditchenko, Carl Vondrick, Josh McDermott, and Antonio Tor-
  ralba. The sound of pixels. In The European Conference on Computer Vision (ECCV), September
  2018a.
Hang Zhao, Chuang Gan, Andrew Rouditchenko, Carl Vondrick, Josh H. McDermott, and Antonio
  Torralba. The sound of pixels. In ECCV, volume 11205, pp. 587–604, 2018b.
Rui Zhen, Wenchao Song, Qiang He, Juan Cao, Lei Shi, and Jia Luo. Human-computer interaction
  system: A survey of talking-head generation. Electronics, 12(1):218, 2023.
Hang Zhou, Yu Liu, Ziwei Liu, Ping Luo, and Xiaogang Wang. Talking face generation by ad-
  versarially disentangled audio-visual representation. In Proceedings of the AAAI conference on
  artificial intelligence, volume 33, pp. 9299–9306, 2019.
Ye Zhu, Yu Wu, Hugo Latapie, Yi Yang, and Yan Yan. Learning audio-visual correlations from
  variational cross-modal generation. In ICASSP 2021-2021 IEEE International Conference on
  Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing (ICASSP), pp. 4300–4304. IEEE, 2021.


                                                14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A                                                         R ESULTS ON MIT-MUSIC DATASET
Setup. We use the MIT-MUSIC (Zhao et al., 2018a) for further verification, which contains 685
videos of musical solos and duets. It consists of 11 categories. We split the dataset into 7 : 1 : 2
as the train, validation and test set. Following the same setting in our paper, we train 8 audio-visual
models on the MIT-MUSIC dataset and respectively use one surrogate model to attack others under
the black-box setting. We use FGSM, I-FGSM, MI-FGSM, MIG, and PAM as our baselines, and
compare the attack performance with our proposed methods, including TIA, MMA, and TMA. For
defense methods, we select AT, DCFL, Mixup, CRMT-AT, and the baselines.
Results. We first use various attack methods to generate adversarial examples by attacking AcR
under the white-box setting, and then attack other models under the black-box setting. As shown
in fig. 10, our proposed TIA, MMA, and TMA achieve state-of-the-art attack performance among
the selected methods. Specifically, TIA achieves an average attack success rate of 95.2%, MMA
achieves an average attack success rate of 93.7%, and the combination method TMA achieves an
average attack success rate of 97.1%, while that of the runner-up method is 85.1%. We can also see
a consistent phenomenon that the adversarial example is easier to transfer between similar architec-
ture, i.e., from AcR to AsR.
We also evaluate the defense performance of our method. The results are depicted in fig. 11. Our
proposed method surpasses the baseline methods with a clear margin of 2.2% on defending the
adversarial attack versus the runner-up method CRMT-AT.

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     $7            '&)/               0L[XS          &507 $7               2XUV
                                                                    )*60                0, )*60            3$0             00$
                                                                    , )*60            0,*                    7,$             70$



                                                                                                                                                           &ODVVLILFDWLRQ 6XFFHVV 5DWH


$WWDFN 6XFFHVV 5DWH


                                                           $F9      $V9      $F5       $V5       5F9    5V9   5F5       5V5                                                                                $F9   $V9        $F5   $V5            5F9   5V9       5F5   5V5


Figure 10: Attack success rates (%) of eight                                                                                                               Figure 11: Attack success rates (%) of each
deep models, where the adversarial exam-                                                                                                                   of 8 deep models on the adversarial examples
ples are generated on the white-box surrogate                                                                                                              crafted under the white-box setting with our
model and attack all models (one white-box                                                                                                                 proposed TMA method.
model and seven black-box models).


B                                                         A BLATION STUDY ON THE ADVERSARIAL CURRICULUM TRAINING
In our paper, we propose adversarial curriculum training to enhance the performance of adversarial
training. This approach includes both data-level and model-level strategies. To study the influence of
the scheduler used to adjust the masking ratio (i.e., ρx and ρf ), we conduct additional experiments to
evaluate the impact of different schedulers on audio-visual robustness. These schedulers are applied
to boost the audio-visual adversarial robustness of RsV. Details are as follows:

                                                           • None: This represents standard adversarial training without employing the adversarial cur-
                                                             riculum training strategy.
                                                           • D*M: 5/20/30%: These represent constant ratios used in the data- and model-centric strate-
                                                             gies. For example:
                                                                – D*M: 5% indicates that 5% of the audio-visual frames and 5% of the model param-
                                                                  eters are randomly masked to generate adversarial examples. This setup provides a
                                                                  relatively simple defense scenario for the model.


                                                                                                                                                      15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


           – D*M: 20% means that 20% of the frames and 20% of the parameters are used to
             generate adversarial examples. This setup creates a stronger adversarial attack and
             increases the difficulty of adversarial training.
           – D*M: 30% follows a similar logic with a higher masking ratio for stronger adversarial
             perturbations.
       • D: 20%: This indicates that only 20% of the frames are randomly sampled for adversarial
         example generation during adversarial training, without masking model parameters.
       • M: 20%: This indicates that 20% of the model parameters are randomly masked in each
         iteration for adversarial example generation, without randomly dropping frames.
       • M: 40%: This indicates that 40% of the model parameters are randomly masked in each
         iteration for adversarial example generation, without randomly dropping frames.
       • Linear: This applies a linear scheduler from 5% to 20% for both data sampling and model
         masking ratios.
       • Cosine: This applies a cosine scheduler from 5% to 20% for both data sampling and model
         masking ratios.

The results are shown in fig. 12. Compared
with vanilla adversarial training, applying the
proposed schedulers in adversarial curriculum                                    85.0

training enhances adversarial robustness. For                                    82.5
                                                   Successful Defense Rate (%)


instance, when we synchronize masking at 20%                                     80.0
on both data and model parameters (D*M:                                          77.5
20%), the success defense rate improves by                                       75.0
3.8%. Furthermore, integrating linear and co-                                    72.5
sine schedulers to dynamically adjust the dif-                                   70.0
ficulty of adversarial examples during training
                                                                                 67.5
leads to additional improvements of 0.8% and
1.4%, respectively.                                                                     None   D*M: 5% D*M: 20% D*M: 30% D: 20%   M: 20%   M: 40%   Linear   Cosine
                                                                                                    Constant Sync            Constant Async
It is worth noting that a lower sampling ra-
tio for frames combined with a higher param-      Figure 12: Evaluation results on applying differ-
eter masking ratio can negatively impact the      ent schedulers to the adversarial curriculum train-
quality of the generated adversarial examples.    ing. The studied model is RsV (ResNet as the vi-
This, in turn, degrades adversarial robustness,   sual backbone, VGG as the audio backbone, and
as demonstrated by the results for D*M: 5%        sum operation as the fusion layer.)
and M: 40%.


C    T HE DIFFERENCE BETWEEN V ISION - LANGUAGE AND AUDIO - VISUAL
     ATTACKS / DEFENSE

There are certain similarities between audio-visual attack/defense and vision-language at-
tack/defense methods (Zhang et al., 2022; Lu et al., 2023), as both require consideration of alignment
and consistency between the two modalities. However, there are also notable differences between
them. (1) Task difference: vision-language attacks aim at attacking content retrieval-related prob-
lems while audio-visual attacks focus on classification problems. (2) Operation difference: vision-
language attacks perturb input data by optimizing latent embeddings while our method perturbs
input by adjusting output logits. (3) Modality difference: vision-language attacks focus on static
images while our approach considers the temporal redundancy of dynamic videos. This redundancy
motivates our design of curriculum training to exploit sparsity, enhancing adversarial robustness
while improving training efficiency.
Considering these reasons, we do not apply our proposed methods to the vision-language domain.
However, we believe these works in audio-visual learning are inspiring for other multi-modal areas
and we think exploring audio-visual attacks from the perspectives of model pretraining, modality
alignment, and content retrieval is a valuable future direction.


                                                  16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


D    D EMO A PPLICATION ON ATTACKING V IDEO LL A MA
To showcase the scalability of our method in
real-world applications, we employ our pro-
posed attack method to generate audio-visual
adversarial examples under an ensemble set-
ting. These examples are then used to deceive
VideoLLaMA2 (Cheng et al., 2024). Using the
prompt, ”Please point out the main object gen-
erating the sound based on the input video,”
we evaluate VideoLLaMA’s responses. Three
results are illustrated in fig. 13, where all in-
puts are misidentified by VideoLLaMA. For
instance, in the case of an airplane, VideoL-
LaMA incorrectly recognizes it as car racing.
This demonstrates the vulnerability of current
MLLMs to adversarial attacks, even when the
adversarial examples are generated using con-
ventional models.
For a quantitative evaluation, we generated a
total of 100 audio-visual adversarial examples
using our proposed TMA method and the best Figure 13: Demo evaluation on attacking the
baseline method, PAM, respectively, and tested VideoLLaMA2 using the generated audio-visual
them on VideoLLaMA. While PAM success- adversarial examples by our proposed attack
fully deceived VideoLLaMA in 41 cases, our method.
proposed TMA achieved a higher success rate, with 74 examples successfully attacked.


                                                    17
