Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


GPUD RIVE : DATA - DRIVEN , MULTI - AGENT DRIVING
SIMULATION AT 1 MILLION FPS

    Saman Kazemkhani∗ †1                         Aarav Pandya∗ †1                   Daphne Cornelisse∗ †1

                       Brennan Shacklett2                                   Eugene Vinitsky1



                                                   A BSTRACT

             Multi-agent learning algorithms have been successful at generating superhuman
             planning in various games but have had limited impact on the design of deployed
             multi-agent planners. A key bottleneck in applying these techniques to multi-
             agent planning is that they require billions of steps of experience. To enable
             the study of multi-agent planning at scale, we present GPUDrive. GPUDrive
             is a GPU-accelerated, multi-agent simulator built on top of the Madrona Game
             Engine capable of generating over a million simulation steps per second. Ob-
             servation, reward, and dynamics functions are written directly in C++, allowing
             users to define complex, heterogeneous agent behaviors that are lowered to high-
             performance CUDA. Despite these low-level optimizations, GPUDrive is fully
             accessible through Python, offering a seamless and efficient workflow for multi-
             agent, closed-loop simulation. Using GPUDrive, we train reinforcement learning
             agents on the Waymo Open Motion Dataset, achieving efficient goal-reaching in
             minutes and scaling to thousands of scenarios in hours. We open-source the code
             and pre-trained agents at
                              www.github.com/Emerge-Lab/gpudrive


1       I NTRODUCTION
Multi-agent learning has been impactful across a wide range of fully cooperative and zero-sum
games (Cui et al., 2023; Wurman et al., 2022; Pérolat et al., 2022; Silver et al., 2017; Jaderberg
et al., 2018; Bakhtin et al., 2023). However, its impact on multi-agent planning for settings that
mix humans and robots has been muted. In contrast to the ubiquity of multi-agent learning-based
agents in zero-sum games, multi-agent planners for most practical robotic systems are not derived
from the output of game-theoretically sound learning algorithms. While it is hard to characterize the
space of deployed planners since many of them are proprietary, the majority likely use a mixture of
collected data for the prediction of human motion and hand-tuned costs. These are then fed into a
cost-based trajectory optimizer or into a planner based on imitation learning (Bronstein et al., 2022;
Lu et al., 2023). This approach has been highly effective in scaling up real-world autonomy but
can struggle with reasoning about long-term behavior, contingency planning, and interaction with
humans in rare, complex scenarios.
The divergence in preferred technique between these two domains is partially the outcome of two
distinct, challenging components of real-world multi-agent planning. First, unlike zero-sum games,
it is necessary to play a human-compatible strategy that is difficult to identify without data. Sec-
ond, generating the billions of samples needed for multi-agent learning algorithms is difficult with
existing simulators. The former challenge is difficult for multi-agent learning since there is not a
clear equilibrium concept that algorithms should be pursuing. The latter problem is a challenge for
simulators since it is difficult to simulate embodied multi-agent environments at appropriately high
rates.
    1
      NYU Tandon School of Engineering
    2
      Stanford University
    *
      These authors contributed equally to this work
    †
        Corresponding authors: skazemkhani@gmail.com, pandya.aarav.97@gmail.com, cornelisse.daphne@nyu.edu.


                                                          1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


 Simulator state


 Agent view


Figure 1: Extremely fast multi-agent simulation with GPUDrive. Top: Bird’s-eye view of Waymo
Open Motion Dataset scenarios in GPUDrive, with boxes marking controlled agents and circles
denoting their goals. Bottom: Corresponding agent views, centered on one agent. Observations can
be easily configured based on the user’s objectives. Here, agents are provided with a scene view
through a relative coordinate frame. Shown are nearby road points within a configurable radius (set
to 50 meters) and the relative positions of other agents in the scene.


To address these challenges and unlock multi-agent learning as a tool for generating capable self-
driving planners, we introduce GPUDrive. GPUDrive is a simulator intended to mix real-world
driving data with simulation speeds that enable the application of sample-inefficient but effective RL
algorithms to the design of autonomous planners. GPUDrive runs at over a million steps per second
on both consumer-grade and datacenter-class GPUs and has a sufficiently light memory footprint to
support hundreds to thousands of simultaneous worlds (environments) with hundreds of agents per
world. GPUDrive supports the simulation of a variety of sensor modalities, from LIDAR to a human-
like view cone, enabling GPUDrive to be used for studying the effects of different sensor types on
resultant agent characteristics. Finally, GPUDrive takes in driving logs and maps from existing self-
driving datasets, enabling the mixing of tools from imitation learning with reinforcement learning
algorithms. This enables the study of both the development of autonomous vehicles and the learning
of models of human driving, cycling, and walking behavior.
Our contributions are:

       • We provide a multi-agent, GPU-accelerated, and data-driven simulator that runs at over a
         million steps per second (Section 4.1). Our simulator provides a testbed for:
           1. Investigating the capability of learning algorithms to solve challenges related to self-
              play or autonomous coordination.
           2. Researching the effects of limited or human-like perception on agent behavior.
       • We provide gymnasium (Towers et al., 2024) environments in both torch and jax that
         can be easily configured with standard open-source multi-agent RL and imitation learning
         libraries. Additionally, we open-sourced two policy-gradient training loops that can be
         readily used to develop agents.
       • We release implementations of tuned RL algorithms that can process 30 million steps of ex-
         perience per hour on consumer-grade GPUs. These can be used to train 95% goal-reaching


                                                  2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


         agents across 1000 different multi-agent scenarios in 15 hours on relatively accessible hard-
         ware.

       • We open-source these strong driving baseline agents that achieve 95% of their goals on a
         subset of scenes. These are integrated into the simulator so that the simulator comes with
         default, reactive agents.



2   R ELATED WORK

Frameworks for batched simulators. There are various open-source frameworks available that
support hardware-accelerated reinforcement learning environments. These environments are gener-
ally written directly in an acceleration framework such as Numpy (Harris et al., 2020), Jax (Bradbury
et al., 2018), or Pytorch (Ansel et al., 2024; Makoviychuk et al., 2021; Panerati et al., 2021). In terms
of multi-agent accelerated environments, standard benchmarks include JaxMARL(Rutherford et al.,
2023), Jumanji (Bonnet et al., 2024), VMAS (Bettini et al., 2022) Gigastep (Lechner et al., 2024)
which primarily feature fully cooperative or fully competitive tasks. Each benchmark requires the
design of custom accelerated structures per environment. In contrast, GPUDrive focuses on a mixed
motive setting and is built atop Madrona, an extensible ECS-based framework in C++, enabling
GPU acceleration and parallelization across environments (Shacklett et al., 2023). Madrona comes
with vectorization of key components of embodied simulation such as collision checking and sen-
sors such as LIDAR. GPUDrive can support hundreds of controllable agents in more than 100,000
distinct scenarios, offering a distinct generalization challenge and scale relative to existing bench-
marks. Moreover, GPUDrive includes a large dataset of human demonstrations, enabling imitation
learning, inverse RL, and combined IL-RL approaches.



Simulators for autonomous driving research and development. Table 1 shows an overview of
current simulators used in autonomous driving research. The purpose of GPUDrive is to facilitate the
systematic study of behavioral, coordination, and control aspects of autonomous driving and multi-
agent learning more broadly. As such, visual complexity is reduced, which differs from several
existing simulators, which (partially) focus on perception challenges in driving (Dosovitskiy et al.,
2017; Cai et al., 2020). Driving simulators close to GPUDrive in terms of either features or speed
include MetaDrive (Li et al., 2022), nuPlan (Caesar et al., 2021), Nocturne (Vinitsky et al., 2022),
and Waymax (Gulino et al., 2024) which all utilize real-world data. Unlike MetaDrive and nuPlan,
our simulator is GPU-accelerated. Like GPUDrive, Waymax is a JAX-based GPU-accelerated sim-
ulator that achieves high throughput through JIT compilation and efficient use of accelerators. With
respect to Waymax, our simulator supports a wider range of possible sensor modalities (Section 3.2)
including LIDAR and human-like views, can scale to nearly thirty times more worlds (see Section
4.1), and comes with performant reinforcement learning baselines. However, it does not currently
come with reactive IDM agents like Waymax though it does come with pre-trained simulated agents
based on RL policies.



Driving agents in simulators and algorithms. Existing simulators often feature baseline agents
for interaction, such as low-dimensional car following models that describe vehicle dynamics
through a limited set of variables or parameters (Kreutz & Eggert, 2021; Kesting et al., 2007; Treiber
et al., 2000). Rule-based agents exhibit predetermined behaviors, like car-following agents (Gulino
et al., 2024; Caesar et al., 2021; Lopez et al., 2018; Casas et al., 2010) such as the IDM model,
or parameterized behavior agents like CARLA’s TrafficManager (Dosovitskiy et al., 2017). Some
simulators offer recorded human driving logs for interaction through replaying the human driving
logs (Lu et al., 2023; Vinitsky et al., 2022; Gulino et al., 2024; Caesar et al., 2021). Additionally,
certain simulators provide learning-based agents, leveraging reinforcement learning techniques (Li
et al., 2022). In GPUDrive, we provide both human driving logs and high-performing reinforcement
learning agents.


                                                   3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Table 1: Comparison of GPUDrive to related driving simulators. Columns represent whether the
simulator supports multi-agent simulation, GPU acceleration, simulation of sensors such as LIDAR
or human views, is built atop data, comes with existing driver models, and whether the agents are
provided explicit goal points or waypoints along the way to the goal.

Simulator                               Multi-agent   GPU-Accel   Sensor Sim   Expert Data   Sim-agents   Routes / Goals
TORCS (Wymann et al., 2000)                                               ✓                          ✓                -
GTA V (Martinez et al., 2017)                                             ✓                                           -
CARLA (Dosovitskiy et al., 2017)                                          ✓                          ✓       Waypoints
Highway-env (Leurent et al., 2018)                                                                                    -
Sim4CV (Müller et al., 2018)                                              ✓                                  Directions
SUMMIT (Cai et al., 2020)               ✓ (≥ 400)                         ✓                          ✓                -
MACAD (Palanisamy, 2020)                       ✓                          ✓                          ✓       Goal point
SMARTS (Zhou et al., 2021)                     ✓                                                             Waypoints
MADRaS (Santara et al., 2021)            ✓ (≥ 10)                         ✓                                  Goal point
DriverGym (Kothari et al., 2021)                                                        ✓            ✓                -
VISTA (Amini et al., 2022)                      ✓                         ✓             ✓                             -
nuPlan (Caesar et al., 2021)                                              ✓             ✓            ✓       Waypoints
Nocturne (Vinitsky et al., 2022)        ✓ (≥ 128)                                       ✓            ✓       Goal point
MetaDrive (Li et al., 2022)                    ✓                          ✓             ✓            ✓                -
InterSim (Sun et al., 2022)                    ✓                                        ✓            ✓       Goal point
TorchDriveSim (Ścibior et al., 2021)          ✓             ✓                                       ✓                -
BITS (Xu et al., 2023)                         ✓                                        ✓            ✓       Goal point
Waymax (Gulino et al., 2024)            ✓ (≥ 128)            ✓                          ✓            ✓       Waypoints
GPUDrive (ours)                         ✓ (≥ 128)            ✓            ✓             ✓            ✓       Goal point



3       S IMULATION D ESIGN

3.1       S IMULATION E NGINE

Learning to safely navigate complex scenarios in a multi-agent setting requires generating many
billions of environment samples. To feed sample-hungry learning algorithms, GPUDrive is built
on top of Madrona (Shacklett et al., 2023), an Entity-Component-State system designed for high-
throughput reinforcement learning environments. In the Madrona framework, multiple independent
worlds (each containing an independent number of agents† ) are executed in parallel on an acceler-
ator via a shared engine.
However, the simulation of driving poses a unique set of challenges which require careful techni-
cal design choices to solve. First, road objects, such as road edges and lane lines are frequently
represented as polylines (i.e. connected sets of points). These polylines can consist of hundreds
of points as they are sampled at every 0.1 meters, leading to even small maps having upwards of
tens of thousands of points. This can blow up the memory requirements of each world as well as
lead to significant redundancy in agent observations. Second, the large numbers of agents and road
objects can make collision checking a throughput bottleneck. Finally, there is immense variability
in the number of agents and road objects in a particular scene. Each world allocates memory to data
structures that track its state and accelerate simulation code. Though independent, each world incurs
a memory footprint proportional to the maximum number of agents across all worlds. In this way,
the performance of GPUDrive is sensitive to the variation in agent counts across all the worlds in a
batch.
These challenges are partially resolved via the following mechanisms. First, a primary acceleration
data structure leveraged by GPUDrive is a Bounding Volume Hierarchy (BVH). The BVH keeps
track of all physics entities and is used to easily exclude candidate pairs for collisions. This allows
us to then run a reduced-size collision check on potential collision candidate pairs. The use of a BVH
avoids invoking a collision check that would otherwise always be quadratic in the number of agents
in a world. Secondly, we observed that a lot of the lines in the geometry of the roads are straight.
This allows us to omit many intermediate points while only suffering a minor hit in the quality of the
curves. We apply a polyline decimation algorithm (Visvalingham-Whyatt Algorithm) (Visvalingam
& Whyatt, 1993) to approximate straight lines and filter out low-importance points in the polylines.
With this modification, we can reduce the number of points by 10-15 times and significantly improve
the step times while decreasing memory usage. Finally, rather than allocate memory for the maxi-
    †
        In the Waymo Open Motion Dataset, an agent constitutes a vehicle, cyclist, or pedestrian.


                                                            4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


mum number of agents in a scene (as is likely necessary in frameworks like Jax), we only allocate
memory equal to the actual number of instantiated agents.

3.2   S IMULATOR FEATURES

We provide an overview of some of the pertinent simulator features as well as sharp edges and
limitations of the simulator as a guide to potential users.


Figure 2: Example scenarios from the Waymo Open Motion Dataset rendered in GPUDrive. The
blue boxes and circles indicate agents and their respective destinations.
                                                    28


Dataset. GPUDrive represents its map as a series of polylines and does not require a connectivity
map of the lanes. As such, it can be made compatible with most driving datasets given the pre-
processing of the roads into the polyline format. Currently, GPUDrive supports the Waymo Open
Motion Dataset (WOMD) (Ettinger et al., 2021) which is available under a non-commercial license.
We show four representative example scenarios from the WOMD in Figure 2. The WOMD consists
of a set of over 100,000 multi-agent traffic scenarios, each of which contains the following key
elements: 1) Road map - the layout and structure of a road, such as a highway or parking garage.
2) Logged human trajectories from vehicles, cyclists, and pedestrians. 3) Road objects, such as stop
signs and crosswalks. Figure 7 depicts an example of an intersection traffic scenario as rendered in
GPUDrive.

Sensor modalities. GPUDrive supports a variety of observation spaces intended to enable hetero-
geneous types of agents. Fig. 7 depicts the three types of supported state spaces. The first mode is
somewhat unphysical in which all agents and road objects within a fixed radius are observable to the
agent. This mode is intended primarily for debugging and quick testing, enabling a user to minimize
the amount of partial observability in the environment. The other two modes are based on a GPU-
accelerated LIDAR scan, representing what an autonomous vehicle would be able to see and what
a human would likely be able to see respectively. Both modes are based on casting LIDAR rays; to
model human vision we simply restrict the LIDAR rays to emanate in a smaller, controllable-sized
cone that can be rotated through an action corresponding to head rotation. Note that since all objects
are represented as bounding boxes of fixed height, the LIDAR observations are over-conservative
as, in reality, it is frequently possible to see over the hoods of cars as their height is lower than the
body of the rest of the car.

Agent dynamics. By default, agents are stepped using a standard Ackermann bicycle model (De-
tails in Appendix B) with actions corresponding to steering and acceleration. This model enables
the dynamics of objects to be affected by their length, creating different dynamics for small cars as
opposed to large cars like trucks. However, this model is not fully invertible which can make it chal-
lenging to use as a model for imitation learning. To enable full invertibility for imitation learning,
we also support the simplified bicycle model, taken from Waymax (Gulino et al., 2024), which is a
double-integrator in the position and velocity and updates its yaw as:
                                                          1
                                   θt+1 = θ + st (vt ∆t + at ∆t2 )
                                                          2

                                                   5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


where θ is the yaw, s is the steering command, v is the velocity, and a is the acceleration at time t
respectively. ∆t is the timestep. This model is always invertible given an unbounded set of steering
and acceleration actions but is independent of the vehicle length. See the appendix for full details
on the models.
Note that this model does not factor in the length of the car, causing both long and short objects to
have identical dynamics. However, we have observed that computing the expert actions and then
using them to mimic the expert trajectory under this model leads to lower tracking error than the
default bicycle model.

Rewards. All agents are given a target goal to reach; this goal is selected by taking the last
recorded position in the vehicle’s logged trajectory. A goal is reached when agents are within
some configurable distance δ of the goal. By default, agents in GPUDrive receive a reward of 1
for achieving their goal and otherwise receive a reward of 0. There are additional configurable col-
lision penalties or other rewards based on agent-vehicle distances or agent-road distances though
these are not used in the experiments reported in this work.

Termination conditions. We terminate an agent’s episode when they achieve their goal position
and support an option to also terminate the episode if the agent collides. As it is not clear where an
agent should go next after it reaches its goal, we simply remove it from the scene afterwards (we
note that an alternative might be to generate a new goal for the agent to drive to). Car and cyclist
agents are considered to be in collision when they drive through a road edge while pedestrian agents
are allowed to cross road edges.

Environment interface. As GPUDrive is implemented in C++, we provide a Pythonic interface
through nanobind (Jakob, 2022). We create environments for both torch and jax that conform to
the Gymnasium API (Towers et al., 2024) so users can use the simulator entirely through Python if
they prefer.

Available driving simulation agents. We use reinforcement learning to train a set of agents that
reach their goals 95% of the time on a subset of 1000 training scenes. While this number is far below
the capability of human drivers, these agents are reactive in a distinct fashion from parametrized
driver models in other simulators. In particular, many logged-data simulators construct reactivity
by having the driver follow along its logged trajectory but decelerate if an agent passes in front of
it. In contrast, these agents can maneuver and negotiate without remaining constrained to a logged
trajectory. These trained agents are extremely aggressive about reaching their goals and can be used
as an out-of-distribution test for proposed driving agents. The training procedure and more details
can be found in Section 4.2.

Simulator sharp-edges. We note the following limitations of the benchmark:

       • Absence of a map. The current version of the simulator does not have a well-defined notion
         of lanes or a higher-level road map which makes it challenging for algorithmic approaches
         that require maps. The absence of this feature also makes it challenging to define rewards
         such as "stay lane-centered."
       • Convex objects only. Collision checking relies on the objects being represented as convex
         objects.
       • Unsolvable goals. Due to incorrect labels of some road points in the Waymo dataset, such
         as an exit to a parking lot being labeled as an impassable road edge, some agent goals
         (roughly 2%) are unreachable. For these agents, we default them to simply replaying their
         logged trajectory and do not treat them as agents.
       • Initialization modes: In many scenarios, a significant portion of agents (25-75%) are al-
         ready at or very close to their goal positions, such as parked cars. To highlight the difficulty
         of controlling agents, GPUDrive supports different initialization modes. By default, the ini-
         tialization mode is set to “all nontrivial” meaning that only agents more than 2 meters away
         from their target positions are considered controllable. Note that while this sharply reduces
         the number of agents in the scene, it more accurately represents actual driving challenges.


                                                   6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


4            S IMULATOR PERFORMANCE
The following Sections describe the simulator speed. Section 4.1 first shows the raw simulator speed
and peak goodput (throughput achieved by the valid number of agents in a scene). Section 4.2 then
investigates the impact on reinforcement learning workflows by evaluating the time it takes to train
reinforcement learning agents through Independent PPO (IPPO) (Yu et al., 2022), a widely used
multi-agent learning algorithm. The performance results here are from IPPO implemented with
PufferLib (Suarez, 2024). A slower IPPO implementation based on Stable Baselines 3 (Hill
et al., 2018) is also available in the repo.

4.1           S IMULATION SPEED

Since scenarios contain a variable number of agents, we introduce a metric called Agent Steps Per
Second (ASPS) to measure the sample throughput of the simulator. We define the ASPS as the total
number of agents across all worlds in a batch that can be fully stepped in a second:

                                                                                        PN
                                                                              S×           k=1 |Ak |
                                                              ASPS =                                                                                                     (1)
                                                                                        ∆T

where Ak is the set of agents in the k th world, S is the number of steps taken, and ∆T is the
number of seconds elapsed. Figure 3 examines the scaling of the simulator as the number of simu-
lated worlds, which represents the amount of parallelism, increases. To measure performance, we
sample random batches of scenarios of size equal to the number of worlds, so that every world is
a unique scenario with K agents. On the left-hand side of Figure 3, we compare the performance
of GPUDrive to Nocturne (Vinitsky et al., 2022) (CPU, no parallelism), a CPU-accelerated version
of Nocturne via Pufferlib (16 CPU cores) (Suarez, 2024) and Waymax Gulino et al. (2024). Em-
pirically, the maximum achievable ASPS of Nocturne is 15,000 (blue dotted line) though we note
that additional speedups may be possible. GPUDrive achieves a peak ASPS of 2.3 million steps,
which is 2 to 3 orders of magnitude faster compared to Nocturne. This performance also surpasses
that of Waymax (Gulino et al., 2024), a JAX-based simulator, where we could not run more than 16
environments in parallel due to Out of Memory (OOM) issues.

                                                              Distribution of controllable agents
                   Agent steps per second                             across traffic scenes                       Controlled agent steps per second
                                                    120
       106                                          100                                                     105
                                                    80
                                                                                                                                                Simulator
                                                                                                    CASPS


       105
                                            Count
ASPS


                                                    60                                                                                          Waymax
                                                                                                                                                GPU Drive
                                                    40                                                      104                                 Device
                                                                                                                                                RTX 4080
       104                                                                                                                                      A100
                                                    20                                                                                          Nocturne | Original
                                                                                                                                                Nocturne | Parallel (16 CPUs)
                                                     0
             100       101          102                   0            20          40          60                        101            102
                   Parallel environments                         Controlled agents per scene                            Parallel environments

Figure 3: Peak goodput of GPUDrive on a consumer-grade and datacenter-class GPU com-
pared to original, CPU and GPU-based, implementations using the radial filter observation.
Left: The total number of agent steps per second (ASPS) is the number of objects for which our sys-
tem computes observations at each time step. To ensure a fair comparison, we align the conditions
with those used in (Gulino et al., 2024), where all cars, bicyclists, and pedestrians are considered
valid experience-generating agents. Center: The distribution of controllable agents across 512 sce-
narios in the Waymo Open Motion Dataset µ ≈ 10.8 (red line), σ ≈ 9.3). These numbers are
obtained using the ”nontrivial“ initialization mode in GPUDrive, which initializes only the agents
that are more than 2 meters away from their final position. Right: The total number of controllable
agent steps per second (CASPS) as we increase the number of worlds (parallelism).

In addition to the ASPS, we report another metric to indicate the number of controllable agents
that are stepped per second. In the Waymo Open Motion Dataset, each scenario contains a varying
number of moving agents (Examples in Figure 2). By default, our system only classifies something


                                                                                   7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


as a controllable agent if its movement is necessary to achieve the goal. Therefore, parked cars
throughout the episode are not considered controllable agents. To illustrate what this looks like, we
plot the distribution of controllable agents across a subset of scenes in Figure 3.
Considering the variance of controllable agents per scene, the right-hand side of Figure 3 depicts
the Controlled Agent Steps Per Second (CASPS). CASPS reflects the expected performance of
our system when utilizing the Waymo Open Motion Dataset with a randomly sampled subset of
scenarios. Due to the significant variability in agents throughout the dataset, the highest CASPS is
notably lower than the ASPS, at around 200,000. Note that this can be improved by strategically
selecting scenes, such as filtering for dense scenes with a high number of controllable agents.

                  Agent steps per second                       Controlled agent steps per second
                                                                                                   Observation space
                                                                                                   Radial filter
                                                                                                   LiDAR
       106                                               105                                       Device
                                                 CASPS                                             NVIDIA GeForce RTX 4080
                                                                                                   NVIDIA A100-SXM4-80GB
ASPS


       105                                               104



                    101         102        103                        101         102        103
              Number of parallel environments                  Number of parallel environments

Figure 4: ASPS and CASPS comparison between Radial Filter and LiDAR observation types.
The radial filter is slower than lidar due to its linear scan of nearby objects. In contrast, the LiDAR
observation type is GPU-accelerated, delivering significantly enhanced performance. As demon-
strated in the plots, depending on the scene selection, the LiDAR can achieve a speedup of approxi-
mately 3x over the radial filter.

Lastly, we demonstrate the speed of different observation spaces in Figure 4. We observe that using
LiDAR is approximately three times faster than using the radial filter observation (Details about the
supported observation spaces are found in Section 3.2).

4.2          E ND - TO - END SPEED AND PERFORMANCE

The purpose of GPUDrive is to facilitate research and development in multi-agent algorithms by
1) reducing the completion time of experiments, and 2) enabling academic research labs to achieve
scale on a limited computing budget. Ultimately, we are interested in the rate at which a machine
learning researcher or practitioner can iterate on ideas using GPUDrive. This section highlights what
our simulator enables in this regard by studying the end-to-end process of learning policies in our
simulator.
Figure 5 contrasts the number of steps (experience) and the corresponding time required to solve 10
scenarios from the WOMD between Nocturne (Vinitsky et al., 2022) and GPUDrive. We compare
Nocturne to GPUDrive, as it is the closest simulator in functionality, except that it is implemented
on the CPU. For benchmarking purposes, we mark a scene as solved when agents can navigate to
their designated target position 95% of the time without colliding or going off-road. Ceteris paribus
(Details in Appendix D), GPUDrive achieves a 200 - 300x training speedup, solving 10 scenarios in
less than 3 minutes compared to approximately 10 hours in Nocturne.
In absolute terms, the number of controlled agent steps per second for the Pufferlib PPO implemen-
tation ranges from 200K to 500K, depending on the hardware used and factors such as the number
of visible road points per agent.
As shown in Fig. 5, GPUDrive allows us to solve scenes in minutes. Next, we investigate how
the individual scene completion time, the time it takes to solve a single scenario, changes as we
increase the total number of scenarios we train on. In practice, it may be desirable to train agents
on thousands of scenarios. Therefore, we ask whether it is feasible to fully leverage the simulator’s
capabilities with a single GPU.


                                                                        8
 Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                           Training steps on 10 scenarios                                                Training time on 10 scenarios                                                                 Training time on 10 scenarios (log x-axis)
                           100                                                                                                 100                                                                                               100

Training performance (%)


                                                                                                    Training performance (%)


                                                                                                                                                                                                      Training performance (%)
                           80                                                                                                  80                                                                                                80

                           60                                                                                                  60                                                                                                60

                           40                                                                                                  40                                                                                                40
                                                                                  Simulator                                    20
                                                                                                                                                                                  Simulator                                      20
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Simulator
                           20                                                        Nocturne                                                                                       Nocturne                                                                              Nocturne
                                                                                     GPUDrive                                                                                       GPUDrive                                                                              GPUDrive
                                                                                                                                0                                                                                                 0
                                 0.0                        0.2     0.4     0.6      0.8      1.0                                    0     5000               10000               15000       20000                                          102          103         104
                                                                    Global step             1e7                                               Wall-clock time (s)                                                                                   Wall-clock time (s)

 Figure 5: From hours to seconds. Left: Training performance (goal-reaching rate) as a function
 of the global step of the controlled agents (CASPS). Center: Training performance as a function
 of wall-clock time in seconds. Right: Training performance as a function of wall-clock time where
 the x-axis is on a log scale. Runs are averaged across three seeds, replicating environmental and
 experimental conditions as closely as possible. See Appendix D for the hyperparameters and train-
 ing details. The green dotted line marks optimal performance (all agents reach their goal without
 collisions).


 Interestingly, we find that the amortized sample efficiency increases with the size dataset of scenes
 we train in. Figure 6 shows the average completion time per scenario as we increase the dataset.
 For instance, using IPPO with 32 scenarios takes 2 minutes per scenario. In contrast, solving 1024
 unique scenarios takes about 200 minutes, which amounts to only 15 seconds per scenario. We ex-
 pect that these scaling benefits will continue as we further increase the size of the training dataset.
 This suggests that GPUDrive should enable effective utilization of the large WOMD dataset com-
 prising 100,000 diverse traffic scenarios, even with limited computational resources.

                                                                  Total time to solve multiple scenarios                                                                     Amortized time to solve multiple scenarios

                                                           200                                                                                                              2.0
                                 Time to solve (minutes)


                                                                                                                                                  Time to solve (minutes)


                                                           150                                                                                                              1.5

                                                           100                                                                                                              1.0

                                                            50                                                                                                              0.5

                                                             0                                                                                                              0.0
                                                                     32        128          256                          512             1024                                       32          128                                256             512      1024
                                                                          Number of unique scenarios                                                                                      Number of unique scenarios
 Figure 6: Scale reduces individual scene completion time. Left: Total time required to solve a
 fixed number of scenarios to a goal-reaching rate of 95%. Note that time-to-completion is sub-
 linear concerning the number of scenes. Right: Each additional scenario costs less to solve than the
 previous scenario. At 1024 scenes, the per-scene cost of solving an additional scene is on the order
 of 15 seconds.


  4.3                                     M EASURING REMAINING UNSOLVED TASKS

 The Waymo Open Motion Dataset contains a total of 103,354 traffic scenarios (Ettinger et al., 2021).
 In this paper, we demonstrate that an agent can achieve 95% performance on a subset of 1000
 scenes after 15 hours of training. Additionally, we show that the time required to solve scenarios
 decreases as the dataset size increases. Our analysis of the failure rates in the current best-performing
 policy suggests that the goal-reaching limit is around 98%, due to mislabeled road edges in the
 dataset, which render some goals unreachable because they are located beyond uncrossable roads.
 An important direction for future work is developing agents that achieve near-perfect performance,


                                                                                                                                                       9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


with a goal-reaching rate approaching 100% and a 0% collision rate while addressing the limitations
posed by data inaccuracies in the benchmark.


5   C ONCLUSION

In this work, we present GPUDrive, a GPU-accelerated, multi-agent, and data-driven simulator.
GPUDrive is intended to help generate the billions of samples that are likely needed to achieve
effective reinforcement learning for multi-agent driving planners. By building atop the Madrona
Engine (Shacklett et al., 2023), we can scale GPUDrive to hundreds of worlds with potentially thou-
sands of agents leading to throughput of millions of steps per second. This throughput occurs while
synthesizing complex observations such as LiDAR. We show that this throughput has consequent
implications for training reinforcement learning agents, leading to the ability to train agents to solve
any particular scene in minutes and in seconds when amortized across many scenes. We release the
simulator and integrated trained agents to enable further research.

Future work and simulator extensions. This paper represents an initial step toward scaling re-
inforcement learning for multi-agent planning in safety-critical, mixed human-autonomous settings.
Several important opportunities remain for future work:

       • Agent performance: Training agents to navigate without crashing in any scenario, matching
         human capabilities, remains an unresolved challenge. Currently, agents trained in GPU-
         Drive achieve a 95% success rate in a few hours, but this still falls short of the standards
         we aim for. Getting to 100% goal reaching performance is left for future work.
       • Integrating multiple datasets: Future work will focus on integrating various datasets, such
         as NuPlan or NuScenes (Caesar et al., 2020). This integration will enable training on data
         from multiple geographic locations, including Boston and Singapore. To achieve this, we
         need to establish a data-processing pipeline that ensures the datasets are converted into a
         format compatible with the simulator.
       • Diverse realistic sim agents: We plan to extend GPUDrive by introducing a variety of
         simulation agents that represent a broad range of human-like behaviors. This will improve
         sim realism.


6   R EPRODUCIBILITY S TATEMENT

The simulator’s source code and data are available at https://github.com/Emerge-Lab/
gpudrive. To ease reproducibility, we provide Dockerfiles to simplify setup. The experiments in
the paper can be reproduced using a single file on a single A100 in 16 hours or slightly longer for
less performant hardware. The data has been pulled from the Waymo Motion dataset and parsed
into JSON files that are used to initialize the simulator; these are all available from Huggingface
datasets.


7   E THICS S TATEMENT

This paper presents GPUDrive, a GPU-accelerated simulator for multi-agent learning in autonomous
driving. We use publicly available datasets, such as the Waymo Open Motion Dataset (Ettinger et al.,
2021), which are anonymized to protect privacy. GPUDrive is intended for research purposes and not
for real-world deployment without further validation. We recognize the risks of autonomous systems
and emphasize the importance of safety and fairness in their application. Although this work does
not involve human participants directly, it leverages real-world data that may reflect human behavior,
and we strive to avoid harm or discrimination. The codebase, pre-trained agents, and evaluation
scripts are openly available to promote transparency. There are no conflicts of interest or external
sponsorships affecting this research. We are committed to ethical practices in data handling, model
deployment, and research integrity.


                                                  10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This work is funded by the C2SMARTER Center through a grant from the U.S. DOT’s University
Transportation Center Program. The contents of this report reflect the views of the authors, who are
responsible for the facts and the accuracy of the information presented herein. The U.S. Government
assumes no liability for the contents or use thereof. This work was also supported in part through
the NYU IT High-Performance Computing resources, services, and staff expertise.

R EFERENCES
Alexander Amini, Tsun-Hsuan Wang, Igor Gilitschenski, Wilko Schwarting, Zhijian Liu, Song Han,
  Sertac Karaman, and Daniela Rus. Vista 2.0: An open, data-driven simulator for multimodal sens-
  ing and policy learning for autonomous vehicles. In 2022 International Conference on Robotics
  and Automation (ICRA), pp. 2419–2426. IEEE, 2022.

Jason Ansel, Edward Z. Yang, Horace He, Natalia Gimelshein, Animesh Jain, Michael Voznesen-
  sky, Bin Bao, Peter Bell, David Berard, Evgeni Burovski, Geeta Chauhan, Anjali Chourdia, Will
  Constable, Alban Desmaison, Zachary DeVito, Elias Ellison, Will Feng, Jiong Gong, Michael
  Gschwind, Brian Hirsh, Sherlock Huang, Kshiteej Kalambarkar, Laurent Kirsch, Michael La-
  zos, Mario Lezcano, Yanbo Liang, Jason Liang, Yinghai Lu, C. K. Luk, Bert Maher, Yunjie Pan,
  Christian Puhrsch, Matthias Reso, Mark Saroufim, Marcos Yukio Siraichi, Helen Suk, Shunting
  Zhang, Michael Suo, Phil Tillet, Xu Zhao, Eikan Wang, Keren Zhou, Richard Zou, Xiaodong
  Wang, Ajit Mathews, William Wen, Gregory Chanan, Peng Wu, and Soumith Chintala. Pytorch
  2: Faster machine learning through dynamic python bytecode transformation and graph compi-
  lation. In Proceedings of the 29th ACM International Conference on Architectural Support for
  Programming Languages and Operating Systems, Volume 2, ASPLOS 2024, La Jolla, CA, USA,
  27 April 2024- 1 May 2024, pp. 929–947. ACM, 2024. doi: 10.1145/3620665.3640366. URL
  https://doi.org/10.1145/3620665.3640366.

Anton Bakhtin, David J. Wu, Adam Lerer, Jonathan Gray, Athul Paul Jacob, Gabriele Farina,
  Alexander H. Miller, and Noam Brown. Mastering the game of no-press diplomacy via human-
  regularized reinforcement learning and planning. In The Eleventh International Conference on
  Learning Representations, ICLR 2023, Kigali, Rwanda, May 1-5, 2023, 2023.

Matteo Bettini, Ryan Kortvelesy, Jan Blumenkamp, and Amanda Prorok. VMAS: A vectorized
 multi-agent simulator for collective robot learning. In Distributed Autonomous Robotic Systems
 - 16th International Symposium, DARS 2022, Montbéliard, France, 28-30 November 2022, vol-
 ume 28 of Springer Proceedings in Advanced Robotics, pp. 42–56. Springer, 2022. doi: 10.1007/
 978-3-031-51497-5\_4. URL https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-51497-5_4.

Clément Bonnet, Daniel Luo, Donal Byrne, Shikha Surana, Sasha Abramowitz, Paul Duckworth,
  Vincent Coyette, Laurence I. Midgley, Elshadai Tegegn, Tristan Kalloniatis, Omayma Mahjoub,
  Matthew Macfarlane, Andries P. Smit, Nathan Grinsztajn, Raphael Boige, Cemlyn N. Waters,
  Mohamed A. Mimouni, Ulrich A. Mbou Sob, Ruan de Kock, Siddarth Singh, Daniel Furelos-
  Blanco, Victor Le, Arnu Pretorius, and Alexandre Laterre. Jumanji: a diverse suite of scalable
  reinforcement learning environments in jax, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2306.
  09884.

James Bradbury, Roy Frostig, Peter Hawkins, Matthew James Johnson, Chris Leary, Dougal
  Maclaurin, George Necula, Adam Paszke, Jake VanderPlas, Skye Wanderman-Milne, and Qiao
  Zhang. JAX: composable transformations of Python+NumPy programs, 2018. URL http:
  //github.com/google/jax.

Eli Bronstein, Mark Palatucci, Dominik Notz, Brandyn White, Alex Kuefler, Yiren Lu, Supratik
  Paul, Payam Nikdel, Paul Mougin, Hongge Chen, Justin Fu, Austin Abrams, Punit Shah, Evan
  Racah, Benjamin Frenkel, Shimon Whiteson, and Dragomir Anguelov. Hierarchical model-based
  imitation learning for planning in autonomous driving. In IEEE/RSJ International Conference on
  Intelligent Robots and Systems, IROS 2022, Kyoto, Japan, October 23-27, 2022, pp. 8652–8659.
  IEEE, 2022. doi: 10.1109/IROS47612.2022.9981695. URL https://doi.org/10.1109/
  IROS47612.2022.9981695.


                                                11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Holger Caesar, Varun Bankiti, Alex H Lang, Sourabh Vora, Venice Erin Liong, Qiang Xu, Anush
  Krishnan, Yu Pan, Giancarlo Baldan, and Oscar Beijbom. nuscenes: A multimodal dataset for
  autonomous driving. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern
  recognition, pp. 11621–11631, 2020.

Holger Caesar, Juraj Kabzan, Kok Seang Tan, Whye Kit Fong, Eric Wolff, Alex Lang, Luke Fletcher,
  Oscar Beijbom, and Sammy Omari. nuplan: A closed-loop ml-based planning benchmark for
  autonomous vehicles. arXiv preprint arXiv:2106.11810, 2021.

Panpan Cai, Yiyuan Lee, Yuanfu Luo, and David Hsu. Summit: A simulator for urban driving
  in massive mixed traffic. In 2020 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation
  (ICRA), pp. 4023–4029. IEEE, 2020.

Jordi Casas, Jaime L Ferrer, David Garcia, Josep Perarnau, and Alex Torday. Traffic simulation with
  aimsun. Fundamentals of traffic simulation, pp. 173–232, 2010.

Brandon Cui, Andrei Lupu, Samuel Sokota, Hengyuan Hu, David J. Wu, and Jakob Nicolaus Fo-
  erster. Adversarial diversity in hanabi. In The Eleventh International Conference on Learn-
  ing Representations, ICLR 2023, Kigali, Rwanda, May 1-5, 2023, 2023. URL https:
  //openreview.net/pdf?id=uLE3WF3-H_5.

Alexey Dosovitskiy, German Ros, Felipe Codevilla, Antonio Lopez, and Vladlen Koltun. Carla: An
  open urban driving simulator. In Conference on robot learning, pp. 1–16. PMLR, 2017.

Scott Ettinger, Shuyang Cheng, Benjamin Caine, Chenxi Liu, Hang Zhao, Sabeek Pradhan, Yuning
  Chai, Ben Sapp, Charles R. Qi, Yin Zhou, Zoey Yang, Aurelien Chouard, Pei Sun, Jiquan Ngiam,
  Vijay Vasudevan, Alexander McCauley, Jonathon Shlens, and Dragomir Anguelov. Large scale
  interactive motion forecasting for autonomous driving : The waymo open motion dataset. In 2021
  IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision, ICCV 2021, Montreal, QC, Canada,
  October 10-17, 2021, pp. 9690–9699. IEEE, 2021. doi: 10.1109/ICCV48922.2021.00957. URL
  https://doi.org/10.1109/ICCV48922.2021.00957.

Cole Gulino, Justin Fu, Wenjie Luo, George Tucker, Eli Bronstein, Yiren Lu, Jean Harb, Xinlei Pan,
  Yan Wang, Xiangyu Chen, et al. Waymax: An accelerated, data-driven simulator for large-scale
  autonomous driving research. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 36, 2024.

Charles R. Harris, K. Jarrod Millman, Stéfan van der Walt, Ralf Gommers, Pauli Virtanen, David
  Cournapeau, Eric Wieser, Julian Taylor, Sebastian Berg, Nathaniel J. Smith, Robert Kern, Matti
  Picus, Stephan Hoyer, Marten H. van Kerkwijk, Matthew Brett, Allan Haldane, Jaime Fernández
  del Río, Mark Wiebe, Pearu Peterson, Pierre Gérard-Marchant, Kevin Sheppard, Tyler Reddy,
  Warren Weckesser, Hameer Abbasi, Christoph Gohlke, and Travis E. Oliphant. Array pro-
  gramming with numpy. Nat., 585:357–362, 2020. doi: 10.1038/S41586-020-2649-2. URL
  https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-020-2649-2.

Ashley Hill, Antonin Raffin, Maximilian Ernestus, Adam Gleave, Anssi Kanervisto, Rene Traore,
  Prafulla Dhariwal, Christopher Hesse, Oleg Klimov, Alex Nichol, Matthias Plappert, Alec Rad-
  ford, John Schulman, Szymon Sidor, and Yuhuai Wu. Stable baselines. https://github.
  com/hill-a/stable-baselines, 2018.

Max Jaderberg, Wojciech M. Czarnecki, Iain Dunning, Luke Marris, Guy Lever, Antonio García
 Castañeda, Charles Beattie, Neil C. Rabinowitz, Ari S. Morcos, Avraham Ruderman, Nico-
 las Sonnerat, Tim Green, Louise Deason, Joel Z. Leibo, David Silver, Demis Hassabis, Ko-
 ray Kavukcuoglu, and Thore Graepel. Human-level performance in first-person multiplayer
 games with population-based deep reinforcement learning. CoRR, abs/1807.01281, 2018. URL
 http://arxiv.org/abs/1807.01281.

Wenzel Jakob.           nanobind:    tiny       and   efficient   c++/python    bindings,    2022.
 https://github.com/wjakob/nanobind.

Arne Kesting, Martin Treiber, and Dirk Helbing. General lane-changing model mobil for car-
  following models. Transportation Research Record, 1999(1):86–94, 2007.


                                                12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Parth Kothari, Christian Perone, Luca Bergamini, Alexandre Alahi, and Peter Ondruska. Drivergym:
  Democratising reinforcement learning for autonomous driving. arXiv preprint arXiv:2111.06889,
  2021.
Karsten Kreutz and Julian Eggert. Analysis of the generalized intelligent driver model (gidm) for
  uncontrolled intersections. In 2021 IEEE International Intelligent Transportation Systems Con-
  ference (ITSC), pp. 3223–3230. IEEE, 2021.
Mathias Lechner, Tim Seyde, Tsun-Hsuan Johnson Wang, Wei Xiao, Ramin Hasani, Joshua Roun-
 tree, Daniela Rus, et al. Gigastep-one billion steps per second multi-agent reinforcement learning.
 Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 36, 2024.
Edouard Leurent et al. An environment for autonomous driving decision-making, 2018.
Quanyi Li, Zhenghao Peng, Lan Feng, Qihang Zhang, Zhenghai Xue, and Bolei Zhou. Metadrive:
  Composing diverse driving scenarios for generalizable reinforcement learning. IEEE transactions
  on pattern analysis and machine intelligence, 45(3):3461–3475, 2022.
Pablo Alvarez Lopez, Michael Behrisch, Laura Bieker-Walz, Jakob Erdmann, Yun-Pang Flötteröd,
  Robert Hilbrich, Leonhard Lücken, Johannes Rummel, Peter Wagner, and Evamarie Wießner. Mi-
  croscopic traffic simulation using sumo. In The 21st IEEE International Conference on Intelligent
  Transportation Systems. IEEE, 2018. URL https://elib.dlr.de/124092/.
Yiren Lu, Justin Fu, George Tucker, Xinlei Pan, Eli Bronstein, Rebecca Roelofs, Benjamin Sapp,
  Brandyn White, Aleksandra Faust, Shimon Whiteson, et al. Imitation is not enough: Robustify-
  ing imitation with reinforcement learning for challenging driving scenarios. In 2023 IEEE/RSJ
  International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS), pp. 7553–7560. IEEE, 2023.
Viktor Makoviychuk, Lukasz Wawrzyniak, Yunrong Guo, Michelle Lu, Kier Storey, Miles Macklin,
  David Hoeller, Nikita Rudin, Arthur Allshire, Ankur Handa, et al. Isaac gym: High performance
  gpu-based physics simulation for robot learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2108.10470, 2021.
Mark Martinez, Chawin Sitawarin, Kevin Finch, Lennart Meincke, Alex Yablonski, and Alain Korn-
 hauser. Beyond grand theft auto v for training, testing and enhancing deep learning in self driving
 cars. arXiv preprint arXiv:1712.01397, 2017.
Matthias Müller, Vincent Casser, Jean Lahoud, Neil Smith, and Bernard Ghanem. Sim4cv: A photo-
 realistic simulator for computer vision applications. International Journal of Computer Vision,
 126:902–919, 2018.
Praveen Palanisamy. Multi-agent connected autonomous driving using deep reinforcement learning.
  In 2020 International Joint Conference on Neural Networks (IJCNN), pp. 1–7. IEEE, 2020.
Jacopo Panerati, Hehui Zheng, SiQi Zhou, James Xu, Amanda Prorok, and Angela P Schoellig.
  Learning to fly—a gym environment with pybullet physics for reinforcement learning of multi-
  agent quadcopter control. In 2021 IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots and
  Systems (IROS), pp. 7512–7519. IEEE, 2021.
Julien Pérolat, Bart De Vylder, Daniel Hennes, Eugene Tarassov, Florian Strub, Vincent de Boer,
  Paul Muller, Jerome T. Connor, Neil Burch, Thomas W. Anthony, Stephen McAleer, Romuald
  Elie, Sarah H. Cen, Zhe Wang, Audrunas Gruslys, Aleksandra Malysheva, Mina Khan, Sherjil
  Ozair, Finbarr Timbers, Toby Pohlen, Tom Eccles, Mark Rowland, Marc Lanctot, Jean-Baptiste
  Lespiau, Bilal Piot, Shayegan Omidshafiei, Edward Lockhart, Laurent Sifre, Nathalie Beauguer-
  lange, Rémi Munos, David Silver, Satinder Singh, Demis Hassabis, and Karl Tuyls. Mastering
  the game of stratego with model-free multiagent reinforcement learning. CoRR, abs/2206.15378,
  2022. doi: 10.48550/ARXIV.2206.15378. URL https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.
  2206.15378.
Rajesh Rajamani. Vehicle dynamics and control. Springer Science & Business Media, 2011.
Alexander Rutherford, Benjamin Ellis, Matteo Gallici, Jonathan Cook, Andrei Lupu, Gardar Ing-
  varsson, Timon Willi, Akbir Khan, Christian Schroeder de Witt, Alexandra Souly, et al. Jaxmarl:
  Multi-agent rl environments in jax. arXiv preprint arXiv:2311.10090, 2023.


                                                13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Anirban Santara, Sohan Rudra, Sree Aditya Buridi, Meha Kaushik, Abhishek Naik, Bharat Kaul,
  and Balaraman Ravindran. Madras: Multi agent driving simulator. Journal of Artificial Intelli-
  gence Research, 70:1517–1555, 2021.
Adam Ścibior, Vasileios Lioutas, Daniele Reda, Peyman Bateni, and Frank Wood. Imagining the
  road ahead: Multi-agent trajectory prediction via differentiable simulation. In 2021 IEEE Inter-
  national Intelligent Transportation Systems Conference (ITSC), pp. 720–725. IEEE, 2021.
Brennan Shacklett, Luc Guy Rosenzweig, Zhiqiang Xie, Bidipta Sarkar, Andrew Szot, Erik Wij-
  mans, Vladlen Koltun, Dhruv Batra, and Kayvon Fatahalian. An extensible, data-oriented archi-
  tecture for high-performance, many-world simulation. ACM Transactions on Graphics (TOG), 42
  (4):1–13, 2023.
David Silver, Julian Schrittwieser, Karen Simonyan, Ioannis Antonoglou, Aja Huang, Arthur Guez,
  Thomas Hubert, Lucas Baker, Matthew Lai, Adrian Bolton, Yutian Chen, Timothy P. Lilli-
  crap, Fan Hui, Laurent Sifre, George van den Driessche, Thore Graepel, and Demis Hassabis.
  Mastering the game of go without human knowledge. Nat., 550(7676):354–359, 2017. doi:
  10.1038/NATURE24270. URL https://doi.org/10.1038/nature24270.
Joseph Suarez. Pufferlib: Making reinforcement learning libraries and environments play nice.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.12905, 2024.
Qiao Sun, Xin Huang, Brian C Williams, and Hang Zhao. Intersim: Interactive traffic simulation
  via explicit relation modeling. In 2022 IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots
  and Systems (IROS), pp. 11416–11423. IEEE, 2022.
Mark Towers, Ariel Kwiatkowski, Jordan Terry, John U Balis, Gianluca De Cola, Tristan Deleu,
 Manuel Goulão, Andreas Kallinteris, Markus Krimmel, Arjun KG, et al. Gymnasium: A standard
 interface for reinforcement learning environments. arXiv preprint arXiv:2407.17032, 2024.
Martin Treiber, Ansgar Hennecke, and Dirk Helbing. Congested traffic states in empirical observa-
 tions and microscopic simulations. Physical review E, 62(2):1805, 2000.
Eugene Vinitsky, Nathan Lichtlé, Xiaomeng Yang, Brandon Amos, and Jakob Foerster. Nocturne:
  a scalable driving benchmark for bringing multi-agent learning one step closer to the real world.
  Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 35:3962–3974, 2022.
M. Visvalingam and J. D. Whyatt. Line generalisation by repeated elimination of points. The
 Cartographic Journal, 30:46–51, 1993. doi: 10.1179/000870493786962263.
Peter R. Wurman, Samuel Barrett, Kenta Kawamoto, James MacGlashan, Kaushik Subramanian,
  Thomas J. Walsh, Roberto Capobianco, Alisa Devlic, Franziska Eckert, Florian Fuchs, Leilani
  Gilpin, Piyush Khandelwal, Varun Kompella, HaoChih Lin, Patrick MacAlpine, Declan Oller,
  Takuma Seno, Craig Sherstan, Michael D. Thomure, Houmehr Aghabozorgi, Leon Barrett, Rory
  Douglas, Dion Whitehead, Peter Dürr, Peter Stone, Michael Spranger, and Hiroaki Kitano.
  Outracing champion gran turismo drivers with deep reinforcement learning. Nat., 602(7896):
  223–228, 2022. doi: 10.1038/S41586-021-04357-7. URL https://doi.org/10.1038/
  s41586-021-04357-7.
Bernhard Wymann, Eric Espié, Christophe Guionneau, Christos Dimitrakakis, Rémi Coulom, and
  Andrew Sumner. Torcs, the open racing car simulator. Software available at http://torcs. source-
  forge. net, 4(6):2, 2000.
Danfei Xu, Yuxiao Chen, Boris Ivanovic, and Marco Pavone. Bits: Bi-level imitation for traffic
  simulation. In 2023 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA), pp.
  2929–2936. IEEE, 2023.
Chao Yu, Akash Velu, Eugene Vinitsky, Jiaxuan Gao, Yu Wang, Alexandre Bayen, and Yi Wu. The
  surprising effectiveness of ppo in cooperative multi-agent games. Advances in Neural Information
  Processing Systems, 35:24611–24624, 2022.
Ming Zhou, Jun Luo, Julian Villella, Yaodong Yang, David Rusu, Jiayu Miao, Weinan Zhang, Mont-
 gomery Alban, Iman Fadakar, Zheng Chen, et al. Smarts: An open-source scalable multi-agent rl
 training school for autonomous driving. In Conference on Robot Learning, pp. 264–285. PMLR,
 2021.


                                                14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A     R EPRODUCIBILITY

A.1   E XTRA FIGURES


Figure 7: Visualization of different observation spaces available in GPUDrive. The top scene is
an example scenario from the dataset, rendered from the ego-centric perspective of the red vehicle.
Grey cars are parked cars while white cars are other controlled agents. From left to right: the Radius
Filter returns all objects within 100 meters, the LIDAR observation with 3000 rays spread around
360 degrees, and a view cone consisting of 3000 rays emanating in a 120-degree view cone.



A.2   C ODE R EPRODUCIBILITY

All code required to reproduce the paper is open-sourced at https://github.com/
Emerge-Lab/gpudrive/tree/main under release number v0.4.0


A.3   C OMPUTATIONAL R ESOURCES

All RL experiments in this paper were run on an NVIDIA RTX 4080 or A100. Total resources for
the paper correspond to less than 2 GPU days.


B     DYNAMICS M ODEL

Agents are driven by a kinematic bicycle model (Rajamani, 2011) which uses the center of gravity as
reference point. The dynamics are as follows. Here (xt , yt ) stands for the coordinate of the vehicle’s
position at time t, θt stands for the vehicle’s heading at time t, vt stands for the vehicle’s speed at
time t, a stands for the vehicle’s acceleration and δ stands for the vehicle’s steering angle. L is the
distance from the front axle to the rear axle (in this case, just the length of the car) and lr is the
distance from the center of gravity to the rear axle. Here we assume lr = 0.5L.


                                                  15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                              v̇ = a
                              v̄ = clip(vt + 0.5 v̇ ∆t, −vmax , vmax )

                                       −1   lr tan(δ)
                              β = tan
                                                L
                                 = tan−1 (0.5 tan(δ))
                              ẋ = v̄ cos(θ + β)
                              ẏ = v̄ sin(θ + β)
                                   v̄ cos(β) tan(δ)
                              θ̇ =
                                            L

We then step the dynamics as follows:


                              xt+1 = xt + ẋ ∆t
                              yt+1 = yt + ẏ ∆t
                              θt+1 = θt + θ̇ ∆t
                              vt+1 = clip(vt + v̇ ∆t, −vmax , vmax )


C    L ICENSE D ETAILS AND ACCESSIBILITY
Our code is released under an MIT License. The Waymo Motion dataset is released under a Apache
License 2.0. The code is available at https://github.com/Emerge-Lab/gpudrive.


                                                16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


D     T RAINING DETAILS
D.1   E ND - TO - END PERFORMANCE

The Table below depicts the hyperparameters used to produce the results in Section 4.2.

Table 2: Experiment hyperparameters used for comparing the training runs between Nocturne and
GPUDrive in Figure 5. The environment configurations are aligned as closely as possible, using
the same observations and field of view. The dataset includes the same 10 scenarios. It’s important
to note that the length of the GPUDrive rollout is approximately equal to the number of worlds
multiplied by the rollout length and then multiplied by the number of controllable agents. We have
set this value to be 92 × 50 ≈ 4600 to approximately match the rollout length in Nocturne.

               Parameter                   IPPO GPUDrive           IPPO Nocturne
               γ                                           0.99                0.99
               λGAE                                        0.95                0.95
               PPO rollout length                             92               4096
               PPO epochs                                      5                   5
               PPO mini-batch size                         2048                2048
               PPO clip range                                0.2                 0.2
               Adam learning rate                          3e-4                3e-4
               Adam ϵ                                      1e-5                1e-5
               normalize advantage                          yes                 yes
               entropy bonus coefficient                  0.001               0.001
               value loss coefficient                        0.5                 0.5
               seeds                                 42, 12, 67          42, 12, 67
               number of worlds                               50                   1


Figure 8: Key performance metrics as a function of training time grouped by the number of
unique scenes in a batch reported in Figure 6. Left: The aggregate percentage of agents that
achieved their goal. Center: The aggregate percentage of agents that collided with another vehicle.
Right: The aggregate number of vehicles that crossed a road edge.


                                                17
