Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


S TATISTICAL A DVANTAGES OF P ERTURBING
C OSINE ROUTER IN M IXTURE OF E XPERTS
    Huy Nguyen1     Pedram Akbarian∗,1 Trang Pham∗,2 Trang Nguyen∗,2
                       Shuijan Zhang1        Nhat Ho1
 1
   The University of Texas at Austin 2 Qualcomm AI Research†



                                               A BSTRACT

            The cosine router in Mixture of Experts (MoE) has recently emerged as an at-
            tractive alternative to the conventional linear router. Indeed, the cosine router
            demonstrates favorable performance in image and language tasks and exhibits
            better ability to mitigate the representation collapse issue, which often leads to
            parameter redundancy and limited representation potentials. Despite its empirical
            success, a comprehensive analysis of the cosine router in MoE has been lacking.
            Considering the least square estimation of the cosine routing MoE, we demonstrate
            that due to the intrinsic interaction of the model parameters in the cosine router via
            some partial differential equations, regardless of the structures of the experts, the
            estimation rates of experts and model parameters can be as slow as O(1/ logτ (n))
            where τ > 0 is some constant and n is the sample size. Surprisingly, these pes-
            simistic non-polynomial convergence rates can be circumvented by the widely
            used technique in practice to stabilize the cosine router — simply adding noises
            to the ℓ2 -norms in the cosine router, which we refer to as perturbed cosine router.
            Under the strongly identifiable settings of the expert functions, we prove that the
            estimation rates for both the experts and model parameters under the perturbed
            cosine routing MoE are significantly improved to polynomial rates. Finally, we
            conduct extensive simulation studies in both synthetic and real data settings to
            empirically validate our theoretical results.


1       I NTRODUCTION
Proposed by Jacobs et al. (1991) and Jordan & Jacobs (1994), Mixture of Experts (MoE) has been
known as an effective statistical method to incorporate the capabilities of various specialized models
called experts. Different from conventional mixture models (Lindsay, 1995) in which the mixture
weights are scalars, the MoE rather utilizes a routing mechanism to determine a set of weights
depending on an input token. In particular, the router first computes the similarity scores between
each token and experts and then assigns more weights to the more relevant experts determined
based on those scores. To further improve the scalability of the MoE, Shazeer et al. (2017) has
recently introduced a sparse variant of this model, which routes each input to only a subset of
experts. This sparse MoE model allows us to increase the number of learnable parameters with nearly
constant computational overhead. As a consequence, the sparse MoE has been leveraged in several
applications, including large language models (Jiang et al., 2024; Puigcerver et al., 2024; Zhou et al.,
2023b; Dai et al., 2024; Pham et al., 2024), computer vision (Riquelme et al., 2021; Liang et al.,
2022), speech recognition (You et al., 2021; Gulati et al., 2020; Peng et al., 1996), continual learning
(Le et al., 2024; Li et al., 2025), multi-task learning (Hazimeh et al., 2021), and other applications
(Han et al., 2024; Chow et al., 2023; Le et al., 2025).
In the above applications, practitioners often use a linear router which calculates the similarity score by
taking the inner product of a token hidden representation and an expert embedding. Nevertheless, Chi
et al. (2022) discovered that utilizing the linear router might induce the representation collapse issue.
This phenomenon occurs when a fraction of experts govern the decision-making process, leading to
the redundancy of other experts. In response, Chi et al. (2022) proposed an alternative known as a
    ∗
        Equal Contribution
    †
        Qualcomm Vietnam Company Limited


                                                      1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


cosine router. In particular, this router begins with projecting the token hidden representation into
a low-dimensional space, followed by applying L2 normalization to both the token representations
and expert embeddings. By doing so, the similarity scores become more stable, circumventing the
dominance of certain experts. The efficacy of the cosine routing MoE has been experimentally
demonstrated in language modeling (Chi et al., 2022), and domain generalization (Li et al., 2023).
On the other hand, a comprehensive theoretical study of the cosine router has remained lacking.
In the literature, there have been some attempts to understand the MoE models with different types of
gating functions whose outputs are the composition of some functions and the routing scores. First of
all, considering the classification problem with cluster structures, Chen et al. (2022) demonstrated
that the router operated by a neural network could learn the cluster-center features, which helped
divide a complex problem into simpler classification sub-problems that individual expert could handle.
Next, Ho et al. (2022) studied the expert estimation under an input-free gating Gaussian MoE model,
showing that the rates for estimating experts depend on the algebraic structures among experts.
Subsequently, the Gaussian MoE model with softmax gating was explored in (Nguyen et al., 2023;
2024a) which pointed out that interactions among model parameters via some partial differential
equations (PDE) did harm the expert estimation rates. Saying that the setting of Gaussian MoE
was far from practice, Nguyen et al. (2024c) rather took into account a regression framework with
the regression function being a linear router MoE model. They verified the benefits of formulating
experts as feed-forward networks with popular activation functions like ReLU and sigmoid from the
perspective of the expert estimation problem.
It is worth noting that the expert estimation problem allows us to capture how fast an expert specializes
in a specific task, which is one of the most important problems in the MoE literature known as expert
specialization (Dai et al., 2024; Krishnamurthy et al., 2023). Furthermore, from the convergence
analysis of expert estimation, we can gain several insights for designing the router and expert networks
(see Section 4). Therefore, we will investigate the effects of the cosine router on the convergence of
expert estimation in this paper. For that sake, let us now present the problem setting formally.
Problem setting. We assume that (X1 , Y1 ), (X2 , Y2 ), . . . , (Xn , Yn ) ∈ Rd1 × R is an i.i.d sample of
size n generated according to the following model
                                  Yi = fG∗ (Xi ) + εi ,    i = 1, . . . , n,                            (1)
where regression function fG∗ (·) takes the following form:
                                Xk∗                   ∗ ⊤

                                                  (β1i ) x        ∗          ∗
                    fG∗ (x) :=       Softmax        ∗ ∥ · ∥x∥ + β 0i · h(x, ηi ).                       (2)
                                i=1
                                                 ∥β 1i

Here, the function h(x, η) is known as the expert function, which we assumed to be of parametric
form. Meanwhile, (β0i  ∗    ∗
                         , β1i , ηi∗ )ki=1
                                        ∗
                                           are true yet unknown parameters in the parameter space Θ ⊂
       d1     d2
                                P   k ∗         ∗
R × R × R and G∗ := i=1 exp(β0i                   )δ(β1i
                                                      ∗ ,η ∗ ) denotes the associated mixing measure, i.e. a
                                                          i
weighted sum of Dirac measures δ. Additionally, we define for any vector v = (v1 , v2 , . . . , vk∗ )
                                            P  k∗
in Rk∗ that Softmax(vi ) := exp(vi )/ j=1           exp(vj ). In the cosine router in equation (2), we omit
the step of reducing the dimension of the input token x, and assume that it has already been in
a low-dimensional space for simplicity. Furthermore, we assume that X1 , X2 , . . . , Xn are i.i.d.
samples from some probability distribution µ. Lastly, ε1 , ε2 , . . . , εn are independent Gaussian noise
variables such that E[εi |Xi ] = 0 and Var(εi |Xi ) = σ 2 for all 1 ≤ i ≤ n. Notably, the Gaussian
assumption is just for the simplicity of the proof argument.
                                                                   ∗
Least squares estimation (LSE). To estimate the true parameters (β0i    ∗
                                                                     , β1i , ηi∗ )ki=1
                                                                                    ∗
                                                                                       or, equivalently,
to estimate the true mixing measure G∗ , we leverage the popular least squares method (see, e.g.,
van de Geer, 2000). Formally, the mixing measure G∗ is approximated by
                                             Xn                 2
                               b
                              Gn := arg min       Yi − fG (Xi ) .                                   (3)
                                            G     i=1

Under the exact-specified setting, i.e., when the true number of expert k∗ is known, the minimum
in the above equation is subject to the set of all mixing measures with k∗ atoms, denoted by
                     Pk∗
Ek∗ (Θ) := {G =          i=1 exp(β0i )δ(β1i ,ηi ) : (β0i , β1i , ηi ) ∈ Θ}. On the other hand, under the
over-specified setting, i.e., when k∗ is unknown and the true model (2) is over-specified by a mixture


                                                     2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


of k experts where k > k∗ , the minimum is subject to the set of all mixing measures with at most k
                             Pk′
atoms, i.e., Gk (Θ) := {G = i=1 exp(β0i )δ(β1i ,ηi ) : 1 ≤ k ′ ≤ k, (β0i , β1i , ηi ) ∈ Θ}.
Universal assumptions. In the sequel, we implicitly impose four following mild assumptions on the
model parameters, which were widely used in previous works (Nguyen et al., 2024c), unless stating
otherwise:
(A.1) Convergence of LSE: The parameter space Θ ⊆ R × Rd1 × Rd2 is compact, while the input
space X ⊆ Rd1 is bounded. This helps ensure the convergence of least squares estimation.
(A.2) Distinct experts: The true parameters η1∗ , . . . , ηk∗∗ are distinct so that the experts
h(·, η1∗ ), . . . , h(·, ηk∗∗ ) are different from each other. Furthermore, the expert function h(·, η) is
Lipschitz continuous w.r.t its parameters and bounded.
(A.3) Identifiability of the MoE: In order that the cosine routing MoE is identifiable, i.e., fG (x) =
                                                           ∗
fG∗ (x) for almost every x implies that G ≡ G∗ , we let β0k  ∗
                                                               = 0.
(A.4) Input-dependent router: To ensure that the router is input-dependent, we assume that at least
                           ∗             ∗
one among the parameters β11  , . . . , β1k ∗
                                              is non-zero.
Technical challenges. The normalization of parameters in the cosine router leads to a fundamental
challenge in theory. In particular, to establish parameter and expert estimation rates based on the
convergence rate of the regression function, we rely on decomposing the discrepancy fGbn (x)−fG∗ (x)
into a combination of linearly independent terms by applying Taylor expansions
                                                                          ⊤ to     the product of the
                                                                            β1 x
softmax’s numerator and the expert function, i.e. H(x, β1 , η) := exp ∥β1 ∥·∥x∥ h(x, η). However,
the normalization of β1 in the cosine router leads to an intrinsic interaction among the elements of
the parameter β1 via the following PDE:
                                               ∂H
                                         β1⊤       (x, β1 , η) = 0.                                    (4)
                                               ∂β1
Although parameter interactions expressed in the language of PDEs have been observed in Nguyen
et al. (2024c), the structure of the above interaction is much more sophisticated (even hold for the
first-order derivatives while those in Nguyen et al. (2024c) occurs only when taking the second-order
derivatives). Thus, this PDE induces several linearly dependent terms in the Taylor expansion, and we
have to aggregate their coefficients in order to form the desired combination of linearly independent
terms. Then, the resulting coefficients become complex, thereby negatively affecting the convergence
of expert estimation. To the best of our knowledge, such a phenomenon with the cosine router has
never been observed in previous works.
Main contributions. In this work, we develop a comprehensive theoretical analysis of regression
function estimation as well as parameter and expert estimations under the cosine router MoE model (1).
Our contributions are two-fold and can be summarized as follows (see also Table 1):
1. Cosine router: Equipped with the cosine router, we demonstrate that under both the exact-specified
                                                                                    ∗    ∗
and the over-specified settings, the rates for estimating ground-truth parameters β0i , β1i and ηi∗ are
slower than any polynomial rates and, therefore, could be as slow as OP (1/ logτ (n)), where τ > 0
is some constant. These slow rates are attributed to the internal interaction among router parameters
expressed by the PDE in equation (4). As a result, the estimation rates for experts h(·, ηi∗ ) are also
negatively affected, and could be of order OP (1/ logτ (n)).
2. Perturbed cosine router: In response, we propose a novel router called perturbed cosine router
in which we add noises to the L2 norms of the token representations and the expert embeddings.
This not only helps stabilize the router but also eliminates the intrinsic interaction in equation (4).
Additionally, we also establish identifiability conditions to characterize expert functions that have
faster estimation rates than others under the exact-specified and over-specified settings, respectively.
Those conditions indicate that the rates for estimating experts, which are formulated as feed-forward
networks (FFNs) with widelyp                        p such as ReLU and GeLU, are significantly
                                used activation functions
improved, ranging from OP ( 4 log(n)/n) to OP ( log(n)/n).
Outline. In Section 2, we establish the convergence rates of parameter and expert estimations under
the setting of the cosine router MoE. Then, we derive these rates when the cosine router is replaced by
the perturbed cosine router in Section 3. Based on these theoretical results, we provide a few practical


                                                      3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Table 1: Summary of worst possible estimation rates for linear experts, polynomial experts and FFN
experts equipped with the ReLU activation function under the MoE with linear router (Nguyen et al.,
2024c), cosine router (ours) and perturbed cosine routers (ours).

      Routers/ Experts         Linear: a⊤ x + b     Polynomial: (a⊤ x + b)p , p ≥ 2         ReLU FFN
            Linear                1/ logτ (n)                1/ logτ (n)                      n−1/4
            Cosine                1/ logτ (n)                1/ logτ (n)                    1/ logτ (n)
       Perturbed cosine           1/ logτ (n)                  n−1/4                          n−1/4


implications in Section 4. Next, we empirically verify the (theoretical) benefits of the perturbed
cosine router over the cosine router under both the synthetic and real data settings in Section 5 before
concluding the paper in Section 6. Finally, proofs and additional details of the experiments are
deferred to the Appendices.
Notations. We let [n] stand for the set {1, 2, . . . , n} for any n ∈ N. Next, for any set S, we
denote |S| as its cardinality. For any vector v ∈ Rd and α := (α1 , α2 , . . . , αd ) ∈ Nd , we let
v α = v1α1 v2α2 . . . vdαd , |v| := v1 + v2 + . . . + vd and α! := α1 !α2 ! . . . αd !, while ∥v∥ stands for its
L2 -norm value. Lastly, for any two positive sequences (an )n≥1 and (bn )n≥1 , we write an = O(bn )
or an ≲ bn if there exists C > 0 such that an ≤ Cbn for all n ∈ N. Meanwhile, the notation
an = OP (bn ) indicates that an /bn is stochastically bounded.

2     C OSINE ROUTER M IXTURE OF E XPERTS
In this section, we characterize the parameter and expert estimation rates under the over-specified
setting of the cosine router MoE. We first start with the convergence rate of the regression function
estimation fGbn to the true regression function fG∗ under the L2 (µ) norm in the following theorem:
Theorem 1. Given the least-square estimator G     b n defined in equation (3), the regression estimator
fGbn (.) converges to the true regression function fG∗ (.) at the following rate:
                                                           p
                                ∥fGbn − fG∗ ∥L2 (µ) = OP ( log(n)/n).

The proof of Theorem 1 is in Appendix B.1. The result of Theorem 1 indicates that the re-
gression estimation rate is parametric. Therefore, as long as we can establish the lower bound
∥fGbn − fG∗ ∥L2 (µ) ≳ L(G  b n , G∗ ) where L is some loss function among parameters, we arrive at the
                                                  p
parameter estimation rate L(G    b n , G∗ ) = OP ( log(n)/n). This approach is the key component of
the convergence rates of parameter and expert estimations under the cosine router MoE. In the sequel,
we will consider the over-specified setting of the cosine router, while the results for the exact-specified
setting will be presented in Appendix A.2.
Recall that under the over-specified setting, the true number of experts k∗ is unknown. Then, based
on the notion of Voronoi cells (Manole & Ho, 2022), we will construct a Voronoi loss function among
parameters tailored to this setting.
Voronoi loss. Let G be a mixing measure with k ′ atoms ωi := (β1i , ηi ). Then, we distribute these
atoms to the Voronoi cells generated by the atoms ωj∗ := (β1j
                                                           ∗
                                                              , ηj∗ ) of G∗ , which are defined as

                       Aj ≡ Aj (G) := {i ∈ [k ′ ] : ∥ωi − ωj∗ ∥ ≤ ∥ωi − ωℓ∗ ∥, ∀ℓ ̸= j}.                    (5)
Then, the Voronoi loss of interest is given by
                       k∗
                       X  X                                  k∗ X
                                                             X                   h                    i
                                                   ∗
    L1,r (G, G∗ ) :=              exp(β0i ) − exp(β0j ) +               exp(β0i ) ∥∆β1ij ∥r + ∥∆ηij ∥r ,
                       j=1 i∈Aj                              j=1 i∈Aj

                                              ∗
where r ≥ 1 is some constant, ∆β1ij := β1i − β1j and ∆ηij := ηi − ηj∗ .
Note that, due to the parameter interaction inside the cosine router captured by the PDE (4), the
lower bound ∥fGbn − fG∗ ∥L2 (µ) ≳ L1,r (Gb n , G∗ ) does not hold true, and thus, we cannot achieve


                                                       4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025



                                         p
                        b n , G∗ ) = OP ( log(n)/n) mentioned at the beginning of Section 2. By
the desired bound L1,r (G
contrast, we show in Appendix B.3 an opposed result to the previous lower bound, saying that
                 lim             inf        ∥fG − fG∗ ∥L2 (µ) /L1,r (G, G∗ ) = 0,
                   ε→0 G∈Ek∗ (Θ):L1,r (G,G∗ )≤ε

for any r ≥ 1. This result implies the following minimax lower bound of parameter estimation:
Theorem 2. Under the over-specified setting, the following minimax lower bound of estimating G∗
                          inf            sup            EfG [L1,r (Gn , G)] ≳ n−1/2 ,
                       Gn ∈Gk (Θ) G∈Gk (Θ)\Gk∗ −1 (Θ)

holds true for any r ≥ 1, where EfG indicates the expectation taken w.r.t the product measure with
 n
fG and the infimum is over all estimators taking values in Gk (Θ).
See Appendix B.3 for the proof of Theorem 2. There are two main implications of the above result:
(i) Parameter estimation rates. The minimax lower bound together with the formulation of L1,r
                                                                          ∗    ∗
indicate that at least one among the rates for estimating parameters β1j    , β0i , ηj∗ is slower than any
                         −1/2r                                          τ
polynomial rates OP (n         ) and, thus, could be of order OP (1/ log (n)), for some constant τ > 0.
(ii) Router estimation rates: When the estimation rate of either β1∗ or β0∗ is slower than any
polynomial rates, since the softmax function is Lipschitz w.r.t the Euclidean norm (Gao & Pavel,
2018), we deduce that the worst possible rate of estimating the cosine router or the mixture weights
in equation (2) could also be slower than any polynomial rates. In practice, the router and the expert
networks are trained simultaneously (see Section 1.2 in (Shazeer et al., 2017)). Thus, the slow
convergence of the router might decelerate the model convergence.
(iii) Expert estimation rates. Assume that G    b n := Pk∗ exp(βb0i )δ bn n . Since the expert h(·, η)
                                                           i=1            (β1i ,b
                                                                                ηi )
is Lipschitz continuous, it follows that
                               sup |h(x, ηbin ) − h(x, ηj∗ )| ≲ ∥b
                                                                 ηin − ηj∗ ∥.                      (6)
                                 x
Consequently, the worst possible rate for estimating the expert h(x, ηj∗ ) is identical to the worst
possible rate for estimating the parameter ηj∗ . For instance, if the expert function takes the polynomial
form of h(x, η) := (ηx)2 (considered in (Mendes & Jiang, 2012; Nguyen et al., 2021; 2024c)), where
we assume x ∈ R for simplicity, then we have |h(x, η̂) − h(x, η ∗ )| = |η̂ − η ∗ | · |η̂ + η ∗ | · |x|. As a
result, the expert estimation rate is exactly the parameter estimation rate. Thus, when the estimation
rate of ηj∗ is slower than any polynomial rates, the worst possible estimation rates for the experts
h(·, ηj∗ ) could also be slower than any polynomial rates and be as slow as OP (1/ logτ (n)). This
indicates that the cosine router is even less sample efficient than the linear router (see also Table 1).
Note that by employing techniques of partitioning the input space in (Nguyen et al., 2024b), we can
show that these results still hold when using the Top-K sparse softmax gating function. Therefore, in
order to improve the sample efficiency while preserving the robustness to the representation collapse,
we need to slightly modify the structure of the cosine router in the next section.

3    P ERTURBED C OSINE ROUTER M IXTURE OF E XPERTS
In this section, we demonstrate that the pessimistic non-polynomial convergence rates of parameter
and expert estimation under the cosine router can be easily circumvented by the widely used technique
in practice to stabilize the cosine router: adding noises to the L2 norm in the cosine router. Although
this perturbation technique and the cosine router have been well studied in the literature, we would
like to emphasize that to the best of our knowledge, our work is the first to be aware of combining
these two methods together which we refer to as the perturbed cosine router MoE. We now present
the formulation of a MoE with the perturbed cosine router under the regression setting.
Problem setup for the perturbed cosine router MoE model. We assume that an i.i.d. sample of
size n: (X1 , Y1 ), (X2 , Y2 ), . . . , (Xn , Yn ) ∈ Rd1 × R is generated according to the model
                                       Yi = gG∗ (Xi ) + εi , i = 1, . . . , n,                   (7)
where regression function gG∗ (·) takes the following form:
                            Xk∗                             ∗ ⊤

                                                          (β1i ) x             ∗           ∗
               gG∗ (x) :=          Softmax
                                                 (∥β ∗ ∥ + τ ) · (∥x∥ + τ ) + β0i · h(x, ηi ).   (8)
                            i=1                      1i     1             2



                                                     5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Here, τ1 , τ2 > 0 are two noise hyper-parameters. The main difference between the two regression
functions fG∗ and gG∗ is the noise hyper-parameters τ1 , τ2 that we add to the norms of the expert
               ∗
embeddings β1i   and the token input x, which leads to the perturbed cosine router. By doing so, the pa-
rameter interaction inside
                           the router as in equation (4) does not occur. More specifically, let us denote
 e                            β⊤ x                                                   ∂H
H(x,  β1 , η) := exp (∥β1 ∥+τ11)·(∥x∥+τ2 ) h(x, η), then it can be verified that β1⊤ ∂β  (x, β1 , η) ̸= 0.
                                                                                       e
                                                                                       1


Least squares estimation. Similar to the cosine router setting, we can estimate the unknown
                          ∗
ground-truth parameters (β0i    ∗
                             , β1i , ηi∗ )ki=1
                                            ∗
                                               using the least-square estimator, which is given by:
                                                   X n                  2
                               Ge n := arg min            Yi − gG (Xi ) .                           (9)
                                             G     i=1

In the following theory, we provide a convergence rate of regression function estimation under the
perturbed cosine router MoE model.
Theorem 3. Given a least squares estimator G     e n defined in equation (9), the regression function
estimation gGen (·) admits the following convergence rate:
                                                          p
                               ∥gGen − gG∗ ∥L2 (µ) = OP ( log(n)/n).                             (10)
Proof of Theorem 3 p is in Appendix C.1. The result of Theorem 3 proves that the regression function
estimation rate OP ( log(n)/n) under the perturbed cosine router MoE is of the same order as that
with the vanilla cosine router in Theorem 1. Following the similar proof strategy in the cosine router
MoE in Section 2 for capturing the convergence rates of parameter and expert estimations under
the perturbed cosine router MoE model, it is sufficient to establish the lower bound between the
difference of regression functions and the difference of parameters under both the exact-specified and
over-specified settings.
In this section, we study the over-specified setting of the perturbed cosine router. The results for the
exact-specified setting of the perturbed cosine router is in Appendix A.2.
We now derive a condition called strong identifiability on the expert function h(·, η) to identify which
experts exhibit faster estimation rates than others under the over-specified setting.
Definition 1 (Strong identifiability). An expert function x 7→ h(x, η) is called strongly identifiable if
it is twice differentiable with respect to its parameter η, and the set of functions in x
               (                                                                          )
                                e
                  ∂ |α1 |+|α2 | H                        d1       d2
                                  (x, β1i , ηi ) : α1 ∈ N , α2 ∈ N , 0 ≤ |α1 | + |α2 | ≤ 2 ,
                   ∂β1α1 ∂η α2
is linearly independent for almost every x for any k ≥ 1 and distinct parameters η1 , . . . , ηk , where
             e                           β⊤ x
we denote H(x,   β1 , η) := exp( (∥β1 ∥+τ11)·(∥x∥+τ2 ) )h(x, η).
Example. For experts formulated as neural networks, i.e. h(x, (a, b)) = ϕ(a⊤ x + b), if the activation
ϕ is selected as ϕ(z) = ReLU(z), ϕ(z) = tanh(·) or ϕ(z) = z p for p ≥ 2, then they are strongly
identifiable. Conversely, a linear expert h(x, (a, b)) = a⊤ x + b fails to meet the strong identifiability
the condition.
To capture the convergence behavior of expert estimation rate under the over-specified setting in
Theorem 4, we will use the Voronoi loss defined as follows:
                 k∗
                 X  X                                          X         X                h                  i
                                             ∗
L2 (G, G∗ ) :=              exp(β0i ) − exp(β0j ) +                              exp(β0i ) ∥∆β1ij ∥ + ∥∆ηij ∥
                 j=1 i∈Aj                                 j∈[k∗ ]:|Aj |=1 i∈Aj
                                                 X           X              h                    i
                                        +                          exp(β0i ) ∥∆β1ij ∥2 + ∥∆ηij ∥2 .       (11)
                                            j∈[k∗ ]:|Aj |>1 i∈Aj

Theorem 4. Suppose that the expert function h(x, η) satisfies the strong identifiability condition in
Definition 1, then the following L2 -lower bound holds for any mixing measure G ∈ Gk (Θ):
                                   ∥gG − gG∗ ∥L2 (µ) ≳ L2 (G, G∗ ).
                                                                                    p
                                                                   e n , G∗ ) = OP ( log(n)/n).
Furthermore, this bound and the result in Theorem 3 imply that L2 (G


                                                      6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


The proof of Theorem 4 is in Appendix C.3. A few comments regarding this theorem are in order:
                                                                                        ∗
(i) Parameter estimation rates. Under the over-specified setting, parameters β1j          , ηj∗ which are
                                                                                            p
                              e n )| = 1, share the same estimation rate of order OP ( log(n)/n).
fitted by one atom, i.e. |Aj (G
Meanwhile, those for parameters                                           e n )| > 1, are slightly slower,
                                  fitted by more than one atom, i.e. |Aj (G
                       p
standing at order OP ( log(n)/n).
                       4



(ii) Expert estimation rates. Given the above parameter estimation rates and the inequality   p (6), we
observe that the rates for estimating strongly identifiable experts h(·, ηj∗ ) range from OP ( 4 log(n)/n)
        p
to OP ( log(n)/n). Notably, these rates apply even for polynomial experts of degree at least two, i.e.
h(x, (a, b)) = (a⊤ x + b)p with p ≥ 2, as they satisfy the strong identifiability condition. By contrast,
the estimation rates for polynomial experts when using the vanilla cosine router (see Theorem 2) and
the linear router (see Theorem 4.6, (Nguyen et al., 2024c)) are significantly slower and could be of
order OP (1/ logτ (n)), where τ > 0 is some constant (see also Table 1). This observation highlights
that our proposed perturbed cosine router is more sample efficient than both the linear router and the
cosine router.

4    P RACTICAL I MPLICATIONS
We now discuss two important practical implications from the theoretical results of the paper.
1. Router and expert design: From the benefits of the perturbed cosine router for the expert
estimation of MoE models, our theories suggest that when using the cosine router to avoid the repre-
sentation collapse, practitioners should add noises to L2 norms of the token hidden representations
and the expert embeddings to achieve a favorable performance. Additionally, the strong identifiability
condition also verifies the advantages of using non-linear expert networks over linear ones.
2. Misspecified settings. Thus far in the paper, we have only considered well-specified settings,
namely, the data are assumed to be sampled from the (perturbed) cosine router MoE. Although it may
look restrictive, the results under this setting lay an important foundation for a more realistic misspec-
ified setting where the data are not necessarily generated from those models. Under that misspecified
setting, we assume that the data are generated from a regression framework as in equation (1) but
with an arbitrary regression function q(·), which is not a (perturbed) cosine router MoE. Then, we can
demonstrate that the LSE G    b n converges to a mixing measure G ∈ arg minG∈G (Θ) ∥q − fG ∥L2 (µ) ,
                                                                                    k
where fG (·) is a regression function taking the form of the (perturbed) cosine router MoE. Further-
more, the optimal mixing measure will be in the boundary of the parameter space Gk (Θ), namely,
G has k atoms. Thus, as n becomes sufficiently large, G        b n also has k atoms. The insights from
our theories for the well-specified setting indicate that the Voronoi losses can be used to obtain the
estimation rates of individual parameters of the LSE G      b n to those of G and therefore, achieve the
following expert estimation rates under the misspecified settings, which will be empirically validated
via numerical experiments in Appendix F:
(2.1) Cosine router MoE: the worst expert estimation rate could be as slow as OP (1/ logτ (n)) for
some τ > 0. It indicates that we still need an exponential number of data (roughly exp(1/ϵτ ) where
ϵ is the desired approximation error) to estimate the experts as well as select important experts.
(2.2) Perturbed cosine router MoE: the slowest expert estimation rate is of order OP (n−1/4 ). Thus,
we only need a polynomial number of data (roughly ϵ−4 ) to estimate the experts. This explains why
the perturbed cosine router is a solution to the parameter estimation problem, or more generally, the
expert estimation problem of the MoE models.
However, the convergence analysis under the misspecified setting suffers from the challenges of
understanding the universal approximation power of the (perturbed) cosine router, which have
remained elusive in the literature. However, since this is beyond the scope of our paper, we leave it
for future development.

5    E XPERIMENTS
In this section, we first conduct numerical experiments on synthetic data (cf. Section 5.1), and then
carry out experiments with real data on language modeling (cf. Section 5.2) and domain generalization
(cf. Section 5.3) tasks. Our main goal is to empirically demonstrate the efficacy of the perturbed
cosine router over the vanilla cosine router and the linear router in MoE models.

                                                    7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


              103
                                                        Vanilla (τ = 0.0)                        103
                                                                                                                                         Vanilla (τ = 0.0)
                                                        192.8 n−0.11                                                                     50.3 n−0.05
                   2                                         Rate = O(n−0.11 )                   102
              10                                                                                                                              Rate = O(n−0.05 )


            b n , G∗ )


                                                                                               b n , G∗ )
              101                                                                                101


       L 2 (G


                                                                                          L 3 (G
                                                                                                 100
              100


                                                                                                10−1
             10−1
                                                             Rate = O(n−0.50 )
                                                                                                                                              Rate = O(n−0.47 )
                                                                                                10−2
             10−2            Perturbed (τ = 0.1)                                                              Perturbed (τ = 0.1)
                             7.2 n−0.50                                                                       1.5 n−0.47
                                                                                                10−3
             10−3
                       103                    104                          105                          103                    104                          105
                                        Sample size n                                                                    Sample size n

(a) Exact-specified setting with k = k∗ = 8 experts                                  (b) Over-specified setting with k = k∗ + 1 = 9

Figure 1: Logarithmic plots displaying empirical convergence rates. Subfigures 1a and 1b depict
the empirical averages of the Voronoi losses L3 (G    b n , G∗ ) (cf. equation (12)) and L2 (G
                                                                                             b n , G∗ ) (cf.
equation (11)) for the exact and over-specified settings, respectively. The blue lines depict the Voronoi
loss associated with the perturbed router, whereas the green lines are indicative of the Voronoi loss
associated with the standard cosine router. The red dash-dotted lines are used to illustrate the fitted
lines for determining the empirical convergence rate.

5.1   N UMERICAL E XPERIMENTS
We first perform numerical experiments on synthetic data to empirically verify the theoretical
convergence rates of the least squares estimation for both perturbed and vanilla cosine router MoE
models. We generate synthetic data based on the model described in equation (1). Specifically, we
generate {(Xi , Yi )}ni=1 ⊂ Rd ×R by first sampling Xi ∼ Uniform([−1, 1]d ) for i = 1, . . . , n. Then,
we generate Yi according to the model: Yi = fG∗ (Xi ) + εi for i ∈ [n], where
                                                                             the regression function
                                 Pk∗                      ∗ ⊤
                                                        (β1i ) x
                                                                         ∗
fG∗ (·) is defined as: fG∗ (x) := i=1 Softmax (∥β ∗ ∥+τ )·(∥x∥+τ ) + β0i · ϕ (a∗i )⊤ x + b∗i . The
                                                     1i
input data dimension is set at d = 32. We employ k∗ = 8 experts of the form ϕ (a∗i )⊤ x + b∗i ,
where the activation function ϕ is set to be the ReLU function. The details of the values of the
parameters as well as the training procedure are in Appendix E.1.
Results. Two experimental settings are examined: (1) Exact-specified, and (2) Over-specified. In the
exact-specified setting, the model is fitted with the same number of experts as the data generation
model, specifically k = k∗ = 8. In the over-specified setting, the model includes one additional
expert, totaling k = k∗ + 1 = 9 experts. In each setting, experiments are conducted using both the
standard and the perturbed cosine routers, with τ set to zero for the standard router and 0.1 for the
perturbed router. For each experiment, we calculate the Voronoi losses for every model and report the
mean values for each sample size in Figure 1. Error bars representing two standard deviations are
also shown. In Figure 1a, the empirical convergence rates of both the standard and perturbed routers
are analyzed under the exact-specified setting. The perturbed router shows a rapid convergence rate
of O(n−0.5 ), while the standard vanilla router has a noticeably slower rate of O(n−0.11 ). Similarly,
in Figure 1b, the convergence rates are assessed for the same routers under the over-specified setting.
Here, the perturbed router again shows a faster convergence rate of O(n−0.47 ), compared to the
cosine router’s slower rate of O(n−0.05 ).
Misspecified settings. In Appendix F, we will also conduct numerical experiments for comparing
the sample efficiency of the cosine router and its perturbed variant under the setting where the data
are generated from the regression framework with the same regression function.

5.2   L ANGUAGE M ODELING
In this section, we focus on the language modeling task (Bahl et al., 1983), a fundamental challenge
in natural language processing that involves predicting the next word or character in a sequence to
evaluate a model’s ability to generate and understand text. To assess how different routers influence
the model’s ability to capture linguistic structures and enhance performance across varying levels of
textual granularity, we compare the performance of perturbed and vanilla cosine router Mixture of
Experts (MoEs) on both character-level (Graves, 2013) and word-level (Bengio et al., 2000) tasks.
Datasets. We evaluate the model’s pre-training capabilities on character-level language modeling
using Enwik8 and Text8 datasets (Mahoney, 2011), and assess its word-level language modeling
performance on Wikitext-103 (Merity et al., 2016).


                                                                                 8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


      Table 2: Performance of vanilla and perturbed cosine routers on language modeling tasks.

                               Enwik8 (BPC ↓)       Text8 (BPC ↓)      Wikitext-103 (PPL ↓)
            Router/Experts
                               Small   Medium      Small    Medium      Small     Medium
            Cosine             1.213     1.161     1.310     1.271     90.070       38.018
            Perturbed cosine   1.197     1.147     1.303     1.251     89.910       37.859


Metrics. To quantify the performance of our perturbed cosine router relative to the vanilla cosine one,
we utilize the Bit Per Character (BPC) metric (Graves, 2013) for character-level language modeling
and Perplexity (PPL) (Jelinek et al., 1977) for word-level language modeling tasks.
Architecture and training procedure. In order to alleviate the representation collapse issue associ-
ated with estimating routing scores in the original space, we follow Chi et al. (2022) to first project
input representations on lower-dimensional space and parameterize experts with corresponding lower-
dimensional embeddings. Subsequently, we calculate the routing scores of inputs and embeddings
in this reduced-dimensional space using our proposed perturbed cosine router. Our experiments
adopt the Switch Transformer (Fedus et al., 2021), which is fundamentally a sparse variant of the T5
encoder-decoder (Raffel et al., 2020), with MoE layers replacing the MLPs. Detailed information
regarding the datasets, metrics, training setup, and hyperparameters for this task is provided in
Appendix E.2.
Results. The empirical advantage of our proposed cosine router over the vanilla version when applied
to language modeling tasks is demonstrated in Table 2. The results indicate that the perturbed cosine
router enhances the performance of the original cosine router in all datasets across both small and
medium configurations. It notably improves results for the Enwik8 and Text8 datasets at various
scales and slightly outperforms the original cosine router for the Wikitext-103 dataset.

5.3    D OMAIN G ENERALIZATION
We conduct experiments on the applications of MoE models in domain generalization. Our objective
is to empirically demonstrate the efficacy of our proposed perturbed cosine router over the vanilla
cosine router in this field. Domain generalization (Zhou et al., 2023a) aims to generalize a model’s
performance to unseen test domains with distributions different from those encountered during
training. Specifically, in domain generalization, a model is expected to leverage multiple training
datasets gathered from various domains and exhibit robustness to domain shifts during testing. Such
ability of out-of-distribution generalization largely hinges on the model’s capability to incorporate
invariances across multiple domains (Li et al., 2023). Given that distribution shifts in data correspond
to distribution shifts in (visual) attributes (Wiles et al., 2022), capturing these diverse attributes and
aligning them with invariant correlations is crucial. Mixture of Experts emerges as a powerful tool for
efficiently capturing these visual attributes, and it has been proven effective in enhancing performance
in domain generalization (Li et al., 2023). Therefore, we further justify the effectiveness of our
perturbed cosine router in domain generalization.
Datasets. We followed the experimental setting of Li et al. (2023) and evaluated our method using
5 benchmark datasets in DomainBed: PACS, VLCS, OfficeHome, TerraIncognita, and DomainNet.
Each dataset is comprised of images for classification tasks from different domains.
Architecture. Following Gulrajani & Lopez-Paz (2021), we conduct experiments on ViT-S/16, which
has an input patch size of 16 × 16, comprising 6 heads in multi-head attention layers, and a total of 12
transformer blocks. We adopt a last-two two-layer configuration, where each MoE block comprises 6
experts. The router selects the top 2 out of 6 experts for each image patch.
Training procedure and result. We follow the training-domain validation procedure outlined in
(Li et al., 2023; Gulrajani & Lopez-Paz, 2021), where each training domain is split into training and
validation subsets. The final overall validation set consists of the validation subsets from all training
domains. Subsequently, we select the model with the highest performance on the overall validation
set. To ensure fair comparisons, the results are averaged over three runs.
Table 3 summarizes the experimental results. For each dataset, we report the average results across
test domains. The results demonstrate that our perturbed cosine router consistently outperforms the
linear and vanilla cosine router across all datasets, thereby convincingly justifying the effectiveness of
adding noise to cosine routers. Detailed performances for each domain are reported in Tables 4 and 5.


                                                    9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                          Table 3: Average out-of-distribution test accuracies.
       Router/Experts      PACS     VLCS      OfficeHome       TerraIncognita       DomainNet        Avg.
       Linear              86.33    78.15       73.02               41.30             48.19          65.40
       Cosine              87.22    78.99       73.27               45.55             48.45          66.70
       Perturbed cosine    89.36    80.01       74.09               49.87             48.51          68.37

         Table 4: Per-domain performance of PACS, VLCS, OfficeHome, TerraIncognita.
                                    Router/Experts         A         C       P         S
                   PACS             Linear                87.29    81.20    98.50     78.34
                                    Cosine                89.24    86.11    97.60     75.92
                                    Perturbed cosine      89.87    86.97    97.90     82.68
                                    Router/Experts         C         L       S         V
                   VLCS             Linear                97.53    63.65    74.09     77.33
                                    Cosine                98.59    67.42    70.88     79.07
                                    Perturbed cosine      98.59    67.80    74.70     78.95
                                    Router/Experts         A         C       P         R
                   OfficeHome       Linear                72.99    57.27    79.03     82.78
                                    Cosine                73.40    57.27    78.69     83.70
                                    Perturbed cosine      74.64    57.85    79.59     84.27
                                    Router/Experts        L100      L30     L43       L46
                   TerraIncognita   Linear                45.99    28.51    54.66     36.05
                                    Cosine                50.00    37.49    53.02     41.67
                                    Perturbed cosine      57.59    43.30    56.93     41.67

                           Table 5: Per-domain performance of DomainNet.
                   Router/Experts     clipart   infograph      painting     quickdraw         real    sketch
     DomainNet     Linear             69.11       24.95           54.81       16.88         68.95     54.41
                   Cosine             68.05       24.48           55.75       17.39         69.41     55.59
                   Perturbed          68.31       24.52           55.03       17.90         69.46     55.83


6    C ONCLUSION
In this paper, we investigate the impacts of the cosine router on the convergence rates of least
squares estimation in MoE models. We figure out that owing to the parameter interaction inside
the cosine router expressed by a PDE, the rates for estimating parameters and experts are slower
than any polynomial rates and therefore, could be as slow as OP (1/ logτ (n)). In response to this
issue, we propose using the perturbed cosine router where we add noises to the L2 norms of the
token representations and the expert embeddings in the cosine router in order to eliminate the
previous parameter interaction. Equipped with this novel router, we demonstrate that if the expert
function satisfies the strong identifiability condition, then the parameter and expert estimation rates
are significantly improved to be of polynomial orders. Finally, we conduct several experiments on
both synthetic and real-world data to empirically justify the theoretical results.
There are a few limitations in our current analysis. First of all, the assumption that the data are
sampled from the (perturbed) cosine router MoE is often violated in real-world settings. However,
as discussed in Section 4, our theories can totally be extended to a more realistic misspecified
setting where the data are not necessarily generated from those models, which we leave for future
development. Second, since the ground-truth parameters are implicitly assumed to be independent of
the sample size n, the parameter and expert estimation rates presented in this work are point-wise
rather than uniform. To deal with this problem, we can utilize the techniques for characterizing the
uniform parameter estimation rates in traditional mixture models (see (Heinrich & Kahn, 2018; Do
et al., 2023; Yan et al., 2025)). Nevertheless, since the adaptation of those techniques to the setting of
the (perturbed) cosine router MoE is still challenging due to the complex structures of the (perturbed)
cosine router, we believe that further technical tools need to be developed to achieve the desired
uniform estimation rates.


                                                   10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
NH acknowledges support from the NSF IFML 2019844 and the NSF AI Institute for Foundations of
Machine Learning.

R EPRODUCIBILITY S TATEMENT
To facilitate the reproduction of our empirical results, we present detailed descriptions of the data and
the experimental setup in Section 5 and Appendix E. We will release our code upon the acceptance of
our submission. All datasets used in this study are publicly available, enabling full replication of our
experiments.

R EFERENCES
Lalit R. Bahl, Frederick Jelinek, and Robert L. Mercer. A maximum likelihood approach to continuous
  speech recognition. IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence, PAMI-5(2):
  179–190, 1983. doi: 10.1109/TPAMI.1983.4767370.
Yoshua Bengio, Réjean Ducharme, and Pascal Vincent. A neural probabilistic language model.
  In T. Leen, T. Dietterich, and V. Tresp (eds.), Advances in Neural Information Processing Sys-
  tems, volume 13. MIT Press, 2000. URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper_
  files/paper/2000/file/728f206c2a01bf572b5940d7d9a8fa4c-Paper.pdf.
Zixiang Chen, Yihe Deng, Yue Wu, Quanquan Gu, and Yuanzhi Li. Towards understanding the
  mixture-of-experts layer in deep learning. In S. Koyejo, S. Mohamed, A. Agarwal, D. Belgrave,
  K. Cho, and A. Oh (eds.), Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 35, pp.
  23049–23062. Curran Associates, Inc., 2022.
Zewen Chi, Li Dong, Shaohan Huang, Damai Dai, Shuming Ma, Barun Patra, Saksham Singhal,
  Payal Bajaj, Xia Song, Xian-Ling Mao, Heyan Huang, and Furu Wei. On the representation
  collapse of sparse mixture of experts. In Alice H. Oh, Alekh Agarwal, Danielle Belgrave, and
  Kyunghyun Cho (eds.), Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2022. URL https:
  //openreview.net/forum?id=mWaYC6CZf5.
Yinlam Chow, Azamat Tulepbergenov, Ofir Nachum, Dhawal Gupta, Moonkyung Ryu, Mohammad
  Ghavamzadeh, and Craig Boutilier. A Mixture-of-Expert Approach to RL-based Dialogue Man-
  agement. In The Eleventh International Conference on Learning Representations, 2023. URL
  https://openreview.net/forum?id=4FBUihxz5nm.
Damai Dai, Chengqi Deng, Chenggang Zhao, R. X. Xu, Huazuo Gao, Deli Chen, Jiashi Li, Wangding
  Zeng, Xingkai Yu, Y. Wu, Zhenda Xie, Y. K. Li, Panpan Huang, Fuli Luo, Chong Ruan, Zhifang Sui,
  and Wenfeng Liang. Deepseekmoe: Towards ultimate expert specialization in mixture-of-experts
  language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2401.04088, 2024.
Dat Do, Huy Nguyen, Khai Nguyen, and Nhat Ho. Minimax optimal rate for parameter estimation in
  multivariate deviated models. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 36,
  pp. 30096–30133. Curran Associates, Inc., 2023.
Nikoli Dryden and Torsten Hoefler. Spatial mixture-of-experts. In Alice H. Oh, Alekh Agarwal,
  Danielle Belgrave, and Kyunghyun Cho (eds.), Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
  2022. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=AlkMMzUX95.
William Fedus, Barret Zoph, and Noam M. Shazeer. Switch transformers: Scaling to trillion parameter
 models with simple and efficient sparsity. J. Mach. Learn. Res., 23:120:1–120:39, 2021. URL
 https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:231573431.
Bolin Gao and Lacra Pavel. On the properties of the softmax function with application in game theory
  and reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1704.00805, 2018.
Alex Graves. Generating sequences with recurrent neural networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:1308.0850,
  2013.


                                                   11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Anmol Gulati, James Qin, Chung-Cheng Chiu, Niki Parmar, Yu Zhang, Jiahui Yu, Wei Han, Shibo
 Wang, Zhengdong Zhang, Yonghui Wu, and Ruoming Pang. Conformer: Convolution-augmented
 Transformer for Speech Recognition. In Proc. Interspeech 2020, pp. 5036–5040, 2020. doi:
 10.21437/Interspeech.2020-3015.

Ishaan Gulrajani and David Lopez-Paz. In search of lost domain generalization. In International
  Conference on Learning Representations, 2021. URL https://openreview.net/forum?
   id=lQdXeXDoWtI.

Xing Han, Huy Nguyen, Carl Harris, Nhat Ho, and Suchi Saria. Fusemoe: Mixture-of-experts
  transformers for fleximodal fusion. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2024.

Hussein Hazimeh, Zhe Zhao, Aakanksha Chowdhery, Maheswaran Sathiamoorthy, Yihua
  Chen, Rahul Mazumder, Lichan Hong, and Ed Chi. DSelect-k: Differentiable Selec-
  tion in the Mixture of Experts with Applications to Multi-Task Learning. In M. Ran-
  zato, A. Beygelzimer, Y. Dauphin, P. S. Liang, and J. Wortman Vaughan (eds.), Advances
  in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 34, pp. 29335–29347. Curran Asso-
  ciates, Inc., 2021. URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper_files/paper/
  2021/file/f5ac21cd0ef1b88e9848571aeb53551a-Paper.pdf.

P. Heinrich and J. Kahn. Strong identifiability and optimal minimax rates for finite mixture estimation.
   The Annals of Statistics, 46(6):2844–2870, 2018.

Nhat Ho, Chiao-Yu Yang, and Michael I. Jordan. Convergence rates for Gaussian mixtures of experts.
  Journal of Machine Learning Research, 23(323):1–81, 2022.

Robert A. Jacobs, Michael I. Jordan, Steven J. Nowlan, and Geoffrey E. Hinton. Adaptive mixtures
  of local experts. Neural Computation, 3, 1991.

Fred Jelinek, Robert L Mercer, Lalit R Bahl, and James K Baker. Perplexity—a measure of the
  difficulty of speech recognition tasks. The Journal of the Acoustical Society of America, 62(S1):
  S63–S63, 1977.

Albert Q. Jiang, Alexandre Sablayrolles, Antoine Roux, Arthur Mensch, Blanche Savary, Chris
  Bamford, Devendra Singh Chaplot, Diego de las Casas, Emma Bou Hanna, Florian Bressand,
  Gianna Lengyel, Guillaume Bour, Guillaume Lample, Lélio Renard Lavaud, Lucile Saulnier, Marie-
  Anne Lachaux, Pierre Stock, Sandeep Subramanian, Sophia Yang, Szymon Antoniak, Teven Le
  Scao, Théophile Gervet, Thibaut Lavril, Thomas Wang, Timothée Lacroix, and William El Sayed.
  Mixtral of experts. arxiv preprint arxiv 2401.04088, 2024.

M. I. Jordan and R. A. Jacobs. Hierarchical mixtures of experts and the EM algorithm. Neural
 Computation, 6:181–214, 1994.

Diederik P. Kingma and Jimmy Ba. Adam: A method for stochastic optimization, 2017.

Yamuna Krishnamurthy, Chris Watkins, and Thomas Gaertner. Improving expert specialization in
  mixture of experts. arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.14703, 2023.

Minh Le, An Nguyen, Huy Nguyen, Trang Nguyen, Trang Pham, Linh Van Ngo, and Nhat Ho.
 Mixture of experts meets prompt-based continual learning. In Advances in Neural Information
 Processing Systems, volume 38, 2024.

Minh Le, Chau Nguyen, Huy Nguyen, Quyen Tran, Trung Le, and Nhat Ho. Revisiting prefix-
 tuning: Statistical benefits of reparameterization among prompts. In The Thirteenth International
 Conference on Learning Representations, 2025. URL https://openreview.net/forum?
 id=QjTSaFXg25.

Bo Li, Yifei Shen, Jingkang Yang, Yezhen Wang, Jiawei Ren, Tong Che, Jun Zhang, and Ziwei
  Liu. Sparse mixture-of-experts are domain generalizable learners. In The Eleventh International
  Conference on Learning Representations, 2023. URL https://openreview.net/forum?
  id=RecZ9nB9Q4.


                                                  12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Hongbo Li, Sen Lin, Lingjie Duan, Yingbin Liang, and Ness Shroff. Theory on mixture-of-experts
  in continual learning. In The Thirteenth International Conference on Learning Representations,
  2025.
Hanxue Liang, Zhiwen Fan, Rishov Sarkar, Ziyu Jiang, Tianlong Chen, Kai Zou,
 Yu Cheng, Cong Hao, and Zhangyang Wang.             M3 ViT: Mixture-of-Experts Vision
  Transformer for Efficient Multi-task Learning with Model-Accelerator Co-design.   In
  NeurIPS, 2022. URL http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2022/hash/
  b653f34d576d1790481e3797cb740214-Abstract-Conference.html.
Bruce G. Lindsay. Mixture models: Theory, geometry and applications. In NSF-CBMS Regional
  Conference Series in Probability and Statistics. IMS, Hayward, CA., 1995.
Matt Mahoney. Large text compression benchmark. http://www.mattmahoney.net/dc/
 text.html, 2011.
Tudor Manole and Nhat Ho. Refined convergence rates for maximum likelihood estimation under
  finite mixture models. In Proceedings of the 39th International Conference on Machine Learning,
  volume 162 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pp. 14979–15006. PMLR, 17–23 Jul
  2022.
Eduardo F. Mendes and Wenxin Jiang. On convergence rates of mixtures of polynomial experts.
  Neural Computation, 24(11):3025–3051, 2012. doi: 10.1162/NECO_a_00354.
Stephen Merity, Caiming Xiong, James Bradbury, and Richard Socher. Pointer sentinel mixture
  models, 2016.
Huy Nguyen, TrungTin Nguyen, and Nhat Ho. Demystifying softmax gating function in Gaussian
  mixture of experts. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2023.
Huy Nguyen, Pedram Akbarian, and Nhat Ho. Is temperature sample efficient for softmax Gaussian
  mixture of experts? In Proceedings of the ICML, 2024a.
Huy Nguyen, Pedram Akbarian, Fanqi Yan, and Nhat Ho. Statistical perspective of top-k sparse
  softmax gating mixture of experts. In International Conference on Learning Representations,
  2024b.
Huy Nguyen, Nhat Ho, and Alessandro Rinaldo. On least square estimation in softmax gating mixture
  of experts. In Proceedings of the ICML, 2024c.
TrungTin Nguyen, Faicel Chamroukhi, Hien Duy Nguyen, and Florence Forbes. Non-asymptotic
  model selection in block-diagonal mixture of polynomial experts models. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2104.08959, 2021.
Fengchun Peng, Robert A. Jacobs, and Martin A. Tanner. Bayesian Inference in Mixtures-of-Experts
  and Hierarchical Mixtures-of-Experts Models With an Application to Speech Recognition. Journal
  of the American Statistical Association, 91(435):953–960, 1996. ISSN 01621459.
Quang Pham, Giang Do, Huy Nguyen, TrungTin Nguyen, Chenghao Liu, Mina Sartipi, Binh T.
  Nguyen, Savitha Ramasamy, Xiaoli Li, Steven Hoi, and Nhat Ho. Competesmoe – effective
  training of sparse mixture of experts via competition. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.02526, 2024.
Joan Puigcerver, Carlosx Riquelme, Basil Mustafa, and Neil Houlsby. From sparse to soft mixtures
  of experts. In The Twelfth International Conference on Learning Representations, 2024.
Colin Raffel, Noam Shazeer, Adam Roberts, Katherine Lee, Sharan Narang, Michael Matena, Yanqi
  Zhou, Wei Li, and Peter J. Liu. Exploring the limits of transfer learning with a unified text-to-text
  transformer. J. Mach. Learn. Res., 21(1), jan 2020. ISSN 1532-4435.
Carlos Riquelme, Joan Puigcerver, Basil Mustafa, Maxim Neumann, Rodolphe Jenatton, André
  Susano Pinto, Daniel Keysers, and Neil Houlsby. Scaling vision with sparse mixture of experts.
  In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 34, pp. 8583–8595. Curran
  Associates, Inc., 2021.


                                                  13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Noam Shazeer, Azalia Mirhoseini, Krzysztof Maziarz, Andy Davis, Quoc Le, Geoffrey Hinton, and
  Jeff Dean. Outrageously large neural networks: The sparsely-gated mixture-of-experts layer. In
  International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR), 2017.
Sara van de Geer. Empirical processes in M-estimation. Cambridge University Press, 2000.
Olivia Wiles, Sven Gowal, Florian Stimberg, Sylvestre-Alvise Rebuffi, Ira Ktena, Krishnamurthy Dj
  Dvijotham, and Ali Taylan Cemgil. A fine-grained analysis on distribution shift. In International
  Conference on Learning Representations, 2022. URL https://openreview.net/forum?
  id=Dl4LetuLdyK.
Fanqi Yan, Huy Nguyen, Dung Le, Pedram Akbarian, and Nhat Ho. Understanding expert structures
  on minimax parameter estimation in contaminated mixture of experts. In Proceedings of The 28th
  International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics, 2025.
Zhao You, Shulin Feng, Dan Su, and Dong Yu. Speechmoe: Scaling to large acoustic models with
  dynamic routing mixture of experts. In Interspeech, 2021.
Bin Yu. Assouad, Fano, and Le Cam. Festschrift for Lucien Le Cam, pp. 423–435, 1997.
Kaiyang Zhou, Ziwei Liu, Yu Qiao, Tao Xiang, and Chen Change Loy. Domain generalization: A
  survey. IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence, 45(4):4396–4415, 2023a.
  doi: 10.1109/TPAMI.2022.3195549.
Yanqi Zhou, Nan Du, Yanping Huang, Daiyi Peng, Chang Lan, Da Huang, Siamak Shakeri, David So,
  Andrew M Dai, Yifeng Lu, et al. Brainformers: Trading simplicity for efficiency. In International
  Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 42531–42542. PMLR, 2023b.


                                                14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


        Supplementary Material for “Statistical Advantages of
          Perturbing Cosine Router in Mixture of Experts”
In this supplementary material, we first explore the exact-specified settings of the (perturbed) cosine
router MoE model in Appendix A. Next, we provide proofs of theoretical results associated with
the cosine router MoE and its perturbed counterpart in Appendix B and Appendix C, respectively.
Those proofs are partially supported by auxiliary results presented in Appendix D. Subsequently, in
Appendix E, we specify the details for the experiments performed in Section 5. Finally, we conduct
further numerical experiments on the convergence of least squares estimation under the misspecified
settings in Appendix F.


A     A DDITIONAL R ESULTS

In this appendix, we provide the convergence analysis of parameter and expert estimation under
the exact-specified settings of the cosine router MoE and its perturbed variant in Appendix A.1 and
Appendix A.2, respectively.

A.1    E XACT- SPECIFIED S ETTING OF THE C OSINE ROUTER M O E

Firstly, we start with the exact-specified setting of the cosine router MoE.
Recall that under the exact-specified setting, the true number of experts k∗ is known. According to
the proof technique for deriving parameter estimation rates under the exact-specified setting in the
literature (Nguyen et al., 2023), a key step is to apply the first-order Taylor expansions
                                                                                       ⊤to the product
                                                                                         β1 x
of the softmax’s numerator and the expert function, i.e. H(x, β1 , η) := exp ∥β1 ∥·∥x∥         h(x, η).
                                                                                     ∂H
However, since the parameter interaction via the PDE in equation (4), i.e. β1⊤ ∂β      1
                                                                                         (x, β1 , η) = 0,
holds even for the first derivatives of the function H, the convergence of LSE under the exact-specified
setting is illustrated by minimax lower bound for estimating G∗ in Theorem 5.
Theorem 5. Under the exact-specified setting, the following minimax lower bound of estimating G∗

                               inf        sup      EfG [L1,r (Gn , G)] ≳ n−1/2 ,
                           Gn ∈Ek∗ (Θ) G∈Ek∗ (Θ)

holds true for any r ≥ 1, where EfG indicates the expectation taken w.r.t the product measure with
 n
fG and the infimum is over all estimators taking values in Ek∗ (Θ).

Proof of Theorem 5 is deferred to Appendix B.2. It can be seen that the convergence behavior of
parameter and expert estimation under the exact-specified setting is analogous to that under the
                                                                        ∗
over-specified setting. That is, the rates for estimating parameters β1j  and ηj∗ as well as experts
h(·, ηj ) are slower than any polynomial rates and thus, could be as slow as OP (1/ logτ (n)), where
      ∗

τ > 0 is some constant.

A.2    E XACT- SPECIFIED S ETTING OF THE P ERTURBED C OSINE ROUTER M O E

We now consider the exact-specified setting of the perturbed cosine router MoE model (7). To begin
with, we introduce a condition called weak identifiability on the expert function h(·, η) to characterize
which experts have faster estimation rates than others under this setting.
Definition 2 (Weak identifiability). An expert function x 7→ h(x, η) is said to be weakly identifiable
if it is differentiable w.r.t its parameter η and the set of functions in x
                (                                                                          )
                                 e
                   ∂ |α1 |+|α2 | H                        d1       d2
                                   (x, β1i , ηi ) : α1 ∈ N , α2 ∈ N , 0 ≤ |α1 | + |α2 | ≤ 1 ,
                    ∂β1α1 ∂η α2

is linearly independent for almost every x, for any k ≥ 1 and pair-wise distinct parameters η1 , . . . , ηk ,
                   e                            β⊤ x
where we denote H(x,    β1 , η) := exp( (∥β1 ∥+τ11)·(∥x∥+τ2 ) )h(x, η).


                                                     15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Recall from the “Technical challenges” paragraph in Section 1 that a key step to establish the expert
estimation rates is to decompose the difference fGen (x) − fG∗ (x) into a combination of linearly
independent terms via Taylor expansions to the function H(·, β1 , η). Therefore, the purpose of the
weak identifiability condition is to avoid all potential parameter interactions as in equation (4), which
may lead to undesirable linearly dependent terms.
Example. For simplicity, we consider experts formulated as neural networks, i.e. h(x, (a, b)) =
ϕ(a⊤ x + b). It can be validated that if the function ϕ(·) is either a popular activation such as
ReLU(·) and tanh(·) or a polynomial ϕ(z) = z p , for any p ∈ N, then the expert h(x, (a, b)) is
weakly identifiable. On the other hand, a constant expert h(·, η) = constant fails to satisfy the weak
identifiability the condition.
Next, we will use the Voronoi loss function L3 (G, G∗ ) defined below to determine the estimation
rates for weakly identifiable experts in Theorem 6, whose proof can be found in Appendix C.2:
                  k∗
                  X     X                            k∗ X
                                                     X                h                   i
                                               ∗
  L3 (G, G∗ ) :=             exp(β0i ) − exp(β0j ) +         exp(β0i ) ∥∆β1ij ∥ + ∥∆ηij ∥ . (12)
                  j=1 i∈Aj                              j=1 i∈Aj

Theorem 6. Assume that h(·, η) is a weakly identifiable expert function, then the following lower
bound holds true for any G ∈ Ek∗ (Θ):
                                    ∥gG − gG∗ ∥L2 (µ) ≳ L3 (G, G∗ ).
                                                                                         p
Furthermore, this bound and the result in Theorem 3 imply that L3 (G    e n , G∗ ) = OP ( log(n)/n).
                                  p
The bound L3 (G  e n , G∗ ) = OP ( log(n)/n) all the parameters β ∗ , η ∗ enjoy the same parametric es-
                                       p                            1j j
timation rates, standing at order OP ( log(n)/n). Furthermore, by employing the argument   p in equa-
                                                                 ∗
tion (6), we deduce that the rates for estimating experts h(·, ηj ) are also of order OP ( log(n)/n).
Those rates are substantially faster than their counterparts when using the vanilla cosine router, which
could be as slow as OP (1/ logτ (n)) (see Theorem 5). This comparison highlights the benefits of our
proposed perturb cosine router over the vanilla cosine router.

B     P ROOF OF R ESULTS FOR C OSINE ROUTER M O E
In this appendix, we provide proofs for the theoretical results regarding the cosine router in stated in
Section 2, including Theorem 1, Theorem 5, and Theorem 2, in that order.

B.1   P ROOF OF T HEOREM 1

First of all, let us introduce the definitions of some necessary concepts for the proof, namely an
ε-bracket, a bracketing number, a bracketing entropy, an ε-cover and a covering number. In particular,
let (R, || · ||) be the space of real-valued functions f : X → R. Then, the aforementioned concepts
are defined as follows:
Definition 3 (ε-bracket). Given two functions L(·) and U (·), the bracket [L, U ] is the set of all
functions f ∈ R such that L(x) ≤ f (x) ≤ U (x) for all x ∈ X , and ∥U − L∥ ≤ ε.
Definition 4 (Bracketing number). The bracketing number N[] (ε, R, ∥ · ∥) is the minimum number of
ε-brackets needed to cover R.
Definition 5 (Bracketing entropy). The bracketing entropy HB (ε, R, || · ||) is the logarithm of the
bracketing number N[] (ε, R, ∥ · ∥).
Definition 6 (ε-cover). An ε-cover of the set R under some norm ∥ · ∥ is a set {π1 , . . . , πN } such
that for any f ∈ R, there exists some i ∈ [N ] such that ∥f − πi ∥ ≤ ε.
Definition 7 (Covering number). The ε-covering number N (ε, R, ∥ · ∥) is the minimum number of
balls B(π; ε) = {f ∈ R : ∥f − π∥ ≤ ε} need to cover R.
Subsequently, we denote by Rk (Θ) the set of regression functions w.r.t mixing measures in Gk (Θ),
that is, Rk (Θ) := {fG (x) : G ∈ Gk (Θ)}. Additionally, for each δ > 0, the L2 ball centered around
the regression function fG∗ and intersected with the set Rk (Θ) is defined as

                        Rk (Θ, δ) := f ∈ Rk (Θ) : ∥f − fG∗ ∥L2 (µ) ≤ δ .


                                                   16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


In order to measure the size of the above set, van de Geer (2000) suggest using the following quantity:
                                        Z δ
                                                   1/2
                 JB (δ, Rk (Θ, δ)) :=           HB (t, Rk (Θ, t), ∥ · ∥L2 (µ) ) dt ∨ δ,           (13)
                                           δ 2 /213

where HB (t, Rk (Θ, t), ∥ · ∥L2 (µ) ) stands for the bracketing entropy (van de Geer, 2000) of Rk (Θ, u)
under the L2 -norm, and t ∨ δ := max{t, δ}. By using the similar proof argument of Theorem 7.4
and Theorem 9.2 in (van de Geer, 2000) with notations being adapted to this work, we obtain the
following lemma:
Lemma 1. Take Ψ(δ) ≥ JB (δ, Rk (Θ, δ)) that satisfies Ψ(δ)/δ 2 is a non-increasing √         function of
δ. Then, for some universal constant c and for some sequence (δn ) such that nδn2 ≥ cΨ(δn ), we
achieve that

                                                                       nδ 2
                          P ∥fGbn − fG∗ ∥L2 (µ) > δ ≤ c exp − 2 ,
                                                                        c
for all δ ≥ δn .

General picture. We first show that when the expert functions are Lipschitz continuous, the following
bound holds for any 0 < ε ≤ 1/4:
                                  HB (ε, Rk (Θ, ε), ∥.∥L2 (µ) ) ≲ log(1/ε).                              (14)
Given this bound, it follows that
                       Z δ                                              Z δ
                                  1/2
  JB (δ, Rk (Θ, δ)) =          HB (t, Rk (Θ, t), ∥ · ∥L2 (µ) ) dt ∨ δ ≲                  log(1/t)dt ∨ δ. (15)
                           δ 2 /213                                           δ 2 /213

Let Ψ(δ) = δ · [log(1/δ)]1/2 , then Ψ(δ)/δ 2 is a non-increasing function p
                                                                          of δ. Furthermore, equa-
     (15) indicates that Ψ(δ) ≥ JB (δ, Rk (Θ, δ)). In addition, let δn = log(n)/n, then we get
tion √
that nδn2 ≥ cΨ(δn ) for some universal constant c. Finally, by applying Lemma 1, we achieve the
desired conclusion of the theorem. As a consequence, it suffices to demonstrate the bound (14).
Proof for the bound (14). In order to prove the bracketing entropy bound in equation (14), we
leverage the proof arguments for the convergence of regression estimation in (Nguyen et al., 2024c).
Since the expert functions are Lipschitz continuous, then for any function fG ∈ Rk (Θ), we have that
fG (x) ≤ M for all x where M > 0 is some constant.
Let τ ≤ ε and {π1 , . . . , πN } be the τ -cover under the L∞ norm of the set Rk (Θ) where N :=
N (τ, Rk (Θ), ∥ · ∥L∞ ) is the τ -covering number of the metric space (Rk (Θ), ∥ · ∥L∞ ). Then, we
construct the brackets of the form [Li (x), Ui (x)] for all i ∈ [N ] as follows:
                                      Li (x) := max{πi (x) − τ, 0},
                                      Ui (x) := max{πi (x) + τ, M }.
From the above formulation, it can be checked that Rk (Θ) ⊂ ∪N     i=1 [Li (x), Ui (x)], and Ui (x) −
Li (x) ≤ min{2τ, M }. Additionally, we get that
                                      Z                       1/2
                  ∥Ui − Li ∥L2 (µ) =      [Ui (x) − Li (x)]2      dµ(x) ≤ 2τ.

By definition of the bracketing entropy, we achieve that
                   HB (2τ, Rk (Θ), ∥ · ∥L2 (µ) ) = log N[] (2τ, Rk (Θ), ∥ · ∥L2 (µ) )
                                                 ≤ log N = log N (τ, Rk (Θ), ∥ · ∥L∞ ).                  (16)
Therefore, it is necessary to provide an upper bound for the covering number N . Indeed, let us denote
∆ := {(β0 , β1 ) ∈ R × Rd1 : (β0 , β1 , η) ∈ Θ} and Ω := {η ∈ Rd2 : (β0 , β1 , η) ∈ Θ}. Since Θ is a
compact set, ∆ and Ω are also compact. Therefore, we can find τ -covers ∆τ and Ωτ for ∆ and Ω,
respectively. Furthermore, it can be validated that
                             |∆τ | ≤ OP (τ −(d1 +1)k ),    |Ωτ | ≤ OP (τ −d2 k ).


                                                      17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025



                                      Pk
For each mixing measure G =              i=1 exp(β0i )δ(β1i ,ηi ) ∈ Gk (Θ), we consider two other mixing
measures G′ and G defined as
                            k
                            X                                          k
                                                                       X
                    G′ :=         exp(β0i )δ(β1i ,ηi ) ,        G :=         exp(β 0i )δ(β 1i ,ηi ) .
                            i=1                                        i=1

Here, η i ∈ Ωτ such that η i is the closest to ηi in that set, while (β 0i , β 1i ) ∈ ∆τ is the closest to
(β0i , β1i ) in that set. Now, we aim to upper bound the term ∥fG − fG′ ∥∞ . In particular, we have
                                     k
                                     X
                                              (β1i )⊤ x
          ∥fG − fG′ ∥∞ = sup     Softmax                 + β0i · [h(x, ηi ) − h(x, η i )
                         x∈X i=1            ∥β1i ∥ · ∥x∥
                         Xk
                                             (β1i )⊤ x
                       ≤     sup Softmax                 + β0i · |h(x, ηi ) − h(x, η i )|
                         i=1 x∈X
                                           ∥β1i ∥ · ∥x∥
                              k
                              X
                          ≤        sup |h(x, ηi ) − h(x, η i )|
                              i=1 x∈X
                              k
                              X
                          ≲        sup ∥ηi − η i ∥ · ∥x∥ ≲ τ,
                              i=1 x∈X

Above, the second inequality holds as the softmax weight is bounded by 1, and the third inequality is
due to the fact that the expert h(x, ·) is a Lipschitz function w.r.t η and the input space X is bounded,
i.e., ∥x∥ ≤ B for any x ∈ X for some constant B > 0.
Next, we demonstrate that ∥fG′ − fG ∥∞ ≲ τ as follows:
                   k h
                                                                                                  #
                   X                               ⊤
                                                 β1i  x                      β⊤ x
                                                                                  1i
∥fG′ − fG ∥∞ = sup    Softmax                              + β0i − Softmax                + β 0i · h(x, η i )
                   x∈X    i=1
                                              ∥β1i ∥ · ∥x∥                  ∥β 1i ∥ · ∥x∥
     k
     X                         ⊤
                             β1i  x                      β x                 ⊤
                                                              1i
 ≤       sup Softmax                   + β0i − Softmax                + β 0i · |h(x, η ℓi )|
     i=1 x∈X
                          ∥β1i ∥ · ∥x∥                  ∥β 1i ∥ · ∥x∥
     k
     X
 ≲       sup [∥β1i − β 1i ∥ · ∥x∥ + |β0i − β 0i |]
     i=1 x∈X
     k
     X
 ≤       sup [τ · B + τ ] ≲ τ,
     i=1 x∈X

By the triangle inequality, we have
                         ∥fG − fG ∥∞ ≤ ∥fG − fG′ ∥∞ + ∥fG′ − fG ∥∞ ≲ τ.
By definition of the covering number, we deduce that
                          N (τ, Rk (Θ), L∞ ) ≤ |∆τ | × |Ωτ |
                                                   ≤ OP (n−(d1 +1)k ) × O(n−d2 k )
                                                   ≤ O(n−(d1 +1+d2 )k ).                                (17)
Putting the results in equations (16) and (17) together, we achieve that
                                  HB (2τ, Rk (Θ), ∥ · ∥L2 (µ) ) ≲ log(1/τ ).

By setting τ = ε/2, we achieve that
                                   HB (ε, Rk (Θ), ∥.∥L2 (µ) ) ≲ log(1/ε),
which completes the proof.


                                                           18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


B.2   P ROOF OF T HEOREM 5

Lemma 2. If the following holds for any r ≥ 1:
                                                      ∥fG − fG∗ ∥L2 (µ)
                         lim              inf                           = 0,                    (18)
                         ε→0 G∈Ek∗ (Θ):L1,r (G,G∗ )≤ε   L1,r (G, G∗ )
then we obtain that
                                inf       sup     EfG [L1,r (Gn , G)] ≳ n−1/2 .                 (19)
                          Gn ∈Ek∗ (Θ) G∈Ek∗ (Θ)


Proof of Lemma 2. Indeed, from the Gaussian assumption on the noise variables ϵi , we obtain that
Yi |Xi ∼ N (fG∗ (Xi ), σ 2 ) for all i ∈ [n]. Next, the assumption in equation (18) indicates for
sufficiently small ε > 0 and a fixed constant C1 > 0 which we will choose later, we can find a mixing
measure G′∗ ∈ Ek∗ (Θ) such that L1,r (G′∗ , G∗ ) = 2ε and ∥fG′∗ − fG∗ ∥L2 (µ) ≤ C1 ε. From Le Cam’s
lemma (Yu, 1997), as the Voronoi loss function L1,r satisfies the weak triangle inequality, we obtain
that
           inf         sup      EfG [L1,r (Gn , G)]
        Gn ∈Ek∗ (Θ) G∈Ek∗ (Θ)

                     L1,r (G′∗ , G∗ )
                   ≳                  exp(−nEX∼µ [KL(N (fG′∗ (X), σ 2 ), N (fG∗ (X), σ 2 ))])
                            8
                   ≳ ε · exp(−n∥fG′∗ − fG∗ ∥2L2 (µ) ),
                   ≳ ε · exp(−C1 nε2 ),                                                         (20)
where the second inequality is due to the fact that
                                                         (fG′∗ (X) − fG∗ (X))2
                 KL(N (fG′∗ (X), σ 2 ), N (fG∗ (X), σ 2 )) =                   .
                                                                  2σ 2
By choosing ε = n−1/2 , we obtain that ε · exp(−C1 nε2 ) = n−1/2 exp(−C1 ). As a consequence,
we achieve the desired minimax lower bound in equation (19).

Main proof. It is sufficient to show that the following limit holds true for any r ≥ 1:
                                                      ∥fG − fG∗ ∥L2 (µ)
                         lim              inf                           = 0.                    (21)
                         ε→0 G∈Ek∗ (Θ):L1,r (G,G∗ )≤ε   L1,r (G, G∗ )
To this end, we need to construct a sequence of mixing measures Gn ∈ Ek∗ (Θ) that satisfies
L1,r (Gn , G∗ ) → 0 and
                                     ∥fGn − fG∗ ∥L2 (µ)
                                                        → 0,
                                       L1,r (Gn , G∗ )
                                                           Pk∗      n
as n → ∞. Next, let us take into account the sequence Gn = i=1 exp(β0i )δ(β1i
                                                                           n ,η n ) in which
                                                                               i

              n            ∗
       • exp(β0i ) = exp(β0i ) for any 1 ≤ i ≤ k∗ ;

          n
       • β11 = 1 + n1 β11∗         n
                             and β1i     ∗
                                     = β1i  for any 2 ≤ i ≤ k∗ ;
       • ηin = ηi∗ for any 1 ≤ i ≤ k∗ .

Consequently, it can be verified that when n → ∞, we have
                                         h           i                √d  r
                                       ∗     n   ∗ r         ∗
             L1,r (Gn , G∗ ) = exp(β01 ) ∥β11 − β11 ∥ = exp(β01 ) ·         → 0,
                                                                      n
Next, we demonstrate that ∥fGn − fG∗ ∥L2 (µ) /L1,r (Gn , G∗ ) → 0. For that purpose, we consider the
quantity
                                                         !
                            X k∗          ∗ ⊤
                                       (β1j  ) x
              Qn (x) :=         exp    ∗ ∥ · ∥x∥ + β0j
                                                        ∗    · [fGn (x) − fG∗ (x)],            (22)
                             j=1
                                     ∥β 1j


                                                      19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


which can be decomposed as follows:
             k∗ X
                               "                                                    !            #
            X                          (β  n ⊤
                                              ) x                      (β  ∗ ⊤
                                                                           1j  ) x
  Qn (x) =                 n
                     exp(β0i ) exp         1i             n
                                         n ∥ · ∥x∥ h(x, ηi ) − exp       ∗ ∥ · ∥x∥     h(x, ηj∗ )
            j=1 i∈Aj
                                      ∥β 1i                           ∥β 1j

             k∗ X
                              "                                                    !         #
            X                          (β1in ⊤
                                             ) x                         ∗ ⊤
                                                                      (β1j  ) x
                           n
          −          exp(β0i ) exp      n ∥ · ∥x∥ fGn (x) − exp        ∗ ∥ · ∥x∥      fGn (x)
            j=1 i∈Aj
                                      ∥β1i                           ∥β1j
             k∗   X
                                                                !
            X                                           ∗ ⊤
                                                     (β1j ) x     h                      i
                             n           ∗                                 ∗
          +            exp(β0i ) − exp(β0j ) exp      ∗ ∥ · ∥x∥     h(x, ηj  ) − f Gn (x)
            j=1
                                                    ∥β1j
                    i∈Aj

           := An (x) − Bn (x) + Cn (x).
             n             ∗
Since exp(β0i  ) = exp(β0i   ) for all i ∈ [k∗ ], we deduce that Cn (x) = 0. Additionally, from the
             n      n
choices of β1i and ηi , we can rewrite An (x) as
                                              n ⊤
                                                                     ∗ ⊤

                              ∗            (β11  ) x              (β11 ) x
            An (x) = exp(β01    ) exp       n ∥ · ∥x∥   − exp      ∗ ∥ · ∥x∥    h(x, η1∗ ).
                                          ∥β11                   ∥β11
                                   ⊤
                                     β1 x
Let us denote F (x, β1 ) := exp ∥β1 ∥·∥x∥    . By applying the Taylor expansion of order r, we have
                                        r
                                        X                     |α|
                       ∗                  1            ∗ α ∂      F
         An (x) = exp(β01 )h(x, η1∗ )            n
                                             · (β11 − β11 ) ·            ∗
                                                                    (x, β11 ) + R(x)
                                          α!                  ∂β1α
                                        |α|=1

                                          1     1  |α| ∗ α ∂ |α| F
                                        r
                                        X
                       ∗
                = exp(β01 )h(x, η1∗ )        1+       (β11 ) ·           ∗
                                                                    (x, β11 ) + R(x),
                                          α!    n              ∂β1α
                                        |α|=1

where R(x) is a Taylor remainder such that R(x)/L1,r (Gn , G∗ ) → 0 as n → ∞. It is implied from
Lemma 3 (see Appendix D) that
                              X 1               |α|
                                         ∗ α ∂      F      ∗
                                      (β11 ) ·     α  (x, β11 ) = 0,
                                   α!          ∂β1
                                |α|=t

for any 1 ≤ t ≤ r, it follows that An (x) = R(x). This result indicates that An (x)/L1,r (Gn , G∗ ) →
0 as n → ∞. By arguing similarly, we also obtain that Bn (x)/L1,r (Gn , G∗ ) → 0 as n → ∞.
Combine the previous results together, we achieve that
                                      Qn (x)/L1,r (Gn , G∗ ) → 0.
Since the  input space X  and the parameter space Θ are both bounded, the term
Pk∗             ∗ ⊤
              (β1j ) x      ∗
   j=1 exp ∥β ∗ ∥·∥x∥ + β0j
               1j
                                is also bounded. This result together with the formulation of Qn (x)
in equation (22) suggests that [fGn (x) − fG∗ (x)]/L1,r (Gn , G∗ ) → 0 for almost every x ∈ X . As a
consequence, we get that
                                      ∥fGn − fG∗ ∥L2 (µ)
                                                          → 0,
                                         L1,r (Gn , G∗ )
as n → ∞, and hence, achieve the result in equation (21).

B.3   P ROOF OF T HEOREM 2

Similar to the proof of Theorem 5 in Appendix B.2, we only need to demonstrate that the following
limit holds true for any r ≥ 1:
                                                      ∥f¯G − fG∗ ∥L2 (µ)
                          lim          inf                                 = 0.               (23)
                          ε→0 G∈Gk (Θ):L1,r (G,G∗ )≤ε    L1,r (G, G∗ )
For that purpose, it suffices to build a sequence of mixing measures Gn ∈ Gk (Θ) that satisfies
L1,r (Gn , G∗ ) → 0 and
                                      ∥f¯Gn − fG∗ ∥L2 (µ)
                                                            → 0,
                                         L1,r (Gn , G∗ )
                                                   Pk∗ +1         n
as n → ∞. Let us consider the sequence Gn = i=1            exp(β0i  )δ(β1i
                                                                        n ,η n ) in which
                                                                            i


                                                 20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


             n
      • exp(β01           n
                ) = exp(β02 ) = 12 exp(β01
                                        ∗               n
                                           ), and exp(β0i           ∗
                                                          ) = exp(β0(i−1) ) for any 3 ≤ i ≤ k∗ +1;

         n
      • β11 = 1 − n1 β11∗     n
                          , β12 = 1 + n1 β11   ∗      n
                                                 and β1i     ∗
                                                         = β1(i−1) for any 3 ≤ i ≤ k∗ + 1;

      • η1n = η2n = η1∗ , and ηin = ηi−1
                                     ∗
                                         for any 3 ≤ i ≤ k∗ + 1.

Consequently, it can be verified that when n → ∞, we have

                        1          h                           i               √d   r
                               ∗      n     ∗ r      n     ∗ r         ∗          1
    L1,r (Gn , G∗ ) =     exp(β01 ) ∥β11 − β11 ∥ + ∥β12 − β11 ∥ = exp(β01 )·          → 0,
                        2                                                       n

Next, we demonstrate that ∥f¯Gn − fG∗ ∥L2 (µ) /L1,r (Gn , G∗ ) → 0.
To this end, we consider the quantity
                                                             !
                             Xk∗                ∗ ⊤
                                             (β1j ) x
                Qn (x) :=       exp                       ∗
                                              ∗ ∥ · ∥x∥ + β0j
                                                                · [fGn (x) − fG∗ (x)],                  (24)
                              j=1
                                            ∥β1j

which can be decomposed as follows:
             k∗ X
                               "                                                   !           #
            X                          (β1in ⊤
                                            ) x                        (β1j∗ ⊤
                                                                              ) x
                           n                              n                                  ∗
  Qn (x) =           exp(β0i ) exp      n ∥ · ∥x∥ h(x, ηi ) − exp
                                      ∥β1i                               ∗ ∥ · ∥x∥
                                                                      ∥β1j
                                                                                      h(x, ηj )
            j=1 i∈Aj
             k∗ X
                              "                                                   !         #
            X                             n ⊤
                                       (β1i ) x                          ∗ ⊤
                                                                      (β1j  ) x
                           n
          −          exp(β0i ) exp      n ∥ · ∥x∥ fGn (x) − exp        ∗ ∥ · ∥x∥     fGn (x)
            j=1 i∈Aj
                                      ∥β1i                           ∥β1j
             k∗   X
                                                                !
            X                                       (β ∗ ⊤
                                                          )  x    h                     i
                                        ∗              1j
          +                  n
                       exp(β0i ) − exp(β0j ) exp     ∗              h(x, ηj∗ ) − fGn (x)
            j=1
                                                   ∥β1j ∥ · ∥x∥
                   i∈Aj

          := An (x) − Bn (x) + Cn (x).
                     n
From the choices of β1i and ηin , we can rewrite An (x) as

                                     X2            n ⊤
                                                                        ∗ ⊤

                 1     ∗         ∗              (β1i ) x              (β11 ) x
         An (x) = exp(β01 )h(x, η1 )     exp     n ∥ · ∥x∥   − exp     ∗ ∥ · ∥x∥    .
                 2                   i=1
                                               ∥β1i                  ∥β11

                                        β1⊤ x
Let us denote F (x, β1 ) := exp       ∥β1 ∥·∥x∥       . By applying the Taylor expansion of order r, we have

                                X2 Xr                     |α|
            1     ∗         ∗         1      n     ∗ α ∂      F     ∗
    An (x) = exp(β01 )h(x, η1 )          · (β1i − β11 ) ·    α (x, β1i ) + R(x)
            2                   i=1
                                      α!                  ∂β 1
                                           |α|=1

                                       1     (−1)i  |α| ∗ α ∂ |α| F
                                 X2 Xr
            1     ∗
           = exp(β01 )h(x, η1∗ )          1+           (β11 ) ·           ∗
                                                                   α (x, β11 ) + R(x),
            2                    i=1
                                       α!      n                ∂β1
                                           |α|=1

where R(x) is a Taylor remainder such that R(x)/L1,r (Gn , G∗ ) → 0 as n → ∞. It follows from
Lemma 3 (see Appendix D) that
                  X 1     (−1)i  |α| ∗ α ∂ |α| F       ∗
                       1+           (β11 ) ·      (x, β11 )
                    α!      n                ∂β1α
                  |α|=t
                                 (−1)i  t X 1 ∗ α ∂ |α| F      ∗
                            = 1+              (β ) ·      (x, β11 ) = 0.
                                   n        α! 11    ∂β1α
                                                       |α|=t

for any 1 ≤ t ≤ r. Thus, we get that An (x) = R(x), which implies that An (x)/L1,r (Gn , G∗ ) → 0
as n → ∞. By arguing similarly, we also obtain that Bn (x)/L1,r (Gn , G∗ ) → 0 as n → ∞.


                                                           21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Furthermore, we have
                     X
                     2                                  ∗ ⊤
                                                                  h                       i
                                                     (β11 ) x
       Cn (x) =             n
                       exp(β0i           ∗
                               ) − exp(β01 ) exp      ∗             h(x, η1∗ ) − f¯Gn (x)
                   i=1
                                                    ∥β11 ∥ · ∥x∥
                 k∗
                                                                     !
                X                                            ∗ ⊤
                                                          (β1j ) x     h                      i
              +             n                ∗
                       exp(β0(j+1) ) − exp(β0j ) exp                     h(x,  η ∗
                                                                                   ) − ¯G (x)
                                                                                       f
                                                           ∗ ∥ · ∥x∥            j        n
                j=2
                                                        ∥β1j
              = 0.
Putting the previous results together, we achieve that
                                        Qn (x)/L1,r (Gn , G∗ ) → 0.
Since the  input space X  and the parameter space Θ are both bounded, the term
Pk∗           ∗ ⊤
            (β1j ) x    ∗
  j=1 exp ∥β ∗ ∥·∥x∥ + β0j
               1j
                           is also bounded. This result together with the formulation of Qn (x)
in equation (24) suggests that [fGn (x) − fG∗ (x)]/L1,r (Gn , G∗ ) → 0 for almost every x ∈ X . As a
consequence, we get that
                                         ∥fGn − fG∗ ∥L2 (µ)
                                                            → 0,
                                           L1,r (Gn , G∗ )
as n → ∞, and hence, achieve the result in equation (23).

C     P ROOF OF R ESULTS FOR P ERTURBED C OSINE ROUTER M O E
In this appendix, we provide proofs for the theoretical results regarding the perturbed cosine router,
namely Theorem 3, Theorem 6, and Theorem 4, in that order.

C.1   P ROOF OF T HEOREM 3

Since the proof of Theorem 3 can be done in a similar fashion to that of Theorem 1, it is omitted.

C.2   P ROOF OF T HEOREM 6

In this proof, we aim to establish the following inequality:
                                inf      ∥gG − gG∗ ∥L2 (µ) /L3 (G, G∗ ) > 0.                       (25)
                             G∈Ek∗ (Θ)

For that purpose, we divide the proof of the above inequality into local and global parts in the sequel.
Local part: In this part, we demonstrate that
                     lim          inf            ∥gG − gG∗ ∥L2 (µ) /L3 (G, G∗ ) > 0.               (26)
                     ε→0 G∈Gk (Θ):L3 (G,G∗ )≤ε

Assume by contrary that the above inequality does not hold true, then there exists a sequence of
                      Pk∗          n
mixing measures Gn = i=1     exp(β0i     n ,η n ) in Gk (Θ) such that L3n := L3 (Gn , G∗ ) → 0 and
                                     )δ(β1i  i


                                      ∥gGn − gG∗ ∥L2 (µ) /L3n → 0,                                 (27)
as n → ∞. Let us denote by Anj := Aj (Gn ) a Voronoi cell of Gn generated by the j-th components
of G∗ . Since our arguments are asymptotic, we may assume that those Voronoi cells do not depend on
the sample size, i.e. Aj = Anj . Moreover, recall that under the exact-specified setting, each Voronoi
cell has only one element. Therefore, we may assume WLOG that Aj = {j}, and
                      k∗
                      X                                  k∗
                                                         X              h                 i
                                  n           ∗                     n       n
             L3n :=          exp(β0i ) − exp(β0i ) +           exp(β0i ) ∥∆β1i ∥ + ∥∆ηin ∥ ,
                       i=1                               i=1
                               ∗
                  n
where we denote ∆β1i     n
                     := β1i − β1i and ∆ηin := ηin − ηi∗ .


                                                    22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                               ∗
Since L3n → 0, we get that (β1i  n
                                   , ηin ) → (β1i , ηi∗ ) and exp(β0i
                                                                   n            ∗
                                                                      ) → exp(β0i  ) as n → ∞ for any
i ∈ [k∗ ]. Now, we divide the proof of the local part into three steps as follows:
Step 1: Taylor expansion. In this step, we decompose the term
                                                                 
                    X k∗                   ∗ ⊤
                                         (β1j ) x
         Qn (x) :=      exp                                 ∗ 
                                   ∗ ∥ + τ ) · (∥x∥ + τ ) + β0j     · [gGn (x) − gG∗ (x)]
                     j=1
                               (∥β 1j      1           2


into a combination of linearly
                               independent    elements using Taylor expansion. In particular, let us
                                 β1⊤ x
denote F (x, β1 ) := exp (∥β1 ∥+τ1 )·(∥x∥+τ2 ) , then we have
                        k∗
                        X              h                                              i
                                                                       ∗
           Qn (x) =                n
                              exp(β0i          n
                                      ) F (x, β1i )h(x, ηin ) − F (x, β1i )h(x, ηi∗ )
                        i=1
                        k∗
                        X              h                         i
                                   n           n             ∗
                   −          exp(β0i ) F (x, β1i ) − F (x, β1i ) gGn (x)
                        i=1
                        k∗
                        X                                    h                                          i
                                                ∗                    ∗
                   +                n
                               exp(β0i ) − exp(β0i )          F (x, β1i )h(x, ηi∗ ) − F (x, β1i
                                                                                             ∗
                                                                                                )gGn (x)
                        i=1
                   := An (x) − Bn (x) + Cn (x).                                                                      (28)
By means of the first-order Taylor expansion, we have
              k∗ X
              X    exp(β n )                                        ∂ |α1 | F    ∗ ∂
                                                                                       |α2 |
                                                                                             h
   An (x) =                          0i      n α1
                                          (∆β1i ) (∆ηin )α2 ·            α1 (x, β1i )    α
                                                                                               (x, ηi∗ ) + R1 (x),   (29)
              i=1 |α|=1
                                α!                                   ∂β1              ∂η    2



where R1 (x) is a Taylor remainder such that R1 (x)/L3n → 0 as n → ∞. Similarly, we also get that
                              k∗ X
                              X    exp(β n )       0i      n γ      ∂ |γ| F      ∗
               Bn (x) =                                 (∆β1i ) ·           (x, β1i )gGn (x) + R2 (x),
                              i=1 |γ|=1
                                              γ!                     ∂β1γ

where R2 (x) is a Taylor remainder such that R2 (x)/L3n → 0 as n → ∞. As a result, we deduce
that
                               k∗ X
                               X  1
                                                          ∂ |α1 | F    ∗ ∂
                                                                             |α2 |
                                                                                   h
                  Qn (x) =                   n
                                            Ti,α1 ,α2
                                                      ·        α1 (x, β1i )    α
                                                                                     (x, ηi∗ ) + R1 (x)
                               i=1 |α|=0
                                                           ∂β1              ∂η    2



                               k∗ X
                               X  1
                                             n       ∂ |γ| F      ∗
                          −                 Si,γ ·           (x, β1i )gGn (x) − R2 (x),                              (30)
                               i=1 |γ|=0
                                                      ∂β1γ

where we define
                                                        n
                                      n           exp(β0i )    n α1
                                     Ti,α1 ,α2
                                               :=           (∆β1i ) (∆ηin )α2 ,
                                                     α!
                                                        n
                                           n      exp(β0i )    n γ
                                          Si,γ :=           (∆β1ij ) ,
                                                     γ!
                                                         n           n             n           ∗
for any (α1 , α2 ) ̸= (0d , 0) and γ ̸= 0d . Otherwise, Ti,0 d ,0
                                                                  = Si,0 d
                                                                           := exp(β0i ) − exp(β0i ).
                                                                                   n
Step 2: Non-vanishing coefficients. In this step, we show that not all the ratios Ti,α1 ,α2
                                                                                            /L3n , and
 n
Si,γ /L3n converge to zero. Indeed, assume by contrary that all of them converge to zero, i.e.
                                              n                      n
                                             Ti,α1 ,α2
                                                                    Si,γ
                                                       → 0,              →0
                                               L3n                  L3n
as n → ∞. Then, it follows that
                  Pk∗                                               Pk∗
       • L13n ·    i=1
                               n
                          exp(β0i          ∗
                                  ) − exp(β0i ) = L13n ·                     n
                                                                       i=1 |Si,0d | → 0;



                                                             23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025



                  Pk∗                                Pk∗ Pd1
       • L13n ·              n      n        1
                    i=1 exp(β0i )∥∆β1i ∥1 = L3n         i=1
                                                                      n
                                                                u=1 |Ti,ed1 ,u ,0d | → 0;
                  Pk∗                                Pk∗ Pd2
       • L13n ·              n      n       1
                    i=1 exp(β0i )∥∆ηi ∥1 = L3n         i=1
                                                                      n
                                                                v=1 |Ti,0d ,ed2 ,v | → 0.

Due to the topological equivalence of norm-1 and norm-2, we deduce that
                       k∗                                          k∗
                   1 X         n      n                        1 X         n
                     ·    exp(β0i )∥∆β1i ∥ → 0,                  ·    exp(β0i )∥∆ηin ∥ → 0.
                  L3n i=1                                     L3n i=1
As a result, we obtain that
                      (k                                                            )
         L3n       1     X∗                         Xk∗          h                 i
                                 n           ∗               n       n         n
    1=        =             exp(β0i ) − exp(β0i ) +     exp(β0i ) ∥∆β1i ∥ + ∥∆ηi ∥    → 0,
         L3n     L3n i=1                            i=1
                                                               n                    n
which is a contradiction. Thus, at least one among the ratios Ti,α1 ,α2
                                                                        /L3n , and Si,γ /L3n must not
go to zero as n → ∞.
Step 3: Application of Fatou’s lemma. In this step, we demonstrate a result opposed to that in Step
                    n                    n
2, i.e. the ratios Ti,α1 ,α2
                             /L3n , and Si,γ /L3n all converge to zero.
                                                                          n                    n
In particular, let us denote by mn the maximum of the absolute values of Ti,α1 ,α2
                                                                                   /L3n , and Si,γ /L3n .
Since at least one among those ratios must not approach zero as n → ∞, we get that 1/mn ̸→ ∞ as
n → ∞.
Recall from the hypothesis in equation (27) that ∥gGn − gG∗ ∥L2 (µ) /L3n → 0 as n → ∞, which
indicates that ∥gGn − gG∗ ∥L1 (µ) /L3n → 0 due to the equivalence between L1 (µ)-norm and L2 (µ)-
norm. By means of the Fatou’s lemma, we have
                                            Z
                       ∥gGn − gG∗ ∥L1 (µ)               |gGn (x) − gG∗ (x)|
             0 = lim                      ≥ lim inf                         dµ(x) ≥ 0.
                 n→∞        mn L3n              n→∞           mn L3n
This result implies that [gGn (x) − gG∗ (x)]/[mn L3n ] → 0 for almost every x.
Let us denote
                                         n
                                        Ti,α1 ,α2
                                                  /mn L3n → ti,α1 ,α2 ,
                                               n
                                              Si,γ /mn L3n → si,γ
with a note that at least one among the limits ti,α1 ,α2 , si,γ is non-zero. Then, from the decomposition
in equation (30), we deduce that
   k∗ X
   X  1                                                           Xk∗ X
                                                                      1
                           ∂ |α1 | F    ∗ ∂
                                              |α2 |
                                                    h       ∗                  ∂ |γ| F     ∗
               ti,α1 ,α2 ·      α1 (x, β1i )          (x, ηi  ) −       si,γ ·      γ (x, β1i )gGn (x) = 0,
   i=1 |α|=0
                            ∂β1              ∂η α2                i=1
                                                                                ∂β  1
                                                                   |γ|=0

for almost every x. Note that the expert function h(·, η) satisfies the condition in Definition 2, then
the above equation implies that ti,α1 ,α2 = si,γ = 0, for any i ∈ [k∗ ], α1 ∈ Nd1 , α2 ∈ Nd2 and
γ ∈ Nd1 such that 0 ≤ |α1 | + |α2 |, |γ| ≤ 2. This contradicts the fact that at least one among the
limits ti,α1 ,α2 , si,γ is different from zero.
Hence, we obtain the local inequality in equation (26). Thus, we can find an ε′ > 0 such that
                                  inf             ∥gG − gG∗ ∥L2 (µ) /L3 (G, G∗ ) > 0.
                        G∈Ek∗ (Θ):L3 (G,G∗ )≤ε′


Global part: Given the above result, it suffices to demonstrate that
                                  inf             ∥gG − gG∗ ∥L2 (µ) /L3 (G, G∗ ) > 0.                    (31)
                        G∈Ek∗ (Θ):L3 (G,G∗ )>ε′

Assume by contrary that the inequality (31) does not hold true, then we can find a sequence of mixing
measures G′n ∈ Ek∗ (Θ) such that L3 (G′n , G∗ ) > ε′ and
                                               ∥gG′n − gG∗ ∥L2 (µ)
                                        lim                        = 0,
                                        n→∞       L3 (G′n , G∗ )


                                                       24
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


which indicates that ∥gG′n − gG∗ ∥L2 (µ) → 0 as n → ∞. Recall that Θ is a compact set, therefore,
we can replace the sequence G′n by one of its subsequences that converge to a mixing measure
G′ ∈ Ek∗ (Ω). Since L3 (G′n , G∗ ) > ε′ , we deduce that L3 (G′ , G∗ ) > ε′ .
Next, by invoking the Fatou’s lemma, we have that
                                            Z                         2
                                     2
              0 = lim ∥gG′n − gG∗ ∥L2 (µ) ≥ lim inf gG′n (x) − gG∗ (x) dµ(x).
                    n→∞                                      n→∞

Thus, we get that gG′ (x) = gG∗ (x) for almost every x. From Proposition 1, we deduce that G′ ≡ G∗ .
Consequently, it follows that L3 (G′ , G∗ ) = 0, contradicting the fact that L3 (G′ , G∗ ) > ε′ > 0.
Hence, the proof is completed.

C.3   P ROOF OF T HEOREM 4

In this proof, it is sufficient to demonstrate the following inequality:
                                    inf      ∥gG − gG∗ ∥L2 (µ) /L2 (G, G∗ ) > 0.                                (32)
                                  G∈Gk (Θ)

This can be done by deriving its local part and the global part as in Appendix C.2. Since the global
part can be argued similarly, our main goal is to prove the local part:
                     lim              inf            ∥gG − gG∗ ∥L2 (µ) /L2 (G, G∗ ) > 0.                        (33)
                     ε→0 G∈Gk (Θ):L2 (G,G∗ )≤ε

Assume by contrary that the above inequality does not hold true, then there exists a sequence of
                      Pk           n
mixing measures Gn = i=1 exp(β0i         n ,η n ) in Gk (Θ) such that L2n := L2 (Gn , G∗ ) → 0 and
                                     )δ(β1i  i

                                          ∥gGn − gG∗ ∥L2 (µ) /L2n → 0,                                          (34)
as n → ∞. Let us denote by Anj := Aj (Gn ) a Voronoi cell of Gn generated by the j-th components
of G∗ . Since our arguments are asymptotic, we may assume that those Voronoi cells do not depend
on the sample size, i.e., Aj = Anj . Therefore, we may assume WLOG that
           k∗
           X  X                                              X         X                h                    i
                              n           ∗                                         n       n
  L2n :=                 exp(β0i ) − exp(β0j ) +                               exp(β0i ) ∥∆β1ij ∥2 + ∥∆ηij
                                                                                                        n 2
                                                                                                           ∥
           j=1 i∈Aj                                     j∈[k∗ ]:|Aj |>1 i∈Aj
                                                             X         X                h                  i
                                                                                    n       n          n
                                                    +                          exp(β0i ) ∥∆β1ij ∥ + ∥∆ηij ∥ ,
                                                        j∈[k∗ ]:|Aj |=1 i∈Aj
                                ∗
                  n
where we denote ∆β1ij     n
                      := β1i − β1j       n
                                   and ∆ηij := ηin − ηj∗ .
Now, we divide the proof of the local part into three steps as follows:
Step 1: Taylor expansion. In this step, we decompose the term
                                                                 
                    X k∗                   ∗ ⊤
                                         (β1j ) x
         Qn (x) :=      exp                                 ∗ 
                                   ∗ ∥ + τ ) · (∥x∥ + τ ) + β0j     · [gGn (x) − gG∗ (x)]
                     j=1
                               (∥β 1j      1           2

into a combination of linearly
                               independent    elements using Taylor expansion. In particular, let us
                                 β⊤ x
denote F (x, β1 ) := exp (∥β1 ∥+τ11)·(∥x∥+τ2 ) , then we have
                   k∗ X
                   X                   h                                              i
                                                                       ∗
       Qn (x) =                    n
                              exp(β0i          n
                                      ) F (x, β1i )h(x, ηin ) − F (x, β1j )h(x, ηj∗ )
                   j=1 i∈Aj
                   k∗ X
                   X                   h                         i
                                   n           n             ∗
               −              exp(β0i ) F (x, β1i ) − F (x, β1j ) gGn (x)
                   j=1 i∈Aj
                   k∗   X
                   X                                    h                                          i
                                                   ∗           ∗
               +                       n
                                  exp(β0i ) − exp(β0j ) F (x, β1j )h(x, ηj∗ ) − F (x, β1j
                                                                                       ∗
                                                                                          )gGn (x)
                   j=1     i∈Aj

               := An (x) − Bn (x) + Cn (x).                                                                     (35)


                                                          25
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Next, we continue to separate the term An (x) into two parts as
                        X        X             h                                             i
                                                                               ∗
        An (x) :=                          n
                                      exp(β0i          n
                                              ) F (x, β1i )h(x, ηin ) − F (x, β1j )h(x, ηj∗ )
                        j∈[k∗ ]:|Aj |=1 i∈Aj
                               X          X                 h                                             i
                                                                                            ∗
                     +                                  n
                                                   exp(β0i          n
                                                           ) F (x, β1i )h(x, ηin ) − F (x, β1j )h(x, ηj∗ )
                          j∈[k∗ ]:|Aj |>1 i∈Aj

                   := An,1 (x) + An,2 (x)
Similar to equation (29), by applying the first-order and the second-order Taylor expansions to
An,1 (x) and An,2 (x), respectively, we have
                  X           X exp(β n )                                          ∂ |α1 | F          |α2 |
                                                                                                ∗ ∂         h
An,1 (x) =                                    0i       n α1
                                                    (∆β1ij      n α2
                                                           ) (∆ηij ) ·                  α1 (x, β1j )          (x, ηj∗ ) + R1 (x),
                                         α!                                         ∂β1              ∂η α2
             j∈[k∗ ]:|Aj |=1 |α|=1

                  X           2
                              X exp(β n )                                          ∂ |α1 | F       ∗ ∂
                                                                                                        |α2 |
                                                                                                              h
An,2 (x) =                                    0i       n α1
                                                    (∆β1ij      n α2
                                                           ) (∆ηij ) ·                  α1   (x, β1j )    α
                                                                                                                (x, ηj∗ ) + R2 (x),
                                         α!                                         ∂β1                ∂η    2
             j∈[k∗ ]:|Aj |>1 |α|=1



where Ri (x) is a Taylor remainder such that Ri (x)/L2n → 0 as n → ∞, for i ∈ {1, 2}. Analogously,
we also get that Bn (x) = Bn,1 (x) + Bn,2 (x) where
                             X           X exp(β n )                            ∂ |γ| F
                                                            0i       n γ                     ∗
         Bn,1 (x) =                                               (∆β1i ) ·             (x, β1j )gGn (x) + R3 (x),
                                                       γ!                        ∂β1γ
                        j∈[k∗ ]:|Aj |=1 |γ|=1

                              X          2
                                         X exp(β n )        0i       n γ        ∂ |γ| F      ∗
         Bn,2 (x) =                                               (∆β1i ) ·             (x, β1j )gGn (x) + R4 (x),
                                                       γ!                        ∂β1γ
                        j∈[k∗ ]:|Aj |>1 |γ|=1

in which Ri (x) is a Taylor remainder such that Ri (x)/L2n → 0 as n → ∞, for i ∈ {3, 4}.
As a result, we deduce that
                         k∗ X
                         X  2
                                                     ∂ |α1 | F       ∗ ∂
                                                                          |α2 |
                                                                                h
           Qn (x) =                   n
                                     Tj,α 1 ,α2
                                                ·         α1   (x, β1j )    α
                                                                                  (x, ηj∗ ) + R1 (x) + R2 (x)
                         j=1 |α|=0
                                                      ∂β1                ∂η    2



                        k∗ X
                        X  2
                                      n       ∂ |γ| F      ∗
                    −                Sj,γ ·           (x, β1j )gGn (x) − R3 (x) − R4 (x),                                   (36)
                        j=1 |γ|=0
                                               ∂β1γ

where we define
                                                   X exp(β n )
                                n                                     0i      n α1     n α2
                               Tj,α 1 ,α2
                                          :=                               (∆β1ij ) (∆ηij ) ,
                                                                 α!
                                                   i∈Aj
                                                   X exp(β n )
                                      n                               0i      n γ
                                     Sj,γ :=                               (∆β1ij ) ,
                                                                 γ!
                                                   i∈Aj

                                                         n          n
                                                                                             P             n           ∗
for any (α1 , α2 ) ̸= (0d , 0) and γ ̸= 0d . Otherwise, Tj,0d ,0
                                                                 = Sj,0d
                                                                         :=                      i∈Aj exp(β0i ) − exp(β0j ).
                                                                                   n
Step 2: Non-vanishing coefficients. In this step, we show that not all the ratios Tj,α 1 ,α2
                                                                                             /L2n , and
 n
Sj,γ /L2n converge to zero. Indeed, assume by contrary that all of them converge to zero, i.e.
                                               n                             n
                                              Tj,α 1 ,α2
                                                                            Sj,γ
                                                         → 0,                    →0
                                                L2n                         L2n
as n → ∞. Then, it follows that
                  Pk∗      P                            Pk∗
       • L12n ·     j=1
                                        n
                                                = L12n · j=1
                                                    ∗
                              i∈Aj exp(β0i ) − exp(β0j )
                                                               n
                                                             |Sj,0 d
                                                                     | → 0;
               Pk∗  P                              P k∗  Pd1
       • L12n · j=1            n      n         1
                     i∈Aj exp(β0i )∥∆β1ij ∥1 = L2n   j=1
                                                                 n
                                                          u=1 |Tj,ed ,u ,0d | → 0;                 1


                                                                  26
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025



                  Pk∗ P                                     Pk∗ Pd2
       • L12n ·    j=1
                                     n      n        1
                           i∈Aj exp(β0i )∥∆ηij ∥1 = L2n        j=1
                                                                               n
                                                                         v=1 |Tj,0d ,ed2 ,v | → 0;
                  Pk∗ P                                       Pk∗ Pd1
       • L12n ·    j=1
                                     n      n    2   1
                           i∈Aj exp(β0i )∥∆β1ij ∥ = L2n          j=1
                                                                                n
                                                                          u=1 |Tj,2ed1 ,u ,0d | → 0;
                  Pk∗ P                                     Pk∗ Pd2
       • L12n ·    j=1
                                     n      n 2     1
                           i∈Aj exp(β0i )∥∆ηij ∥ = L2n         j=1
                                                                               n
                                                                         v=1 |Tj,0d ,2ed2 ,v | → 0.

Due to the topological equivalence of the norm-1 and norm-2, we deduce that
                k∗ X                                      k∗ X
          1 X                 n       n               1 X               n     n
              ·         exp(β0i )∥∆β1ij ∥ → 0,          ·         exp(β0i )∥∆ηij ∥ → 0.
         L2n j=1                                    L2n j=1
                    i∈Aj                                                 i∈Aj

Thus, by taking the summation of the above limits, we obtain that 1 = L2n /L2n → 0 as n → ∞,
                                                                       n                     n
which is a contradiction. Consequently, at least one among the ratios Tj,α 1 ,α2
                                                                                 /L2n , and Sj,γ /L2n
must not go to zero as n → ∞.
Step 3: Application of Fatou’s lemma. In this step, we demonstrate a result opposed to that in Step
                    n                     n
2, i.e. the ratios Tj,α 1 ,α2
                              /L2n , and Sj,γ /L2n all converge to zero.
                                                                          n                     n
In particular, let us denote by mn the maximum of the absolute values of Tj,α 1 ,α2
                                                                                    /L2n , and Sj,γ /L2n .
Since at least one among those ratios must not approach zero as n → ∞, we get that 1/mn ̸→ ∞ as
n → ∞.
Recall from the hypothesis in equation (34) that ∥gGn − gG∗ ∥L2 (µ) /L2n → 0 as n → ∞, which
indicates that ∥gGn − gG∗ ∥L1 (µ) /L2n → 0 due to the equivalence between L1 (µ)-norm and L2 (µ)-
norm. By means of the Fatou’s lemma, we have
                                              Z
                        ∥gGn − gG∗ ∥L1 (µ)              |gGn (x) − gG∗ (x)|
             0 = lim                        ≥ lim inf                       dµ(x) ≥ 0.
                 n→∞          mn L2n              n→∞         mn L2n
This result implies that [gGn (x) − gG∗ (x)]/[mn L2n ] → 0 for almost every x.
Let us denote
                                        n
                                       Tj,α 1 ,α2
                                                  /mn L2n → tj,α1 ,α2 ,
                                                n
                                             Sj,γ   /mn L2n → sj,γ
with a note that at least one among the limits tj,α1 ,α2 , sj,γ is non-zero. Then, from the decomposition
in equation (36), we deduce that
   Xk∗ X 2                                                        Xk∗ X
                                                                      2
                         ∂ |α1 | F       ∗ ∂
                                              |α2 |
                                                    h       ∗                  ∂ |γ| F     ∗
             tj,α1 ,α2 ·      α1   (x, β1j )    α2
                                                      (x, ηj  ) −       sj,γ ·      γ (x, β1j )gGn (x) = 0,
   j=1
                          ∂β 1               ∂η                   j=1
                                                                                ∂β  1
       |α|=0                                                     |γ|=0

for almost every x. Note that the expert function h(·, η) satisfies the condition in Definition 1, then
the above equation implies that tj,α1 ,α2 = sj,γ = 0, for any j ∈ [k∗ ], α1 ∈ Nd1 , α2 ∈ Nd2 and
γ ∈ Nd1 such that 0 ≤ |α1 | + |α2 |, |γ| ≤ 2. This contradicts the fact that at least one among the
limits tj,α1 ,α2 , sj,γ is different from zero.
Hence, we obtain the local inequality in equation (33) and complete the proof.

D    AUXILIARY R ESULTS
In this appendix, we present three additional results to facilitate the proofs in Appendix B and
Appendix C.
Proposition 1 (Identifiability). If gG (x) = gG∗ (x) holds true for almost every x, then it follows that
G ≡ G′ .

Proof of Proposition 1. For almost every x, since gG (x) = gG∗ (x), then we have
           Xk                      (β1i )⊤ x
               Softmax                                 + β0i · h(x, ηi )
           i=1
                          (∥β1i ∥ + τ1 ) · (∥x∥ + τ2 )
                                k∗
                                X                          ∗ ⊤
                                                         (β1i ) x
                                                                               ∗
                            =         Softmax       ∗ ∥ + τ ) · (∥x∥ + τ ) + β 0i   · h(x, ηi∗ ).      (37)
                                i=1
                                                 (∥β1i     1            2



                                                      27
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Due to the identifiability of the expert function h(·, η), the set {h(x, ηi′ ) : i ∈ [k ′ ]}, where η1′ , . . . , ηk′ ′
are pair-wise different vectors for some k ′ ∈ N, is linearly independent for almost every x.
Additionally, note that if k ̸= k∗ , then there exists some index i ∈ [k∗ ] such that ζi ̸= ηj∗ for any

                                                        (β1i )⊤ x
j ∈ [k∗ ]. This result implies that Softmax (∥β1i ∥+τ     1 )·(∥x∥+τ 2 ) + β 0i   = 0 for almost every x,
which is a contradiction. Thus, we must have k = k∗ . As a result, it follows that
       (                                       ) (                                            )

                          ⊤                                             ∗ ⊤        ∗
          Softmax (β1i ) x + β0i : i ∈ [k] = Softmax (β1i ) x + β0i : i ∈ [k∗ ] ,

for almost every x. WLOG, we may assume that
                       (β1i )⊤ x                                      ∗ ⊤
                                                                    (β1i ) x
                                                                                          ∗
   Softmax                                 + β0i = Softmax     ∗ ∥ + τ ) · (∥x∥ + τ ) + β 0i ,
              (∥β1i ∥ + τ1 ) · (∥x∥ + τ2 )                  (∥β1i     1            2
                                                                                             (38)
for almost every x, for any i ∈ [k∗ ]. As the Softmax function is invariant to translations, then the
equation (38) indicates that
                                  (β1i )⊤ x                        ∗ ⊤
                                                                 (β1i ) x
                                                      =    ∗                         ,
                         (∥β1i ∥ + τ1 ) · (∥x∥ + τ2 )   (∥β1i ∥ + τ1 ) · (∥x∥ + τ2 )
                                                         ∗
                                                 β0i = β0i + v0 ,
                                                        ∗
for some v0 ∈ R. The first equation implies that β1i = β1i , while the second equation together with
                       ∗                       ∗
the assumption β0k = β0k = 0 lead to β0i = β0i for any i ∈ [k∗ ].
Let us consider x ∈ Xℓ , where ℓ ∈ [q] such that {ℓ1 , . . . , ℓK } = {1, . . . , K}. Then, the equation (37)
can be rewritten as
           k∗
                                                              !
          X                               ∗ ⊤
                                        (β1i ) x
              exp(β0i ) exp       ∗ ∥ + τ ) · (∥x∥ + τ ) h(x, ζi )
          i=1
                              (∥β1i       1               2

                                  k
                                                                                        !
                                 X ∗                                  ∗ ⊤
                                                                    (β1i ) x
                                             ∗                                                   ∗
                              =       exp(β0i ) exp            ∗ ∥ + τ ) · (∥x∥ + τ ) h(x, ηi ),         (39)
                                 i=1
                                                         (∥β   1i     1               2

for almost every x ∈ Xℓ . Next, we denote P1 , P2 , . . . , Pm as a partition of the index set [k∗ ], where
                                      ∗                 ′
m ≤ k, such that exp(β0i ) = exp(β0i    ′ ) for any i, i ∈ Pj and j ∈ [k∗ ]. On the other hand, when

i and i′ do not belong to the same set Pj , we let exp(β0i ) ̸= exp(β0i′ ). Thus, we can represent
equation (39) as
      m X
                                                             !
     X                                 (β1i∗ ⊤
                                             ) x
              exp(β0i ) exp       ∗ ∥ + τ ) · (∥x∥ + τ ) h(x, ζi )
     j=1 i∈Pj
                             (∥β1i         1              2

                                  m X
                                                                                         !
                                 X                                        ∗ ⊤
                                                                       (β1i ) x
                                                  ∗                                                 ∗
                              =             exp(β0i ) exp         ∗ ∥ + τ ) · (∥x∥ + τ ) h(x, ηi ),
                                 j=1
                                                              (∥β 1i     1             2
                                              i∈Pj
                                                     ∗             ∗
for almost every x ∈ Xℓ . Recall that we have β1i = β1i and β0i = β0i , for any i ∈ [k∗ ], then the
above result leads to
                                           {ηi : i ∈ Pj } ≡ {ηi∗ : i ∈ Pj },
for any j ∈ [m]. As a consequence, we obtain that
                     Xm X                           m X
                                                    X
                G=           exp(β0i )δ(β1i ,ηi ) =     exp(β0i )δ(β1i
                                                                    ∗ ,η ∗ ) = G∗ .
                                                                        i
                         j=1 i∈Pj                              j=1 i∈Pj

Hence, we reach the conclusion of this proposition.

                                      β1⊤ x
Lemma 3. Let F (x, β1 ) := exp                  . For any vector β1 ∈ Rd1 and t ∈ N, we have
                                  ∥β1 ∥ · ∥x∥
                             d1
                             X            (u )       (u )            ∂tF
                                         β1 1 . . . β1 t ·        (u )     (u )
                                                                                  (x, β1 ) = 0.                   (40)
                         u1 ,...,ut =1                       ∂β1 1 . . . ∂β1 t

                                                             28
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Proof of Lemma 3. We will prove the above result by using the induction method. In particular, we
first show that it holds for t = 1. By taking the first derivative of F w.r.t β1 , we have
                    ∂F             x · ∥β1 ∥ · ∥x∥ − ∥ββ11 ∥ · ∥x∥ · β1⊤ x
                        (x, β1 ) =                                         · F (x, β1 ).
                    ∂β1                         ∥β1 ∥2 ∥x∥2
Then, it follows that
                                                               ⊤                                 β1⊤ β1                    ⊤
                               ∂F             β1 x · ∥β1 ∥ · ∥x∥ − ∥β1 ∥ · ∥x∥ · β1 x
                           β1⊤     (x, β1 ) =                                         = 0,
                               ∂β1                           ∥β1 ∥2 ∥x∥2
or equivalently,
                                                    d1
                                                    X              (u )         ∂F
                                                               β1 1 ·              (u )
                                                                                          (x, β1 ) = 0.
                                                    u1 =1                    ∂β1 1
Subsequently, assume that the equation (40) holds for t − 1, i.e.
                                d1
                                X               (u )               (u       )                  ∂ t−1 F
                                              β1 1 . . . β1 t−1 ·                    (u )        (u    )
                                                                                                                      (x, β1 ) = 0,
                           u1 ,...,ut−1 =1                                         ∂β1 1 . . . ∂β1 t−1
we will demonstrate that it also holds for t. Note that the above left-hand side can be decomposed as
     d1
     X                                                                                                              X
                    (u )           (u     )                ∂ t−1 F                                                                 (u )      (u        )         ∂ t−1 F
                  β1 1 . . . β1 t−1 ·             (u )        (u    )
                                                                                        (x, β1 ) =                               β1 1 . . . β1 t−1 ·         (u )        (u    )
u1 ,...,ut−1 =1                                 ∂β1 1 . . . ∂β1 t−1                                          u1 ,...,ut−1 ̸=ut                             ∂β1 1 . . . ∂β1 t−1
                        X                                                                                 t−1
        t−1                              (u )          (u           ) (u )                           ∂          F
+                                       β1 2 . . . β1 t−1 β1 t ·                     (u )        (u   )  (u )
                                                                                                                                  (x, β1 )
         1                                                                         ∂β1 2 . . . ∂β1 t−1 ∂β1 t
                  u2 ,...,ut−1 ̸=ut

+ ...
          X
    t−1      (u   )  (u )            ∂ t−1 F                    (ut ) t−1     ∂ t−1 F
+           β1 t−1 (β1 t )t−2 ·   (u  )     (u )
                                                  (x, β1 ) + (β 1    )    ·    (u )
                                                                                       (x, β1 ),
    t−2                         ∂β t−1 ∂(β t )t−2                           ∂(β t )t−1
                  ut−1 ̸=ut                                             1                 1                                                        1
                                                                              (u )
where ut is some index in [d]. By taking the derivatives of both sides w.r.t β1 t , we get
                  X           (u )       (u   )        ∂tF
      0=                     β1 1 . . . β1 t−1 ·   (u )        (u )
           u1 ,...,ut−1 ̸=ut                     ∂β1 1 . . . ∂β1 t
                         X
            t−1                      (u )       (u   )            ∂ t−1 F
         +                          β1 2 . . . β1 t−1 ·    (u )       (u   )  (u )
                                                                                   (x, β1 )
             1                                          ∂β1 2 . . . ∂β1 t−1 ∂β1 t
                  u2 ,...,ut−1 ̸=ut
                         X
            t−1                      (u )       (u   ) (u )               ∂tF
         +                          β1 2 . . . β1 t−1 β1 t ·    (u )       (u  )     (u )
                                                                                            (x, β1 )
             1                                                ∂β 2 . . . ∂β t−1 ∂(β t )2
                            u2 ,...,ut−1 ̸=ut                                                        1                 1              1

         + ...
                            X
             t−1                     (u    ) (u )               ∂ t−1 F
         +        (t − 2)           β1 t−1 (β1 t )t−3 ·     (u   )     (u )
                                                                                 (x, β1 )
             t−2                                        ∂β1 t−1 ∂(β1 t )t−2
                          ut−1 ̸=ut
                   X
             t−1             (u    )  (u )               ∂tF
         +                 β1 t−1 (β1 t )t−2 ·     (u    )     (u )
                                                                        (x, β1 )
             t−2                                ∂β   t−1
                                                           ∂(β t )t−1
                            ut−1 ̸=ut                                               1                    1
                                                    t−1
                            (u )                ∂         F                                   (u )                  ∂tF
         + (t − 1)(β1 t )t−2 ·                      (u )
                                                                    (x, β1 ) + (β1 t )t−1 ·                           (u )
                                                                                                                                 (x, β1 )
                                              ∂(β1 t )t−1                                                        ∂(β1 t )t
                    d1
                    X              (u )          (u        )                    ∂tF
         =                      β1 1 . . . β1 t−1 ·                  (u )        (u )
                                                                                                     (x, β1 )
             u1 ,...,ut−1 =1                                       ∂β1 1 . . . ∂β1 t
                                                      d1
                                                      X                     (u )           (u         )              ∂ t−1 F
                               + (t − 1)                                β1 2 . . . β1 t−1 ·                     (u )        (u )
                                                                                                                                       (x, β1 ).
                                                u2 ,...,ut−1 =1                                               ∂β1 2 . . . ∂β1 t


                                                                                29
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Therefore, it follows that
 d1
 X                          d1
                            X
          (u )                           (u )         (u    ) (u )                  ∂tF
         β1 t · 0 =                     β1 1 . . . β1 t−1 β1 t ·            (u )        (u )
                                                                                                  (x, β1 )
 ut =1                  u1 ,...,ut =1                                     ∂β1 1 . . . ∂β1 t
                                                            d1
                                                            X             (u )          (u    ) (u )           ∂ t−1 F
                                         + (t − 1)                      β1 2 . . . β1 t−1 β1 t ·             (u )          (u )
                                                                                                                                  (x, β1 ).
                                                        u2 ,...,ut =1                                  ∂β1 2 . . . ∂β1 t
It is worth noting that
         d1
         X           (u )       (u       ) (u )            ∂ t−1 F
                    β1 2 . . . β1 t−1 β1 t ·            (u )              (u )
                                                                                 (x, β1 )
    u2 ,...,ut =1                                    ∂β1 2 . . . ∂β1 t
                                                     d1
                                                     X             (u )           (u     )         ∂ t−1 F
                                           =                      β1 1 . . . β1 t−1 ·           (u )          (u    )
                                                                                                                        (x, β1 ) = 0.
                                                u1 ,...,ut−1 =1                              ∂β1 1 . . . ∂β1 t−1
Consequently, we deduce that
                            d1
                            X            (u )         (u     ) (u )                    ∂tF
                                        β1 1 . . . β1 t−1 β1 t ·             (u )        (u )
                                                                                                  (x, β1 ) = 0.
                        u1 ,...,ut =1                                      ∂β1 1 . . . ∂β1 t
Hence, we reach the conclusion in equation (40).

E     E XPERIMENTAL D ETAILS
In this appendix, we provide the details for the numerical experiments on synthetic data, and the
experiments with real data on language modeling conducted in Section 5.

E.1      E XPERIMENTAL D ETAILS FOR S YNTHETIC DATA

Model details. We now provide the details for the model parameters in model
                   Xk∗                        ∗ ⊤

                                           (β1i ) x             ∗        ∗ ⊤      ∗

        fG∗ (x) :=     Softmax
                                  (∥β ∗ ∥ + τ ) · (∥x∥ + τ ) + β0i · ϕ (ai ) x + bi .                                                 (41)
                   i=1                1i

The variance of Gaussian noise is specified as σ 2 = 0.01. For simplicity, the perturbations for both
              ∗
∥x∥ and ∥β1i    ∥ are considered identical, denoted by τ1 = τ2 = τ . The true parameters for the router,
  ∗     ∗
(β1i , β0i ) ∈ Rd × R, are drawn independently from an isotropic Gaussian distribution with zero mean
and variance σr2 = 0.01/d for 1 ≤ i ≤ 6, and otherwise are set to zero. Similarly, the true parameters
of the experts, (a∗i , b∗i ) ∈ Rd × R, are drawn independently of an isotropic Gaussian distribution
with zero mean and variance σe2 = 1/d for all experts. These parameters remain unchanged for all
experiments.
Training procedure. For each sample size n, spanning from 103 to 105 , we perform 20 experiments.
In every experiment, the parameters initialization for the router’s and experts’ parameters are adjusted
to be near the true parameters, minimizing potential instabilities from the optimization process.
Subsequently, we execute SGD across 10 epochs, employing a learning rate of η = 0.1 to fit a model
to the synthetic data. All the numerical experiments are conducted on a MacBook Air equipped with
an M1 chip CPU.

E.2      E XPERIMENTAL D ETAILS FOR L ANGUAGE M ODELING TASK

Datasets. We use the Enwik8 and Text8 datasets (Mahoney, 2011) for our character-level language
modeling task. The Enwik8 dataset comprises 100 million bytes of unprocessed Wikipedia text,
while the Text8 dataset contains 100 million processed Wikipedia characters. We further evaluate the
word-level language modeling task on the Wikitext-103 dataset (Merity et al., 2016), which is the
largest available word-level language modeling benchmark with long-term dependency. It contains


                                                                     30
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


103M training tokens from 28K articles, with an average length of 3.6K tokens per article, which
allows us to test the ability of long-term dependency modeling.
Metrics. In the main paper, we employ the Bit per character (BPC) (Graves, 2013) metric to assess
the performance of character-level language modeling tasks. This metric measures the average
number of bits needed to encode each character in the dataset. It is calculated as follows:
                                                       T
                                                 1X
                                   BPC(X) = −          log2 P̂t (xt )
                                                 T t=1

where T is the length of the input string X, P̂t is the approximate distribution and xt is the character
in the input string at location t.
Essentially, BPC quantifies the average number of bits required to encode each character in the text
using the probability distribution predicted by the model. This concept works as follows: characters
with high probability get a short bit sequence, while characters with low probability get a longer
sequence. Then, the next character is read from the input and encoded using the bit sequence
performance determined from the probability distribution. If the language model is good, the target
character will have been predicted with high probability, so the bit sequence will be short. This means
that a lower BPC indicates better compression, which in turn demonstrates the model’s superior
ability to predict the next character accurately.
For the word-level language modeling task on the Wikitext-103 dataset, we utilize Perplexity (PPL)
(Jelinek et al., 1977) as our evaluation metric. It represents the exponentiated average negative
log-likelihood of a sequence and demonstrates how well the model predicts the next word in a
sequence. More specifically, if we have a tokenized sequence X = (x0 , x1 , ..., xt ), the perplexity of
X is:
                                            n    Pt                  o
                            PPL(X) = exp − 1t i=1 log pθ (xi |x<i )

where pθ (xi |x<i ) is the log-likelihood of the ith token conditioned on the preceding tokens x<i
according to our model. A lower perplexity score indicates better generalization performance.
We follow the implementation of (Pham et al., 2024) to use experts consisting of two linear layers: the
first with weights of shape input_dim × hidden_dim_experts and the second with weights of shape
hidden_dim_experts × input_dim, followed by ReLU activations and Dropout layer with drop rate
p = 0.1. This architecture ensures the output has a shape of input_dim × input_dim while can flexibly
reduce parameters compared to a single linear layer with weights of shape input_dim × input_dim
when the number of hidden dimensions of experts chosen is smaller than dimensions of the input. We
consistently apply this architecture with our perturbed and vanilla cosine router across all datasets.
Training setup and hyperparameters. We consider two model configurations: the small and
medium setups. The small setup has a total of 15 million parameters with 6 SMoE layers (Dryden &
Hoefler, 2022), and each layer can learn spatial structure in the input domain and routing experts at a
fine-grained level to utilize it. Similarly, the medium setup consists of 36 million parameters with
8 SMoE layers (Dryden & Hoefler, 2022). For SMoE layers in both configurations, we employ 16
experts with top-2 gating in both cosine and perturbed cosine routers. To mitigate the representation
collapse issue, we adopt the method proposed by Chi et al. (2022). Specifically, this approach involves
parameterizing the experts using lower-dimensional embeddings ei ∈ Rde and applying a linear
projection to map token vectors into this compact space, rather than the original high-dimensional
hidden space d. Furthermore, we follow Chi et al. (2022) to set de = 8, which is half the number of
experts in our implementation for the language modeling task.
During training, we use Adam optimizer (Kingma & Ba, 2017) with default parameters. We set the
number of training steps to 60000 and 80000 for small and medium configurations, respectively. The
results are averaged over three runs for fair comparisons.
All language modeling experiments are conducted on NVIDIA A100 GPUs. Training the small
configuration of the Text8 and Enwik8 datasets takes 11 hours, whereas Wikitext-103 requires 5
hours. Training Text8 and Enwik8 for medium configurations takes 17 hours, while Wikitext-103
training takes 8 hours.


                                                  31
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


E.3   E XPERIMENTAL D ETAILS FOR D OMAIN G ENERALIZATION

Expert types. Similarly, following (Li et al., 2023), the experts utilized in the domain generalization
experiments are two-layer feedforward networks, featuring a GELU activation and a Dropout layer
with a drop rate of 0.1 positioned between the two linear layers. The dimensions of the two linear
layers are input_dim × hidden_dim_experts and hidden_dim_experts × input_dim, respectively,
where hidden_dim_experts = input_dim × 4.
Training procedure. All DG experiments are run on NVIDIA A100 GPUs with 15,000 iterations.
The training time on PACS, VLCS, OfficeHome, and TerraIncognita is 2 hours, while the training
time for DomainNet is 7 hours.

F     A DDITIONAL E XPERIMENTS
In this appendix, we carry out additional experiments on the synthetic data to compare the sample
efficiency of the perturbed cosine router to that of the cosine router and the linear router (Nguyen
et al., 2024c) under the settings where the data are generated from the same regression framework.

F.1   C OSINE ROUTER VS . P ERTURBED C OSINE ROUTER

Experimental setup. We generate the data by first sampling Xi ∼ Uniform([−1, 1]d ) for i =
1, . . . , n. Then, we generate Yi according to the following model:
                                          Yi = sG∗ (Xi ) + ϵi ,
where the regression function sG∗ (·) takes the form of a linear router MoE (Nguyen et al., 2024c):
                       k∗
                       X
                                       ∗ ⊤       ∗

                             Softmax((β1i ) x + β0i ) · ReLU (a∗i )⊤ x + b∗i .
                       i=1

All other experimental details remain the same as specified in Section 5.1 and Appendix E.1.
Results. We calculate the Voronoi losses and report the mean values for each sample size in Figure 2a.
Error bars representing two standard deviations are also shown. In Figure 2a, the Voronoi losses
associated with the cosine router vanish at the rate of O(n−0.10 ), which is very slow and roughly
matches our theoretical results. Meanwhile, those associated with the perturbed cosine router converge
to zero at significantly faster rate of O(n−0.45 ). This empirically shows that the perturbed cosine
router is more sample efficient than the vanilla cosine router.

F.2   L INEAR ROUTER VS . P ERTURBED C OSINE ROUTER

Experimental setup. From Table 1, we see that the perturbed cosine router outperforms the
linear router when the experts are of polynomial forms (a⊤ x + b)2 . Thus, we will incorporate
polynomial experts in both fitted models. Additionally, we generate the data by first sampling
Xi ∼ Uniform([−1, 1]d ) for i = 1, . . . , n. Then, we generate Yi according to the following model:
                                          Yi = sG∗ (Xi ) + ϵi ,
where the regression function sG∗ (·) takes the form of a linear router MoE with polynomial experts
(Nguyen et al., 2024c):
                          k∗
                          X
                                          ∗ ⊤       ∗
                                                                              2
                                Softmax((β1i ) x + β0i ) · (a∗i )⊤ x + b∗i        .
                          i=1

All other experimental details remain the same as specified in Section 5.1 and Appendix E.1.
Results. We calculate the Voronoi losses and report the mean values for each sample size in
Figure 2b. Error bars representing two standard deviations are also shown. In Figure 2b, the Voronoi
losses associated with the linear router vanish at a very slow rate of O(n−0.13 ). By contrast, the
convergence rate of those associated with the perturbed cosine router are of order O(n−0.47 ), which
are substantially faster. Thus, we can claim that the perturbed cosine router is more sample efficient
than the linear router both theoretically and empirically.


                                                   32
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                      Vanilla (τ = 0.0)                                                                      Linear Router
              103                                                                          103
                                                                                                                                             26.9 n−0.13
                                                      11.8 n−0.10
                                                                                           102
              102

                                                                                                                                            Rate = O(n−0.13 )
                                                                                           101
            b n , G∗ )


                                                                                         b n , G∗ )


              101                                          Rate = O(n−0.10 )

                                                                                           100
       L 2 (G


                                                                                    L 2 (G



              100

                                                                                          10−1
             10−1
                                                                                                                                            Rate = O(n−0.47 )
                                                                                          10−2
                                                           Rate = O(n−0.45 )
             10−2
                           Perturbed (τ = 0.1)                                            10−3          Perturbed Cosine Router (τ = 0.1)
                           0.9 n−0.45                                                                   1.1 n−0.47
             10−3
                                                                                          10−4
                     103                    104                          105                      103                          104                        105
                                      Sample size n                                                                     Sample size n

       (a) Cosine router vs. Perturbed cosine router                                (b) Linear router vs. Perturbed cosine router

Figure 2: Log-log scaled plots displaying the empirical convergence rates. Figure 2a depicts the
empirical averages of the Voronoi losses when using the cosine router (green line) versus when
using the perturbed cosine router (blue line). The red dash-dotted lines illustrate the fitted lines for
determining the empirical convergence rates. Similarly, Figure 2b depicts the empirical averages of
the Voronoi losses when using the linear router (green line) versus when using the perturbed cosine
router (blue line). We use the same data samples for those experiments.


                                                                               33
