Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


E FFICIENT S PARSE PCA VIA B LOCK -
D IAGONALIZATION
 Alberto Del Pia & Dekun Zhou                          Yinglun Zhu
 University of Wisconsin-Madison                       University of California, Riverside
 {delpia,dzhou44}@wisc.edu                             yzhu@ucr.edu



                                            A BSTRACT

         Sparse Principal Component Analysis (Sparse PCA) is a pivotal tool in data analy-
         sis and dimensionality reduction. However, Sparse PCA is a challenging problem
         in both theory and practice: it is known to be NP-hard and current exact methods
         generally require exponential runtime. In this paper, we propose a novel framework
         to efficiently approximate Sparse PCA by (i) approximating the general input
         covariance matrix with a re-sorted block-diagonal matrix, (ii) solving the Sparse
         PCA sub-problem in each block, and (iii) reconstructing the solution to the original
         problem. Our framework is simple and powerful: it can leverage any off-the-shelf
         Sparse PCA algorithm and achieve significant computational speedups, with a
         minor additive error that is linear in the approximation error of the block-diagonal
         matrix. Suppose g(k, d) is the runtime of an algorithm (approximately) solving
         Sparse PCA in dimension d and with sparsity constant k. Our framework,  when in-
         tegrated with this algorithm, reduces the runtime to O dd⋆ · g(k, d⋆ ) + d2 , where
         d⋆ ≤ d is the largest block size of the block-diagonal matrix. For instance, integrat-
         ing our framework with the Branch-and-Bound algorithm reduces the complexity
         from g(k, d) = O(k 3 · dk ) to O(k 3 · d · (d⋆ )k−1 ), demonstrating exponential
         speedups if d⋆ is small. We perform large-scale evaluations on many real-world
         datasets: for exact Sparse PCA algorithm, our method achieves an average speedup
         factor of 100.50, while maintaining an average approximation error of 0.61%;
         for approximate Sparse PCA algorithm, our method achieves an average speedup
         factor of 6.00 and an average approximation error of -0.91%, meaning that our
         method oftentimes finds better solutions.


1    I NTRODUCTION

In this paper, we study the Sparse Principal Component Analysis (Sparse PCA) problem, a variant
of the well-known Principal Component Analysis (PCA) problem. Similar to PCA, Sparse PCA
involves finding a linear combination of d features that explains most variance. However, Sparse
PCA distinguishes itself by requiring the use of only k ≪ d many features, thus integrating a sparsity
constraint. This constraint significantly enhances interpretability, which is essential in data analysis
when dealing with a large number of features. Sparse PCA has found widespread application across
various domains, including text data analysis (Zhang & Ghaoui, 2011), cancer research (Hsu et al.,
2014), bioinformatics (Ma & Dai, 2011), and neuroscience (Zhuang et al., 2020). For further reading,
we refer interested readers to a comprehensive survey on Sparse PCA (Zou & Xue, 2018).
While being important and useful, Sparse PCA is a challenging problem—it is known to be NP-
hard (Magdon-Ismail, 2017). Solving Sparse PCA exactly, such as through the Branch-and-Bound
algorithm (Berk & Bertsimas, 2019), requires worst-case exponential runtime. Moreover, while
there are near-optimal approximation algorithms that exhibit faster performance empirically, they
still require worst-case exponential runtime (Bertsimas et al., 2022; Li & Xie, 2020; Cory-Wright &
Pauphilet, 2022; Dey et al., 2022b; Zou et al., 2006; Dey et al., 2022a). This complexity impedes
their applicability to large-scale datasets. On the other hand, there are numerous polynomial-time
approximation algorithms for Sparse PCA (Chowdhury et al., 2020; Li & Xie, 2020; Papailiopoulos
et al., 2013; Chan et al., 2015; Del Pia, 2022; Asteris et al., 2015). These algorithms typically face
trade-offs between efficiency and solution quality. Some algorithms are fast but yield sub-optimal


                                                   1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


solutions, others provide high-quality solutions at the cost of greater computational complexity, and a
few achieve both efficiency and accuracy but only under specific statistical assumptions.
In this paper, we introduce a novel framework designed to efficiently approximate Sparse PCA
through matrix block-diagonalization. Our framework facilitates the use of off-the-shelf algorithms
in a plug-and-play manner. Specifically, the framework comprises three principal steps: (i) Matrix
Preparation: Given a general input covariance matrix to Sparse PCA, we generate a re-sorted
block-diagonal matrix approximation. This includes finding a denoised input matrix by thresholding,
grouping non-zero entries into blocks, and slicing corresponding blocks in original input matrix.
(ii) Sub-Problem Solution: Solve Sparse PCA sub-problems using any known algorithm in each
block with a lower dimension, and find out the best solution among sub-problems; (iii) Solution
Reconstruction: Reconstruct the best solution to the original Sparse PCA problem. We illustrate these
steps in Fig. 1. At a high level, our approach involves solving several sub-problems in smaller matrices
instead of directly addressing Sparse PCA in a large input matrix (Step (ii)), which significantly
reduces computational runtime. This is made possible by carefully constructing sub-problems (Step
(i)) and efficiently reconstructing an approximate solution to the original problem (Step (iii)).


Figure 1: Illustration of our proposed approach, given a 9 × 9 covariance input matrix A. (i) Entries
away from zero are highlighted in the upper matrix (original input A). Then group those entries in
blocks, zero out outside entries, sort the matrix, and obtain the lower block-diagonal approximation.
Heatmaps present values of matrix entries. The axes are indices of A; (ii) Extract sub-matrices from
the block-diagonal approximation, and solve sub-problems via a suitable Sparse PCA algorithm;
(iii) Select the solution with the highest objective value obtained from the sub-problems. Construct
a solution for the original Sparse PCA problem by mapping its non-zero entries to their original
locations using the inverse mapping of the sorting process, and setting all other entries to zero.

Our framework significantly speeds up the computation of Sparse PCA, with negligible approximation
error. We theoretically quantify the computational speedup and approximation error of our framework
in Sections 3 and 4, and conduct large scale empirical evaluations in Section 5. Next, we illustrate
the performance of our method via a concrete example. Suppose one is given an input covariance
matrix being a noisy sorted block-diagonal matrix with 10 blocks, each of size 100, and is asked to
solve Sparse PCA with a sparsity constant 4. The Branch-and-Bound algorithm (Berk & Bertsimas,
2019) takes over 3600 seconds and obtains a solution with objective value 13.649. Our framework
integrated with Branch-and-Bound algorithm reduces runtime to 17 seconds, a speedup by a factor of
211, and obtains a solution with objective value 13.637, with an approximation error of 0.09%.
Our contributions. We summarize our contributions in the following:
• We propose a novel framework for approximately solving Sparse PCA via matrix block-
  diagonalization. This framework allows users to reuse any known algorithm designed for Sparse
  PCA in the literature in a very easy way, i.e., simply applying the known algorithm to the blocks of
  the approximate matrix, and accelerates the computation. To the best of our knowledge, our work
  is the first to apply block-diagonalization to solving Sparse PCA problem.


                                                   2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


• We provide approximation guarantees for our framework. We show that when integrated with an
  approximation algorithm, our method can generally obtain a better multiplicative factor, with an
  additional cost of an additive error that is linear in the approximation error of the block-diagonal
  approximate matrix. Under certain assumptions, the additive error can also be improved.
• We also perform a time complexity analysis showing that for an (approximation) algorithm with
  runtime g(k, d), our framework could reduce the runtime to O( dd⋆ · g(k, d⋆ ) + d2 ), where d is the
  dimension of Sparse PCA input covariance matrix, k is the sparsity constant, and d⋆ is the largest
  block size in the block-diagonal approximate matrix.
• We show that for a statistical model that is widely studied in robust statistics, there exists an efficient
  way to find a block-diagonal approximation matrix. Moreover, we provide a very simple way
  to extend to the setting where the statistical assumptions are dropped and where computational
  resources are taken into consideration.
• We conduct extensive experiments to evaluate our framework, and our empirical study shows
  that (i) when integrated with Branch-and-Bound algorithm, our framework achieves an average
  speedup factor of 100.50, while maintaining an average approximation error of 0.61%, and (ii)
  when integrated with Chan’s algorithm (Chan et al., 2015), our framework achieves an average
  speedup factor of 6.00 and an average approximation error of -0.91%, meaning that our method
  oftentimes finds better solutions.
Our techniques. In this paper, we also introduce several novel techniques that may be of independent
interest. We characterize a structural property of an optimal solution to Sparse PCA, when given a
block-diagonal input matrix. We establish that solving Sparse PCA for a block-diagonal matrix input
is equivalent to addressing individual Sparse PCA sub-problems within blocks, which consequently
provides significant computational speedups. This result is non-trivial: while the support of optimal
solutions might span multiple blocks, we prove that there always exists an optimal solution whose
support is contained within a single block, ensuring the efficiency of our framework. Additionally,
leveraging the defined structure, we propose a novel binary-search based method to identify the best
block-diagonal approximation, particularly when computational resources are limited.
Paper organization. This paper is organized as follows. In Section 2, we introduce Sparse PCA
problem formally, and provide motivation of our proposed framework. In Section 3, we provide details
of operational procedures of our proposed framework, and develop guarantees of approximation
errors as well as runtime complexity. In Section 4 we further extend our algorithms to learning
problems either under (i) a statistical model, or under (ii) a model-free setting, and provide theoretical
guarantees respectively. In Section 5, we run large-scale empirical evaluations and demonstrate the
efficacy of our proposed framework when integrated with both exact and approximate Sparse PCA
algorithms. We defer discussion of additional related work, including existing block-diagonalization
methods in the literature, detailed proofs, and additional empirical results to the appendix.

2    P ROBLEM SETTING AND MOTIVATION
In this section, we define formally the problem of interest in this paper, and then we explain the
motivation behind our framework. We first define the Sparse PCA problem as follows:
                          OPT := max x⊤ Ax          s.t. ∥x∥2 = 1, ∥x∥0 ≤ k.                        (SPCA)
Here, a symmetric and positive semidefinite input matrix A ∈ Rd×d , and a positive integer k ≤ d
are given. k is known as the sparsity constant, the upper bound on the number of nonzero entries in
solution x.
Motivating idea in this paper. The motivation for our method is illustrated through the following
example, which demonstrates the efficiency of solving sub-problems: Suppose that a user is given
an input block-diagonal covariance matrix A of size d, comprising d/d⋆ many d⋆ × d⋆ blocks
(assume that d is divisible by d⋆ ), and is asked to solve SPCA with sparsity constant k. The user
can simply apply an     exact algorithm  (e.g., Branch-and-Bound algorithm) to solve the large problem
                    d
in time O(k · k ) = O(k · d ). The user could also solve d/d⋆ many sub-problems in each
              3                   3  k

block, potentially obtaining an optimal solution (a fact we rigidly prove in Section 3.2.1), in time
O((d/d⋆ ) · k 3 · (d⋆ )k ). This segmented approach yields a significant speedup factor of O((d/d⋆ )k−1 ).
However, not all input matrices A are of the block-diagonal structure, even after permuting its
rows and columns. One goal of our work is to develop a reasonable way to construct a (sorted)


                                                     3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


block-diagonal matrix approximation A  e to A such that they are close enough. In this paper, we are
interested in finding the following ε-matrix approximation to A:
Definition 1 (ε-matrix approximation). Given a matrix A ∈ Rd×d , denote by Aij the (i, j)-th entry
of A. An ε-matrix approximation of A is defined as a d × d matrix A
                                                                  e such that


                                       A−A
                                         e          := max Aij − A
                                                                 eij ≤ ε.
                                                ∞       i,j∈[d]

Moreover, we define the set of all ε-matrix approximations of A to be B(A, ε).

In other words, A e ∈ B(A, ε) if and only if A e belongs to an ℓ∞ -ball centered at A with radius ε. Our
overarching strategy is that if the input matrix is not block-diagonal, we find a matrix approximation
in the ball so that it could be resorted to be block-diagonal. We then solve the Sparse PCA problem
using this resorted matrix and reconstruct the approximate solution to the original problem, taking
advantage of the computational speedups via addressing smaller sub-problems.
Additional notation. We adopt non-asymptotic big-oh notation: For functions f, g : Z → R+ ,
we write f = O(g) (resp. f = Ω(g)) if there exists a constant C > 0 such that f (z) ≤ Cg(z)
(resp. f (z) ≥ Cg(z)) for all z ∈ Z. For an integer n ∈ N, we let [n] denote the set {1, 2, . . . , n}.
For a vector z ∈ Rd , we use zi to denote its i-th entry. We denote supp(z) := {i ∈ [d] : zi ̸= 0}
                                                                                         Pd          q
the support of z. For 1 ≤ q ≤ ∞, we denote ∥z∥q the q-norm of z, i.e., ∥z∥q := ( i=1 |zi | )1/q ,
and ∥z∥∞ := maxi∈[d] |zi |. For a matrix A ∈ Rn×m , we use Aij to denote its (i, j)-th entry. We
define ∥A∥∞ := maxi,j |Aij |. For index sets S ⊆ [n], T ⊆ [m], we denote AS,T the |S| × |T |
sub-matrix of A with row index S and column Pp index T P  . For matrices Ai ∈ Rdi ×di for i = 1, 2, . . . , p,
                                                             p
we denote diag(A1 , A2 , . . . , Ap ) the ( i=1 di ) × ( i=1 di ) block-diagonal matrix with blocks
A1 , A2 , . . . , Ap . For a square matrix B ∈ Rd×d , we define the size of B to be d.

3       O UR APPROACH

In this section, we introduce our framework for solving SPCA approximately via block-
diagonalization technique. We explain in detail the operational procedures of our framework in
Section 3.1. In Section 3.2, we characterize the approximation guarantees and computational speedups
of our framework. Note that, in this section, our proposed procedures require a predefined threshold
ε > 0. In Section 4, we extend our algorithms to learning the threshold in a statistical model, as well
as in a model-free setting.

3.1       A LGORITHMS

In this section, we outline the operational procedure of our proposed framework for solving SPCA
approximately. The procedure commences with the input matrix A ∈ Rd×d and a predefined
threshold value ε > 0. Initially, a denoised matrix Aε is derived through thresholding as described in
Algorithm 1. Subsequently, several sub-matrices and their corresponding sets of indices are extracted
from A and Aε by employing Algorithm 2, which groups index pair (i, j) if Aεij ̸= 0. This grouping
mechanism can be efficiently implemented using a Depth-First Search approach, which iterates over
each unvisited index i and examines all non-zero Aεij , and then visit each corresponding index j
that is unvisited. The computational complexity of Algorithm 2 is bounded by O(d2 ). Finally, an
approximate solution to SPCA is obtained by solving several Sparse PCA sub-problems in each block
using a certain (approximation) algorithm A, mapping the solution back to the original problem, and
finding out the best solution. The operational details are further elaborated in Algorithm 3.1
3.2       A PPROXIMATION GUARANTEES AND COMPUTATIONAL SPEEDUPS

In this section, we provide analysis of approximation guarantees and speedups of our framework Al-
gorithm 3. Before showing approximation guarantees, we first define the ε-intrinsic dimension of A:

    1
        We note that on line 6 in Algorithm 3, if k is larger than the size of A
                                                                               ei , a PCA problem is solved instead.


                                                           4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Algorithm 1 Denoising procedure via thresholding
 1: Input: Matrix A ∈ Rd×d , threshold ε > 0
 2: Output: Denoised matrix Aε ∈ Rd×d
 3: for (i, j) = (1, 1) to (d, d) do
 4:     If |Aij | > ε, set Aεij ← Aij , otherwise set Aεij ← 0
 5: Return Aε


Algorithm 2 Matrix block-diagonlization
 1: Input: Matrices A, Aε ∈ Rd×d
 2: Output: Sub-matrices and their corresponding lists of indices
 3: for each pair of indices (i, j) ∈ [d] × [d] do
 4:     Group i and j together if Aεij > 0
                                 p
 5: Obtain sets of indices {Si }i=1 that are grouped together
 6: Return sub-matrices ASi ,Si and the corresponding Si , for i ∈ [p]



Definition 2 (ε-intrinsic dimension). Let A ∈ Rd×d . The ε-intrinsic dimension of A, denoted by
int dim(A, ε), is defined as:
                                     int dim(A, ε) :=     min      lbs(B),
                                                        B∈B(A,ε)

where lbs(B) denotes the largest block size of B, i.e., the largest among {|Si |}i∈[p] after running
lines 3-5 in Algorithm 2 with Aε = B.

As we will see later in this section, this concept plays a crucial role in characterizing both the quality
of the approximate solution obtained through our framework, Algorithm 3, and the computational
speedup achieved by our framework. Moreover, a matrix A         e can be efficiently identified such that
lbs(A)
     e = int dim(A, ε) using Algorithm 1, as shown in Lemma 1.
Lemma 1. Let A ∈ Rd×d and ε > 0. Given input (A, ε), Algorithm 1 outputs an ε-approximation of
A, denoted as A,              e = int dim(A, ε) in time O(d2 ).
              e such that lbs(A)

3.2.1   A PPROXIMATION GUARANTEES
In this section, we provide approximation guarantees for our framework Algorithm 3. We first show
that in Theorem 1 that, an optimal solution to SPCA with input (A, k) and an optimal solution to
(Aε , k) are close to each other in terms of objective value:
Theorem 1. Let A ∈ Rd×d be symmetric, k ≤ d, and ε > 0. Denote by Aε the output of Algorithm 1
                   e an optimal solution to SPCA with input (Aε , k), and x⋆ an optimal solution to
with input (A, ε), x
SPCA with input (A, k). Then, it follows that

                                       (x⋆ )⊤ Ax⋆ − x
                                                    e⊤ Ae
                                                        x ≤ 2k · ε.


Algorithm 3 Efficient Sparse PCA via block-diagonalization
 1: Input: Matrix A ∈ Rd×d , positive integer k ≤ d, threshold ε > 0, algorithm A for (approxi-
    mately) solving SPCA
 2: Output: Approximate solution to SPCA
 3: Obtain denoised matrix Aε using Algorithm 1 with input (A, ε)
 4: Obtain sub-matrices {A ei }p and corresponding index sets {Si }p via Algorithm 2 with (A, Aε )
                               i=1                                    i=1
 5: for i = 1 to p do
 6:     Solve SPCA approximately with input (A  ei , k) using algorithm A and obtain solution xi
                         d
 7:     Construct yi ∈ R by placing (xi )j at (yi )Si (j) for j in block indices Si and zero elsewhere
                                             p
 8: Return the best solution among {yi }i=1 that gives the largest yi⊤ Ayi



                                                    5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Then, in Theorem 2, we show that solving SPCA exactly with a block-diagonal input matrix A            e is
equivalent to addressing SPCA sub-problems in blocks within A:          e
Theorem 2. Let A   e = diag(A  e1 , A            ep ) be a symmetric block-diagonal matrix. Denote OPT to
                                    e2 , . . . , A
be the optimal value to SPCA with input pair (A,       e k). Let OPTi to be the optimal value to SPCA with
            ei , k), for i ∈ [p]. Then, one has OPT = maxi∈[p] OPTi .
input pair (A
Remark 1. Theorem 2 is particularly non-trivial: without this result, one might think the support of
any optimal solution to SPCA may span different blocks. Solving SPCA with a block-diagonal input
would consequently involve iterating over all possible sparsity constants (that sum up to k) for each
block-diagonal sub-matrix, making our framework proposed in Section 3.1 nearly impractical.
We now extend Theorem 1 to incorporate the use of various approximation algorithms. We note
that our extension improves the general bound proposed in Theorem 1, since Algorithm 3 finds
a specific block-diagonal approximation of A. Furthermore, Theorem 3 suggests that our frame-
work Algorithm 3, can also be highly effective when combined with other approximation algorithms.
Specifically, it has the potential to find a better solution, particularly when the value of ε is small.
Theorem 3. Let A ∈ Rd×d be symmetric and positive semidefinite, let k be a positive integer, and
denote by x⋆ ∈ Rd an optimal solution to SPCA with input (A, k). Suppose that an algorithm A for
SPCA with input (A, k) finds an approximate solution x ∈ Rd to SPCA with multiplicative factor
m(k, d) ≥ 1 and additive error a(k, d) ≥ 0, i.e., one has x⊤ Ax ≥ (x⋆ )⊤ Ax⋆ /m(k, d) − a(k, d).
Furthermore, we assume that m(k, d) and a(k, d) is non-decreasing with respect to d. For ε > 0,
denote by y ∈ Rd be the output of Algorithm 3 with input tuple (A, k, ε, A). Then, one has
                        (x⋆ )⊤ Ax⋆                                               1
        y ⊤ Ay ≥                         − a (k, int dim(A, ε)) −                             · kε.
                   m (k, int dim(A, ε))                                m (k, int dim(A, ε))
Remark 2. Denote by d⋆ := int dim(A, ε) ≤ d. Theorem 3 implies that our framework, Algorithm 3,
when inputted with (A, k, ε, A), could find an approximate solution with a better multiplicative factor
                                                 kε
m (k, d⋆ ), and an additive error a (k, d⋆ ) + m(k,d ⋆ ) . Note that the additive error is also improved if

                                                               1
                     a(k, d) ≥ a (k, int dim(A, ε)) +                     · kε.
                                                     m (k, int dim(A, ε))
In addition, we have found instances where our framework can indeed obtain better solutions when
integrated with some approximation algorithm, as shown in Table 9 in Appendix C. Finally, we
summarized in Table 1 the change of multiplicative factor and additive error when integrated our
framework to some existing (approximation) algorithms for SPCA.
Table 1: Comparison of multiplicative factors (MF) and additive errors (AE) when integrating our
framework with different algorithms. The MISDP and Greedy algorithms are both studied in Li &
Xie (2020). Note that our MF is always no larger than the original MF.

     Algorithm                   MF              AE                Our MF                 Our AE
                                 √                            √
     Chan et al. (2015)      min( k, d1/3 )       0       min( k, int dim(A, ε)1/3 )    kε/Our MF
     MISDP                    min(k, d/k)         0        min(k, int dim(A, ε)/k)      kε/Our MF
     Greedy                       k               0                    k                    ε
     Exact algorithms             1               0                    1                    kε
     Asteris et al. (2015)        1               δ                    1                  kε + δ


3.2.2   C OMPUTATIONAL SPEEDUPS
In this section, we characterize the runtime complexity of Algorithm 3. We will see that the ε-intrinsic
dimension also plays an important role in this section.
Proposition 1. Let A ∈ Rd×d , and let k be a positive integer. Suppose that for a specific algorithm
A, the time complexity of using A for (approximately) solving SPCA with input (A, k) is a function
g(k, d) which is convex and non-decreasing with respect to d. We assume that g(k, 1) = 1. Then, for
a given threshold ε > 0, the runtime of Algorithm 3 with input tuples (A, k, ε, A) is at most

                                       d                                   2
                          O                      · g (k, int dim(A, ε)) + d
                                 int dim(A, ε)

                                                      6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Remark 3. We remark that the assumption g(k, d) is convex and non-decreasing with respect to d in
Proposition 1 is a very weak assumption. Common examples include dα and dα log d with α ≥ 1.
Remark 4. In this remark, we explore the computational speedups provided by Algorithm 3 by
modeling int dim(A, ε) as a function of A and ε. We assume without loss of generality that ∥A∥∞ =
1, thereby setting int dim(A, 1) = 0. It is important to note that while int dim(A, ε) is discontinuous,
for the purpose of illustration in Table 2, it is treated as a continuous function of ε.
Table 2: Comparison of original runtimes and current runtimes in our framework. We assume that the
algorithm has runtime O(dα ), for some α ≥ 2.

           int dim(A, ε)       Runtime            Our Runtime                 Speedup factor
          d(1 − e−c(1−ε) )      O(dα )      O(dα (1 − e−c(1−ε) )α−1 )      O((1 − e−c(1−ε) )1−α )
              d(1 − ε)          O(dα )         O(dα (1 − ε)α−1 )              O((1 − ε)1−α )
             d(1 − ε)m          O(dα )       O(dα (1 − ε)(α−1)m )           O((1 − ε)(1−α)m )

4      E XTENSIONS

Our algorithm presented in Section 3.1 takes a known threshold as an input. In this section, we
remove this constraint by extending our algorithm to various settings. Specifically, in Section 4.1, we
consider learning under a statistical model, where one can do the denoising of a matrix easily. In
Section 4.2, we propose a practical learning approach without any assumption.

4.1     L EARNING UNDER A STATISTICAL MODEL

A crucial aspect of our proposed framework involves determining an appropriate threshold, ε, as
required by Algorithm 3. While specifying such a threshold is generally necessary, there are many
instances where it can be effectively estimated from the data. In this section, we discuss a model
commonly employed in robust statistics (Comminges et al., 2021; Kotekal & Gao, 2023; 2024). This
model finds broad applications across various fields, including clustering (Chen & Witten, 2022) and
sparse linear regression (Minsker et al., 2022).
Before presenting the formal definition, we first establish some foundational intuition about the model.
Conceptually, if the input data matrix A is viewed as an empirical covariance matrix, and based on
the intuition that, a feature is expected to exhibit strong correlations with only a few other features, it
follows that A should be, or at least be close to, a block-diagonal matrix. This observation motivates
us for considering Model 1:
Model 1. The input matrix A ∈ Rd×d is close to a block-diagonal symmetric matrix A         e ∈ Rd×d , i.e.,
A=A   e + E for some symmetric matrix E ∈ Rd×d such that A is positive semidefinite and
     (i) for i ≤ j, each entry Eij is drawn from an i.i.d. ϱ-sub-Gaussian distribution, with mean zero,
         and variance σ 2 , where ϱ > 0 and  σ 2 being unknown, but an upper bound u ≥ ϱ2 /σ 2 is given;
    (ii) write Ae = diag A  e1 , A
                                 e2 , . . . , A                                    ei is upper bounded by d⋆ ,
                                              ep , the size of each diagonal block A
        where d⋆ ≤ Cdα for some known constant C > 0 and α ∈ (0, 1), but d⋆ is unknown.

In assumption (i) of Model 1, the sub-Gaussian distribution is particularly favored as this class of
distributions is sufficiently broad to encompass not only the Gaussian distribution but also distributions
of bounded variables, which are commonly observed in noise components of real-world datasets.
Assumption (ii) of Model 1 uses the constant α to quantify the extent to which features are clustered.
The procedure for estimating ∥E∥∞ in Model 1 involves an estimation of the variance
                                                                              √     σ 2 , which is
adapted from Comminges et al. (2021), and then multiply a constant multiple of log d. We present
the details in Algorithm 4:
In the next theorem, we provide a high probability approximation bound, as well as a runtime analysis,
for Algorithm 3 using the threshold ε̄ found via Algorithm 4. The results imply that in Model 1, one
can efficiently solve SPCA by exploiting the hidden sparse structure.
Proposition 2. Consider Model 1, and denote by ε̄ the output of Algorithm 4 with input tuple
(A, C, α, u). Let k ≤ d be a positive integer, and assume that d satisfies that d1−α > C0 · (C + 1) ·


                                                       7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Algorithm 4 Estimation of ∥E∥∞ in Model 1
 1: Input: Matrix A ∈ Rd×d , parameters C > 0, α ∈ (0, 1), and u in Model 1
 2: Output: A number ε̄ > 0 as an estimate of ∥E∥∞
 3: Divide the set of indices {(i, j) ∈ [d] × [d] : i ≤ j} into m = ⌊(2C + 2)d1+α ⌋ disjointj subsets
                                                                                                  k
                                                                                                 d2 +d
    B1 , B2 , . . . , Bm randomly, ensuring each subset Bi has cardinality lower bounded by       2m
 4: Initialize an array S to store subset variances
 5: for i = 1 to mP    do
 6:     Si ← |B1i | (i,j)∈Bi A2ij
 7: σ̄ 2 ← median(S)√
 8: Return ε̄ ← 2uσ̄ 3 log d


u log(8C + 8) for some large enough absolute constant C0 > 0. Then, the following holds with
probability at least 1 − 2d−1 − exp{2 log d − d1+α /(4C + 4)}:
  (i) Denote by x e⋆ the optimal solution to SPCA with input (A,
                                                              e k). For an (approximation) algorithm
      A with multiplicative factor m(k, d) ≥ 1 and additive error a(k, d) ≥ 0, where the functions
      m and a is non-deceasing with respect to d, the output y of Algorithm 3 with input tuple
      (A, k, ε̄, A) satisfies that
                                    x⋆ )⊤ Ae
                                           ex⋆
                            ⊤ e    (e                   ⋆              2
                          y Ay ≥               − a (k, d ) − 1 +                · kε̄.
                                    m (k, d⋆ )                     m (k, d⋆ )
  (ii) If, in addition, the time complexity of using A for (approximately) solving SPCA with input
       (A, k) is a function g(k, d) which is convex and non-decreasing with respect to d, and satisfies
       g(k, 1) = 1. Then, the runtime of Algorithm 3 with input tuples (A, k, ε, A) is at most

                                                d            ⋆     2
                                         O          · g (k, d ) + d
                                               d⋆

Finally, we remark that, the assumption d1−α > C0 · (C + 1) · u log(8C + 8) is true when d is large
enough, as C0 , C, and u are usually some constants not changing with respect to the dimension d.

4.2   A PRACTICAL LEARNING APPROACH

In this section, we describe a practical algorithm to estimate ε without prior statistical assumptions
while simultaneously providing an approximate solution to SPCA.
Recall from Algorithm 3 that for a given threshold ε, a thresholded matrix Aε is generated via
Algorithm 1 from the original matrix A. This matrix Aε is then utilized to approximate SPCA using
a specified algorithm A. Our proposed approach in this section involves initially selecting an ε value
within a predefined range, executing Algorithm 3 with this ε, and subsequently adjusting ε in the
following iterations through a binary search process. Since efficiency is of our major interest; thus, we
ask users to provide a parameter d0 that indicates the maximum dimension they are willing to compute
due to computational resource limit. We defer the detailed description of this binary-search based
algorithm to Algorithm 5. For clarity, let us denote by OPT(ε) the objective value of (xε )⊤ Axε ,
where xε is the output of Algorithm 3 with inputs (A, k, ε, A).
We have the characterization of approximation error and runtime complexity of Algorithm 5:
Theorem 4. Let A ∈ Rd×d be symmetric and positive semidefinite, and let k be a positive integer.
Suppose that an algorithm A for SPCA with input (A, k) finds an approximate solution x ∈ Rd
to SPCA such that has multiplicative factor m(k, d) ≥ 1 and additive error a(k, d) ≥ 0, with
m(k, d) and a(k, d) being non-decreasing with respect to d. Suppose that Algorithm 5 with input
(A, k, δ, A, d0 ) terminates with OPT(ε⋆ ) ≥ 0. Then one has
                                     1                                1
                     OPT(ε⋆ ) ≥             · OPT(0) − a(k, d0 ) −           · kε⋆ .
                                  m(k, d0 )                        m(k, d0 )
Suppose that for A, the time complexity of using A for (approximately) solving SPCA with input
(A, k) is a function g(k, d) which is convex and non-decreasing with respect to d, g(k, 1) = 1, and


                                                   8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Algorithm 5 A practical version of Algorithm 3 without a given threshold
 1: Input: Matrix A ∈ Rd×d , positive integer k ≤ d, tolerance parameter δ, (approximate) algorithm
    A for SPCA, and integer d0
 2: Result: Approximate solution to Problem SPCA
 3: L ← 0, U ← ∥A∥∞ , find OPT(U ) via A
 4: while U − L > δ do
 5:     ε ← (L + U )/2
 6:     Find Aε via Algorithm 1, and the largest block size d⋆ := lbs(Aε )
 7:     if problems with largest block size ≥ d⋆ has been solved before then U ← ε; continue
 8:     if d⋆ > d0 then L ← ε; continue
 9:     Find OPT(ε) via Algorithm 3 with algorithm A
10:     if OPT(ε) does not improve then U ← ε
11: return best OPT(ε) found and the corresponding xε



g(k, 0) = 0. The runtime for Algorithm 5 is at most

                                   ∥A∥∞           d
                         O log               ·      · g (k, d0 ) + d2
                                      δ          d0
Remark 5. In this remark, we discuss the practical advantages of Algorithm 5:
• The first direct advantage is that Algorithm 5 does not rely on any assumptions, enabling users to
  apply the framework to any dataset. Moreover, the framework can be applied to scenarios where
  an improved estimation of the binary search range is known. For instance, if users possess prior
  knowledge about an appropriate threshold ε̄ for binary search, they can refine the search interval
  in Algorithm 5 by setting the lower and upper bounds to L := aε̄ and U := bε̄ for some proper
  0 ≤ a < b to improve the efficiency by a speedup factor of O(log(∥A∥∞ /δ)/ log((b − a)ε̄/δ)).
• Secondly, as detailed in Theorem 4, is that Algorithm 5 achieves a similar trade-off between
  computational efficiency and approximation error as Algorithm 1, which are proposed in Theorem 3
  and Proposition 1. The time complexity of Algorithm 5, compared to Algorithm 3, increases only
  by a logarithmic factor due to the binary search step, thus preserving its efficiency.
• The third advantage is that this algorithm considers computational resources, ensuring that each
  invocation of Algorithm 3 remains efficient.

5   E MPIRICAL RESULTS
In this section, we report the numerical performance of our proposed framework.
Datasets. We perform numerical tests in datasets widely studied in feature selection, including
datasets CovColon from Alon et al. (1999), LymphomaCov1 from Alizadeh et al. (1998), Red-
dit1500 and Reddit2000 from Dey et al. (2022b), LeukemiaCov, LymphomaCov2, and ProstateCov
from Dettling (2004), ArceneCov and DorotheaCov from Guyon et al. (2007), and GLI85Cov and
GLABRA180Cov from Li (2020). We take the sample covariance matrices of features in these
datasets as our input matrices A. The dimensions of A range from 500 to 100000. Most of the
matrices A are dense and hence are not block-diagonal matrices, as discussed in Appendix C.1.
Baselines. We use the state-of-the-art exact algorithm Branch-and-Bound (Berk & Bertsimas, 2019)
and the state-of-the-art polynomial-time approximation algorithm (in terms of multiplicative factor)
Chan’s algorithm (Chan et al., 2015) as our baselines.
Notation. We calculate the approximation error between two methods using the formula (objBase −
objOurs )/objBase × 100%, where objBase is the objective value obtained by a baseline algorithm, while
objOurs is the objective value obtained by our framework integrated with the baseline algorithm.
We calculate the speedup factor by dividing the runtime of a baseline algorithm by the runtime of
Algorithm 5 integrated with the baseline algorithm.
Results. In Table 3, we report the performance of Algorithm 5 when integrated with Branch-and-
Bound algorithm. We summarized the performance results for k = 2, 5, 10, 15 across various
datasets. For each dataset, we report the average approximation error, average speedup factors, and


                                                  9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


their corresponding standard deviations. Notably, the average speedup factor across all datasets is
100.50, demonstrating significant computational efficiency. Our theoretical analysis anticipates a
trade-off between speedups and approximation errors; however, the empirical performance of our
framework in terms of approximation accuracy is remarkably strong, with an average error of just
0.61% across all datasets.
In Table 4 we report the performance of Algorithm 5, in larger datasets with larger k’s, when
integrated with Chan’s algorithm (Chan et al., 2015). We summarized the performance results for
k = 200, 500, 1000, 2000 across various datasets. Chan’s algorithm terminates √ in    time O(d3 ) and
                                                                                   1/3
returns an approximate solution to SPCA with a multiplicative factor min{ k, d }. The average
speedup factor is 6.00, and grows up to 14.51 as the dimension of the dataset grows, while the average
error across all four datasets remains remarkably below 0%, meaning that our framework finds better
solutions than the standalone algorithm.
These findings affirm the ability of our framework to handle diverse datasets and various problem
sizes both efficiently and accurately. For a more detailed discussion, additional information on
settings, and further empirical results, we refer readers to Appendix C.
Table 3: Summary of average approximation errors and average speedup factors for each dataset,
compared to Branch-and-Bound. Standard deviations are reported in the parentheses.

            Dataset             Avg. Error (%) (Std. Dev)     Avg. Speedup (Std. Dev)
            CovColonCov                 0.00 (0.00)                 25.84 (38.69)
            LymphomaCov1                0.00 (0.00)                 22.64 (15.87)
            Reddit1500                  0.00 (0.00)                365.12 (238.24)
            Reddit2000                  0.06 (0.13)                278.69 (164.93)
            LeukemiaCov                 0.00 (0.00)                 71.39 (83.17)
            LymphomaCov2                4.82 (5.78)                  6.95 (4.35)
            ProstateCov                 0.00 (0.00)                 19.90 (30.82)
            ArceneCov                   0.00 (0.00)                 13.50 (14.17)
            Overall                     0.61 (2.42)                100.50 (163.60)

Table 4: Summary of average approximation errors and average speedup factors for each dataset,
compared to Chan’s algorithm. Standard deviations are reported in the parentheses. Datasets are
sorted in ascending order according to their dimensions.

            Dataset              Avg. Error (%) (Std. Dev)     Avg. Speedup (Std. Dev)
            ArceneCov            -0.08 (0.10)                  0.86 (0.28)
            GLI85Cov             -1.06 (1.22)                  1.58 (0.21)
            GLABRA180Cov         -0.19 (0.26)                  7.07 (0.62)
            DorotheaCov          -2.30 (0.62)                  14.51 (0.50)
            Overall              -0.91 (1.11)                  6.00 (5.66)


6   D ISCUSSION

In this paper, we address the Sparse PCA problem by introducing an efficient framework that
accommodates any off-the-shelf algorithm designed for Sparse PCA in a plug-and-play fashion.
Our approach leverages matrix block-diagonalization, thereby facilitating significant speedups when
integrated with existing algorithms. The implementation of our framework is very easy, enhancing its
practical applicability. We have conducted a thorough theoretical analysis of both the approximation
error and the time complexity associated with our method. Moreover, extensive empirical evaluations
on large-scale datasets demonstrate the efficacy of our framework, which achieves considerable
improvements in runtime with only minor trade-offs in approximation error.
Looking ahead, an important direction for future research involves extending our framework to
handle the Sparse PCA problem with multiple principal components, while maintaining similar
approximation and runtime guarantees. This extension could further broaden the applicability of our
approach, addressing more complex scenarios in real-world applications.


                                                 10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


7   ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

A. Del Pia and D. Zhou are partially funded by AFOSR grant FA9550-23-1-0433. Any opinions,
findings, and conclusions or recommendations expressed in this material are those of the authors and
do not necessarily reflect the views of the Air Force Office of Scientific Research.

R EFERENCES
Farid Alizadeh, Jean-Pierre A Haeberly, and Michael L Overton. Primal-dual interior-point methods
  for semidefinite programming: convergence rates, stability and numerical results. SIAM Journal
  on Optimization, 8(3):746–768, 1998.
Uri Alon, Naama Barkai, Daniel A Notterman, Kurt Gish, Suzanne Ybarra, Daniel Mack, and
  Arnold J Levine. Broad patterns of gene expression revealed by clustering analysis of tumor and
  normal colon tissues probed by oligonucleotide arrays. Proceedings of the National Academy of
  Sciences, 96(12):6745–6750, 1999.
Arash A Amini and Martin J Wainwright. High-dimensional analysis of semidefinite relaxations
  for sparse principal components. In IEEE International Symposium on Information Theory, pp.
  2454–2458, 2008.
Megasthenis Asteris, Dimitris Papailiopoulos, Anastasios Kyrillidis, and Alexandros G Dimakis.
 Sparse pca via bipartite matchings. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 28, 2015.
Lauren Berk and Dimitris Bertsimas. Certifiably optimal sparse principal component analysis.
  Mathematical Programming Computation, 11:381–420, 2019.
Dimitris Bertsimas, Ryan Cory-Wright, and Jean Pauphilet. Solving large-scale sparse pca to
  certifiable (near) optimality. Journal of Machine Learning Research, 23(13):1–35, 2022.
Siu On Chan, Dimitris Papailiopoulos, and Aviad Rubinstein. On the worst-case approximability of
  sparse pca. arXiv preprint arXiv:1507.05950, 2015.
Yiqun T Chen and Daniela M Witten. Selective inference for k-means clustering. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2203.15267, 2022.
Agniva Chowdhury, Petros Drineas, David P Woodruff, and Samson Zhou. Approximation algorithms
  for sparse principal component analysis. arXiv preprint arXiv:2006.12748, 2020.
Laëtitia Comminges, Olivier Collier, Mohamed Ndaoud, and Alexandre B Tsybakov. Adaptive robust
  estimation in sparse vector model. The Annals of Statistics, 49(3):1347–1377, 2021.
Ryan Cory-Wright and Jean Pauphilet. Sparse pca with multiple components. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2209.14790, 2022.
Alberto Del Pia. Sparse pca on fixed-rank matrices. Mathematical Programming, pp. 1–19, 2022.
Yash Deshp, Andrea Montanari, et al. Sparse pca via covariance thresholding. Journal of Machine
  Learning Research, 17(141):1–41, 2016.
Marcel Dettling. Bagboosting for tumor classification with gene expression data. Bioinformatics, 20
 (18):3583–3593, 2004.
Emilie Devijver and Mélina Gallopin. Block-diagonal covariance selection for high-dimensional
 gaussian graphical models. Journal of the American Statistical Association, 113(521):306–314,
 2018.
Santanu S Dey, Rahul Mazumder, and Guanyi Wang. Using ℓ1 -relaxation and integer programming
  to obtain dual bounds for sparse pca. Operations Research, 70(3):1914–1932, 2022a.
Santanu S Dey, Marco Molinaro, and Guanyi Wang. Solving sparse principal component analysis
  with global support. Mathematical Programming, pp. 1–39, 2022b.


                                                11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Yunzi Ding, Dmitriy Kunisky, Alexander S Wein, and Afonso S Bandeira. Subexponential-time
  algorithms for sparse pca. Foundations of Computational Mathematics, pp. 1–50, 2023.
Tommaso d’Orsi, Pravesh K Kothari, Gleb Novikov, and David Steurer. Sparse pca: algorithms,
  adversarial perturbations and certificates. In 2020 IEEE 61st Annual Symposium on Foundations
  of Computer Science (FOCS), pp. 553–564. IEEE, 2020.
Salar Fattahi and Somayeh Sojoudi. Graphical lasso and thresholding: Equivalence and closed-form
  solutions. Journal of machine learning research, 20(10):1–44, 2019.
Jiashi Feng, Zhouchen Lin, Huan Xu, and Shuicheng Yan. Robust subspace segmentation with
   block-diagonal prior. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern
   recognition, pp. 3818–3825, 2014.
Isabelle Guyon, Jiwen Li, Theodor Mader, Patrick A Pletscher, Georg Schneider, and Markus Uhr.
   Competitive baseline methods set new standards for the nips 2003 feature selection benchmark.
   Pattern recognition letters, 28(12):1438–1444, 2007.
William W Hager, Dzung T Phan, and Jiajie Zhu. Projection algorithms for nonconvex minimization
 with application to sparse principal component analysis. Journal of Global Optimization, 65:
 657–676, 2016.
Insu Han, Rajesh Jayaram, Amin Karbasi, Vahab Mirrokni, David Woodruff, and Amir Zandieh.
  Hyperattention: Long-context attention in near-linear time. In The Twelfth International Conference
  on Learning Representations, 2023.
Ying-Lin Hsu, Po-Yu Huang, and Dung-Tsa Chen. Sparse principal component analysis in cancer
  research. Translational cancer research, 3(3):182, 2014.
Subhodh Kotekal and Chao Gao. Sparsity meets correlation in gaussian sequence model, 2023.
Subhodh Kotekal and Chao Gao. Optimal estimation of the null distribution in large-scale inference,
  2024.
Jundong Li. Feature selection datasets at asu. https://jundongl.github.io/
  scikit-feature/OLD/datasets_old.html, 2020. Accessed: 2024-09-27.
Yongchun Li and Weijun Xie. Exact and approximation algorithms for sparse pca. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2008.12438, 2020.
Shuangge Ma and Ying Dai. Principal component analysis based methods in bioinformatics studies.
  Briefings in bioinformatics, 12(6):714–722, 2011.
Malik Magdon-Ismail. Np-hardness and inapproximability of sparse PCA. Information Processing
 Letters, 126:35–38, 2017.
Rahul Mazumder and Trevor Hastie. Exact covariance thresholding into connected components for
  large-scale graphical lasso. The Journal of Machine Learning Research, 13(1):781–794, 2012.
Stanislav Minsker, Mohamed Ndaoud, and Lang Wang. Robust and tuning-free sparse linear
  regression via square-root slope. arXiv preprint arXiv:2210.16808, 2022.
Dimitris Papailiopoulos, Alexandros Dimakis, and Stavros Korokythakis. Sparse pca through low-
  rank approximations. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 747–755. PMLR,
  2013.
Roman Vershynin. High-dimensional probability: An introduction with applications in data science,
  volume 47. Cambridge university press, 2018.
Xiwen Wang, Jiaxi Ying, and Daniel Palomar. Learning large-scale mtp 2 gaussian graphical
  models via bridge-block decomposition. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 36:
  73211–73231, 2023.
Xiao-Tong Yuan and Tong Zhang. Truncated power method for sparse eigenvalue problems. Journal
  of Machine Learning Research, 14(4), 2013.


                                                12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Youwei Zhang and Laurent Ghaoui. Large-scale sparse principal component analysis with application
  to text data. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 24, 2011.
Xiaowei Zhuang, Zhengshi Yang, and Dietmar Cordes. A technical review of canonical correlation
  analysis for neuroscience applications. Human brain mapping, 41(13):3807–3833, 2020.
Hui Zou and Lingzhou Xue. A selective overview of sparse principal component analysis. Proceedings
  of the IEEE, 106(8):1311–1320, 2018.
Hui Zou, Trevor Hastie, and Robert Tibshirani. Sparse principal component analysis. Journal of
  computational and graphical statistics, 15(2):265–286, 2006.


                                               13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A     A DDITIONAL RELATED WORK

In this section, we discuss additional related work. There exist many attempts in solving Sparse PCA
in the literature, and we outlined only a selective overview of mainstream methods. Algorithms require
worst-case exponential runtimes, including mixed-integer semidefinite programs (Bertsimas et al.,
2022; Li & Xie, 2020; Cory-Wright & Pauphilet, 2022), mixed-integer quadratic programs (Dey
et al., 2022b), non-convex programs (Zou et al., 2006; Dey et al., 2022a), and sub-exponential
algorithms (Ding et al., 2023). On the other hand, there also exist a number of algorithms that
take polynomial runtime to approximately solving Sparse PCA. To the best of our knowledge, the
state-of-the-art approximation
                             √ algorithm is proposed by Chan et al. (2015), in which an algorithm with
multiplicative factor min{ k, d−1/3 } is proposed. There also exists tons of other (approximation)
algorithms that have polynomial runtime, including semidefinite relaxations (Chowdhury et al.,
2020), greedy algorithms (Li & Xie, 2020), low-rank approximations (Papailiopoulos et al., 2013),
and fixed-rank Sparse PCA (Del Pia, 2022). Apart from the work we have mentioned, there also
exists a streamline of work focusing on efficient estimation of sparse vectors in some specific
statistical models. For instance, for a statistical model known as Spiked Covariance model, methods
such as semidefinite relaxations (Amini & Wainwright, 2008; d’Orsi et al., 2020) and covariance
thresholding (Deshp et al., 2016). Finally, there are also local approximation algorithms designed for
Sparse PCA, and iterative algorithms are proposed (Yuan & Zhang, 2013; Hager et al., 2016).
The idea of decomposing a large-scale optimization problem into smaller sub-problems is a widely
adopted approach in the optimization literature. For instance, Mazumder & Hastie (2012) leverages
the connection between the thresholded input matrix and the support graph of the optimal solution in
graphical lasso problem (GL), enabling significant computational speedups by solving sub-problems.
Building on this, Fattahi & Sojoudi (2019) improves the computational efficiency of these subroutines
by providing closed-form solutions under an acyclic assumption and analyzing the graph’s edge
structure. Wang et al. (2023) addresses GL in Gaussian graphical models through bridge-block
decomposition and derives closed-form solutions for these blocks. In addition, several methods in
the literature involve or are similar to matrix block-diagonalization. For instance, Feng et al. (2014)
employ block-diagonalization for subspace clustering and segmentation problems by mapping data
matrices into block-diagonal matrices through linear transformations. More recently, Han et al. (2023)
introduce the sortedLSH algorithm to sparsify the softmax matrix, thus reducing the computational
time of the attention matrix through random projection-based bucketing of “block indices”. We
remark that in all studies above, the underlying problems of interests, as well as the techniques, are
different from ours, and the techniques developed therein cannot be directly applied to SPCA. A more
related work (Devijver & Gallopin, 2018) explores block-diagonal covariance matrix estimation using
hard thresholding techniques akin to ours. However, our framework diverges in two critical aspects:
(i) They assume data is drawn from a Gaussian distribution, while we do not - we show in Section 4.2
that our method can by applied to any data inputs; and (ii) they use maximum likelihood estimation,
whereas our Algorithm 5 involves iterative binary search to determine the optimal threshold ε.


B     D EFERRED PROOFS

In this section, we provide proofs that we defer in the paper.

B.1   P ROOFS IN S ECTION 3.2

Lemma 1. Let A ∈ Rd×d and ε > 0. Given input (A, ε), Algorithm 1 outputs an ε-approximation of
A, denoted as A,              e = int dim(A, ε) in time O(d2 ).
              e such that lbs(A)


                                                                        2
                                                                    O(d ), and it suffices to show
Proof of Lemma 1. It is clear that Algorithm 1 has time complexity
that the output A
                e of Algorithm 1 with input (A, ε) satisfies lbs A
                                                                 e = int dim(A, ε).
             ⋆                                               ⋆
           A is an ε-approximation of A, and satisfies lbs (A ) = int dim(A, ε). We intend to
Suppose that
show lbs Ae ≤ lbs (A⋆ ). WLOG we assume that A⋆ ∈ B(A, ε) is a block-diagonal matrix with


                                                 14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                                                       A11   A12   ...   A1p
                                                                                                            
                                                                                      A21   A22   ...   A2p 
blocks A⋆1 , A⋆2 , . . . , A⋆p , i.e., A⋆ = diag A⋆1 , A⋆2 , . . . , A⋆p . Write A = 
                                                                                      ...    ..    ..    .. 
                                                                                               .     .     . 
                                                                            Ap1 Ap2 . . . App
                                    
            Ae11 A e12 . . . A  e1p
          A e21 A e22 . . . A  e2p 
and Ae=   .        .     .
                                                   eii , and A⋆ have the same number of rows and
                                  .. , where Aii , A          i
           ..       ..    ..      . 
            Aep1 A ep2 . . . A  epp
columns, by the definition of B(A, ε), it is clear that ∥Aij ∥∞ ≤ ε, for any 1 ≤ i ̸= j ≤ p. This
further implies that for any 1 ≤ i ̸= j ≤ p,  A  eij is a zero matrix by the procedure described in

                                                e ≤ lbs (A⋆ ). By minimality of A⋆ , we obtain that
Algorithm 1, and therefore it is clear that lbs A

lbs Ae = lbs (A⋆ ).


B.1.1    P ROOFS IN S ECTION 3.2.1
Theorem 1. Let A ∈ Rd×d be symmetric, k ≤ d, and ε > 0. Denote by Aε the output of Algorithm 1
                   e an optimal solution to SPCA with input (Aε , k), and x⋆ an optimal solution to
with input (A, ε), x
SPCA with input (A, k). Then, it follows that

                                       (x⋆ )⊤ Ax⋆ − x
                                                    e⊤ Ae
                                                        x ≤ 2k · ε.

Proof of Theorem 1. Note that
                   (x⋆ )⊤ Ax⋆ − x
                                e⊤ Ae
                                    x ≤ (x⋆ )⊤ Ax⋆ − x
                                                     e⊤ Aε x   e⊤ (Aε − A)e
                                                           e + x          x
                                       ≤ (x⋆ )⊤ Ax⋆ − x  e⊤ Aε x
                                                               e + k · ∥A − Aε ∥∞ ,
                                                                                   √          √
where the last inequality follows from Holder’s inequality and the fact that ∥e
                                                                              x∥1 ≤ k · ∥e
                                                                                         x∥2 = k.
Therefore, it suffices to show that
                                 (x⋆ )⊤ Ax⋆ − x
                                              e⊤ Aε x
                                                    e ≤ k · ∥A − Aε ∥∞ .

Observe that


                       (x⋆ )⊤ Ax⋆ − x
                                    e⊤ Aε x
                                          e =            max x⊤ Ax − max x⊤ Aε x
                                                     ∥x∥2 =1,            ∥x∥2 =1,
                                                     ∥x∥0 ≤k             ∥x∥0 ≤k

                                                 ≤ max          x⊤ (Aε − A)x
                                                    ∥x∥2 =1,
                                                    ∥x∥0 ≤k

                                                 ≤ k · ∥A − Aε ∥∞ ,
where the first inequality follows from the following facts:

                           max x⊤ Ax − max x⊤ Aε x ≤ max x⊤ (A − Aε )x
                         ∥x∥2 =1,            ∥x∥2 =1,              ∥x∥2 =1,
                         ∥x∥0 ≤k             ∥x∥0 ≤k               ∥x∥0 ≤k

                           max x⊤ Aε x − max x⊤ Ax ≤ max x⊤ (Aε − A)x
                         ∥x∥2 =1,             ∥x∥2 =1,             ∥x∥2 =1,
                         ∥x∥0 ≤k              ∥x∥0 ≤k              ∥x∥0 ≤k

Finally, combining the fact that ∥A − Aε ∥∞ ≤ ε, we are done.

Theorem 2. Let A   e = diag(A  e1 , A
                                    e2 , . . . , A
                                                 ep ) be a symmetric block-diagonal matrix. Denote OPT to
be the optimal value to SPCA with input pair (A,       e k). Let OPTi to be the optimal value to SPCA with
input pair (Ai , k), for i ∈ [p]. Then, one has OPT = maxi∈[p] OPTi .
            e


                                                         15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Proof of Theorem 2. It is clear that OPT ≥ maxi∈[p] OPTi . It remains to show the reverse, i.e.,
OPT ≤ maxi∈[p] OPTi .
Suppose not, we have OPT > maxi∈[p] OPTi . Then, there must exist principal submatrices
Ae′ , A
      e′ , . . . , A
                   e′p contained in A
                                    e1 , A                              e′ , A
                                                      ep such that diag(A
                                         e2 , . . . , A                      e′ , . . . , A
                                                                                          e′p ) is a k × k matrix,
  1     2                                                                 1    2
and
                            OPT = max x⊤ diag(A
                                              e′1 , A
                                                    e′2 , . . . , A
                                                                  e′p )x > max OPTi .
                                     ∥x∥2 =1                                  i∈[p]

This gives a contradiction, as
                 max OPTi = max max x⊤ A
                                       ei x ≥ max x⊤ diag(A
                                                          e′ , A
                                                            1
                                                               e′ , . . . , A
                                                                 2
                                                                            e′ )x,
                                                                              p
                 i∈[p]             i∈[p] ∥x∥2 =1,               ∥x∥2 =1
                                         ∥x∥0 ≤k

where the inequality follows from the fact that
      max x⊤ diag(A
                  e′1 , A
                        e′2 , . . . , A
                                      e′p )x = max max x⊤ A
                                                          e′i x = max max x⊤ A
                                                                             e′i x = max OPTi .
  ∥x∥2 =1                                       i∈[p] ∥x∥2 =1             i∈[p] ∥x∥2 =1           i∈[p]
                                                                                ∥x∥0 ≤k


Theorem 3. Let A ∈ Rd×d be symmetric and positive semidefinite, let k be a positive integer, and
denote by x⋆ ∈ Rd an optimal solution to SPCA with input (A, k). Suppose that an algorithm A for
SPCA with input (A, k) finds an approximate solution x ∈ Rd to SPCA with multiplicative factor
m(k, d) ≥ 1 and additive error a(k, d) ≥ 0, i.e., one has x⊤ Ax ≥ (x⋆ )⊤ Ax⋆ /m(k, d) − a(k, d).
Furthermore, we assume that m(k, d) and a(k, d) is non-decreasing with respect to d. For ε > 0,
denote by y ∈ Rd be the output of Algorithm 3 with input tuple (A, k, ε, A). Then, one has
                             (x⋆ )⊤ Ax⋆                                          1
          y ⊤ Ay ≥                            − a (k, int dim(A, ε)) −                      · kε.
                         m (k, int dim(A, ε))                          m (k, int dim(A, ε))

Proof of Theorem 3. In the proof, we use the same notation as in Algorithm 3. We assume WLOG
that the thresholded matrix Aε is a block-diagonal matrix, i.e., Aε = diag(Aε1 , Aε2 , . . . , Aεp ), where

Aε := Aε
  i            . We also define A
            Si ,Si
                                 e := diag A e1 , A
                                                  e2 , . . . , A         ei := AS ,S . It is clear that
                                                               ep , with A
                                                                                          i   i

                                     ⋆     d
 A−A
   e                           e ∈ R an optimal solution to SPCA with input (A,
                ≤ ε. Denote by x                                             e k). By Theorem 2,
            ∞
one can assume WLOG that x  e⋆ has zero entries for indices greater than d1 := |S1 |. In other
                                                                                               words,
  ⋆
e is “found” in the block A1 . Recall that we denote xi the solution found by A with input A
x                                                                                              ei , k .
Then, it is clear that
                 max x⊤            ⊤ e
                      i Ai x i ≥ x 1 A1 x 1
                        e
                 i∈[p]
                                      1
                                 ≥              x⋆ )⊤ Ae
                                             · (e     ex⋆ − a(k, d1 )
                                   m(k, d1 )
                                             1
                                 ≥                          x⋆ )⊤ Ae
                                                         · (e     ex⋆ − a(k, int dim(A, ε)).
                                   m(k, int dim(A, ε))
Recall that yi is the reconstructed solution. By the proof of Theorem 1, one obtains that
                 max yi⊤ Ayi
                 i∈[p]

             = max x⊤
                    i Ai x i
                      e
                 i∈[p]
                        1                                                                                     (1)
             ≥                        x⋆ )⊤ Ae
                                   · (e     ex⋆ − a(k, int dim(A, ε))
               m(k, int dim(A, ε))
                        1
             ≥                     · (x⋆ )⊤ Ax⋆ − k A − A    e     − a(k, int dim(A, ε)).
               m(k, int dim(A, ε))                             ∞


                                                         16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


B.1.2     P ROOFS IN S ECTION 3.2.2
Proposition 1. Let A ∈ Rd×d , and let k be a positive integer. Suppose that for a specific algorithm
A, the time complexity of using A for (approximately) solving SPCA with input (A, k) is a function
g(k, d) which is convex and non-decreasing with respect to d. We assume that g(k, 1) = 1. Then, for
a given threshold ε > 0, the runtime of Algorithm 3 with input tuples (A, k, ε, A) is at most

                                     d
                         O                     · g (k, int dim(A, ε)) + d2
                               int dim(A, ε)

Proof of Proposition 1. Suppose that the largest block size of A   e ∈ B(A, ε) is equal to int dim(A, ε),
and A e can be sorted to a block-diagonal matrix with p blocks A        e1 , A
                                                                             e2 , . . . , A
                                                                                          ep and block sizes
d1 , d2 , . . . , dp , respectively. WLOG we assume that p < d, otherwise the statement holds trivially. It
is clear that the time complexity of running line 5 - 8 in Algorithm 3 is upper bounded by a constant
multiple of
                                                              p
                                                              X
                                                max               g(k, dk ).                                      (2)
                                            i ≤int dim(A,ε)
                                         1≤dP
                                               m            i=1
                                               i=1 di =d


Since k is fixed, the optimization problem (2) is maximizing a convex objective function over a
polytope
                                                                              p
               (                                                                      )
                                                                              X
                                         p
         P := (d1 , d2 , . . . , dp ) ∈ R : 1 ≤ di ≤ int dim(A, ε), ∀i ∈ [p],   di = d .
                                                                                          i=1

Therefore, the optimum to (2) is obtained at an extreme point of P . It is clear that an extreme point
(d⋆1 , d⋆2 , . . . , d⋆p ) of P is active at a linearly independent system, i.e., among all d⋆i ’s, there are p − 1 of
                                                                                                        Pp
them must be equal to 1 or int dim(A, ε), and the last one is taken such that the euqality i=1 d⋆i = d
holds. Since there could be at most ⌊d/ int dim(A, ε)⌋ many blocks in A                  e with block size equal to
int dim(A, ε), and that g(k, d) is increasing with respect to d, we obtain that the optimum of the
optimization problem (2) is upper bounded by

                                     d                                                   d
                                                 · g (k, int dim(A, ε)) + p −
                              int dim(A, ε)                                        int dim(A, ε)

                                     d
                          <                       · g (k, int dim(A, ε)) + d.
                               int dim(A, ε)
We are then done by noticing the fact that lines 3 - 4 in Algorithm 3 have a runtime bounded by
O(d2 ).

B.2     P ROOFS IN S ECTION 4.1

To establish a connection with robust statistics, we begin by expressing each element of the input
matrix A in Model 1 as follows:
                                                 e + σ 2 Zij,
                                      e + Eij := Aij
                                Aij = Aij                                      i ≤ j,

where Zij is an i.i.d. centered (ϱ2 /σ 2 )-sub-Gaussian random variable with unit variance. Considering
that Ae is block-diagonal and, according to (ii) in Model 1, has at most ⌈d/d⋆ ⌉ · (d⋆ )2 = O(d1+α )
nonzero entries, the methodology proposed by Comminges et al. (2021) can be employed to estimate
σ 2 accurately using Algorithm 4.
Inspired by the methods proposed in Comminges et al. (2021), we show that the number σ̄ found in
Algorithm 4 could provide an constant approximation ratio to the true variance σ 2 in Model 1 with
high probability:
Proposition 3 (adapted from Proposition 1 in Deshp et al. (2016)). Consider Model 1, and denote
PZ to be the distribution of the random variable Eij /σ 2 . Let σ̄ 2 be the same number found in


                                                         17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Algorithm 4 with input tuple (A, C, α). There exist an absolute constant c > 0 such that for the
dimension d of the input matrix A satisfying
                                                                 
                                               log  (8C  + 8)
                   log d > log (4C + 4) ·  2   2              + 1 /(1 − α)
                                              cσ      σ
                                              2ϱ2 ·   2ϱ2 + 1

we have that for distribution PZ of Zij , the variance σ 2 , one has a uniform lower bound on the
accuracy of estimation:

                                                        σ̄ 2                      dα+1

                                                     1       3
             inf inf      inf        PPZ ,σ,Ae         ≤ 2 ≤         ≥ 1 − exp −          .
              PZ σ>0 ∥A∥
                      e 0 ≤Cd1+α                     2  σ    2                   4C + 4


Proof of Proposition 3. Recall that we write

                                              e + σ 2 Zij, i ≤ j,
                                   e + Eij := Aij
                             Aij = Aij

where Zij is an i.i.d. centered (ϱ2 /σ 2 )-sub-Gaussian random variable with unit variance. Since
d⋆ ≤ Cdα for some α ∈ (0, 1), WLOG we assume that d⋆ = Cdα for some C > 0, and for
simplicity we assume that d1+α and C are all integers to avoid countless discussions of integrality. By
Algorithm 4, one divides the index set {(i, j) ∈ [d] × [d] : i ≤ j} into m = (2C + 2)d1+α disjoint
subsets B1 , B2 , . . . , Bm , and each Bi has cardinality at lease k := ⌊(d2 + d)/(2m)⌋. Denote the set
J to be the set of indices i such that the set Bi contains only indices such that for any (k, l) ∈ Bi ,
Aekl = 0. It is clear that |J| is lower bounded by m − Cdα+1 = (2C + 1)d1+α .
By Bernstein’s inequality (see, e.g., Corollary 2.8.3 in Vershynin (2018)), it is clear that there exists
an absolute constant c > 0 such that
                                                                                  
                                           2
              1      X
                             2           σ               1      X                  1
        P                  Ekl − σ2 >        = P                      2
                                                                       Zkl −1 > 
             |Bi |                        2             |Bi |                      2
                   (k,l)∈Bi                                   (k,l)∈Bi
                                                                      4
                                                                             σ2

                                                                       σ
                                               ≤ 2 exp −c min              ,      |Bi |
                                                                       4ϱ4 2ϱ2
                                                                      4
                                                                             σ2
                                                                                    2
                                                                       σ            d +d
                                               ≤ 2 exp −c min              ,                    .
                                                                       4ϱ4 2ϱ2        2m

                                                                               n                               o
                                                                                    1
Then, we denote I := [σ 2 /2, 3σ 2 /2], denote Ai to be the random event                             2
                                                                                           P
                                                                                   |Bi |   (k,l)∈Bi Akl ̸∈ I    ,
and denote 1Ai to be the indicator function of Ai . One obtains that
                                                     m
                                                      !
                                 2
                                                    mX
                            P σ̄ ∈
                                 ̸ I ≤P       1Ai ≥
                                         i=1
                                                    2
                                                                
                                         X          m   X
                                     = P     1Ai ≥   −      1Ai 
                                                    2
                                          i∈J           i̸∈J
                                                               !
                                         X          m
                                     ≤P       1Ai ≥   − Cdα+1
                                                    2
                                                     i∈J

Denote
                                                    4
                                                        σ2
                                                              2
                      m     α+1                    σ         d +d
                 t :=   − Cd    − 2|J| exp −c min     ,              ,
                      2                            4ϱ4 2ϱ2    2m


                                                       18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


and by Hoeffding’s inequality, one obtains that
                                    !
          X           m
      P         1Ai ≥   − Cdα+1
                      2
          i∈J
                                                          4     2
                                                                     2       !
       X                   m                             σ    σ     d  + d
    ≤P     (1Ai − E1Ai ) ≥    − Cdα+1 − 2|J| exp −c min     ,
                            2                            4ϱ4 2ϱ2      2m
       i∈J
                            !
       X
    =P     (1Ai − E1Ai ) ≥ t
           i∈J
            2t2

    ≤ exp −
            |J|

Since m = (2C + 2)dα+1 , it is clear that m ≥ |J| ≥ (2C + 1)dα+1 , and
                                         4
                                              σ2

                                        σ                                       1
     t ≥ dα+1 1 − 2(2C + 2) exp −c min    4
                                            ,   2
                                                    ⌊d1−α
                                                          /(4C + 4)⌋    ≥ dα+1 · ,
                                        4ϱ 2ϱ                                   2

where the last inequality follows from the fact that
                                                               
                                               log  (8C  + 8)
                       log d > log (4C + 4) · 2   2             /(1 − α).
                                              cσ      σ
                                              2ϱ2 ·   2ϱ2 + 1

Hence, the probability of σ̄ 2 ̸∈ I is upper bounded by exp{−dα+1 /(4C + 4)}.


Proposition 2. Consider Model 1, and denote by ε̄ the output of Algorithm 4 with input tuple
(A, C, α, u). Let k ≤ d be a positive integer, and assume that d satisfies that d1−α > C0 · (C + 1) ·
u log(8C + 8) for some large enough absolute constant C0 > 0. Then, the following holds with
probability at least 1 − 2d−1 − exp{2 log d − d1+α /(4C + 4)}:
  (i) Denote by x e⋆ the optimal solution to SPCA with input (A,
                                                              e k). For an (approximation) algorithm
      A with multiplicative factor m(k, d) ≥ 1 and additive error a(k, d) ≥ 0, where the functions
      m and a is non-deceasing with respect to d, the output y of Algorithm 3 with input tuple
      (A, k, ε̄, A) satisfies that

                                   x⋆ )⊤ Ae
                                         ex⋆
                                  (e                                   2
                        y ⊤ Ay
                            e ≥               − a (k, d ⋆
                                                          ) −   1 +              · kε̄.
                                   m (k, d⋆ )                       m (k, d⋆ )

  (ii) If, in addition, the time complexity of using A for (approximately) solving SPCA with input
       (A, k) is a function g(k, d) which is convex and non-decreasing with respect to d, and satisfies
       g(k, 1) = 1. Then, the runtime of Algorithm 3 with input tuples (A, k, ε, A) is at most

                                                 d              ⋆      2
                                        O             · g (k, d   ) + d
                                                 d⋆



                                                                                                 −1
Proof
   n of Proposition
                1+α
                    o We first show that, the probability that ∥E∥∞ ≤ ε̄ is at least 1 − 2d2 −
                    2.
              d
exp 2 log d − 4C+4    . This comes directly from Proposition 3 that σ̄ 2 satisfies that 12 ≤ σ̄σ2 ≤ 32
with probability at least 1 − exp{−d1+α /(4C + 4)}, the definition of Ekl being i.i.d. ϱ-sub-Gaussian
                                                                                          2
variables, and a union bound argument. Indeed, define the random event A := { 12 ≤ σσ̄2 ≤ 32 }, one


                                                     19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


can see that
         P (|Ekl | > ε̄) = P (|Ekl | > ε̄ | A) P(A) + P (|Ekl | > ε̄ | Ac ) P(Ac )
                                          √      p
                         = P |Ekl | > 2 3uσ̄ log d | A P(A) + P (|Ekl | > ε̄ | Ac ) P(Ac )
                                        √      p
                         ≤ P |Ekl | > 6uσ log d | A P(A) + P(Ac )
                                        √                            d1+α

                                               p
                         ≤ P |Ekl | > 6uσ log d + exp −
                                                                    4C + 4
                                         2 2                       1+α

                                      6u σ                       d
                         ≤ 2 exp −            log d + exp −
                                       2ϱ2                      4C + 4
                                                 1+α

                                               d
                         = 2d−3 + exp −                .
                                             4C + 4
By union bound, one has
                                                                                 d1+α

                                    2                      −1
               P (∥E∥∞ > ε̄) ≤ d · P (|Ekl | > ε̄) ≤ 2d         + exp 2 log d −              .
                                                                                4C + 4
This implies that, with high probability, int dim (A, ε̄) ≤ d⋆ . In the remainder of the proof, we will
assume that the random event ∥E∥∞ ≤ ε̄ holds true.
We are now ready to show the desired approximation error. Denote by x⋆ the optimal solution to
SPCA with input (A, k), by the proof of Theorem 1, it is clear that

                                        (x⋆ )⊤ Ax⋆ ≥ (e
                                                      x⋆ )⊤ Ae
                                                            ex⋆ − kε̄,

                     e−A
due to the fact that A              ≤ ε̄. Combining with Theorem 3, we have
                                ∞

      y ⊤ Ay
          e ≥ y ⊤ Ay − k · ε̄
                  (x⋆ )⊤ Ax⋆

                                                                          1
            ≥                      − a (k, int dim(A, ε)) − 1 +                        · kε̄
              m (k, int dim(A, ε))                              m (k, int dim(A, ε))
                    x⋆ )⊤ Ae
                          ex⋆
                  (e                                                      2
            ≥                      − a (k, int dim(A, ε)) − 1 +                        · kε̄.
              m (k, int dim(A, ε))                              m (k, int dim(A, ε))

Finally, we obtain the desired runtime complexity via Proposition 1.

B.3     P ROOFS IN S ECTION 4.2

Theorem 4. Let A ∈ Rd×d be symmetric and positive semidefinite, and let k be a positive integer.
Suppose that an algorithm A for SPCA with input (A, k) finds an approximate solution x ∈ Rd
to SPCA such that has multiplicative factor m(k, d) ≥ 1 and additive error a(k, d) ≥ 0, with
m(k, d) and a(k, d) being non-decreasing with respect to d. Suppose that Algorithm 5 with input
(A, k, δ, A, d0 ) terminates with OPT(ε⋆ ) ≥ 0. Then one has
                                       1                                1
                    OPT(ε⋆ ) ≥                · OPT(0) − a(k, d0 ) −           · kε⋆ .
                                    m(k, d0 )                        m(k, d0 )
Suppose that for A, the time complexity of using A for (approximately) solving SPCA with input
(A, k) is a function g(k, d) which is convex and non-decreasing with respect to d, g(k, 1) = 1, and
g(k, 0) = 0. The runtime for Algorithm 5 is at most

                                     ∥A∥∞          d
                           O log              ·       · g (k, d0 ) + d2
                                        δ         d0

Proof of Theorem 4. We will use Theorem 3 and Proposition 1 to prove this theorem.


                                                     20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                                    ⋆
We first prove the approximation bound. First note that A − Aε          ∞
                                                                            ≤ ε⋆ . By Theorem 3,

                      (x⋆ )⊤ Ax⋆                                              1
    OPT(ε⋆ ) ≥                          − a (k, int dim(A, ε⋆ )) −                        · kε⋆
                 m (k, int dim(A, ε⋆ ))                            m (k, int dim(A, ε⋆ ))
                        OPT(0)                                                1
               =                        − a (k, int dim(A, ε⋆ )) −                        · kε⋆ .
                 m (k, int dim(A, ε⋆ ))                            m (k, int dim(A, ε⋆ ))
Note that in Algorithm 5, the algorithm is guaranteed to terminate with an ε⋆ such that
int dim(A, ε⋆ ) ≤ d0 . Since the functions m(k, d) and a(k, d) are all non-decreasing with respect
to d, we have that m (k, int dim(A, ε⋆ )) ≤ m(k, d0 ) and a (k, int dim(A, ε⋆ )) ≤ a(k, d0 ), and
therefore we obtain our desired approximation bound
                                     OPT(0)                       1
                        OPT(ε⋆ ) ≥              − a (k, d0 ) −            · kε⋆ .
                                     m (k, d0 )                m (k, d0 )
Here, the inequality holds due to the fact that (i) if OPT(0) ≤ kε⋆ , then since OPT(ε⋆ ) is non-
negative, the inequality trivially holds; (ii) if OPT(0) > kε⋆ , then the inequality also holds since
a(k, d) and m(k, d) are non-decreasing with respect to d.
Then, we show the time complexity. By Proposition 1, it is clear that the runtime for a single iteration
in the while loop in Algorithm 5 is upper bounded by

                                     d                                    2
                        O                     · g (k, int dim(A, ε)) + d ,                            (3)
                              int dim(A, ε)
for some ε ≥ 0 such that int dim(A, ε) ≤ d0 . Let ε1 ≥ ε2 be two positive numbers, and it is clear
that int dim(A, ε1 ) ≤ int dim(A, ε2 ). Since

                             int dim(A, ε1 )                         int dim(A, ε1 )
           int dim(A, ε1 ) =                 · int dim(A, ε2 ) + 1 −                   · 0,
                             int dim(A, ε2 )                         int dim(A, ε2 )
and by convexity of g(k, d), along with the fact that g(k, 0) = 0, we obtain that
                                           int dim(A, ε1 )
                 g(k, int dim(A, ε1 )) ≤                   · g(k, int dim(A, ε2 )) + 0.
                                           int dim(A, ε2 )
This implies that for any ε ≥ 0 such that int dim(A, ε) ≤ d0 , we have that
                              d                                  d
                                       · g(k, int dim(A, ε1 )) ≤    · g(k, d0 ),
                       int dim(A, ε1 )                           d0
and thus

                              d
                                          · g(k, int dim(A, ε))
                       int dim(A, ε)
                             d
                    ≤                  · g(k, int dim(A, ε)) + g(k, int dim(A, ε))
                      int dim(A, ε)
                       d
                    ≤     · g(k, d0 ) + g(k, int dim(A, ε))
                      d0

                       d                                 d
                    ≤     · g(k, d0 ) + g(k, d0 ) ≤ 2        · g(k, d0 ).
                      d0                                d0
Combining with (3), and the fact that at most O(log(∥A∥∞ /δ)) iterations would be executed in the
while loop in Algorithm 5, we are done.

C    A DDITIONAL EMPIRICAL SETTINGS AND RESULTS
In this section, we report additional empirical settings in Appendix C.1 and detailed empirical
results in Appendices C.2 and C.3. We report empirical results under Model 1 in Appendix C.4. In
Appendix C.5, we discuss impacts of parameters d0 and δ in Algorithm 5.


                                                   21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


C.1   E MPIRICAL S ETTINGS

Datasets. We summarize the dimensions and percentage of non-zero entries in the input matrices
in Table 5. It is important to note that more than 70% of these input covariance matrices are dense.
We utilize these matrices to evaluate the practicality of our approach, demonstrating its effectiveness
irrespective of whether the input matrix has a block-diagonal structure.

             Table 5: Dimensions for each dataset and percentage of non-zero entries.

               Dataset               Dimension (d)     Percentage of non-zero entries
               CovColonCov                  500                      100%
               LymphomaCov1                 500                      100%
               Reddit1500                  1500                      5.30%
               Reddit2000                  2000                      6.20%
               LeukemiaCov                 3571                      100%
               LymphomaCov2                4026                      100%
               ProstateCov                 6033                      100%
               ArceneCov                  10000                      100%
               GLI85Cov                   22283                      100%
               GLABRA180Cov               49151                      100%
               DorotheaCov               100000                     77.65%

Parameters. (i) When integrated Algorithm 5 with Branch-and-Bound algorithm: We choose the
parameter ε̄ := 1, a := 0, b := ∥A∥∞ , d0 := 30, and δ := 0.01 · ∥A∥∞ . (ii) When integrated
Algorithm 5 with Chan’s algorithm: We choose the parameter ε̄ := 1, a := 0, b := ∥A∥∞ , d0 := 2k
(twice the sparsity constant), and δ := 0.01 · ∥A∥∞ .
Early Stopping. For experiments conducted with a positive semidefinite input matrix A, we add a
very simple step in Algorithm 5 - we set an extra stopping criteria on Algorithm 5, which breaks the
while loop as soon as a problem with largest block size d0 has been solved. This additional step helps
further reduce computational time of Algorithm 5.
Compute resources. We conducted all tests on a computing cluster equipped with 36 Cores (2x 3.1G
Xeon Gold 6254 CPUs) and 768 GB of memory.

C.2   E MPIRICAL RESULTS WHEN INTEGRATED WITH B RANCH - AND -B OUND ALGORITHM

In this section, we provide the detailed empirical results of our framework when integrated with
Branch-and-Bound algorithm (previously summarized in Table 3), in Table 6. We provide statistics
related to the best solution in Table 7, including the ratio of corresponding ε⋆ (the best threshold
                                                               ⋆
found) and ∥A∥∞ , the percentage of zeros in the matrix Aε , and the Jaccard index between the
solution obtained by baseline algorithm and that obtained by Algorithm 5, which is defined as
                                             | supp(xBase ) ∩ supp(xOurs )|
                          Jaccard index :=                                  .
                                             | supp(xBase ) ∪ supp(xOurs )|
Here, xBase denotes the solution obtained by the baseline algorithm, which refers to Branch-and-
Bound algorithm in this section and Chan’s algorithm in Appendix C.3, and xOurs denotes the solution
obtained by Algorithm 5 when integrated with the baseline algorithm. We also summarize the average
approximation errors and average speedup factors for with respect to k in Table 8.
From the data presented in Table 6, it is evident that our framework achieves exceptional performance
metrics. The median approximation error is 0, with the 90th percentile approximation error not
exceeding 0.19%. Additionally, the median speedup factor is recorded at 20.87. These statistics
further underscore the efficiency and effectiveness of our framework, demonstrating its capability to
provide substantial computational speedups while maintaining small approximation errors.
From the data in Table 7, we conclude that the Jaccard index is oftentimes one, and the change of
Jaccard index aligns with the change of the approximation error. Additionally, for each dataset, the
                                                                    ⋆
relative threshold value ε⋆ / ∥A∥∞ and the percentage of zeros in Aε remain relatively stable across


                                                  22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Table 6: Comparison of runtime and objective values on real-world datasets, between Branch-and-
Bound and Algorithm 5 integrated with Branch-and-Bound. d is the dimension of Sparse PCA
problem, and k is the sparsity constant. We set the time limit to 3600 seconds for each method.
Approximation errors between two methods, and speedup factors are reported. We note that the
objective value for ArceneCov is scaled by 105 .

Dataset                d      k    Branch-and-Bound               Ours             Error (%)    Speedup
                                   Time     Objective     Time(s)     Objective
CovColonCov           500      3      8      1059.49         1.20      1059.49       0.00          6.67
CovColonCov           500      5      8      1646.45         1.08      1646.45       0.00          7.41
CovColonCov           500     10   3600      2641.23        42.93      2641.23       0.00         83.86
CovColonCov           500     15   3600       3496.6       666.95       3496.6       0.00          5.40
LymphomaCov1          500      3     11      2701.61         1.32      2701.61       0.00          8.33
LymphomaCov1          500      5     44       4300.5         1.51       4300.5        0.00        29.14
LymphomaCov1          500     10   3600      6008.74        85.72      6008.74       0.00         42.00
LymphomaCov1          500     15   3600      7628.66        324.6      7628.66       0.00         11.09
Reddit1500           1500      3     75       946.12         3.68       946.12        0.00        20.38
Reddit1500           1500      5   3600       980.97         6.86       980.97        0.00       524.78
Reddit1500           1500     10   3600      1045.74         9.20      1045.74       0.00        391.30
Reddit1500           1500     15   3600      1082.12         6.87      1082.12       0.00        524.02
Reddit2000           2000      3    412      1311.36        8.70       1311.36       0.00         47.36
Reddit2000           2000      5   3600      1397.36         9.03      1397.36       0.00        398.67
Reddit2000           2000     10   3600      1523.82        13.18      1523.82       0.00        273.14
Reddit2000           2000     15   3600      1605.48         9.10      1601.32       0.26        395.60
LeukemiaCov          3571      3    280         7.13        18.89         7.13        0.00        14.82
LeukemiaCov          3571      5   3600        10.29        18.64        10.29        0.00       193.13
LeukemiaCov          3571     10   3600        17.22        64.03        17.22        0.00        56.22
LeukemiaCov          3571     15   3600        21.87       168.47        21.87        0.00        21.37
LymphomaCov2         4026      3    210        40.62        25.73        40.62        0.00         8.16
LymphomaCov2         4026      5    144        63.66        26.75        63.66        0.00         5.38
LymphomaCov2         4026     10   3600        78.29       293.42        69.27       11.52        12.27
LymphomaCov2         4026     15   3600        93.46      1810.19        86.20        7.77         1.99
ProstateCov          6033      3    102         8.19        57.35         8.19        0.00         1.78
ProstateCov          6033      5   3600        12.92        54.63        12.92        0.00        65.90
ProstateCov          6033     10   3600        24.38       407.14        24.38        0.00         8.84
ProstateCov          6033     15   3600        34.98      1175.40        34.98        0.00         3.06
ArceneCov           10000      3     88         3.36       138.07         3.36        0.00         0.64
ArceneCov           10000      5    248         5.56       135.47         5.56        0.00         1.83
ArceneCov           10000     10   3600        10.81       138.56        10.81        0.00        25.98
ArceneCov           10000     15   3600        15.30       140.92        15.30        0.00        25.55


k, as the largest block size d0 is set to 30, and the best solutions are typically found in blocks near
this size.
From the data in Table 8, it is clear that our framework consistently obtains significant computational
speedups across a range of settings. Notably, it achieves an average speedup factor of 13.52 for k = 3,
with this factor increasing dramatically to over 153 for k ≥ 5. An observation from the analysis
is the relationship between k and performance metrics: although the speedup factor increases with
larger k, there is a corresponding rise in the average approximation errors. Specifically, for k = 3
and k = 5, the average errors remain exceptionally low, which are all zero, but they escalate to 1.47%
for k = 10 and 1.05% for k = 15. This indicates a consistent pattern of increased approximation
errors as k grows, which is aligned with Theorem 3, despite the significant gains in speed.

C.3   E MPIRICAL RESULTS WHEN INTEGRATED WITH C HAN ’ S ALGORITHM

In this section, we provide the detailed numerical test results of our framework when integrated with
Chan’s algorithm (previously summarized in Table 4), in Table 9. We provide statistics related to the


                                                  23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Table 7: Additional statistics regarding the best solution obtained by Algorithm 5 in Table 6. Denote
by ε⋆ the threshold found that yields the best solution in Algorithm 5, A the input covariance matrix,
   ⋆
Aε is thresholded matrix obtained by Algorithm 1 with input (A, ε⋆ ).
                                                                       ⋆
       Dataset              k    Error (%)     ε⋆ / ∥A∥∞    Zeros in Aε (%)      Jaccard Index
       CovColonCov          3         0          0.75            99.988              1.00
       CovColonCov          5         0          0.59            99.941              1.00
       CovColonCov         10         0          0.58            99.926              1.00
       CovColonCov         15         0          0.59            99.941              1.00
       LymphomaCov1         3         0          0.50            99.982              1.00
       LymphomaCov1         5         0          0.50            99.982              1.00
       LymphomaCov1        10         0          0.38            99.951              1.00
       LymphomaCov1        15         0          0.35            99.940              1.00
       Reddit1500           3         0          0.13            99.999              1.00
       Reddit1500           5         0          0.06            99.997              1.00
       Reddit1500          10         0          0.06            99.997              1.00
       Reddit1500          15         0          0.06            99.997              1.00
       Reddit2000           3         0          0.13            99.999              1.00
       Reddit2000           5         0          0.09            99.998              1.00
       Reddit2000          10         0          0.09            99.998              1.00
       Reddit2000          15       0.26         0.09            99.998              0.88
       LeukemiaCov          3         0          0.41            99.998              1.00
       LeukemiaCov          5         0          0.50            99.999              1.00
       LeukemiaCov         10         0          0.50            99.999              1.00
       LeukemiaCov         15         0          0.44            99.999              1.00
       LymphomaCov2         3         0          0.50            99.999              1.00
       LymphomaCov2         5         0          0.50            99.999              1.00
       LymphomaCov2        10      11.52         0.42            99.999              0.42
       LymphomaCov2        15       7.77         0.44            99.999              0.30
       ProstateCov          3         0          0.75            99.999              1.00
       ProstateCov          5         0          0.68            99.999              1.00
       ProstateCov         10         0          0.69            99.999              1.00
       ProstateCov         15         0          0.69            99.999              1.00
       ArceneCov            3         0          0.75            99.999              1.00
       ArceneCov            5         0          0.75            99.999              1.00
       ArceneCov           10         0          0.75            99.999              1.00
       ArceneCov           15         0          0.75            99.999              1.00

Table 8: Summary of average approximation errors and average speedup factors for each k, when
integrated our framework with Branch-and-Bound algorithm. The standard deviations are reported in
the parentheses.

                       k    Avg. Error (Std. Dev)      Avg. Speedup (Std. Dev)
                      3          0.00 (0.00)                13.52 (15.12)
                      5          0.00 (0.00)               153.28 (203.17)
                      10         1.47 (4.06)               111.70 (141.81)
                      15         1.05 (2.72)               123.51 (210.55)


best solution in Table 10, including the ratio of corresponding ε⋆ and ∥A∥∞ , the percentage of zeros
                 ⋆
in the matrix Aε , and the Jaccard index. We also summarized the average approximation errors and
average speedup factors for with respect to k in Table 11.
In Table 9, we once again demonstrate the substantial speedup improvements our framework achieves
when integrated with Chan’s algorithm. The results show a median approximation error of -0.38%,
with the maximum approximation error not exceeding 0.28%, and a median speedup factor of
3.96. We observe that the speedup factor grows (linearly) as the dimension of the dataset goes up,


                                                  24
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


highlighting the efficacy of our framework, especially in large datasets. Notably, in all instances within
the DorotheaCov dataset, the instances k = 500, 1000, 2000 in GLI85Cov and GLABRA180Cov
datasets, the instances k = 1000, 2000 in ArceneCov dataset, our framework attains solutions with
negative approximation errors, indicating that it consistently finds better solutions than Chan’s
algorithm alone. These instances provide tangible proof of our framework’s potential to find better
solutions, as highlighted in Remark 2.
In Table 10, the Jaccard index does not vary significantly with k, nor does its change align with the
change of the approximation error. A possible reason is that Chan’s algorithm is an approximation
algorithm, and the Jaccard index may not fully capture the similarity between the solutions obtained
and the true optimal solutions. As expected, since d0 = 2k, the relative threshold value ε⋆ / ∥A∥∞
and the percentage of zeros decrease as k increases.
In Table 11, we do not observe an increase in speedup factors as k increases. This phenomenon can be
attributed to the runtime of Chan’s algorithm, which is O(d3 ) and independent of k. Consequently, as
predicted by Proposition 1, the speedup factors do not escalate with larger values of k. Additionally,
unlike the trends noted in Table 8, the average errors do not increase with k. This deviation is likely
due to Chan’s algorithm only providing an approximate solution with a certain multiplicative factor:
As shown in Theorem 3, our algorithm has the capability to improve this multiplicative factor at
the expense of some additive error. When both k and d are large, the benefits from the improved
multiplicative factor tend to balance out the impact of the additive error. Consequently, our framework
consistently achieves high-quality solutions that are comparable to those obtained solely through
Chan’s algorithm, maintaining an average error of less than 0.55% for each k.
Finally, we note that Chan’s algorithm is considerably more scalable than the Branch-and-Bound
algorithm. The statistics underscore our framework’s ability not only to enhance the speed of scalable
algorithms like Chan’s, but also to maintain impressively low approximation errors in the process.

Table 9: Comparison of runtime and objective values on real-world datasets, between Chan’s
algorithm and Algorithm 5 integrated with Chan’s algorithm. d is the dimension of Sparse PCA
problem, and k is the sparsity constant. We note that the objective value for GLI85Cov is scaled
by 109 and that for GLABRA180Cov is scaled by 108 . The error being negative means that our
framework finds a better solution than the standalone algorithm.

Dataset                  d         k       Chan’s algorithm               Ours            Error    Speedup
                                           Time      Objective     Time     Objective
ArceneCov              10000     200        228          91.7       288        91.7        0.00      0.79
ArceneCov              10000     500        239         140.4       188       140.4        0.00      1.27
ArceneCov              10000     1000       249         190.4       349       190.8       -0.21      0.71
ArceneCov              10000     2000       256         233.3       377       233.5       -0.09      0.68
GLI85Cov               22283     200       2836         35.8       1660       35.7         0.28      1.71
GLI85Cov               22283     500       2728         38.8       1528       39.4        -1.55      1.79
GLI85Cov               22283     1000      2869         39.9       1942       40.9        -2.51      1.48
GLI85Cov               22283     2000      2680         42.3       2034       42.5        -0.47      1.32
GLABRA180Cov           49151      200      35564        44.7       4890       44.6         0.11      7.27
GLABRA180Cov           49151      500      33225        60.4       4475       60.7        -0.50      7.42
GLABRA180Cov           49151     1000      30864        70.5       4142       70.7        -0.28      7.45
GLABRA180Cov           49151     2000      29675        78.1       4830       78.2        -0.10      6.14
Dorothea              100000      200     246348        3.25      16194       3.34        -2.77     15.21
Dorothea              100000      500     246539        4.94      17554       5.07        -2.63     14.04
Dorothea              100000     1000     244196        6.23      16934       6.38        -2.41     14.42
Dorothea              100000     2000     255281        7.18      17774       7.28        -1.39     14.36


C.4   E MPIRICAL RESULTS UNDER M ODEL 1

In this section, we report the numerical results in Model 1 using Algorithm 3 with a threshold obtained
by Algorithm 4. In Model 1, we set E to have i.i.d. centered Gaussian variables with a standard
deviation σ = 0.1 in its lower triangle entries, i.e., Eij for 1 ≤ i ≤ j, and set Eij = Eji for i ̸= j to


                                                   25
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Table 10: Additional statistics regarding the best solution obtained by Algorithm 5 in Table 9. Denote
by ε⋆ the threshold found that yields the best solution in Algorithm 5, A the input covariance matrix,
   ⋆
Aε is thresholded matrix obtained by Algorithm 1 with input (A, ε⋆ ).
                                                                             ⋆
     Dataset                 k     Error (%)      ε⋆ / ∥A∥∞    Zeros in Aε (%)      Jaccard Index
     ArceneCov               200      0.00          0.38            99.974               0.82
     ArceneCov               500      0.00          0.26            99.868               0.82
     ArceneCov              1000      -0.21         0.16            99.469               0.79
     ArceneCov              2000      -0.09         0.05            95.891               0.94
     GLI85Cov               200       0.28          0.09            99.997               0.67
     GLI85Cov               500       -1.55         0.04            99.985               0.49
     GLI85Cov               1000      -2.51         0.02            99.962               0.62
     GLI85Cov               2000      -0.47         0.01            99.775               0.73
     GLABRA180Cov            200      0.11          0.18            99.999               0.82
     GLABRA180Cov            500      -0.50         0.10            99.997               0.81
     GLABRA180Cov           1000      -0.28         0.05            99.990               0.82
     GLABRA180Cov           2000      -0.10         0.04            99.980               0.80
     DorotheaCov             200      -2.77         0.12            99.999               0.78
     DorotheaCov             500      -2.63         0.09            99.999               0.79
     DorotheaCov            1000      -2.41         0.06            99.999               0.76
     DorotheaCov            2000      -1.39         0.05            99.998               0.67


Table 11: Summary of average approximation errors and average speedup factors for each k, when
integrated our framwork with Chan’s algorithm. The standard deviations are reported in the parenthe-
ses.

                       k     Avg. Error (Std. Dev)      Avg. Speedup (Std. Dev)
                      200          -0.60 (1.45)                6.25 (6.63)
                      500          -1.17 (1.17)                6.13 (5.96)
                     1000          -1.35 (1.28)                6.02 (6.36)
                     2000          -0.51 (0.61)                5.63 (6.31)



make it symmetric. We generate 30 independent random blocks in A,
                                                               e each of size 20, with each block
defined as Mi⊤ M/100, where M ∈ R100×20 has i.i.d. standard Gaussian entries (which implies that
u = 1 in Model 1).
We run Algorithm 4 with C = 1, α = 0.7, and u = 1, obtaining the threshold ε̄ as the output.
Subsequently, we execute Algorithm 3 with A,e k ∈ {2, 3, 5, 7, 10}, the Branch-and-Bound algorithm,
and ε̄. We denote the solution output by Algorithm 3 as xOurs .
In Table 12, we compare Algorithm 3 integrated with Branch-and-Bound algorithm, with vanilla
Branch-and-Bound algorithm. We report the optimality gap, speed up factor, and the value of ε̄
outputted by Algorithm 4. The optimality gap is defined as:

                                      Gap := ObjBB − ObjOurs ,

where ObjBB := x⊤ BB AxBB , and xBB is the output of the Branch-and-Bound algorithm with input
                     e
(A, k), and where ObjOurs is the objective value y ⊤ Ay
 e                                                   e in Proposition 2.
To ensure reproducibility, we set the random seed to 42 and run the experiments ten times for each k.
From Table 12, we observe that the average optimality gap increases as k grows. Additionally, ε̄
remains relatively stable across different values of k, as the calculation of ε̄ does not depend on k at
all. The optimality gap is much smaller than the predicted bound 3k · ε̄, providing computational
verification of the bound proposed in Proposition 2. The speedup factor is exceptionally high, often
exceeding a thousand when k ≥ 5.


                                                   26
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Table 12: Summary of average optimality gaps, average speedup factors, and average threshold ε̄ for
each k, when integrated our framework with Branch-and-Bound algorithm. The standard deviations
are reported in the parentheses. The time limit for Branch-and-Bound is set to 600 seconds.

                 k   Avg. Gap (Std. Dev)           Avg. Spdup (Std. Dev)       Avg. ε̄ (Std. Dev)
                2        0.29 (0.08)                    16.52 (12.18)            0.96 (0.0016)
                3        0.35 (0.13)                    94.78 (78.52)            0.96 (0.0030)
                5        0.48 (0.12)                  2010.02 (625.55)           0.96 (0.0028)
                7        0.59 (0.14)                  1629.38 (869.91)           0.96 (0.0040)
                10       0.64 (0.14)                  1900.05 (598.14)           0.96 (0.0036)


C.5     I MPACTS OF PARAMETERS d0 AND δ IN A LGORITHM 5

In this section, we discuss the impacts of parameters d0 and δ in Algorithm 5. We showcase the
impacts by comparing the approximation errors and speedups on certain datasets when integrating
Algorithm 5 with Branch-and-Bound algorithm.

C.5.1    I MPACT OF d0

In Table 13, we summarize the numerical results when increasing d0 from 30 to 45 and 55 in the
LymphomaCov2 dataset. We observe a significant improvement on the approximation error, going
from an average of 4.82% to 1.94% and 0.03%, at the cost of lowering the average speedup factor
from 6.95 to around 4.

Table 13: Comparison of errors and speedups for different d0 values across LymphomaCov2 dataset.

      Dataset                 d        k           d0 = 30               d0 = 45              d0 = 55
                                              Error    Speedup      Error     Speedup   Error     Speedup
      LymphomaCov2          4026        3       0.0       8.16       0.0       8.29       0.0       8.62
      LymphomaCov3          4026        5       0.0       5.38       0.0       5.35       0.0       5.95
      LymphomaCov4          4026       10     11.52      12.27       0.0       1.84       0.0       1.00
      LymphomaCov5          4026       15      7.77       1.99      7.77       0.92      0.13       1.00
      Overall                                  4.82      6.95       1.94       4.10      0.03       4.14



C.5.2    I MPACT OF δ

In Table 14, we summarize the numerical results when increasing δ from 0.01 · ∥A∥∞ to 0.1 · ∥A∥∞
and 0.15 · ∥A∥∞ in the ProstateCov dataset. We observe that, by increasing δ, the speedup factors
dramatically improve, from an average of 19.90 to 38.41 and 99.49, at the potential cost of lowering
the approximation error from 0 to 6.07%.

  Table 14: Comparison of errors and speedups for different δ values across ProstateCov dataset.

       Dataset          d          k       δ = 0.01 · ∥A∥∞       δ = 0.1 · ∥A∥∞       δ = 0.15 · ∥A∥∞
                                           Error   Speedup       Error     Speedup    Error     Speedup
       ProstateCov     6033        3        0.0        1.78       0.0         2.79     0.0         3.62
       ProstateCov     6033        5        0.0       65.90       0.0       106.32     0.0       128.16
       ProstateCov     6033       10        0.0        8.84       0.0        29.56     0.0       128.25
       ProstateCov     6033       15        0.0        3.06       0.0        14.99    24.27      137.93
       Overall                              0.0       19.90       0.0        38.41    6.07        99.49


                                                         27
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


D     E XTENSION TO NON - POSITIVE SEMIDEFINITE INPUT MATRIX
In this paper, we focus on solving SPCA, where the input matrix A is symmetric and positive
semidefinite, following conventions in the Sparse PCA literature (Chan et al., 2015; Amini &
Wainwright, 2008; Berk & Bertsimas, 2019; Dey et al., 2022a;b). We remark that, our framework
remains effective for symmetric and non-positive semidefinite inputs, provided that the algorithm
A for (approximately) solving SPCA supports symmetric and non-positive semidefinite inputs.2 In
other words, if A is compatible with symmetric and non-positive semidefinite inputs, the assumption
of A being positive semidefinite can be removed in Theorems 3 and 4 and in Proposition 3 (stated in
Model 1), and all theoretical guarantees still hold.


    2
      Such algorithms do exist; for example, a naive exact algorithm that finds an eigenvector corresponding to
the largest eigenvalue of submatrices AS,S for all subsets S with |S| ≤ k.


                                                      28
