Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


O N S TOCHASTIC C ONTEXTUAL BANDITS WITH K NAP -
SACKS IN S MALL B UDGET R EGIME

 Hengquan Guo and Xin LiuЛҡ
 School of Information Science and Technology
 ShanghaiTech University
 {guohq,liuxin7}@shanghaitech.edu.cn



                                               A BSTRACT

            This paper studies stochastic contextual bandits with knapsack constraints (CBwK),
            where a learner observes a context, takes an action, receives a reward, and incurs
            a vector of costs at every round. The learner aims to maximize the cumulative
            rewards across T rounds under the knapsack constraints with an initial budget
                                                                                        ? of B.
            We study CBwK in the small budget regime where the budget B вҖң в„Ұp T q and
            propose an Adaptive and Universal PrimalвҖ“Dual algorithm (AUPD)
                                                                         ?         that achieves
                                                                      ОҪЛҡ
            strong regret performance: 1) AUPD achieves OМғpp1 ` Оҙb q T q regret under the
            strict feasibility assumption without?any prior information, matching the best-
                                                         ОҪ Лҡ 34
            known bounds; 2) AUPD achieves OМғp T ` ?       b
                                                             T q regret without strict feasibility
            assumption, which, to the best of our knowledge, is the first result in the litera-
            ture. Here, the parameter ОҪ Лҡ represents the optimal average reward; b вҖң B{T
            is the average budget and Оҙb is the feasibility/safety margin. We establish these
            strong results through the adaptive budget-aware design, which effectively balances
            reward maximization and budget consumption. We provide a new perspective
            on analyzing budget consumption using the Lyapunov drift method, along with
            a refined analysis of its cumulative variance. Our theory is further supported by
            experiments conducted on a large-scale dataset.


1       I NTRODUCTION
Stochastic contextual bandits with knapsacks (CBwK) is a general framework for online decision-
making under resource-constrained applications and has been applied to a broad range of practical
scenarios (e.g., resource-constrained recommendation Balakrishnan et al. (2018); Yang et al. (2020),
clinic trials in healthcare Tewari & Murphy (2017); Tomkins et al. (2021), content moderation for
healthy social platform Lykouris & Weng (2024); Lee et al. (2024), online advertisement platform
Lucier et al. (2024); Feng et al. (2024); Gaitonde et al. (2022)). At each round t, the learner observes
a context xt P X and chooses an action at P A. The learner then receives a reward Rt and also
consumes K types of resources or costs Ct . The initial budget of the kth type of resource is Bk and
let B вҖң mink Bk and its average version be b вҖң B{T . The interaction with the environment stops
after T rounds or when one of the resource budgets has been exhausted. The goal of the learner is to
maximize the cumulative reward under the constrained resource budget.
CBwK is a contextual version of BwK, initially introduced in the literature Agrawal & Devanur
(2014); Badanidiyuru et al. (2018), and has been extensively studied in Slivkins et al. (2023); Agrawal
& Devanur (2016); Han et al. (2023); Chzhen et al. (2024). The work Slivkins et al. (2023) assumes
online learning oracles are accessed to estimate the rewards and costs and leverages an inverse gap
weighting method Abe & Long (1999); Foster & Rakhlin (2020) to balance exploration, reward
acquisition, and cost consumption. However, this work assumes a large initial budget (or in a large
budget regime) such that B вҖң в„ҰpT q. In many real-world applications, the budget is precious and
scarce (i.e., B ! T ). For example, a store with a limited supply of B items of a product provides
customized offers to T users in contextual dynamic pricing. Users arrive sequentially with different
contexts, and the number of users is much larger than the number of items, i.e., B ! T ; In task
    Лҡ
        Corresponding author


                                                      1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


scheduling for the crowdsourcing platform, the tasks with different contexts arrive sequentially, and
the platform decides if a task is good to assign to an expert or an ordinary worker. In this setting, the
number of experts is much smaller than the number of tasks; In content moderation for healthy online
review platforms, reviews are constantly posted on the platform, and the platform is required to filter
out harmful reviews within a limited number of queries from human experts, where the query budget
is much smaller than the number of reviews.
To solve problems with limited total budgets, the work Agrawal & Devanur (2016); Han et al. (2023)
studied CBwK under either linear or general realizability assumptions on rewards/costs and attempt
                                                                                         3
to relax the large budget requirement. However, these work still?assume B вҖң в„ҰpT 4 q due to the
proposed two-stage strategies where an initial warm-up stage with T rounds is required in learning
the optimal value for the subsequent decision-making.
                                            ?          A very recent work Chzhen et al. (2024) further
relaxed the budget requirement of B вҖң в„Ұp T q by assuming the strict feasibility assumption (a.k.a
the SlaterвҖҷs condition) and the prior knowledge of the feasibility/safety margin. However, obtaining
such information can be quite (if not impossible) challenging in real-world scenarios. Besides, the
work utilizes a double-tricking to learn the optimal stepsize in tracking the dual variable (the proxy
for budget consumption) to achieve a good balance between rewards and resource consumption,
which shares a similar flavor as the two-stage approach in Agrawal & Devanur (2016); Han et al.
(2023). This raises a natural open question:
Can we design
       ?      an adaptive (ideally single-stage) algorithm to solve CBwK under the small budget
B вҖң в„Ұp T q, achieving the universal and optimal performance regardless of the strict feasibility
assumption and any prior knowledge about it?
In this paper, we provide a positive answer to this question by introducing the Adaptive and Universal
PrimalвҖ“Dual algorithm (AUPD). Our contributions can be summarized as follows:
Algorithm: AUPD is motivated by the primal-dual approach which has also been widely explored in
safe online learning Yu & Neely (2020); Slivkins et al. (2023); Guo & Liu (2024); Gangrade et al.
(2024), but with an adaptive budget-aware design and a novel perspective from Lyapunov optimization.
                                                      pkq
In the dual modular, we design the virtual queues tQt u, resemble scaled dual variables, to track the
cumulative over-used budget consumption. Unlike previous studies in Agrawal & Devanur (2016);
Han et al. (2023); Chzhen et al. (2024), we do not impose any upper bound or any conservative
factors in the dual update.
                         ? In the primal decision modular, we explicitly incorporate the knowledge of
the initial budget V вҖң b T , in addition to the virtual queues that capture the over-used resource, to
                                                                              pkq
balance the reward and resource consumption. The scaled virtual queues tQt {V u can be regarded
as the estimators of the optimal dual variables, which avoids an explicit learning process used in
Agrawal & Devanur (2016); Han et al. (2023); Chzhen et al. (2024). The budget-aware strategy
and virtual queue design are the keys for AUPD to minimize regret and establish strong theoretical
performance under the small budget regime without any prior information on the problem instance.
           Reference                        Regret          Budget            Strict Feasibility
                                                 Лҡ ?            3
  SquareCBwK Han et al. (2023)         OМғpp1 ` ОҪОҙb q T q    в„ҰpT 4 q   Required and known safety margin
                                                 Лҡ ?          ?
 PGD Adaptive Chzhen et al. (2024)     OМғpp1 ` ОҪОҙb q T q    в„Ұp T q    Required and known safety margin
                                                 Лҡ ?          ?
             AUPD                      OМғpp1 ` ОҪОҙb q T q    в„Ұp T q                Required
                                          ?       ОҪ Лҡ 34
                                                              ?
             AUPD                      OМғp T ` ?    b
                                                      T q   в„Ұp T q              Not Required

                             Table 1: Our results and most related works.

Theoretical Results: AUPD achieves the strong regret performance for CBwK in the small budget
regime, regardless of the strict feasibility assumption (our results and most related work are summa-
                                                                                               Лҡ ?
rized in Table 1): (i) When the strict feasibility assumption holds, AUPD achieves OМғpp1 ` ОҪОҙb q T q
                                      ?
in the small budget regime B вҖң в„Ұp T q regret under the general realizability assumption of reward
and cost functions, where the parameter ОҪ Лҡ is the average performance of an optimal static policy and
Оҙb is the feasibility/safety margin. This result matches the regret guarantee in Agrawal & Devanur
(2016); Han et al. (2023); Chzhen et al. (2024). However, unlike in Agrawal & Devanur (2016);
Han et al. (2023); Chzhen et al. (2024), Lyapunov drift analysis establishes an upper bound on the
virtual queue (a proxy for the budget consumption process) without requiring any prior knowledge
of the safety margin nor the extra implement parameter search steps. (ii) When the strict feasibility


                                                    2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025



                                                                  ?    ОҪ Лҡ 34
assumption does not hold, AUPD achieves a worst-case regret of OМғp T ` ? b
                                                                           T q in the small budget
               ?
regime B вҖң в„Ұp T q. To the best of our knowledge, there are no existing results even in the large
budget regime B вҖң в„ҰpT q without the strict feasibility assumption.
Experiments: We evaluate AUPD using a real-world learning-to-rank dataset in the small budget
regime. Our experimental results demonstrate that AUPD outperforms baseline algorithms and
achieves the best performance under various initial budgets.

R ELATED W ORK

Contextual bandits and bandits with knapsacks have been studied extensively. We only focus on the
literature most related to ours.
(Contextual) BwK: вҖңlargeвҖқ budget regime and two-stage design. Bandits with knapsacks (BwK)
was initialized by Agrawal & Devanur (2014); Sankararaman & Slivkins (2018; 2021); Badanidiyuru
et al. (2018), where the well-known optimistic exploration with the primal-dual design has been
extensively studied in Agrawal & Devanur (2014; 2019); Agrawal et al. (2016); Badanidiyuru et al.
(2018); Immorlica et al. (2022) to reduce BwK to unconstrained bandits. BwK has been further
extended to the contextual version of BwK in Agrawal & Devanur (2016); Badanidiyuru et al. (2014);
Agrawal et al. (2016); Li & Stoltz (2022); Slivkins et al. (2023); Han et al. (2023) under different
realizability assumptions for rewards and costs, such as linear class, logistic function class or even
general function class. When the linear structure is imposed on the rewards and costs, the work
Agrawal & Devanur (2016) integrates the primal-dual design with    LinUCB exploration and designs a
                                                               Лҡ ?                     3
two-stage learning method to achieve the regret of OМғpp1 ` ОҪb q T q when B вҖң в„ҰpT 4 q. Inspired by
the estimation-to-decision framework for contextual bandits in Foster & Rakhlin (2020), CBwK under
general realizability conditions is studied in Slivkins et al. (2023); Han et al. (2023) by assuming
access to online learning oracles. However, the work Slivkins et al. (2023) requires a large budget
                                                                                          3
assumption where B вҖң в„ҰpT q and the work Han et al. (2023) still assumes B вҖң в„ҰpT 4 q as it also
                                                                 Лҡ
utilizes the two-stage method to search the optimal value Z вҖң ОҪ {b as in Agrawal & Devanur (2016),
both of these works assume prior knowledge about the strict feasibility margin.
Contextual BwK: вҖңsmallвҖқ budget regime and strict feasibility assumption. There exist two
                                                                                                   3
recent work Kim et al. (2023); Chzhen et al. (2024) that attempt to break the barrier of B вҖң в„ҰpT 4 q,
                                             Лҡ ?                                       ?
where they achieve the regret of OМғpp1 ` ОҪb q T q under the relaxed budget B вҖң в„Ұp T q. However,
these works rely on specific assumptions: Kim et al. (2023) requires a null action (which is a more
stringent requirement), while Chzhen et al. (2024) assumes strict feasibility. Besides, Kim et al.
(2023) assumes linear rewards and costs, and Chzhen et al. (2024) presumes the safety margin is
known, allowing the learner to make conservative decisions. Although Chzhen et al. (2024) claims
that their proposed algorithm is a direct primal-dual approach (unlike the previous two-stage designs),
they still need to implement a doubling trick to search for the optimal dual variables, which shares a
similar spirit to the two-stage algorithm in Agrawal & Devanur (2016).
(Contextual) BwK: вҖңflexibleвҖқ budget regime and without hard-stopping. There exists another
line of literature where the interaction can continue even after the budget is exhausted Kumar &
Kleinberg (2022); Bernasconi et al. (2024a;b), which we call a вҖңflexibleвҖқ budget regime. Kumar &
Kleinberg (2022) consider non-monotonic or replenishable resource utilization for (non-contextual)
stochastic bandits with knapsacks, where a вҖңnull actionвҖқ is introduced to allow the budgets to be
replenished. Bernasconi et al. (2024b) extended bandits with replenishable knapsack constraints into
adversarial scenarios and achieved вҖңbest-of-both-worldsвҖқ regret guarantees. Very recently, Bernasconi
et al. (2024a) studied stochastic and adversarial bandits with general constraints, where constraint
violations are allowed and no hard stopping is imposed. They proposed weakly adaptive primal and
dual algorithms that achieve tight regret bounds in both stochastic and adversarial settings. However,
extending these results to the hard stop setting might require additional and dedicated procedures.

2   S TOCHASTIC C ONTEXTUAL BANDITS WITH K NAPSACKS
In this section, we introduce Stochastic Contextual Bandits with Knapsacks (CBwK) defined by
tX , A, r, c, Bu, where X is the context set (a countable set), A is the action set (a finite set),
r : X ЛҶ A Г‘ r0, Rs is the reward function, c : X ЛҶ A Г‘ r0, CsK are the cost functions, and


                                                  3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


B вҖң rB1 , . . . , BK s is the initial total budget vector. Without loss of generality1 , we assume the
uniform budget Bk вҖң B, @k P rKs. At the beginning of every round t P rT s, the learner observes a
context xt that is randomly generated from the context set X according to an unknown probability
distribution px . The learner takes an action at P A according to a policy defined by ПҖ : X Г‘ A, and
then observes the noisy reward, i.e., Rt pxt , at q, and the noisy costs, denoted by C t pxt , at q. Given the
initial budgets B, the interaction terminates once any type of resource is exhausted or it reaches the
end of time horizon T . Note that the context distribution, reward, and cost functions are all unknown
to the learner. We present the following assumption on them.
Assumption 1 The context tct u are i.i.d. across rounds. There exists reward function r : X ЛҶ A Г‘
r0, Rs and cost functions c : X ЛҶ A Г‘ r0, CsK satisfy that rpx, aq вҖң ErRt pxt , aq|xt вҖң xs and
cpx, aq вҖң ErC t pxt , aq|xt вҖң xs, @x P X , a P A.

Let aПҖt t be the action taken by the policy ПҖt pxt q given context xt in round t. For the given instance
txt ut drawn from a certain distribution, the learnerвҖҷs objective is to design dynamic policies that
maximize the cumulative rewards over horizon T under the knapsack constraints:
                                      T
                                      Гҝ                          T
                                                                 Гҝ
                             max           rpxt , aПҖt t q s.t.         cpxt , aПҖt t q ДҸ B.                (1)
                                     tвҖң1                         tвҖң1

Note it could be quite challenging to solve (1) because the reward, cost, and context distributions are
all unknown to the learner. The budget constraint further complicates the problem because all actions
are coupled over the time horizon, making it difficult to balance the reward acquisition and budget
consumption. To evaluate the performance of a policy, we introduce the definition of regret.
Regret: We begin with an offline problem by assuming the full knowledge of rewards, costs, and
context distribution. Define b :вҖң B{T вҖң rb, . . . , bs with b вҖң B{T , the offline problem in (1) can be
reformulated as follows
                                  Гҝ
                          max         px rpx, aqПҖpx, aq                                             (2)
                             ПҖ
                                    xPX ,aPA
                                      Гҝ
                             s.t.              px cpkq px, aqПҖpx, aq ДҸ b, @k P rKs                        (3)
                                    xPX ,aPA
                                    Гҝ
                                          ПҖpx, aq вҖң 1, ПҖpx, aq Дӣ 0, @x P X ,                              (4)
                                    aPA

where ПҖpx, aq can be viewed as the probability of taking action a on context x, and px is the
probability that context x is sampled in each round. The next lemma shows that the optimal value of
(2)вҖ“(4) serves as an upper bound on that of (1). The detailed proof can be found in Appendix A.
Lemma 1 Under Assumption 1, let ОҪ Лҡ be the optimal value of the offline problem (2)вҖ“(4) and OP T
be the expected reward of the optimal dynamic policies to the problem (1), respectively. We have
OP T ДҸ T ОҪ Лҡ .

Now we define (pseudo)-regret based on the baseline above for an algorithm as follows
                                                   В«               ff
                                                     ГҝT
                                            Лҡ
                           RegretpT q вҖң T ОҪ Вҙ E         rpxt , at q .                                     (5)
                                                                  tвҖң1

The expectation is taken w.r.t. randomness from tat ut drawn by the algorithm and the environment.
Before presenting our algorithm and analyzing the regret performance, we first introduce the modeling
and estimation of reward and cost functions.
Learning Oracles: We assume there exist online learning oracles for reward and cost func-
tions such that the corresponding estimators are either optimistic or pessimistic and the cumu-
lative estimation errors can be bounded. Specifically, given the historical feedback information
tRs pxs , as q, Cs pxs , as qutВҙ1
                              sвҖң1 at every round t, the online learning oracles will output the estimators
of reward and costs rМӮt : X ЛҶ A Г‘ r0, Rs and cМҢt : X ЛҶ A Г‘ r0, CsK that satisfy the following
assumptions.
   1
     If the initial budgets tBk u are different, we can always make them identical with the scaling factor
Bk { mink Bk for every type of resource.


                                                           4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Assumption 2 There exist online learning oracles tOur,c such that the reward and cost estimators
                 pkq
rМӮt px, aq and cМҢt px, aq satisfy the following conditions with a high probability at least 1 Вҙ p:
             #                                                                                  +
               0 ДҸ rМӮt px, aq Вҙ rpx, aq ДҸ 2Оөt px, a, pq,
        EвҖң                         pkq                                                             ,
               0 ДҸ cpkq px, aq Вҙ cМҢt px, aq ДҸ 2Оөt px, a, pq, @k P rKs, x P X , a P A, t P rT s
                                       ЕҷT                      ?
where p вҖң 1{T 2 , and U pT, pq :вҖң tвҖң1 Оөt pxt , at , pq вҖң Op T logpT {pqq.

This assumption describes the performance of learning oracles, a common condition that can be
met in contextual bandits Abbasi-yadkori et al. (2011); Filippi et al. (2010); Foster et al. (2018);
Han et al. (2023); Chzhen et al. (2024). When the reward and cost functions belong to the linear
class, the classical online least-square regression oracle satisfy Assumption 2 and Оөt px, a, pq is
simply the upper/lower confidence bound Abbasi-yadkori et al. (2011). When the reward and cost
functions belong to the generalized linear class, the online maximum-likelihood estimate oracles
satisfy Assumption 2 and Оөt px, a, pq is the generalized upper/lower confidence bound Filippi et al.
(2010). When the reward and cost functions are general and do not have a good structure, the weighted
online regression estimators still satisfy Assumption 2 and Оөt px, a, pq can be calculated efficiently
via binary search method Foster et al. (2018).

3    A DAPTIVE AND U NIVERSAL P RIMAL вҖ“D UAL A LGORITHM FOR CB W K
In this section, we introduce AUPD, an adaptive, single-stage algorithm for solving CBwK, designed
to achieve the universal regret guarantee under both the absence and presence of the SlaterвҖҷs condition
in the small budget regime. AUPD does not require any prior knowledge except the initial budgets B
and the time horizon T . The design of AUPD is motivated by the primal-dual optimization approach
Wright (1997); Bertsimas & Tsitsiklis (1997), incorporating an adaptive budget-aware design with a
new perspective from Lyapunov optimization. We utilize the virtual queues to estimate the over-used
budget consumption and carefully choose the tradeoff parameter to balance the rewards and budget
consumption. AUPD algorithm comprises the following key components:

вҖў Budget-Aware Decision-Making: At each round t, AUPD first obtains estimated reward and
  cost functions from the learning oracles tOur,c , which are used to construct optimistic/pessimistic
                                                                 Еҷ pkq pkq
  estimators rМӮt and cМҢt . The action is chosen to maximize rМӮt Вҙ k Qt cМҢt {V, inspired by вҖңReward -
                                                                                    pkq        pkq
  Lyapunov DriftвҖқ in Lyapunov optimization, where the Lyapunov drift k rpQt`1 q2 Вҙ pQt q2 s,
                                                                              Еҷ
                         Еҷ pkq pkq
  is approximated by k Qt cМҢt {V according to the virtual queues update in (7). This resembles
  the primal-dual method, where the primal modular is to maximize the approximated Lagrangian
  function                                           Гҝ
                             Lpxt , aq :вҖң rpxt , aq Вҙ О»pkq pcpkq pxt , aq Вҙ bqq,
                                                       k
                                   pkq                        pkq
  where the Lagrange multiplier О» is approximated by Qt {V , and the reward and cost functions
  are approximated by the optimistic/pessimistic
                                 ?                    estimators. The key design is the budget-aware
  trade-off parameter V вҖң b T (resembling an adaptive learning rate). It is different from the
  traditional Lyapunov optimization method where the trade-off parameter is only related to the time
  horizon T. Intuitively, when the budget is small, V is small, and it prompts more conservative
  decisions; otherwise, it prompts relatively optimistic decisions.
  Unlike the approaches in Agrawal & Devanur (2016); Han et al. (2023); Chzhen et al. (2024),
  which require the extra parameter search stage, AUPD enjoys a single-stage and direct greedy
  structure in decision-making. Besides, the primal decision module implicitly learns the context
  distribution, as the decision in (6) tends to avoid overspending the resources on contexts with low
  rewards and high costs.
вҖў Oracles Update and Budget Pacing: After observing the noisy reward Rt pxt , at q and noisy costs
  Ct pxt , at q, AUPD feeds them into learning oracles (e.g., online weighted regression oracles) to con-
  struct estimators for future rounds. The other key design in AUPD is budget pacing, where we design
                                                                                Еҷt      pkq
  the virtual queues to track the cumulative over-used budget consumption sвҖң1 pcМҢt pxt , at q Вҙ bq.
  The concept of virtual queues originates from queueing theory and is widely used in networking and
  operations research in Hajek (1982); Neely (2010); Eryilmaz & Srikant (2012). In a real queueing


                                                   5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


    system, customers arrive, receive service, and leave, with the queues capturing the carryover effect
    and representing the number of waiting customers. The real queues motivate the design of virtual
               pkq
    queues Qt in our setting, it represents the cumulative overuse of a resource, where the вҖңarrivalвҖқ
    corresponds to the current resource consumption and the вҖңserviceвҖқ corresponds to the average
    budget. When the virtual queues increase, it implies that we might have spent too many resources
    so far, and it encourages a relatively conservative decision. The virtual queues can be regarded as
    the scaled dual variables in the primal-dual design in Agrawal & Devanur (2016); Han et al. (2023);
    Chzhen et al. (2024).
    However, unlike these works, which either impose upper bounds or conservative factors in the dual
    update that require a two-stage learning process, strict feasibility assumption, or the knowledge of
    feasibility/safety margin, the virtual queues update in AUPD is again natural and direct. This is
    the key reason we do not require strict feasibility assumptions or any prior information about the
    feasibility/safety margin. Furthermore, by treating the virtual queues as Markovian processes, we
    can use Lyapunov drift analysis to establish their upper bound, which can then be translated into a
    strong lower bound on the stopping time.

Algorithm 1 Adaptive and Universal PrimalвҖ“Dual Algorithm for CBwK
                                 pkq                          ?
 1: Initialization: О» вҖң 1, Q1 вҖң 0, @k P rKs and V вҖң b T , learning oracles set tOur,c .
 2: for t вҖң 1, ВЁ ВЁ ВЁ , T, do
 3:     Parameters Estimation: Given a context xt , estimate the reward functions rМӮt pxt , aq and the
    cost function cМҢt pxt , aq from learning oracles tOur,c .
 4:     Budget-Aware Decision-Making: Take the action at such that
                                                            Гҝ pkq pkq
                                at вҖң argmax V rМӮt pxt , aq Вҙ Qt cМҢt pxt , aq.                      (6)
                                      aPA                   k

 5:    Feedback and Oracles Update: Observe noisy reward Rt pxt , at q and noisy costs Ct pxt , at q
    and feed them to tOur,c .
 6:    Budget Pacing: Update virtual queues as follows
                                  вҖқ                     Дұ`
                              pkq   pkq   pkq
                          Qt`1 вҖң Qt ` cМҢt pxt , at q Вҙ b , @k P rKs.                            (7)

 7: end for

In summary, AUPD provides a novel algorithm design template and theoretical analysis for CBwK.
The budget-aware decision-making and virtual queue-based budget-pacing are crucial in developing
a fully adaptive algorithm to achieve a strong regret performance in the small budget regime.

4     M AIN R ESULTS
In this section, we analyze the regret performance for AUPD in Algorithm 1. We begin by stating the
strict feasibility assumption for the performance analysis.
Assumption 3 There exists  Еҷ a constant Оҙ P p0, 1s such that a feasible solution ПҖ to the optimization
problem (2)вҖ“(4) satisfies xPX ,aPA px cpkq px, aqПҖpx, aq ДҸ bp1 Вҙ Оҙq, @k P rKs.

The term Оҙb plays a similar role with the SlaterвҖҷs constant in optimization. However, the term Оҙb
differs from the traditional SlaterвҖҷs constant because the definition b вҖң B{T implies it is both budget
and time horizon related. Note that the existence of null action is a special case of this assumption
with Оҙ вҖң 1. This assumption has been used in the literature of BwK Agrawal & Devanur (2014;
2016); Badanidiyuru et al. (2014; 2018); Chzhen et al. (2024).
Now, we are ready to present the theoretical results of our algorithm, which are given in an order-wise
sense. The detailed proof and parameters are in the appendix.
Theorem 1 Under? Assumptions 1 and 2, AUPD achieves the following regret in the small budget
regime B вҖң в„Ұp T q that
                                                  ЛҶ                  Лҷ
                                                     ?       ОҪЛҡ 3
                                 RegretpT q вҖң OМғ       T`? T       4   .
                                                               b

                                                    6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


When the additional strict feasibility assumption in Assumption 3 holds, AUPD achieves the following
regret in the small budget regime
                                                    ЛҶ             Лҷ
                                                          ОҪЛҡ ?
                                    RegretpT q вҖң OМғ p1 `      q T .
                                                           Оҙb
                                                                                            Лҡ ?
Remark
   Вҙ? 1 When the          strict feasibility assumption holds, AUPD achieves OМғpp1 ` ОҪОҙb q T q вҖң
                      1
                          ВҜ                                                   ?
OМғ     T ` 1Оҙ T ОҪ Лҡ T 2 ВҙОұ regret in the small budget regime B вҖң T Оұ вҖң в„Ұp T q under the general
realizability assumption of reward and cost functions. The parameter ОҪ Лҡ {Оҙb in the regret captures the
effect of knapsack constraints, where it could be large when the safety margin Оҙb is small, indicating
the challenge of distinguishing the budget consumption among context-action pairs. The typical and
practical setting would have T ОҪ Лҡ вҖң ОҳpT Оұ q (i.e., T ОҪ Лҡ вҖң ОҳpBq) because it represents вҖңone unit of
reward
   ? earned by consuming one unit of costвҖқ. In this setting, we can get the classical and optimal
OМғp T q regret. This result matches the regret guarantee in Han et al. (2023); Chzhen et al. (2024).
Unlike these works, AUPD does not require the doubling trick or other parameter search stages, thus
providing a more direct and adaptive structure.
When the strict feasibility assumption does not necessary           to hold, AUPD     achieves a worst-case
                               ?       ОҪ Лҡ 34
                                                       Вҙ?
                                                                      Лҡ 14 Вҙ Оұ
                                                                               ВҜ
theoretical guarantee of OМғp T ` ?       b
                                           T  q вҖң  OМғ     T   `   T ОҪ  T     2   in the small budget regime,
which, to be the best of our knowledge, is the first result for CBwK without strict feasibility assumption
                                                             ОҪ Лҡ 34
even when B вҖң в„ҰpT q. Intuitively, the additional term ?        b
                                                                 T is due to the вҖңhardвҖқ problem instance.
          Лҡ          Оұ
When T ОҪ вҖң ОҳpT q вҖң ОҳpBq, i.e., one unit of reward for each           ? unit of cost, AUPD achieves the
            3
regret OМғpT 4 q performance, instead of the classical regret OМғp T q. This might imply that the CBwK
instance, without a strict feasibility assumption, is indeed challenging.
Finally, it is worth emphasizing that all these results are achieved with a single AUPD algorithm,
without any tailored adjustment or any prior knowledge of the problem instance. This demonstrates
that AUPD is quite adaptive and universal for CBwK.
                                                       ?
Remark 2 The classical lower bound for CBwK is в„Ұp T q in Agrawal & Devanur (2016) derived by
reducing the constrained contextual bandits into unconstrained ones. However, this lower bound did
not capture the effect of knapsack constraints. To our knowledge, the most relevant lower bound for
CBwK is from Chzhen et al. (2024). With the assumption of strict feasibility,
                                                                   ?          Section E in Chzhen? et al.
(2024) provides a problem-dependent lower bound of в„Ұpp1 ` ОҪ Лҡ {bq T q for CBwK with B вҖң в„Ұp T q.
Therefore, our regret bound is tight when the assumption of strict feasibility holds. However, no
existing lower bounds are reported without the assumption of strict feasibility, which is an interesting
direction for future work.

To establish these strong results, we need to carefully analyze the budget consumption processes. The
key is to identify when the interaction terminates/stops and how much cumulative rewards AUPD
gains during the process. When the strict feasibility assumption holds, we provide a new perspective
on the stopping time (i.e., the first time when any type of resource budget is exhausted) and a refined
analysis of the cumulative variance of budget consumption. Our analysis treats the virtual queue
update as a Markovian process and leverages the Lyapunov-drift analysis to establish the expected
upper bound on the virtual queues (i.e., the over-consumed budgets), which is translated to be the
lower bound of the stopping time. Without the strict feasibility assumption, we directly establish
the upper bound of the virtual queues. These bounds will be used to establish the regret bounds in
Theorem 1, as we detailed in the next section.

5    T HEORETICAL A NALYSIS
In this section, we provide a detailed proof of Theorem 1. To state these results, we first decompose
the regret defined in (5) according to the stopping time П„ . The stopping time is defined as the first
time when one of the resource budgets is exhausted
                                                   П„1
                                        #                              +
                                                   Гҝ
                                           1           pkq
                            П„ вҖң argmin П„ | Dk,        c pxt , at q Дӣ B .                           (8)
                                  П„ 1 PrT s          tвҖң1



                                                     7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


5.1   R EGRET D ECOMPOSITION

Let ПҖ Лҡ be the optimal solution to the baseline problem (2)вҖ“(4) and aЛҡt be the optimal actions sampling
from it, i.e., aЛҡt вҖһ ПҖ Лҡ . We decompose the regret as follows
                                     В«                                ff
                                       ГҝT                T
                                                         Гҝ
                     RegretpT q ДҸ E       rpxt , aЛҡt q Вҙ   rpxt , at q                               (9)
                                       tвҖң1                tвҖң1
                                                          В«                                     ff
                                                              П„
                                                              Гҝ
                                      Лҡ
                                ДҸ ОҪlooooomooooon
                                      ErT Вҙ П„ s ` E               rpxt , aЛҡt q Вҙ rpxt , at q
                                                           tвҖң1
                                 Regret after stopping looooooooooooooooomooooooooooooooooon
                                                           Regret before stopping: RegretpП„ q

The decomposition includes two parts: вҖңregret after stoppingвҖқ and вҖңregret before stoppingвҖқ. The
former one is simply bounded by the remaining rounds ЛҶ the optimal value ОҪ Лҡ ; the latter one denoted
by ErRegretpП„ qs is the difference between our policy and the optimal one.
Regret via Lyapunov Drift Analysis: As discussed, we provide a new perspective on analyzing the
regret via Lyapunov drift analysis, which can be used to bound both вҖңregret before stoppingвҖқ and
вҖңregret after stoppingвҖқ. We view tQt u as a stochastic/Markovian process and study its connection
                                             pkq
with regret. Let Lt вҖң }Qt }22 {2 вҖң k pQt q2 {2 be the Lyapunov function and вҲҶt вҖң Lt`1 Вҙ Lt be
                                        Еҷ
its drift. Further let EHt rВЁs вҖң ErВЁ|Ht s, where Ht вҖң rxt , rМӮt , cМҢt , Qt s We establish the following key
lemma that bridges the one-step regret and Lyapunov drift. The detailed proof is in Appendix B.1.
Lemma 2 Under Assumptions 1 and 2, AUPD in Algorithm 1 establishes that for any feasible policy
ПҖ to (2)вҖ“(4) with a вҖһ ПҖ that
              В«                                                         ff
                                  вҲҶt       1 Гҝ pkq pkq
         EHt Regretpxt , aq `           Вҙ       Q pc pxt , aq Вҙ bq
                                   V       V k
               В«                                                                                    ff
                 2                          1 Гҝ Вҙ pkq                ВҜ2 Гҝ 2Qpkq p1 ` bq P pE c q
       ДҸ EHt         ` 2Оөt pxt , at , pq `        cМҢt pxt , at q Вҙ b `                                 ,
                 T2                        2V k                              k
                                                                                     V        P pEq
where Regretpxt , aq вҖң rpxt , aq Вҙ rpxt , at q and the event E is defined in Assumption 2.

This Lemma is the key lemma that establishes the bound of вҖңone-step regret + Lyapunov driftвҖқ.
It bridges the analysis to bound both "regret before/after stopping" as we will demonstrate in the
following. Note that the lemma holds without strict feasibility assumption in Assumption 3.

5.2   R EGRET B EFORE S TOPPING

Letting a вҖң aЛҡt вҖһ ПҖ Лҡ in Lemma 2 and ignoring the low probability event E c , then the inequality
suggests that вҖңone-step
                     Еҷ regret + Lyapunov driftвҖқ is upper bounded by three related terms: the optimal
budget consumption k pcpkq pxt , aЛҡt q Вҙ bq, the single-step estimation error Оөt pxt , at , pq, the estimated
                        Еҷ pkq
consumption resource k pcМҢt pxt , at q Вҙ bq2 . Bounding вҖңregret before stoppingвҖқ E rRegretpП„ qs
requires establishing their cumulative counterparts: the expected optimal budget consumption is
always negative according to the definition; the cumulative estimation error is bounded by Assumption
2; the estimated consumption resource is the most important part and we provide a refined analysis
that bound this term by OppT b ` T b2 q{V q, which is one of the key components in proving the strong
results in Theorem 1. The result of вҖңregret before stoppingвҖқ is summarized in the following lemma
and the detailed proof is in Appendix B.2.
Lemma 3 Under Assumptions 1 and 2, the budget-aware optimistic exploration algorithm in Algo-
rithm 1 achieves
                                                               KpT b ` T b2 q
                                             ЛҶ                                Лҷ
                                               ?
                        E rRegretpП„ qs вҖң O       T logpT q `                     .
                                                                     V

5.3   R EGRET A FTER S TOPPING

In the regret decomposition, the вҖңregret after stoppingвҖқ is bounded by ОҪ Лҡ ErT Вҙ П„ s. To minimize this
regret, it is crucial to establish a вҖңlargeвҖқ lower bound on the stopping time П„ , ideally depleting the


                                                      8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


budget only when it is very close to T . To (lower) bound the stopping time П„, we need to analyze the
behavior of the virtual queue because it captures the over-consumed budget against the average usage
b for the round t.
                                                pkq                    pkq       pkq                  pkq
Recall we have the virtual queue update Qt`1 вҖң maxpQt ` cМҢt pxt , at q Вҙ b, 0q. Let MП„ вҖң
ЕҷП„      pkq                pkq
 tвҖң1 pc     pxt , at q Вҙ cМҢt pct , at qq, then for certain budget k 1 that is first to be exhausted, we have
                                                              П„
                                  pk1 q               1                1
                                                              Гҝ
                                QП„ `1 ` bП„ ` MП„pk q Дӣ               cpk q pxt , at q.                   (10)
                                                              tвҖң1

From learning oracle errors in Assumption 2, we already have a high probability upper bound
       pkq
for MП„ , @k P rKs, then we can consequently define a virtual stopping time such that П„0 вҖң
                        pk1 q              ?
argminП„ 1 PrT s tП„ 1 | QП„ 1 `1 ` bП„ 1 ` OМғp П„ q Дӣ Bu, where k 1 denotes the resource that was first depleted.
The virtual stopping time is the first time when the upper bound of budget consumption in (10) is
                                                                  pk1 q
greater than B. The inequality (10) indicates that the value Qt`1 reflects how soon the algorithm will
deplete the resource. Combined with the definition of the stopping time in (8), we immediately have
that the true stopping time is lower bounded by the virtual stopping time, i.e., П„ Дӣ П„0 . Now we only
need to establish the lower bound on П„0 , and the key is to prove an upper bound for the virtual queue
length at the stopping time, which can be provided through Lyapunov drift analysis.
Lyapunov drift analysis for establishing П„0 : As discussed, we view tQt u as a stochastic/Markovian
process and study its convergence or upper bound via Lyapunov analysis. When the strict feasibility
assumption in Assumption 3 holds, from Lemma 2, we establish a вҖңnegative driftвҖқ of the Lyapunov
drift function, implying a вҖңsmallвҖқ expected upper bound of the virtual queues in the following lemma.
Without Assumption 3, we establish a slightly worse upper bound.
                                                      ?
Lemma 4 Under Assumptions 1 and 2, when B вҖң в„Ұp T q, AUPD in Algorithm 1 achieves that
                                 В«        ff
                                   Гҝ pkq          ?
                               E      Qt     вҖң Op KV T q, @t P rT s,
                                      k

with the additional Assumption 3, AUPD guarantees that
                              В«       ff
                                Гҝ pkq        ?
                            E      Qt    вҖң Op KV {Оҙbq, @t P rT s.                                       (11)
                                     k


The above lemma demonstrates that the virtual queues are вҖңstableвҖқ and relatively вҖңsmallвҖқ, indicating
that our algorithm utilizes the resources effectively and does not terminate early. Intuitively, the
underlying reasons behind virtual queues staying within a вҖңsmallвҖқ region because, upon detecting
over-consumption (the virtual queues increases), the algorithm would make conservative decisions to
reduce the queue length. Now, we are ready to establish the expected upper bound on the remaining
rounds in the following lemma, which is the key to establishing the regret performance.
Lemma?   5 Under Assumptions 1 and 2, the expected remaining round in the small budget regime
B вҖң в„Ұp T q under AUPD in Algorithm 1 satisfies that
                                              Вҙ?             ?    ВҜ
                               ErT Вҙ П„ s вҖң OМғ     KV T {b ` T {b ,

with the additional Assumption 3, the expected remaining round under AUPD satisfies that
                                             Вҙ?            ?     ВҜ
                             ErT Вҙ П„ s вҖң OМғ      KV {Оҙb2 ` T {b .

Proving Theorem 1: Lemma 3 demonstrates that the algorithmвҖҷs performance approaches the optimal
policy before stopping, while Lemma 5 ensures that the algorithm would not exhaust resources and
terminate prematurely. Combine them into (9), we immediately have the regret bound for two cases.
Specifically, for the worst-case without any feasibility assumptions, we have
              RegretpT q ДҸ ОҪ Лҡ ErT Вҙ П„ s ` ErRegretpП„ qs
                              Вҙ?              ?          ?                    ВҜ
                         вҖң OМғ    KV T ОҪ Лҡ {b ` T ОҪ Лҡ {b ` T ` KpT b ` T b2 q{V .


                                                          9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


With the strict feasibility assumption in Assumption 3, we have
             RegretpT q ДҸ ОҪ Лҡ ErT Вҙ П„ s ` ErRegretpП„ qs
                             Вҙ?               ?         ?                    ВҜ
                        вҖң OМғ    KV ОҪ Лҡ {Оҙb2 ` T ОҪ Лҡ {b ` T ` KpT b ` T b2 q{V .
         ?
Let V вҖң b T and we prove Theorem 1.

6    E XPERIMENTS
In this section, we validate our algorithm through numerical experiments using the large-scale learning-
to-rank dataset Qin & Liu (2013) in the small budget regime. We compare our algorithm AUPD with
                                                                                          3
SquareCBwK Han et al. (2023), an oracleвҖ“based primalвҖ“dual algorithm under B вҖң в„ҰpT 4 q, and PGD
Adaptive Chzhen et al. (2024), a primalвҖ“dual algorithm with doubling? trick for learning the optimal
stepsize that claims to achieve optimal performance under B вҖң в„Ұp T q. The large-scale learning-to-
rank dataset MSLR-WEB30k Qin & Liu (2013) contains 31, 278 queries. Each query includes various
document-query contexts, each with a dimensionality of 136, and there are 20 documents/arms. The
reward function rpx, aq is defined as the relevance of each document-context pair as collected in
the dataset. We construct the expected cost of each arm cpx, aq by uniformly drawing from the
interval r0, 5s, and these values remain fixed throughout each trial. The observations are corrupted
with Gaussian noise N p0, 0.05q. All the algorithms utilize gradient-boosted tree regression as the
learning oracle for the reward function and the empirical mean for the cost function. We set the
time?horizon T вҖң 5000 and vary the budgets B вҖң t100, 600, 1000u to represent the budget regime
                  3
tОҳp T q, ОҳpT 4 q, ОҳpT qu, respectively. The interaction terminates once the budget is exhausted,
incurring zero reward and cost for the remaining rounds. The further details on the experiments and
hyperparameters can be found in Appendix D. Our experimental results are shown in Figure 1. These
results are obtained by averaging over 50 trials and are reported with a 95% confidence interval.


                     ?                                      3
    (a) Budget B вҖң Оҳp T q.              (b) Budget B вҖң ОҳpT 4 q.            (c) Budget B вҖң ОҳpT q.

                       Figure 1: Experiments under different budget regimes.


From Figure 1, we observe our algorithm AUPD achieves the best performance compared to
SquareCBwK and PGD Adaptive under various budget regimes. Especially when the budget is
relatively small, as shown in Figures 1a, AUPD outperforms the baselines by a large margin. This
justifies that the joint design of budget-aware decision-making and virtual queue-based budget pacing
is very adaptive and effective to balance the reward and budget consumption.

7    C ONCLUSIONS
In this paper, we studied stochastic contextual bandits with knapsack constraints under the small
budget regime. We introduced an Adaptive and Universal PrimalвҖ“Dual Algorithm and provided a
new perspective of Lyapunov
                       ?      drift analysis to establish strong theoretical guarantees under the small
budget regime B вҖң в„Ұp T q: AUPD achieves the best well-known regret under the strict feasibility
assumption; AUPD achieves the first regret result without the strict feasibility assumption. The
experiments further confirmed our theoretical results.


                                                  10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
The work was partly supported by the National Nature Science Foundation of China under grant
62302305 and Shanghai Sailing Program 22YF1428500.

R EFERENCES
Yasin Abbasi-yadkori, DГЎvid PГЎl, and Csaba SzepesvГЎri. Improved algorithms for linear stochastic
  bandits. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 24, 2011.
Naoki Abe and Philip M. Long. Associative reinforcement learning using linear probabilistic concepts.
  In Int. Conf. Machine Learning (ICML), 1999.
Shipra Agrawal and Nikhil Devanur. Linear contextual bandits with knapsacks. In Advances Neural
  Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS), 2016.
Shipra Agrawal and Nikhil R. Devanur. Bandits with concave rewards and convex knapsacks. In
  Proceedings of the Fifteenth ACM Conference on Economics and Computation. Association for
  Computing Machinery, 2014.
Shipra Agrawal and Nikhil R Devanur. Bandits with global convex constraints and objective.
  Operations Research, 67(5):1486вҖ“1502, 2019.
Shipra Agrawal, Nikhil R. Devanur, and Lihong Li. An efficient algorithm for contextual bandits with
  knapsacks, and an extension to concave objectives. In Proc. Conf. Learning Theory (COLT), 2016.
Ashwinkumar Badanidiyuru, John Langford, and Aleksandrs Slivkins. Resourceful contextual bandits.
  In Proc. Conf. Learning Theory (COLT), 2014.
Ashwinkumar Badanidiyuru, Robert Kleinberg, and Aleksandrs Slivkins. Bandits with knapsacks. J.
  ACM, 2018.
Avinash Balakrishnan, Djallel Bouneffouf, Nicholas Mattei, and Francesca Rossi. Using contextual
  bandits with behavioral constraints for constrained online movie recommendation. In Proceedings
  of the 27th International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence, pp. 5802вҖ“5804, 2018.
Martino Bernasconi, Matteo Castiglioni, and Andrea Celli. No-regret is not enough! bandits with
 general constraints through adaptive regret minimization. arXiv preprint arXiv:2405.06575, 2024a.
Martino Bernasconi, Matteo Castiglioni, Andrea Celli, and Federico Fusco. Bandits with replenish-
 able knapsacks: the best of both worlds. In The Twelfth International Conference on Learning
 Representations, 2024b.
Dimitris Bertsimas and John N Tsitsiklis. Introduction to linear optimization, volume 6. Athena
  Scientific Belmont, MA, 1997.
Evgenii Chzhen, Christophe Giraud, Zhen Li, and Gilles Stoltz. Small total-cost constraints in
  contextual bandits with knapsacks, with application to fairness. Advances in Neural Information
  Processing Systems, 36, 2024.
Nikhil R Devanur, Kamal Jain, Balasubramanian Sivan, and Christopher A Wilkens. Near opti-
  mal online algorithms and fast approximation algorithms for resource allocation problems. In
  Proceedings of the 12th ACM conference on Electronic commerce, pp. 29вҖ“38, 2011.
Atilla Eryilmaz and R. Srikant. Asymptotically tight steady-state queue length bounds implied by
  drift conditions. Queueing Syst., 72(3-4):311вҖ“359, December 2012.
Yiding Feng, Brendan Lucier, and Aleksandrs Slivkins. Strategic budget selection in a competitive
  autobidding world. In Proceedings of the 56th Annual ACM Symposium on Theory of Computing,
  pp. 213вҖ“224, 2024.
Sarah Filippi, Olivier Cappe, AurГ©lien Garivier, and Csaba SzepesvГЎri. Parametric bandits: The
  generalized linear case. In J. Lafferty, C. Williams, J. Shawe-Taylor, R. Zemel, and A. Culotta
  (eds.), Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2010.


                                                11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Dylan Foster and Alexander Rakhlin. Beyond ucb: Optimal and efficient contextual bandits with
  regression oracles. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 3199вҖ“3210. PMLR,
  2020.
Dylan Foster, Alekh Agarwal, Miroslav DudГӯk, Haipeng Luo, and Robert Schapire. Practical
  contextual bandits with regression oracles. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp.
 1539вҖ“1548. PMLR, 2018.
Jason Gaitonde, Yingkai Li, Bar Light, Brendan Lucier, and Aleksandrs Slivkins. Budget pacing in
  repeated auctions: Regret and efficiency without convergence. arXiv preprint arXiv:2205.08674,
  2022.
Aditya Gangrade, Tianrui Chen, and Venkatesh Saligrama. Safe linear bandits over unknown
  polytopes. In The Thirty Seventh Annual Conference on Learning Theory, pp. 1755вҖ“1795. PMLR,
  2024.
Hengquan Guo and Xin Liu. Stochastic constrained contextual bandits via lyapunov optimization
  based estimation to decision framework. In The Thirty Seventh Annual Conference on Learning
 Theory, pp. 2204вҖ“2231. PMLR, 2024.
B. Hajek. Hitting-time and occupation-time bounds implied by drift analysis with applications. Ann.
  Appl. Prob., pp. 502вҖ“525, 1982.
Yuxuan Han, Jialin Zeng, Yang Wang, Yang Xiang, and Jiheng Zhang. Optimal contextual bandits
  with knapsacks under realizability via regression oracles. In International Conference on Artificial
  Intelligence and Statistics, pp. 5011вҖ“5035. PMLR, 2023.
Nicole Immorlica, Karthik Sankararaman, Robert Schapire, and Aleksandrs Slivkins. Adversarial
  bandits with knapsacks. Journal of the ACM, 69(6):1вҖ“47, 2022.
Wonyoung Kim, Garud Iyengar, and Assaf Zeevi. Improved algorithms for multi-period multi-class
 packing problems with bandit feedback. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp.
 16458вҖ“16501. PMLR, 2023.
Raunak Kumar and Robert Kleinberg. Non-monotonic resource utilization in the bandits with
  knapsacks problem. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 35:19248вҖ“19259, 2022.
Jiung Lee, Hongseok Namkoong, and Yibo Zeng. Design and scheduling of an ai-based queueing
   system. arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.06855, 2024.
Zhen Li and Gilles Stoltz. Contextual bandits with knapsacks for a conversion model. Advances in
  Neural Information Processing Systems, 35:35590вҖ“35602, 2022.
Xin Liu, Bin Li, Pengyi Shi, and Lei Ying. An efficient pessimistic-optimistic algorithm for stochastic
  linear bandits with general constraints. In Advances Neural Information Processing Systems
  (NeurIPS), 2021.
Brendan Lucier, Sarath Pattathil, Aleksandrs Slivkins, and Mengxiao Zhang. Autobidders with
  budget and roi constraints: Efficiency, regret, and pacing dynamics. In The Thirty Seventh Annual
  Conference on Learning Theory, pp. 3642вҖ“3643. PMLR, 2024.
Thodoris Lykouris and Wentao Weng. Learning to defer in content moderation: The human-ai
  interplay. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.12237, 2024.
M. J. Neely. Energy-aware wireless scheduling with near-optimal backlog and convergence time
 tradeoffs. IEEE/ACM Transactions on Networking, 24(4):2223вҖ“2236, 2016.
M. J. Neely. Stochastic network optimization with application to communication and queueing
 systems. Springer Nature, 2022.
Michael J. Neely. Stochastic network optimization with application to communication and queueing
 systems. Synthesis Lectures on Communication Networks, 3(1):1вҖ“211, 2010.
Tao Qin and Tie-Yan Liu. Introducing letor 4.0 datasets. arXiv preprint arXiv:1306.2597, 2013.


                                                  12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Karthik Abinav Sankararaman and Aleksandrs Slivkins. Combinatorial semi-bandits with knapsacks.
  In International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics, pp. 1760вҖ“1770. PMLR, 2018.
Karthik Abinav Sankararaman and Aleksandrs Slivkins. Bandits with knapsacks beyond the worst
  case. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 34:23191вҖ“23204, 2021.
Aleksandrs Slivkins, Karthik Abinav Sankararaman, and Dylan J Foster. Contextual bandits with
  packing and covering constraints: A modular lagrangian approach via regression. In The Thirty
  Sixth Annual Conference on Learning Theory, pp. 4633вҖ“4656. PMLR, 2023.
Ambuj Tewari and Susan A Murphy. From ads to interventions: Contextual bandits in mobile health.
 Mobile health: sensors, analytic methods, and applications, pp. 495вҖ“517, 2017.
Sabina Tomkins, Peng Liao, Predrag Klasnja, and Susan Murphy. Intelligentpooling: Practical
  thompson sampling for mhealth. Machine learning, 110(9):2685вҖ“2727, 2021.
Stephen J Wright. Primal-dual interior-point methods. Society for Industrial and Applied Mathemat-
  ics, 1997.
Mengyue Yang, Qingyang Li, Zhiwei Qin, and Jieping Ye. Hierarchical adaptive contextual bandits
  for resource constraint based recommendation. In Proceedings of the web conference 2020, pp.
  292вҖ“302, 2020.
                                                                    ?
Hao Yu and Michael J. Neely. A low complexity algorithm with Op T q regret and Op1q constraint
  violations for online convex optimization with long term constraints. Journal of Machine Learning
  Research, 21(1):1вҖ“24, 2020.


                                               13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A     P ROOF OF L EMMA 1
The proof is similar to that in Devanur et al. (2011). Recall the problem in (1) and let ПҖМӮtЛҡ be the
adaptive optimal solution:
                                                        T
                                                        Гҝ
                                              max             rpxt , aПҖt t q
                                                        tвҖң1
                                                        T
                                                        Гҝ
                                      subject to:             cpxt , aПҖt t q ДҸ B
                                                        tвҖң1


Recall the context xt is i.i.d. across rounds and rpx, aq and cpx, aq are the expected functions given
x. We have
          В«                            ff       В« В«                               ffff
            T Гҝ
            Гҝ                              T
                                           Гҝ         Гҝ
        E          rpxt , aqПҖt pxt , aq вҖң     E E       rpxt , aqПҖt pxt , aq|HtВҙ1
             tвҖң1 a                            tвҖң1                 a
                                                        В«                                                      ff
                                              T
                                              Гҝ          ГҝГҝ
                                          вҖң         E                 px rpx, aqE r ПҖt px, aq| xt вҖң x, HtВҙ1 s
                                              tвҖң1        x        a
                                                  В«                                                            ff
                                                   ГҝГҝ                          T
                                                                               Гҝ
                                          вҖңE                  px rpx, aq           E r ПҖt px, aq| xt вҖң x, HtВҙ1 s
                                                    x    a                   tвҖң1
                                              ГҝГҝ                         T
                                                                         Гҝ
                                          вҖң             px rpx, aq             E r ПҖt px, aq| xt вҖң xs
                                              x     a                   tвҖң1

Similarly, we have
      В«                             ff
        ГҝT Гҝ                           ГҝГҝ                T
                                                         Гҝ
                pkq
    E          c pxt , aqПҖt pxt , aq вҖң    px cpkq px, aq   E r ПҖt px, aq| xt вҖң xs , @k P rKs.
         tвҖң1 a                                x     a                       tвҖң1

                        ЕҷT
Define ПҖМӮ Лҡ px, aq вҖң T1 tвҖң1 E r ПҖМӮtЛҡ px, aq| xt вҖң xs , where ПҖМӮTЛҡ is a feasible solution to (2)вҖ“(4) because
  Лҡ
ПҖМӮ is a feasible solution to (1). Therefore, we have
                        В«                             ff
                          T Гҝ
                          Гҝ                                ГҝГҝ
                                            Лҡ
                      E          rpxt , aqПҖМӮt pxt , aq вҖң T         px rpx, aqПҖМӮ Лҡ px, aq
                          tвҖң1 a                                         x   a
                                                              ДҸ T ОҪЛҡ.

B     R EGRET A NALYSIS
For the sake of simplicity, we initially let the reward and cost upper bounds R вҖң C вҖң 1 in Assumption
1 before delving into detailed proofs.

B.1    P ROOF OF L EMMA 2

In Algorithm 1, the action at is the optimal solution such that for any a P A,
                            1 Гҝ pkq pkq                            1 Гҝ pkq pkq
             rМӮt pxt , aq Вҙ     Qt cМҢt pxt , aq ДҸ rМӮt pxt , at q Вҙ     Q cМҢ pxt , at q.
                            V k                                    V k t t

Add Regretpxt , aq вҖң rpxt , aq Вҙ rpxt , at q on both sides and rearrange these terms, we have
      Regretpxt , aq                                                                                       (12)
                                                                   1 Гҝ pkq Вҙ pkq             pkq
                                                                                                         ВҜ
    ДҸprpxt , aq Вҙ rМӮt pxt , aqq ` prМӮt pxt , at q Вҙ rpxt , at qq `    Q     cМҢt pxt , aq Вҙ cМҢt pxt , at q .
                                                                   V k t


                                                             14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


According to the virtual queue update
                                       Вҙ                          ВҜ
                              pkq        pkq   pkq
                             Qt`1 вҖң max Qt ` cМҢt pxt , at q Вҙ b, 0 , @k.

The following inequality holds for the Lyapunov drift that
        1 Гҝ Вҙ pkq ВҜ2 1 Гҝ Вҙ pkq ВҜ2 1 Гҝ             pkq      pkq             pkq
вҲҶt :вҖң        Qt`1 Вҙ             Qt      ДҸ     p2Qt ` cМҢt pxt , at q Вҙ bqpcМҢt pxt , at q Вҙ bq
        2 k              2 k              2 k
                                          Гҝ pkq Вҙ pkq                 ВҜ Гҝ1Вҙ                      ВҜ2
                                                                                 pkq
                                        вҖң Qt        cМҢt pxt , at q Вҙ b `       cМҢt pxt , at q Вҙ b .
                                           k                             k
                                                                           2

Combine this inequality with (12), we can establish the following key bound on the вҖңRegret +
Lyapunov driftвҖқ:
                        вҲҶt
     Regretpxt , aq `      ДҸprpxt , aq Вҙ rМӮt pxt , aqq ` prМӮt pxt , at q Вҙ rpxt , at qq
                        V
                               1 Гҝ pkq Вҙ pkq                     ВҜ        1 Гҝ Вҙ pkq                 ВҜ2
                             `         Qt      cМҢt pxt , aq Вҙ b `                 cМҢt pxt , at q Вҙ b .       (13)
                               V k                                       2V k

To proceed, we recall the following event defined in Assumption 2, which holds with a probability of
at least 1 Вҙ p:
            #                                                                                +
              0 ДҸ rМӮt px, aq Вҙ rpx, aq ДҸ 2Оөt px, a, pq,
       EвҖң                         pkq                                                          .
              0 ДҸ cpkq px, aq Вҙ cМҢt px, aq ДҸ 2Оөt px, a, pq, @k P rKs, x P X , a P A, t P rT s

Recall p вҖң 1{T 2 , now taking the conditional expectation Er ВЁ |Ht вҖң hs on (13), where h вҖң
rx, fЛҶ, cМҢ, Qs, we obtain that
                                                  вҖһ               И·
                                                    вҲҶt
             E rRegretpxt , aq|Ht вҖң hs ` E               |Ht вҖң h
                                                    V
            ДҸE rprpxt , aq Вҙ rМӮt pxt , aqq ` prМӮt pxt , at q Вҙ rpxt , at qq|Ht вҖң h, E c s ` 2Оөt pxt , at , pq
                  В«                                                                                   ff
                    1 Гҝ pkq Вҙ pkq                      ВҜ      1 Гҝ Вҙ pkq                  ВҜ2
              `E           Q       cМҢt pxt , aq Вҙ b `                  cМҢt pxt , at q Вҙ b |Ht вҖң h
                    V k t                                    2V k
                                           В«                                            ff
              2                               1 Гҝ Вҙ pkq                    ВҜ2
            ДҸ 2 ` 2Оөt pxt , at , pq ` E                 cМҢt pxt , at q Вҙ b |Ht вҖң h
             T                               2V k
                  В«                                                ff
                    1 Гҝ pkq Вҙ pkq                      ВҜ
              `E           Q       cМҢt pxt , aq Вҙ b |Ht вҖң h
                    V k t
                                           В«                                            ff
              2                               1 Гҝ Вҙ pkq                    ВҜ2
            ДҸ 2 ` 2Оөt pxt , at , pq ` E                 cМҢt pxt , at q Вҙ b |Ht вҖң h
             T                               2V k
                 1 Гҝ pkq вҖқ pkq                                        Дұ Гҝ Qpkq p1 ` bq
              `        Q E pc pxt , aq Вҙ bq | Ht вҖң h, E `                                    P pE c q
                 V k                                                        k
                                                                                     V
                                           В«                                            ff
              2                               1 Гҝ pkq Вҙ                    ВҜ  2
            ДҸ 2 ` 2Оөt pxt , at , pq ` E                 cМҢt pxt , at q Вҙ b |Ht вҖң h
             T                               2V k
                 1 Гҝ pkq вҖқ pkq                                  Дұ Гҝ 2Qpkq p1 ` bq P pE c q
              `        Q E pc pxt , aq Вҙ bq|Ht вҖң h `                                              ,           (14)
                 V k                                                   k
                                                                                V          P pEq

where the second and third inequalities hold because of the definition of event E. The last inequality
holds because the context is independent of Ht and the distribution of xt does not change conditioned
on Ht . Therefore, we have
                                  P pxt вҖң x|Ht вҖң h, Eq вҖң P pxt вҖң x|Eq .


                                                       15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Then we calculate that
                                                    Ppxt вҖң x, Eq Вҙ P pxt вҖң xq P pEq
                        P pxt вҖң x|Eq Вҙ P pxt вҖң xq вҖң
                                                                 PpEq
                                                    P pxt вҖң xq pPpE|xt вҖң xq Вҙ P pEqq
                                                  вҖң
                                                                  PpEq
                                                               1 Вҙ P pEq
                                                  ДҸP pxt вҖң xq            ,
                                                                 P pEq
which implies that
         Гҝ         вҖқ                             Дұ Гҝ      вҖқ                          Дұ
             Qpkq E pcpkq pxt , aq Вҙ bq|Ht вҖң h, E Вҙ Qpkq E pcpkq pxt , aq Вҙ bq|Ht вҖң h
                k                                                k
              Гҝ
                    pkq           1 Вҙ P pEq Гҝ pkq        P pE c q
          ДҸ         Q     p1 ` bq          вҖң   Q p1 ` bq          .
                k
                                    P pEq    k
                                                         P pEq

B.2    P ROOF OF L EMMA 3

Since the action a could be any action in A, we can let a вҖң aЛҡt вҖһ ПҖ Лҡ in (14) to obtain:
                                     вҖһ               И·
                     Лҡ                 вҲҶt
     E rRegretpxt , at q|Ht вҖң hs ` E        |Ht вҖң h
                                        V
                               В«                                    ff
      2                           1 Гҝ Вҙ pkq                ВҜ2            Гҝ 2Qpkq p1 ` bq P pE c q
   ДҸ 2 ` 2Оөt pxt , at , pq ` E           cМҢt pxt , at q Вҙ b |Ht вҖң h `
     T                           2V k                                     k
                                                                                   V     P pEq
                                                                                                (15)
where
  вҖң pkqthe inequality       holds вҖ°because the action aЛҡt satisfies the constraint in (3) such that
              Лҡ
E pc pxt , at q Вҙ bq|Ht вҖң h ДҸ 0. We further take the expectation on both sides of the inequality
and then take summation from t вҖң 1 to П„ that
    В«                       ff     В«                               ff
      П„                             Гҝ pQpkq      2    Гҝ pQpkq q2
      Гҝ                                    П„ `1 q             1
  E      Regretpxt , aЛҡt q ` E                     Вҙ
     tвҖң1                              k
                                           2V          k
                                                             2V
                                   В«                                    ff    В«                             ff
           П„                           П„                                        П„ Гҝ
  2П„       Гҝ                         Гҝ    1 Гҝ Вҙ pkq                  ВҜ2         Гҝ    2Qpkq p1 ` bq P pE c q
ДҸ 2 `2        Оөt pxt , at , pq ` E                 cМҢt pxt , at q Вҙ b      `E                                  .
  T       tвҖң1                        tвҖң1
                                         2V k                                  tвҖң1 k
                                                                                          V        P pEq
          pkq                                              pkq       pkq
Since Q1 вҖң 0, @k P rKs, PpE c q ДҸ 1{T 2 and Qt ДҸ QtВҙ1 ` 1 ДҸ T, @k P rKs, t P rT s, we
conclude that
  В«                    ff                                           В«                                    ff
    П„                           T                                     П„                               ВҜ2
    Гҝ
                    Лҡ      2   Гҝ                                      Гҝ   1 Гҝ Вҙ pkq
E      Regretpxt , at q ДҸ ` 2      Оөt pxt , at , pq ` 4Kp1 ` bq ` E                cМҢt pxt , at q Вҙ b
   tвҖң1
                           T   tвҖң1                                   tвҖң1
                                                                         2V k
                                                            В«                                  ff
                                                               П„                            ВҜ2
                           2                                  Гҝ    1 Гҝ Вҙ pkq
                          ДҸ ` 2U pT, pq ` 4Kp1 ` bq ` E                  cМҢt pxt , at q Вҙ b       ,
                           T                                  tвҖң1
                                                                  2V k
where the first inequality holds since stopping time П„ ДҸ T , and the second inequality comes from the
learning oracle assumption. Finally, we complete the proof by providing a simple but refined analysis
on the cumulative budget consumption that
                В«                                   ff    В«                           ff
                  П„                                         П„ Гҝ pkq
                  Гҝ   1 Гҝ Вҙ pkq                  ВҜ2         Гҝ    cМҢt pxt , at q2 ` b2
             E                cМҢt pxt , at q Вҙ b       ДҸE
                 tвҖң1
                     2V k                                  tвҖң1 k
                                                                          V
                                                            В«                     ff
                                                              П„ Гҝ
                                                        1     Гҝ       pkq              П„ Kb2
                                                       ДҸ E          cМҢt pxt , at q `         ,
                                                        V    tвҖң1 k
                                                                                         V
where the second inequality holds because cМҢt pxt , at q is bounded by 1. Moreover, we have
  В«                  ff   В«                                  ff    В«                ff
    П„
    Гҝ                       П„
                            Гҝ                                        П„
                                                                     Гҝ
         pkq                    pkq             pkq                      pkq
E      cМҢt pxt , at q вҖң E     cМҢt pxt , at q Вҙ c pxt , at q ` E         c pxt , at q ДҸ 1 ` Bk вҖң 1 ` T b,
    tвҖң1                           tвҖң1                                      tвҖң1


                                                      16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


where the last inequality holds because of Assumption 2 and the definition of stopping time П„.
Therefore, we have
           В«                                  ff
             П„
             Гҝ   1 Гҝ Вҙ pkq                 ВҜ2      Kp1 ` T b ` П„ b2 q   Kp1 ` T b ` T b2 q
        E                cМҢt pxt , at q Вҙ b      ДҸ                    ДҸ                    .
            tвҖң1
                2V k                                     V                    V
By combining all these facts, we derive an upper bound for the regret incurred before stopping.
                           2                             Kp1 ` T b ` T b2 q
          E rRegretpП„ qs ДҸ ` 2U pT, pq ` 4Kp1 ` bq `
                          T                                       VЛҶ               Лҷ
                                   ?                                    1             ?
                         ДҸ2 ` 2C0 T logpT {pq ` 4Kp1 ` bq ` K          ? `1`b           T
                                                                      b T
                                               ?                         ?
                         ДҸp6K ` 4Kbq ` 2C0 T logpT {pq ` Kp2 ` bq T
                                     ?                        ?
                         вҖңC1 ` 2C0 T logpT {pq ` Kp2 ` bq T ,
where C1 вҖң 6K ` 4Kb and the second inequality holds due to the value of V , while the third
inequality is a consequence of the fact that K Дӣ 1.

B.3     P ROOF OF L EMMA 4

B.3.1    LYAPUNOV D RIFT A NALYSIS
From (14), we have established the Lyapunov drift
           В«                                 ff
            Гҝ pQpkq
                  t`1 q
                       2    Гҝ pQpkq q2
                                   t
        E                Вҙ               |Ht
              k
                   2         k
                                   2
                                      В«                                                      ff
        2V                                                     1 Гҝ Вҙ pkq               ВҜ2
      ДҸ 2 ` 2V Оөt pxt , at , pq ` E ВҙV Regretpxt , aq `              cМҢt pxt , at q Вҙ b | Ht
         T                                                     2 k
            Гҝ        вҖқ                        Дұ Гҝ 2Qpkq p1 ` bq P pE c q
         ` Qpkq E pcpkq pxt , aq Вҙ bq|Ht `
             k                                     k
                                                             V        P pEq
                В«                                                          ff
                                         1 Гҝ Вҙ pkq                ВҜ2
      ДҸ4V ` E ВҙV Regretpxt , aq `               cМҢt pxt , at q Вҙ b | Ht
                                         2 k
            Гҝ        вҖқ                        Дұ Гҝ 2Qpkq p1 ` bq P pE c q
         ` Qpkq E pcpkq pxt , aq Вҙ bq|Ht `                                                         (16)
             k                                     k
                                                             V        P pEq
                В«                                   ff
                  1 Гҝ Вҙ pkq                ВҜ2            Гҝ              Гҝ 2Qpkq p1 ` bq P pE c q
      ДҸ6V ` E            cМҢt pxt , at q Вҙ b | Ht Вҙ Qpkq Оҙb `
                  2 k                                     k              k
                                                                                   V      P pEq
                В«                                   ff
                  1 Гҝ Вҙ pkq                ВҜ2            Гҝ              Гҝ 4Qpkq p1 ` bq
      ДҸ6V ` E            cМҢt pxt , at q Вҙ b | Ht Вҙ Qpkq Оҙb `
                  2 k                                     k              k
                                                                                V T2
                В«                                   ff
                  1 Гҝ Вҙ pkq                ВҜ2            Гҝ              4Kp1 ` bq
      ДҸ6V ` E            cМҢt pxt , at q Вҙ b | Ht Вҙ Qpkq Оҙb `                                       (17)
                  2 k                                     k
                                                                             VT
where the second inequality holds because Оөt pxt , at , pq ДҸ 1 as specified by the estimatorsвҖҷ and the
functionвҖҷs upper bounds; the third inequality holds because of the upper bounds of reward function
and cost estimators and the вҖңSlater conditionвҖқ in Assumption 3 that there exists a feasible policy such
that                        вҖқ                          Дұ
                          E cpkq pxt , aq Вҙ b | Ht вҖң h ДҸ ВҙОҙb, @k P rKs.

B.4     CB W K WITHOUT STRICT FEASIBILITY ASSUMPTIONS
                                                                     Лҡ   Лҡ
For CBwK without strict feasibility assumptions, we Еҷ canpkqset a вҖң a вҖһ ПҖ in (16). This allows us
to obtain an inequality similar to (17), replacing Вҙ k Q Оҙb with 0, we can then directly take the


                                                  17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


expectation on both sides to obtain:
        В«                            ff         В«                            ff
          Гҝ pQpkq
                t`1 q
                      2   Гҝ pQpkq q2              1 Гҝ Вҙ pkq               ВҜ2      4Kp1 ` bq
                                t
      E                 Вҙ               ДҸ6V ` E        cМҢt pxt , at q Вҙ b       `
           k
                 2        k
                                2                 2 k
                                                                                    VT
                                                В«                            ff
                                                  1 Гҝ Вҙ pkq                ВҜ      4Kp1 ` bq
                                        ДҸ6V ` E        cМҢt pxt , at q ` b2 `                ,
                                                  2 k                               VT
                                                                                             pkq
where the inequality holds since Qpkq , Оҙ, b Дӣ 0, pa Вҙ bq2 ДҸ a2 ` b2 and the value of cМҢt px, aq are
bounded. Sum this inequality from 1 to П„ , then we have
    В«                             ff            В«                                  ff
      Гҝ pQpkq      2   Гҝ pQpkq q2                       П„
             П„ `1 q          1                     1 Гҝ Гҝ Вҙ pkq                 2
                                                                                 ВҜ      4KП„ p1 ` bq
  E                  Вҙ               ДҸ6V П„ ` E              cМҢt pxt , at q ` b        `             ,
       k
              2        k
                             2                     2 k tвҖң1                                 VT
                                                   K 1                 4KП„ p1 ` bq
                                           ДҸ6V П„ `   p ` B ` П„ b2 q `
                                                   2 T                    VT
                                                                      4Kp1  ` bq
                                           ДҸ6V T ` Kp1 ` B ` T b2 q `
                                                                      ?  V
                                           ДҸ6V T ` 6KB ` KT b2 ` 4K T ,
where the second inequality holds due to the high probability event E, the last inequality holds since
        ?               ?                                       pkq
1{V ДҸ T and b{V ДҸ T b ДҸ B, Combine the facts that Q1 вҖң 0, @k and Cauchy-Schwarz
inequality, we have
                          Еҷ pkq ВҜ2
                      В»Вҙ               fi
                              Q
                            k П„ `1                                         ?
                                       fl ДҸ 6V T ` 6KB ` KT b2 ` 4K T ,
                      вҖ”                ffi
                    EвҖ“
                             2K

Rearrange these terms, we obtain that
                  В»Лң          Вё2 fi
                     Гҝ pkq                                            ?
               EвҖ“       QП„ `1 fl ДҸ 12KV T ` 12K 2 B ` 2K 2 T b2 ` 8K 2 T .
                        k

Then we have            В«            ff
                         Гҝ    pkq
                                             ?    3     ?         ?        1
                    E        QП„ `1        ДҸ 4 KbT 4 ` 4K T b ` 2Kb T ` 3KT 4 .
                         k


B.4.1    CB W K WITH STRICT FEASIBILITY ASSUMPTION IN A SSUMPTION 3
                                        b
                                           Еҷ      pkq 2
We define the Lyapunov function LМ„t вҖң         k pQt q вҖң }Qt }2 . To establish the expected bound on
the virtual queue, we prove conditions (i) and (ii) in Lemma 6 for LМ„t . From (17), we have
                                   В«                                 ff
                                     1 Гҝ Вҙ pkq                 ВҜ2          Гҝ           4Kp1 ` bq
              2        2
   Er}Qt`1 }2 Вҙ }Qt }2 s ДҸ6V ` E             cМҢt pxt , at q Вҙ b | Ht Вҙ Qpkq Оҙb `
                                     2 k                                   k
                                                                                          VT
                                               Гҝ              4Kp1 ` bq
                         ДҸ6V ` p1 ` bq2 Вҙ Qpkq Оҙb `
                                                k
                                                                 VT
                                                  Гҝ
                         ДҸ6V ` 6Kp1 ` bq2 Вҙ Qpkq Оҙb.
                                                      k

                                                  2
Given Ht вҖң h and LМ„t Дӣ ПҶt вҖң 4p3V `3Kp1`bq
                                   Оҙb
                                          q
                                            , the conditional expected drift of LМ„t is
                                                        1
                 Er}Qt`1 }2 Вҙ }Qt }2 |Ht вҖң hs ДҸ             Er}Qt`1 }22 Вҙ }Qt }22 |Ht вҖң hs
                                                      2}Q}2
                 6V ` 6Kp1 ` bq2 Вҙ }Q}1 Оҙb
             ДҸ
                         2}Q}2

                                                      18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                    Оҙb 3V ` 3Kp1 ` bq2
              ДҸВҙ       `
                    2            }Q}2
                    Оҙb
               ДҸВҙ ,
                    4
where the first inequality holds because 2p}Qt`1 }2 Вҙ }Qt }2 q}Qt }2 ДҸ }Qt`1 }22 Вҙ }Qt }22 ; the second
inequality holds by the вҖңnegative driftвҖқ in (17) above; the third inequality holds since }Q}1 Дӣ }Q}2 ;
                                                                                      2
and the last inequality holds given the condition }Qt }2 Дӣ ПҶt вҖң 4p3V `3Kp1`bq Оҙb
                                                                                        q
                                                                                          . Moreover, for
condition (ii) in Lemma 6, we have
                    }Qt`1 }2 Вҙ }Qt }2 ДҸ }Qt`1 Вҙ Qt }2 ДҸ }Qt`1 Вҙ Qt }1 ДҸ K,
                                             pkq     pkq
where the last inequality holds because |Qt`1 Вҙ Qt | ДҸ 1 Вҙ b, @k P rKs.
                                       pkq
Let ПҒ вҖң Оҙb
         4 , ОҪmax вҖң K and recall Q1 вҖң 0, @k P rKs. We are ready to apply Lemma 6 for LМ„ptq
and obtain
                    вҖқ       Дұ      2eО¶pОҪmax `ПҶt q               ПҒ
                  E eО¶}Qt }2 ДҸ 1 `                with О¶ вҖң 2              .           (18)
                                        О¶ПҒ                ОҪmax ` ОҪmax ПҒ{3
Then according to Cauchy-Schwarz inequality, we have
                              вҖқ О¶
                                 ? }Q }
                                         Дұ        2eО¶pОҪmax `ПҶt q
                            E e K t 1 ДҸ1`                        ,
                                                       О¶ПҒ
Applying JensenвҖҷs inequality, we obtain that
                         О¶
                        ? Er}Qt }1 s
                                         вҖқ О¶
                                            ? }Q }
                                                   Дұ 2eО¶pОҪmax `ПҶt q
                      e K            ДҸE e K t 1 ДҸ1`                 ,
                                                          О¶ПҒ
Finally, for any t P rT s
                В«         ff ?
                                           2eО¶pОҪmax `ПҶt q
                                      ЛҶ                   Лҷ
                  Гҝ pkq         K
              E       Qt    ДҸ     log 1 `
                   k
                               О¶                  О¶ПҒ
                              ?                2
                                                   eО¶pОҪmax `ПҶt q
                                      ЛҶ                          Лҷ
                                K          8ОҪmax
                            ДҸ     log 1 `
                               О¶                    3ПҒ2
                              ?       ЛҶ    2     О¶pОҪmax `ПҶt q
                                                              Лҷ
                                K       11ОҪmax e
                            ДҸ     log
                               О¶                3ПҒ2
                               ?
                              2 K                       3     ?
                            ДҸ      log p2ОҪmax {ПҒq ` K 2 ` KПҶt
                                О¶
                               ?                              ?
                              2 K                     3    4 Kp3V ` 3Kp1 ` bq2 q
                            вҖң      log p8K{Оҙbq ` K `  2
                                О¶                                     Оҙb
                               ?                                             ?
                              2 K                     3    12K p1 ` bq2
                                                                 2
                                                                           12 KT
                            вҖң      log p8K{Оҙbq ` K `  2                  `       ,
                                О¶                                  Оҙb         Оҙ


where the second, the third and the fourth inequality comes from the definition of О¶ and the fact that
0 Дғ ПҒ ДҸ ОҪmax and ОҪmax вҖң K, the last two equalities comes from the definition of ПҶt and V .

B.5   P ROOF OF L EMMA 5 UNDER A LGORITHM 1

Recall the definition of virtual stopping time
                                          !                                   )
                                                  pkq              pkq
                      П„0 вҖң argminП„ 1 PrT s П„ 1 | QП„ 1 `1 ` bП„ 1 ` MП„ 1 Дӣ B, Dk ,
          pkq   ЕҷП„                    pkq
where MП„ вҖң tвҖң1 pcpkq pxt , at q Вҙ cМҢt pxt , at qq. Divide both sides of the stopping time definition
inequality by b and take the expectation, we have
                             E rT Вҙ П„ s ДҸE rT Вҙ П„0 s


                                                   19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025



                                                  вҖқ        Дұ
                                                    pk1 q           1
                                                ДҸE QП„ `1 {b ` ErMП„pk q {bs
                                                                                 1
                                                ДҸE r}QП„ `1 }1 {bs ` ErMП„pk q {bs,
where the first inequality holds since П„ ДҸ П„0 according to the definition (8). From Assumption 2, for
any k
                            П„
                            Гҝ                       T
                                                    Гҝ                       ?
                 MП„pkq ДҸ 2     Оөt pxt , at , pq ДҸ 2   Оөt pxt , at , pq ДҸ 2C0 T logpT {pq,
                                tвҖң1                      tвҖң1
then the stopping time bound can be established by
                                                                          ?
                                                                       2C0 T logpT {pq
                              E rT Вҙ П„ s ДҸ Er}QП„ `1 }1 {bs `
                                                                             b
We first consider the case without strict feasibility assumption, then we can establish the bound
through Lemma 4 such that:
                          c             c                        1       ?
                            K 3             T        ?     3KT 4      2C0 T logpT {pq
           E rT Вҙ П„ s ДҸ 4     T ` 4K
                                4             ` 2K T `             `                   .
                            b               b                 b              b
We can then get a refined result with the Slater condition in Assumption 3. Since we have established
an upper bound in Lemma 4, the stopping time can be bounded by
                 ?                                                     ?            ?
               2 K                        3
                                            Вҙ1     12K 2 p1 ` bq2   12 KT        2C0 T logpT {pq
  E rT Вҙ П„ s ДҸ         log p8K{Оҙbq ` K 2 b `                      `           `                    .
                 О¶b                                      Оҙb2           Оҙb               b

B.6     P ROOF OF T HEOREM 1 UNDER A LGORITHM 1

Now we aggregate the regret after stopping and before stopping as follows. For the general case, we
have
                                       В«                   ff     В«                  ff
                                          ГҝП„                         ГҝП„
                  Лҡ                                     Лҡ
   RegretpT q ДҸ ОҪlooooomooooon
                    ErT Вҙ П„ s ` E             rpxt , at q Вҙ E            rpct , at q
                                         tвҖң1                        tвҖң1
               regret after stopping looooooooooooooooooooooomooooooooooooooooooooooon
                                                        regret before stopping
                                 ?                ?
                  ДҸC1 ` 2C0 T logpT {pq ` Kp2 ` bq T
                     Лң c             c                   1      ?            Вё
                          K 3           T      ?     3KT 4   2C0 T logpT {pq
                   ` 4       T ` 4K
                              4           ` 2K T `         `                   ОҪЛҡ.              (19)
                           b            b              b           b
With the Slater condition in Assumption 3, we have
                                     В«                   ff     В«                  ff
                                        ГҝП„                         ГҝП„
                Лҡ                                     Лҡ
RegretpT q ДҸ ОҪlooooomooooon
                  ErT Вҙ П„ s ` E             rpxt , at q Вҙ E            rpct , at q
                                       tвҖң1                        tвҖң1
             regret after stopping looooooooooooooooooooooomooooooooooooooooooooooon
                                                   regret before stopping
                            ?                ?
             ДҸC1 ` 2C0 T logpT {pq ` Kp2 ` bq T
                Лң ?                                              ?        ?            Вё
                  2 K                  3
                                          Вҙ1  12K 2 p1 ` bq2   12 KT   2C0 T logpT {pq
              `        log p8K{Оҙbq ` K 2 b `                 `       `                   ОҪЛҡ.
                    О¶b                             Оҙb2           Оҙb          b
                                                                                  (20)
which proves the regret bounds in Theorem 1.

C     S UPPORTING L EMMAS
C.1     LYAPUNOV D RIFT L EMMA

We present a lemma that will be used to derive the high probability of tQt u. The lemma is from Liu
et al. (2021), which is a minor variation of Lemma 4.1 Neely (2016; 2022) and the results in Hajek
(1982), where the radius of ПҶt could be time dependent.


                                                            20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Lemma 6 Let Sptq be a random process, ОҰptq be its Lyapunov function with ОҰp0q вҖң ОҰ0 and
вҲҶptq вҖң ОҰpt ` 1q Вҙ ОҰptq be the Lyapunov drift. Given an increasing sequence tПҶt u, ПҒ and ОҪmax with
0 Дғ ПҒ ДҸ ОҪmax , if the expected drift ErвҲҶptq|Sptq вҖң ss satisfies the following conditions:

      (i) There exists constants ПҒ Д… 0 and ПҶt Д… 0 such that ErвҲҶptq|Sptq вҖң ss ДҸ ВҙПҒ when
          ОҰptq Дӣ ПҶt , and
      (ii) |ОҰpt ` 1q Вҙ ОҰptq| ДҸ ОҪmax holds with probability one;

then we have
                                                        2eО¶pОҪmax `ПҶt q
                                  EreО¶ОҰptq s ДҸ eО¶ОҰ0 `                  ,                          (21)
                                                             О¶ПҒ
                  ПҒ
where О¶ вҖң ОҪ 2                .
             max `ОҪmax ПҒ{3



D     E XPERIMENTAL D ETAILS AND ADDITIONAL EXPERIMENTS
D.1    E XPERIMENTAL DETAILS

In this section, we provide the experimental details of our evaluations. We first discuss the learning-
to-rank dataset we use as the reward functions: Microsoft Learning to Rank. We use the MSLR-
WEB30K dataset Qin & Liu (2013) which is available at https://www.microsoft.com/
en-us/research/project/mslr/. This dataset has 31,278 arrivals, and the contextual di-
mension is 136. We extract |A| вҖң 20 documents (arms) per query and the reward is defined as the
relevance judgments in the dataset which take 5 values from 0 (irrelevant) to 4 (perfectly relevant).
We set the time horizon T вҖң 5000 and randomly draw an arrival from the 31,278 data points.
We then provide the hyperparameters of tested algorithms in our experiments.

                     Algorithm                               Parameters
                                                                     ?
                  AUPD Algorithm                         ?  V вҖң 0.1b T          ?
                                                               ?
           PGD Adaptive Chzhen et al. (2024)       MT вҖң 4 T ` 2 T log T , Оҙb
                                                                          aвҖң 1{ T
                                                         ?
            SquareCBwK Han et al. (2023)             U вҖң T log T , Оі вҖң 0.1 T {U

                                 Table 2: Parameters in the experiment.


                                       Figure 2: Budget B вҖң 30.


                                                  21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                   Table 3: Average cumulative rewards under various budgets.

                                         B = 30     B = 100   B = 600    B = 1000
               Our Algorithm (AUPD)      0.105       0.233     0.238      0.344
                   PGD Adaptive          0.012       0.051     0.230      0.336
                   SquareCBwK            0.007       0.028     0.174      0.298


D.2   E XPERIMENTS UNDER OTHER BUDGET REGIMES

Recall the previous
            ?       experiments with budgets B вҖң t100, 600, 1000u to represent different budget
regimes tОҳp T q, ОҳpT 3{4 q, ОҳpT qu. We consider the same setting and vary the budget with smaller
budgets, where B вҖң t30u. The experimental results are shown in Figure 2, which suggests that our
algorithm adapts effectively to varying budget regimes and achieves much better performance as the
budget decreases or the constraints become tight. A summary of average cumulative rewards can be
found in Table 3, where the values for B вҖң t100, 600, 1000u are from Figure 1.


                                               22
