Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


P ROVING O LYMPIAD I NEQUALITIES BY S YNERGIZING
LLM S AND S YMBOLIC R EASONING
 Zenan Li1∗, Zhaoyu Li2∗, Wen Tang3 , Xian Zhang4 , Yuan Yao1 , Xujie Si2 , Fan Yang4 ,
 Kaiyu Yang5†, Xiaoxing Ma1†
 1
  State Key Lab of Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University, China,
 2
  University of Toronto, 3 Peking University, 4 Microsoft Research, 5 Meta FAIR
 lizn@smail.nju.edu.cn, zhaoyu@cs.toronto.edu
 zhxian@microsoft.com, kaiyuy@meta.com, xxm@nju.edu.cn


     Problem (Chen, 2014): If a, b, c are positive reals and a2 + b2 + c2 = 1, then
                         1      1      1        1           1         1
                            +      +       ≤          +          +          .                         (1)
                      a2 + 2 b2 + 2 c2 + 2   6ab + c2   6bc + a2   6ca + b2

Figure 1: We prove inequality problems in math Olympiads that involve a finite number of real vari-
ables, hypotheses, and one conclusion. Both the hypotheses and the conclusion consist of constants,
variables, algebraic operations (e.g., addition, multiplication), and transcendental functions like exp.

                                                  A BSTRACT
              Large language models (LLMs) can prove mathematical theorems formally by
              generating proof steps (a.k.a. tactics) within a proof system. However, the space
              of possible tactics is vast and complex, while the available training data for formal
              proofs is limited, posing a significant challenge to LLM-based tactic generation.
              To address this, we introduce a neuro-symbolic tactic generator that synergizes the
              mathematical intuition learned by LLMs with domain-specific insights encoded by
              symbolic methods. The key aspect of this integration is identifying which parts of
              mathematical reasoning are best suited to LLMs and which to symbolic methods.
              While the high-level idea of neuro-symbolic integration is broadly applicable to
              various mathematical problems, in this paper, we focus specifically on Olympiad
              inequalities (Figure 1). We analyze how humans solve these problems and distill
              the techniques into two types of tactics: (1) scaling, handled by symbolic methods,
              and (2) rewriting, handled by LLMs. In addition, we combine symbolic tools with
              LLMs to prune and rank the proof goals for efficient proof search. We evaluate
              our framework on 161 challenging inequalities from multiple mathematics com-
              petitions, achieving state-of-the-art performance and significantly outperforming
              existing LLM and symbolic approaches without requiring additional training data.


1        I NTRODUCTION
Automated theorem proving has been a long-standing goal in AI (Newell & Simon, 1956). Recent
research explores leveraging large language models (LLMs) to generate formal proofs that can be
verified in formal proof systems like Lean (de Moura et al., 2015), opening a new avenue to theo-
rem proving (Li et al., 2024; Yang et al., 2024). This promising approach has already led to tools
that assist human mathematicians (Song et al., 2024) and the first AI that achieves silver-medal
performance in the International Mathematical Olympiad (IMO) (Google DeepMind, 2024).
While LLM-based proof generation shows great promise across various mathematical domains, its
performance is constrained by the scarcity of formal proof data. Furthermore, it remains an open
     ∗
         Equal contribution. This work was partially done during Zenan’s internship at MSRA.
     †
         Equal advising. All experiments were conducted outside Meta’s compute infrastructure.


                                                         1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


 Current inequality problem                              New inequality problem                                            Inequality sequence (Proof)
  Given 𝑎, 𝑏, 𝑐 three reals, prove that                    Given 𝑎, 𝑏, 𝑐 three reals, prove that                            Given 𝑎, 𝑏, 𝑐 three reals, prove that
                                                                                                                   … …            𝑎𝑏 + 𝑏𝑐 + 𝑐𝑎 ≤ 𝑎! + 𝑏 ! + 𝑐 !
      𝑎𝑏 + 𝑏𝑐 + 𝑐𝑎 ≤ 𝑎! + 𝑏 ! + 𝑐 !                            (2𝑎! + 𝑏 ! )(2𝑐 ! + 𝑏 ! ) ≤ 𝑎! + 𝑏 ! + 𝑐 !
                                                                                                                            1. scale Cauchy_Schwarz_3vars

 Tactic generation & pruning                                    Goal filtering & ranking                                      (2𝑎! + 𝑏 ! )(2𝑐 ! + 𝑏 ! ) ≤ 𝑎! + 𝑏 ! + 𝑐 !

            (2𝑎! + 𝑏 ! )(2𝑐 ! + 𝑏 ! ) ≤ 𝑎! + 𝑏 ! + 𝑐 !          ①     (2𝑎! + 𝑏 ! )(2𝑐 ! + 𝑏 ! ) ≤ 𝑎! + 𝑏 ! + 𝑐 !            2. scale AM_GM_2vars
   ∀∃⊨
                                           !
                     𝑎𝑏 + 𝑏𝑐 + 𝑐𝑎 ≤ 3 𝑎! 𝑏 ! 𝑐 !                ② 3𝑎𝑏 + 3𝑏𝑐 + 3𝑐𝑎 ≤ 𝑎 + 𝑏 + 𝑐 !                                2𝑎! + 𝑏 ! + 2𝑐 ! + 𝑏 !
  x∧y∨z                                                                                                                                               ≤ 𝑎! + 𝑏 ! + 𝑐 !
   𝑎! = 1
                 Symbolic-based scaling … …                          … …                    LLM ranking                                  2
                                                                                                                            3. llm_simplify
              𝑎 𝑏−𝑎 +𝑏 𝑐−𝑏 +𝑐 𝑎−𝑐 ≤0                                𝑎𝑏 + 𝑏𝑐 + 𝑐𝑎 ≤ 𝑎 + 𝑏 ! − 2𝑎𝑏 + 𝑐 !                 …
                                                                                    !
                                                                                                                                  𝑎! + 𝑏 ! + 𝑐 ! ≤ 𝑎! + 𝑏 ! + 𝑐 !
                 3𝑎𝑏 + 3𝑏𝑐 + 3𝑐𝑎 ≤ 𝑎 + 𝑏 + 𝑐 !                      𝑎𝑏 + 𝑏𝑐 + 𝑐𝑎 ≤ 3 𝑎! 𝑏 ! 𝑐 !             C      A


                                                                     … …
                                                                                                            A      B
                                                                                                                                              QED!
                LLM-generated rewriting … …                                        Symbolic filtering       C      B


Figure 2: An overview of our neuro-symbolic inequality prover L IPS. By integrating both LLMs
and symbolic methods in an iterative process of tactic generation and goal selection, it can generate
human-readable and formally verifiable proofs in Lean for Olympiad-level inequality problems.


problem whether LLMs can perform precise and complex symbolic manipulations (Hammond &
Leake, 2023). To address these limitations, mechanical symbolic reasoning is still essential. Un-
like LLMs, symbolic methods leverage domain-specific knowledge to achieve greater efficiency and
generalization without relying on extensive training data (Wu, 2008; Heule et al., 2016). Integrating
LLMs with symbolic methods presents a promising strategy for tactic generation and theorem prov-
ing. This raises a key question: Which aspects of mathematical reasoning are best suited to LLMs,
and which to symbolic methods? By exploring this question, we aim to combine the strengths of
both approaches effectively. Since symbolic methods are inherently domain-specific, we focus on a
concrete domain: inequalities, which offers a balance between feasibility and practicality.
Mathematical Inequalities. Inequalities arise from various branches of mathematics (Hardy et al.,
1952). Their proofs often rely on a relatively small set of fundamental techniques, yet these tech-
niques can be applied in remarkably intricate and nuanced ways. In this paper, we further constrain
our scope to elementary algebraic inequalities (Figure 1), which were prevalent in high-school math-
ematics competitions (Manfrino et al., 2010), e.g., Problem 2 in IMO 2000. Additionally, these
inequalities are closely related to quantifier-free real arithmetic in satisfiability modulo theories
(SMT) (Barrett & Tinelli, 2018), which have numerous practical applications in formal verification.
Even this restricted class of inequalities poses significant challenges that surpass the capabilities of
current symbolic or neural provers. Symbolic methods (Yang, 1999; Uray, 2020) partition the vari-
able space (e.g., R3 for three variables) into a finite number of cells, which are then exhaustively
enumerated. These approaches suffer from combinatorial explosion and quickly become compu-
tationally infeasible for competition-level problems. Furthermore, due to their enumerative nature,
these methods are black boxes that cannot produce human-readable proofs. On the other hand, neural
approaches (Wu et al., 2021; Wei et al., 2024) fine-tune language models to generate formal proofs
by predicting tactics or evaluating subgoals during proof search. However, due to data scarcity and
difficulties in generalization, they frequently underperform on certain types of problems.
Our Approach. We introduce L IPS (LLM-based inequality prover with symbolic reasoning),
a neuro-symbolic framework that synergistically combines LLMs with domain-specific symbolic
techniques, as illustrated in Figure 2. Specifically, we analyze common proving strategies used by
humans in inequality proofs and categorize them into two types of tactics: scaling and rewriting.
Scaling tactics apply existing lemmas (e.g., the Cauchy-Schwarz inequality) to scale a subterm in
the current goal. The set of lemmas is finite, and each lemma can be applied only in a limited
number of ways. Therefore, we can enumerate all possible scaling tactics using symbolic tools.
However, not all scaling tactics are useful for the current goal; over-scaling may render the goal
invalid. We filter out such invalid scaling by using symbolic tools such as SMT solvers to check
for counterexamples of the resulting goals. Rewriting tactics, on the other hand, transform a term
into an equivalent form (e.g., subtracting 2ab from both sides of the current goal). Any term can
be rewritten in infinite ways, making exhaustive enumeration impossible. To address this, we use
LLMs to generate rewriting tactics by designing a series of prompts for different rewriting formats.
By leveraging the mathematical intuition embedded in LLMs, we implicitly prune the infinite tactic
space, sampling the most promising equivalent transformations.


                                                                                        2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Scaling and rewriting the current goal leads to a set of subgoals with new inequalities to prove.
Efficient proof search requires prioritizing the most promising subgoals for further exploration. To
this end, we employ two strategies: symbolic filtering and neural ranking. In symbolic filtering, we
use heuristics based on inequalities’ homogeneity and decoupling properties to filter out unpromis-
ing subgoals. In neural ranking, the remaining subgoals are fed into an LLM, which compares and
ranks them using chain-of-thought prompting (Wei et al., 2022). After filtering and ranking, we end
up with a small number of ranked subgoals. We then iteratively generate and apply new tactics, filter
and rank the resulting subgoals, until the final goal becomes trivially provable, resulting in a proof
that is both human-readable and formally verified by Lean.
We evaluate L IPS on 161 challenging inequalities collected from three problem sets (Chen, 2014;
Tung, 2012; Wei et al., 2024). The experimental results show that L IPS consistently achieves state-
of-the-art performance and significantly outperforms existing neural and symbolic methods in both
effectiveness and speed. Remarkably, out of 61 inequality problems sourced from various math
Olympiad competitions, L IPS successfully proves 56 within 90 minutes, whereas the previous best
approach proves only 41 problems and fails to generate human-readable proofs.

2     I NEQUALITY T HEOREM P ROVING

In this section, we briefly review existing neural and symbolic methods for inequality proving. In a
nutshell, symbolic methods complete proofs by exploring the problem space exhaustively, whereas
neural methods use LLMs to sample proof steps from a vast tactic space. Each approach comes with
distinct advantages and challenges.

2.1   S YMBOLIC M ETHODS
Consider a set of polynomial inequalities Φj ▷◁ 0, j = 1, . . . , m, where ▷◁ ∈ {≤, <, ≥, >, =, ̸=},
                                                                             Pk            i1 i2      in
and each polynomial is defined over n variables as Φj (x1 , . . . , xn ) :=     i=1 ai · x1 x2 · · · xn ,
cylindrical algebraic decomposition (CAD) (Arnon et al., 1984; Caviness & Johnson, 2012; Kre-
mer, 2020) divides the variable space Rn into multiple connected semi-algebraic sets, known as
cells. Within each cell, the sign of every polynomial remains constant (positive, negative, or zero).
Figure 6(a) illustrates this process with an example of CAD-producing cells for two intersecting
unit circles. By exploiting this sign invariance, we can determine the satisfiability of inequalities by
enumerating and checking all the cells, rather than searching the entire infinite space Rn .
CAD and its variants have been extensively utilized in modern SMT solvers (Jovanović & de Moura,
2013; Kremer et al., 2022; Uncu et al., 2023). For inequality theorem proving, CAD transforms the
problem into an enumeration task, exhaustively examining all cells to assess whether the inequality
can be satisfied. While it is capable, CAD’s performance remains unsatisfactory for several reasons.
Firstly, CAD’s heuristic strategies are primarily designed to efficiently find counterexamples rather
than to optimize the proof search process. Secondly, CAD’s proving mechanism fails to generate
explicit and interpretable reasoning paths, hindering both automatic verification by existing interac-
tive theorem provers and human interpretation of the proofs. Additionally, CAD suffers from double
exponential computational complexity relative to the number of variables n (Davenport & Heintz,
1988), causing its efficiency to decrease significantly as the number of variables increases. Specifi-
cally, when dealing with nonlinear inequalities involving fractions or radical
                                                                            √ expressions,
                                                                                   √         auxiliary
variables are always introduced to eliminate these terms (e.g., converting x1 + x2 + x23 = 0 into
{x4 + x5 + x23 = 0, x24 = x1 , x25 = x2 , x4 > 0, x5 > 0}). Although this transformation successfully
rewrites the inequality into polynomial form, it drastically degrades the performance of CAD.

2.2   N EURAL M ETHODS
In contrast to symbolic methods based on CAD, some approaches leverage neural networks to pre-
dict tactics within an interactive theorem prover, generating human-like, step-by-step formal proofs.
Specifically, these inequality proofs are typically structured in a top-down sequential manner, where
each tactic either transforms the current goal into a new subgoal or directly completes the proof (see
Figure 6(b)). Figure 6(c) provides an example proof of the inequality ab + bc + ca ≤ a2 + b2 + c2 .
Among existing work, INT (Wu et al., 2021) designs a theorem generator for elementary-level in-
equalities by randomly sampling axioms from a fixed set. It trains a Transformer (Vaswani et al.,


                                                   3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


2017) model to predict tactics and utilizes another value network with the Monte Carlo tree search
to complete proofs. Similarly, AIPS (Wei et al., 2024) implements a synthetic generator that can
produce IMO-level inequalities and trains a language model to score each inequality expression in a
curriculum manner, performing a best-first search to solve these problems. However, their inequal-
ity generators have some restrictions – either limited in difficulty or constrained by specific forms
like cyclic symmetry. Moreover, these approaches mainly rely on fine-tuning models on large-scale
datasets, making them highly dependent on the quantity and diversity of the training data.


3     TACTIC G ENERATION AND P RUNING

Compared to general theorem proving, the tactics used in inequality proofs are more well-structured:
Common tactics can be categorized into two types, namely scaling and rewriting (Lee, 2004; Ike-
naga, 2018). Scaling refines the given inequality using a known inequality lemma, such as the
arithmetic and geometric means (AM-GM) inequality, while rewriting transforms a given inequality
into an equivalent form, such as multiplying both sides by two. Scaling and rewriting have distinct
characteristics. The number of lemmas that can be used in scaling is finite, whereas the number of
equivalent transformations in rewriting can be infinite, which leads to different strategies for tactic
generation. Furthermore, unlike rewriting, scaling does not preserve the provability of the inequality,
leading to different strategies for pruning the resulting subgoals.
Let’s consider the inequality problem in Figure 1 as a running example. To the best of our knowl-
edge, the proof for this problem is not readily available online, and neither the most advanced LLMs
(e.g., OpenAI o3-mini and DeepSeek-R1) nor existing CAD solvers can solve this inequality.

3.1   S CALING TACTICS
Given an inequality lemma (e.g., the special case of the AM-GM inequality u2 + v 2 ≥ 2uv),
we enumerate all possible ways to instantiate its arguments (u and v) so that it matches a part of
the current proof goal. This is a classical problem called e-matching (De Moura & Bjørner, 2007;
Moskal et al., 2008) and can be solved using existing symbolic tools (Willsey et al., 2021). However,
it introduces a challenge due to the potentially large number of possible patterns. In our running
example, there are a total of 162 possible
                                    √       pattern matches for the two-variable AM-GM inequality,
including cases like {u := a, v := 2}, {u := 1, v := √a12 +2 }.
Since scaling tactics refine the inequality goal, they may produce potentially incorrect subgoals
(i.e., unprovable
         √        statements). For instance, applying the AM-GM inequality with the pattern {u :=
a, v := 2} would transform the original inequality (1) into

                    1   1    1      1           1         1
                   √ + √ + √ ≤            +          +          .                                 (2)
                  2 2a 2 2b 2 2c 6ab + c2   6bc + a2   6ca + b2
                                                             √
However, this inequality does not hold when a = b = c = 33 . Specifically, out of the 162 possible
patterns for applying the AM-GM inequality in our running example, only six (i.e., {u := a, v := b}
and its symmetric or cyclical versions) yield correct deductions. Therefore, we propose using CAD
to identify counterexamples in the new inequality goals and eliminate the scaling tactics that produce
them. Moreover, since most scaling tactics are incorrect and thus induce counterexamples, CAD can
efficiently detect and discard them using well-established heuristic strategies.
To further enhance the efficacy and efficiency of scaling tactic pruning, we propose several additional
methods to complement CAD in searching for counterexamples:
Quick Check via Test Cases. When CAD identifies a counterexample for a scaling tactic, we store
it as a “test case”. For any subsequent scaling tactic, we will perform a quick check using this test
case before invoking CAD to determine if the counterexample invalidates the tactic.
Incorporating Numerical Optimization. Since most inequality problems are differentiable, we
also use gradient-based optimization as an effective alternative when CAD fails. Specifically, we
rewrite the inequality f (x) ≤ g(x) into minx [g(x) − f (x)], and then integrate Newton’s method
with simulated annealing to solve it (Fu & Su, 2016; Ma et al., 2019; Ni et al., 2023).


                                                  4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Utilization of Prior Knowledge. Additionally, prior knowledge can be leveraged in scaling tactic
pruning when the specific form of an inequality problem is known. For example, the inequalities
generated and evaluated by AIPS (Wei et al., 2024) are cyclically symmetric and sufficiently tight to
achieve equality. Consequently, AIPS verifies the consistency of equality conditions across multiple
tactics and discards subgoals that either violate these conditions or do not conform to the desired
form. However, to accommodate a broader range of inequalities, our current framework does not
incorporate such priors, even though this information could efficiently prune scaling tactics.

3.2    R EWRITING TACTICS
After pruning, only a few scaling tactics are applicable. For example, we may choose to apply the
two-variable AM-GM inequality (with pattern {u := a, v := b} and its cyclical versions) and derive
a new proof goal from the initial goal (1), formulated as

         1            1            1                1                    1                    1
                +            +            ≤                    +                    +                    .   (3)
       a2 + 2       b2 + 2       c2 + 2       3a2 + 3b2 + c2       3b2 + 3c2 + a2       3a2 + 3c2 + b2

To solve the current proof goal, we need some equivalent transformations. For example, one may
                                            1              1                           2    2     2
simplify the proof goal by replacing 3a2 +3b  2 +c2 with 3−2c2 using the assumption a + b + c = 1.

However, figuring out effective ways to transform the goal needs creativity and cannot be readily
automated through brute-force methods. Consequently, relying solely on symbolic pattern matching
tends to be highly ineffective. Moreover, the argument space for rewriting tactics is typically infinite.
For example, the assumption a2 + b2 + c2 = 1 can be inserted at almost any point within the
inequality, significantly enlarging the space of possible rewriting tactics.
To generate and prune the rewriting tactics, we propose directly prompting an LLM to generate
candidates. Specifically, for different types of rewriting (e.g., rearrangement, simplification, denom-
inator cancellation, etc.), we design tailored prompts that guide the LLM to transform the current
proof goal into an appropriate form. The details of these prompts can be found in Appendix C.
In this setting, tactic pruning is performed implicitly leveraging the algebraic intuition of LLMs,
thereby effectively reducing the space of possible rewriting tactics.
Besides neural-guided rewriting, we incorporate two additional symbolic rewriting tactics: the sum-
of-squares (Chen, 2013) and the tangent line (Li, 2005) tricks. The sum-of-squares trick attempts to
transform the current expression into a summation of non-negative terms, e.g., proving 2x2 + 2xy −
3x + y 2 + 94 ≥ 0 by recognizing 2x2 + 2xy − 3x + y 2 + 49 = (x + y)2 + (x − 23 )2 . The tangent
line trick is a powerful variable substitution technique that is frequently used to tackle inequality
problems in math competitions.

4     G OAL F ILTERING AND S ELECTION

Scaling and rewriting tactics yield a collection of new proof goals. By combining these newly
generated goals with existing unexplored ones, we can derive a candidate set. The next step is
to select the most promising goal from this candidate set for subsequent proving. In our running
example, we can derive 16 new proof goals from the current goal (3). Below, we present three of
these new goals, each derived by applying the two-variable AM-GM inequality, the three-variable
Titu inequality, and simplifying using the given assumption a2 + b2 + c2 = 1, respectively:
                              r
         1      1      1               1                1            1
       2
            + 2    + 2     ≤2     2     2      2
                                                 · 2     2   2
                                                               + 2            ; (4)
      a +2 b +2 c +2            a + 3b + 3c b + 3a + 3c         c + 3a2 + 3b2
         1      1      1            9
            +      +       ≤ 2               ;                                  (5)
      a2 + 2 b2 + 2 c2 + 2   7a + 7b2 + 7c2
         1      1      1        1          1          1
            +      +       ≤         +           +         .                    (6)
      a2 + 2 b2 + 2 c2 + 2   3 − 2a2    3 − 2b2    3 − 2c2

To select proof goals effectively, existing methods often train a language model as a value function to
evaluate and rank each goal in the candidate set. However, limitations in data quantity and diversity
can significantly degrade the performance of these fine-tuned models. For example, the largest


                                                         5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


collected inequality dataset in Lean comprises only 46K samples (Ying et al., 2024), while the largest
synthesized dataset of competition-level inequalities contains merely 191K cyclically symmetric
instances (Wei et al., 2024). Consequently, we opt to directly employ an off-the-shelf LLM (e.g.,
GPT-4o) without fine-tuning. However, as more proof goals accumulate, the context length required
for prompting an LLM for goal ranking becomes substantial, potentially leading to the issue of
LLMs being “lost in the middle” (Liu et al., 2024). To address this, we propose dividing the goal
selection pipeline into two stages: symbolic filtering and neural ranking.

4.1   S YMBOLIC F ILTERING

First, we eliminate proof goals that are less promising based on carefully designed symbolic rules.
Specifically, we prioritize two key properties: (1) homogeneity, meaning both sides of the inequality
have the same degree (e.g., a2 + b2 ≥ 2ab); and (2) decoupling, which refers to whether the inequal-
ity contains mixed-variable terms (e.g., abc is considered coupled). Both properties are reasonable
criteria for prioritization. Regarding homogeneity, most substitution and transformation tactics pre-
serve homogeneity. Hence, a homogeneous inequality allows for a broader range of tactics to be
applied, thereby producing more valuable proof goals. For decoupling, an inequality with fewer
coupled terms is not only clearer but also amenable to a greater variety of techniques, such as the
sum-of-squares and tangent line tricks.
To measure decoupling and homogeneity, we first approximate the proof goal by a polynomial in-
equality using Taylor expansion. We then compute the expectation of the number of variables in
each term and the variance of the degree of each term, respectively. Formally, given a polynomial
                                             Pk
inequality expressed as Φ(x1 , . . . , xn ) = i=1 ai · xi11 xi22 · · · xinn ≤ 0, the decoupling score (DC)
and homogeneity score (HM) are computed as:

                              k        n                                  k           k
                           1X X                                        1X          1X 2
              DC(Φ) =            ai (     I(ij > 0)),       HM(Φ) =          (di −       dj ) ,
                           k i=1      j=1
                                                                       k i=1       k j=1

where di = i1 + · · · + in is the total degree of i-th term in the inequality.
It is worth noting that the homogeneity score and the decoupling score are not always consistent.
In our running example, the newly generated goals in (4), (5), and (6) achieve homogeneity scores
of 0.56, 0.55, and 0.80, and decoupling scores of 0.44, 0.48, and 0.66, respectively. As a result, we
normalize the scores into [0, 1] and then compute the average score to filter the candidates.

4.2   N EURAL R ANKING

Symbolic rules are not universally effective. Hence, we use these rules solely to eliminate unpromis-
ing proof goals, leaving top-k candidates, for final selection by an LLM. Unlike symbolic filtering,
which requires explicit definitions of inequality metrics, we use the chain-of-thought prompting (Wei
et al., 2022; Chu et al., 2023) to query an LLM to rank the proof goals based on their proving diffi-
culty. The detailed prompt for the running example is shown below.

  Prompt of neural ranking

  I am trying to prove the original inequality: “ If a, b, c are positive reals and a2 + b2 + c2 = 1, then
    1
  a2 +2
        + b21+2 + c21+2 ≤ 3a2 +3b1               1               1
                                   2 +c2 + 3b2 +3c2 +a2 + 3a2 +3c2 +b2 ”, and transform it into the following
  inequalities.                 q
  (1) a21+2 + b21+2 + c21+2 ≤ 2          1
                                  a2 +3b2 +3c2
                                               · b2 +3a12 +3c2 + c2 +3a12 +3b2
  (2) a21+2 + b21+2 + c21+2 ≤ 7a2 +7b92 +7c2
  (3) a21+2 + b21+2 + c21+2 ≤ 3−2a
                                1           1
                                   2 + 3−2b2 + 3−2c2
                                                     1

  Your task is to rank the transformation results in a descent order. Note that
  1. Please reason step by step;
  2. More meaningful transformation, i.e., reduce the proving difficulty, should be ranked higher;
  3. Put the index of selected inequality within \\boxed{{}}, e.g., \\boxed{{(1),(2),(3)}}.



                                                        6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


      Table 1: Proof success rates (%) on three datasets. L IPS consistently outperforms baselines.
                                             Neural Provers                Symbolic Provers
          Dataset     # of Problems                                    †
                                                                                              L IPS         ∆
                                         D SP    M CTS         A IPS       C AD‡    M MA‡
      ChenNEQ               41            0.0      17.0            -        70.7       68.2    95.1      24.4↑
      MO-INT                20            0.0      15.0         50.0        60.0       60.0    80.0      20.0↑
      567NEQ                100           0.0       4.0            -        54.0       52.0    68.0      14.0↑
           Total            161           0.0        8.6               -    59.0       57.1    76.3      17.3↑
      †
          We include the results reported by the A IPS paper since the code is not publicly available.
      ‡
          C AD and M MA only output verification results, they cannot produce human-readable proofs.


5     E XPERIMENTS
In this section, we conduct a series of experiments to address the following three research questions:
RQ1: Efficacy – Can L IPS prove more problems compared to existing methods?
RQ2: Efficiency – Can L IPS obtain proofs in less time compared to existing methods?
RQ3: Scalability – Can L IPS be improved by using more scaling lemmas or more powerful LLMs?

5.1       E XPERIMENTAL S ETUP
Datasets. We evaluate L IPS on three datasets: ChenNEQ, MO-INT-20, and 567NEQ, respectively.
ChenNEQ consists of 41 Olympiad-level inequalities collected by Chen (2014); MO-INT is a new
competition-level inequality benchmark introduced in AIPS (Wei et al., 2024), featuring 20 prob-
lems sourced from IMO shortlists and various national mathematical Olympiads; 567NEQ consists
of 567 hard inequalities created by Tung (2012) and we randomly selected 100 problems from the
original problem set as the testbed for our framework. To formalize the problems in Lean 4, we
directly translate the LaTeX source code into Lean using manually defined rules.
Baselines. We compare L IPS with five baselines: D SP (Jiang et al., 2023b), C AD (Kremer, 2020),
M MA (Wolfram Research), M CTS (Wu et al., 2021), and A IPS (Wei et al., 2024). D SP consists of
two steps, natural language reasoning generation and proof autoformalization, and we instantiate
the LLM used in each step GPT-4o. M CTS (Monte Carlo tree search) has been explored in previ-
ous studies (Wu et al., 2021) and serves as an alternative method for proof goal selection. A IPS
is an inequality prover system based on SymPy, which has demonstrated the capability to prove
competition-level inequalities. C AD integrates a series of CAD-based inequality solvers including
Z3 (De Moura & Bjørner, 2008), CVC5 (Kremer et al., 2022), RC-CAD (Lemaire et al., 2005), and
Bottema (Lu, 1998). M MA, referring to Mathematica, incorporates the CAD algorithm with other
reduction strategies, providing a powerful algebraic system for inequality verification (Wolfram Re-
search, 2020). Further implementation details for the baseline methods are provided in Appendix C.
Implementation. The detailed processes of tactic generation, goal selection, as well as the overall
framework are provided in Appendix B. To construct the tactics, we design a total of 96 scaling
tactics and 16 rewriting tactics, each formalized in Lean 4. The corresponding premises and LLM
prompts are summarized in Appendix C. For the counterexample search in scaling tactic pruning, we
integrate four CAD-based solvers (Z3, CVC5, RC-CAD, and Bottema) and implement an optimizer
based on SciPy (Virtanen et al., 2020). For the LLM involved in transformation tactic generation and
proof goal ranking, we use GPT-4o (version Azure-0501). In symbolic filtering, we fix the size of
the filtered goal set to 10, as it is the largest size that ensures GPT-4o’s efficacy. The code, together
with the experimental data, is available at https://github.com/Lizn-zn/NeqLIPS.

5.2       E XPERIMENTS
RQ1 : Efficacy. We evaluate the proof success rates of L IPS and the five comparative methods
across the three datasets. For each proving task, a time limit of 90 minutes is imposed, consistent
with that of A IPS and the standard problem-solving time constraint in the IMO. The overall results
are presented in Table 1. First, we observe that the neural methods (D SP and M CTS) cannot achieve
satisfactory performance. An analysis of D SP’s results reveals that GPT-4o is unable to provide ac-


                                                           7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                           100                                                                                                                                                                                36                                                                                                            33
                                           AIPS                     LIPS              95                                              96           97 97                                                                    Oracle                  LIPS


Tactic pruning ratio (%)
                                                                                                                                           94 94                        94
                                                                                                                                                                                                              30                                                              29


                                                                                                                                                                                       Number of iterations
                                                          92                                                             92 92
                                                                            90                                                                                  90 89
                           90    86
                                      89        88                                                   87             86
                                                                                                                                                                                  90
                                                                                                                                                                                                              24       22
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   24
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       22
                                                                    85 84                                                        85                                          84
                                                     81
                           80              78                                    78                                                                                                                           18                 17                                          16                               15
                                                                                                75                                                                                                                                        14                                                                                         13       14
                                                                                                               74
                                                                                                                                                                                                              12   9                           9
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               11       11
                           70                                                                                                                                                                                                7        6                 66 6        6              7            8
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    6
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        8 8             7        8
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          6
                                                                                                          66
                                                                                                                                                                                                               6                                                                            5                      45
                                                               61                          62
                           60     1 2 3 4 5 8 9 10 11 13 14 15 16 17 18 19
                                                                                                                                                           60
                                                                                                                                                                                                               0   1 2 3 4 5 8 9 10 11 13 14 15 16 17 18 19
                                       Index of successfully proved problems                                                                                                                                            Index of successfully proved problems

Figure 3: Tactic pruning ratio (↑, higher is better) and number of iterations (↓). The results illustrate
that the tactic pruning method of L IPS is very stable, and outperforms the existing method by 7.92%
on average. Furthermore, the high efficiency of L IPS is derived from accurate goal selection, allow-
ing a proof to be successfully constructed with a small number of goal selection iterations.


curate natural language solutions or generate precise formal proofs in the Lean 4 language, resulting
in a zero success rate. Alternatively, M CTS struggles to effectively identify the correct reasoning
path among numerous proof goals, causing many proving attempts to terminate due to timeouts.
We also evaluate the performance of the recent OpenAI o1-preview model on the MO-INT dataset.
Through manual inspection of the generated natural language answers, we find that none of the
problems are correctly solved. Examples of these neural methods are provided in Appendix E.
Symbolic provers outperform neural provers, C AD and M MA achieve overall success rates of 59.0%
and 57.1%, respectively. However, L IPS further surpasses symbolic provers by a significant margin
of 14.0% to 24.4%. Notably, symbolic provers fail to produce any human-readable reasoning path.
In contrast, the proofs generated by L IPS are not only accessible and human-readable, but also have
been successfully verified by the Lean theorem prover. For reference, we include two examples (one
showcasing a successful proof and the other demonstrating a failed attempt) in Appendix E.
RQ2 : Efficiency. Since existing methods are built on different deduction engines, a direct compar-
ison of their proving time could be unfair. Instead, we break down the efficiency evaluation into two
aspects, i.e., the pruning ratio of scaling tactics and the number of iterations in goal selection. Given
that A IPS uses the equality check as the scaling tactic pruning strategy, we compare this approach
with the CAD-based strategy employed in L IPS. Figure 3 provides the result of each problem in the
MO-INT dataset. L IPS outperforms the existing method in 13 out of 20 problems, and achieves an
average improvement of 7.92%.
Furthermore, we count the number of goal selection iterations for each successfully proved problem,
and present the results in Figure 3. Due to the absence of a comparison method, we only include the
oracle (i.e., optimal goal selection) as a reference. We can observe that L IPS performs no more than
33 search loops to successfully obtain a proof, and for 12 out of 16 problems, it exceeds the oracle
by fewer than 10 steps. In addition, L IPS requires an average of 15.75 search loops, which is only
2.17 times that of the oracle (7.25), demonstrating that L IPS’s efficiency also stems from its high
accuracy in generating proving paths.
RQ3 : Scability. We conduct four experiments on the ChenNEQ dataset to explore the scalability
of L IPS’s symbolic and neural components. For the symbolic part, we first examine how expanding
the scaling tactics affects the performance of L IPS. To this end, we randomly select 7 sets of scaling
tactics with varying sizes and plot the performance curve in Figure 4(a). The results show that the
proof success rate consistently increases as more scaling tactics are included, suggesting potential
benefits in further enlarging our scaling tactic library. The second experiment investigates the effect
of different sizes of the filtered set. The corresponding performance curve is shown in Figure 4(b).
We observe that the success rate remains robust (over 85%) with sizes from 8 to 16, but decreases
significantly when the set is either too small or too large.
For the neural part, we explore the performance of L IPS with different LLMs serving in rewriting
tactic generation and neural ranking. We select three alternative LLMs, i.e., Mathstral 7B (Jiang
et al., 2023a), LLaMA-3 8B (AI, 2024), and DeepSeek-chat V2.5 (DeepSeek-AI, 2024). We also in-
clude a baseline method as an ablative study. In rewriting tactic generation, the baseline uses SymPy
simplify function instead of existing LLM-based rewriting tactics. In neural ranking, we directly
use random selection as the baseline. The proving success rates are provided in Figure 5. The re-


                                                                                                                                                                                       8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Baseline           Mathstral     LLaMA-3      Deepseek-chat            GPT4-o
                                                                                                                                                       100


3URYLQJ VXFFHVV UDWH


                                                                                                                               Proving success rate (%)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            100                                 95.1                    92.7                 95.1


                                                                                                                                                                                                 Proving success rate (%)
                                                                                                                                                         80                                                                                            85.4                                         87.8
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               80.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            75             73.2
                                                                                                                                                         60                                                                                     63.4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 51.2
                                                                                                                                                         40                                                               50
                                                                                                                                                         20
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            25      17.1
                                                                                                                                              00    4   8 12 16 20 24 28 32
                                                            9DULRXV VL]HV RI VFDOLQJ WDFWLFV                                     Various sizes of filtered set                               0        Tactic Generation                    Neural Ranking
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Various LLMs in rewriting tactic generation and neural ranking
Figure 4: Performance curves across different scaling Figure 5: Performance of various LLMs as
tactics and filtered set sizes. Results indicate that: (1) alternatives. Results illustrate that: (1) LLMs
Adding scaling tactics consistently improves the prov- are crucial in rewriting tactic generation and
ing success rate; (2) The effectiveness of symbolic fil- neural ranking; (2) The more powerful LLM
tering and the size of the filtered set are critical factors. can achieve higher proving success rate.


sults demonstrate that all three alternative LLMs exhibit strong mathematical intuition, achieving
performance comparable to GPT-4o in neural ranking. However, there exists a small decline in per-
formance for rewriting tactic generation, which may be due to differences in instruction following
and mathematical reasoning capabilities.
Ablation study. To showcase the strength of our neuro-symbolic paradigm, we present the results
of removing neural or symbolic modules of L IPS in Appendix D. We also analyze the performance
of symbolic solvers, offering guidance on optimal time limit settings in L IPS.
Case study. Besides the running example (1), we provide two additional examples in Appendix F
to illustrate that L IPS can discover new proofs, which are previously unavailable online. Moreover,
we also present two examples in Appendix F to demonstrate that users can verify human-written
proofs by comparing them with the reasoning paths generated by L IPS.

6                                                           R ELATED W ORK
Symbolic Tools for Mathematical Reasoning. Symbolic tools are essential for performing ex-
act computations and formal reasoning in mathematics. Interactive theorem provers such as Is-
abelle (Paulson, 1994), Coq (Coq, 1996), and Lean (de Moura et al., 2015) enable users to build
verifiable proofs manually, ensuring correctness through rigorous formal logic. These systems have
been instrumental in formalizing and verifying significant mathematical theorems, including the
Four Color Theorem (Gonthier, 2008) and the Kepler Conjecture (Hales et al., 2017). Alternatively,
some symbolic reasoning tools aim to solve mathematical problems without human intervention.
Automated theorem provers like E (Schulz, 2002) and Vampire (Kovács & Voronkov, 2013) are
designed to prove mathematical statements by systematically exploring possible proofs within a
logical framework, particularly excelling in first-order logic. SMT solvers such as Z3 (De Moura &
Bjørner, 2008) and CVC5 (Barbosa et al., 2022) determine the satisfiability of logical formulas with
respect to background theories like arithmetic, bit-vectors, and arrays by integrating logical reason-
ing with theory-specific decision procedures. Computer algebra systems like Mathematica (Wolfram
Research), Maple (Heck & Koepf, 1993), and SymPy (Meurer et al., 2017) manipulate mathemat-
ical expressions symbolically, supporting functionalities such as simplification, differentiation, in-
tegration, and equation solving. Despite their capabilities, these automated solvers struggle with
competitive mathematical problems and often cannot generate human-readable reasoning steps.
Machine Learning for Formal Theorem Proving. There is a longstanding tradition of leveraging
machine learning techniques to automate theorem proving (Urban et al., 2008; Gauthier et al., 2017;
Zhang et al., 2021; Piotrowski et al., 2023; Blaauwbroek et al., 2024). Recently, the emergence of
LLMs has expanded the potential of these techniques, offering new opportunities for automating
theorem proving (Li et al., 2024; Yang et al., 2024). A line of research (Polu & Sutskever, 2020;
Wu et al., 2021; Han et al., 2022; First et al., 2023; Yang et al., 2023; Xin et al., 2024a; Lin et al.,
2025) fine-tunes pre-trained language models on large-scale formal datasets to predict the tactics
given a proof goal. Alternative approaches (Jiang et al., 2023b; Xin et al., 2024b; Zhao et al., 2024;
Zheng et al., 2024; Thakur et al., 2024) integrate LLMs into structured prompt frameworks for
formal theorem proving, leveraging information such as natural language proofs or feedback from


                                                                                                                                                                                          9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


interactive theorem provers. Some methods (Polu & Sutskever, 2020; Lample et al., 2022; Polu et al.,
2023; Wang et al., 2023; Wei et al., 2024) also train LLMs as value networks to evaluate each subgoal
and guide the proof search to completion. However, these methods primarily rely on LLMs to prune
the search space, and their performance heavily depends on the quality and diversity of the training
data, which may limit their generalizability to novel or more complex mathematical problems. A
notable exception and closely related work to ours is AlphaGeometry (Trinh et al., 2024), which
uses a language model only to predict auxiliary construction rules, after which its symbolic solver
automatically enumerates all inference rules to generate the proof in a specialized language used in
GEX (Chou et al., 2000). Compared to their approach, our neuro-symbolic framework generates
step-by-step proofs in general-purpose formal language Lean and allows for integrating arbitrary
symbolic tools that do not require direct proof generation. Furthermore, our focus on inequality
problems spans a much wider range of complex mathematical skills than plane geometry problems.
Our techniques could serve as a solid foundation for broader areas of mathematical research such as
information theory (Dembo et al., 1991), optimization (Nesterov, 2013), and deep learning (Roberts
et al., 2022), making it a suitable pathway to more advanced mathematical problems.

7   L IMITATIONS AND F UTURE W ORK
While L IPS has shown significant promise in generating formal proofs for Olympiad inequalities,
several avenues remain open for enhancement and expansion.
Automating the Formalization of Tactics. Our framework currently relies on a set of manually
crafted tactics for scaling and rewriting inequalities, such as various forms of AM-GM inequality.
This manual effort may impact scalability, given that the effectiveness of our approach is closely tied
to the breadth of available tactics. Future work could focus on automating the discovery, formaliza-
tion, and proof of new tactics to expand the tactic library. Developing methods for automatic tactic
generation would reduce human effort and enhance the framework’s scalability and adaptability.
Enhancing the Reasoning Capabilities of LLMs. We leverage the mathematical insights learned
by LLMs in our framework, and there is potential to further improve their reasoning performance.
One promising direction is to collect or generate additional formal inequality problems and their
corresponding proofs to create a richer dataset for fine-tuning LLMs specifically for this task. Some
existing techniques (Li et al., 2025) may be useful for generating diverse and high-quality problems
to enhance the LLMs’ capabilities in handling inequalities, leading to better overall performance.
Broadening the Application Domain. While our framework currently focuses on Olympiad-level
elementary algebraic inequalities, extending it to more complex problems, such as concentration
inequalities in machine learning theory, presents an exciting avenue for future research. This would
involve improving the symbolic solver to handle inequality structures that consist of infinite vari-
ables and higher-order concepts like expectations or variances. Developing efficient algorithms and
symbolic reasoning methods for these advanced mathematical constructs could significantly broaden
the applicability of our neuro-symbolic paradigm. Extending our approach to other mathematical
domains holds great potential and is a promising direction for future work.

8   C ONCLUSION
In this paper, we introduce a neuro-symbolic framework for generating formal proofs that integrates
the mathematical intuition learned by LLMs with domain-specific insights encoded by symbolic
methods, specifically focusing on the domain of Olympiad inequalities. We categorize the tactics
used in inequality proofs into two types: scaling and rewriting. Symbolic methods are employed
to generate and filter scaling tactics by applying a set of lemmas through mechanical symbolic
reasoning. LLMs are leveraged to generate rewriting tactics, implicitly pruning the infinite num-
ber of equivalent transformations to a manageable set. We further combine symbolic tools with
LLMs to prune and rank subgoals, enhancing the efficiency of proof search. Experiments on chal-
lenging inequalities from three problem sets show that our neuro-symbolic inequality prover L IPS
significantly outperforms both LLMs and symbolic methods, demonstrating the effectiveness of the
neuro-symbolic integration and laying a solid foundation for its adoption in broader domains.


                                                  10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


ACKNOWLEDGMENT
We appreciate anonymous reviewers for their valuable comments and engaging discussions. This
work was partially conducted during Zenan’s and Wen’s internships at MSRA. It is supported by the
National Natural Science Foundation of China (Grants #62025202) and the Frontier Technologies
R&D Program of Jiangsu (BF2024059). Zhaoyu Li and Xujie Si were also supported, in part, by In-
dividual Discovery Grants from the Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council of Canada,
and the Canada CIFAR AI Chair Program. Xian Zhang (zhxian@microsoft.com), Kaiyu Yang
(kaiyuy@meta.com), and Xiaoxing Ma (xxm@nju.edu.cn) are the corresponding authors.

R EFERENCES
Meta AI. Llama 3 model card. 2024. URL https://github.com/meta-llama/llama3/
 blob/main/MODEL_CARD.md.
Dennis S Arnon, George E Collins, and Scott McCallum. Cylindrical algebraic decomposition I:
  The basic algorithm. SIAM Journal on Computing, 1984.
Haniel Barbosa, Clark Barrett, Martin Brain, Gereon Kremer, Hanna Lachnitt, Makai Mann, Ab-
  dalrhman Mohamed, Mudathir Mohamed, Aina Niemetz, Andres Nötzli, et al. cvc5: A versatile
  and industrial-strength SMT solver. In International Conference on Tools and Algorithms for the
  Construction and Analysis of Systems, 2022.
Clark Barrett and Cesare Tinelli. Satisfiability modulo theories. 2018.
Lasse Blaauwbroek, Mirek Olšák, Jason Rute, Fidel Ivan Schaposnik Massolo, Jelle Piepenbrock,
  and Vasily Pestun. Graph2Tac: Online representation learning of formal math concepts. In
  International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML), 2024.
Bob F Caviness and Jeremy R Johnson. Quantifier elimination and cylindrical algebraic decompo-
  sition. Springer Science & Business Media, 2012.
Evan Chen. Supersums of square-weights (SOS), 2013.
Evan Chen. A brief introduction to olympiad inequalities.          2014.   URL https://web.
  evanchen.cc/handouts/Ineq/en.pdf.
Shang-Ching Chou, Xiao-Shan Gao, and Jing-Zhong Zhang. A Deductive Database Approach to
  Automated Geometry Theorem Proving and Discovering. Journal of Automated Reasoning, 2000.
Zheng Chu, Jingchang Chen, Qianglong Chen, Weijiang Yu, Tao He, Haotian Wang, Weihua Peng,
  Ming Liu, Bing Qin, and Ting Liu. A survey of chain of thought reasoning: Advances, frontiers
  and future. arXiv preprint arXiv:2309.15402, 2023.
Project Coq. The Coq proof assistant-reference manual. INRIA Rocquencourt and ENS Lyon, ver-
  sion, 5, 1996.
James H Davenport and Joos Heintz. Real quantifier elimination is doubly exponential. Journal of
  Symbolic Computation, 1988.
Leonardo De Moura and Nikolaj Bjørner. Efficient e-matching for SMT solvers. In Automated
  Deduction–CADE-21: 21st International Conference on Automated Deduction Bremen, Ger-
  many, July 17-20, 2007 Proceedings 21, pp. 183–198. Springer, 2007.
Leonardo De Moura and Nikolaj Bjørner. Z3: An efficient SMT solver. In International Conference
  on Tools and Algorithms for the Construction and Analysis of Systems, 2008.
Leonardo de Moura, Soonho Kong, Jeremy Avigad, Floris Van Doorn, and Jakob von Raumer. The
  Lean theorem prover (system description). In International Conference on Automated Deduction
  (CADE), 2015.
DeepSeek-AI. DeepSeek-V2: A strong, economical, and efficient mixture-of-experts language
  model, 2024.


                                                 11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Amir Dembo, Thomas M Cover, and Joy A Thomas. Information theoretic inequalities. IEEE
 Transactions on Information theory, 1991.
Emily First, Markus Rabe, Talia Ringer, and Yuriy Brun. Baldur: Whole-proof generation and
  repair with large language models. In ACM Joint European Software Engineering Conference
  and Symposium on the Foundations of Software Engineering (ESEC/FSE), 2023.
Zhoulai Fu and Zhendong Su. XSat: A fast floating-point satisfiability solver. In International
  Conference on Computer Aided Verification (CAV), 2016.
Thibault Gauthier, Cezary Kaliszyk, and Josef Urban. Learning to reason with HOL4 tactics. In
  International Conference on Logic for Programming, Artificial Intelligence and Reasoning, 2017.
Georges Gonthier. The Four Colour Theorem: Engineering of a Formal Proof. In Proceedings of
  the Asian Symposium on Computer Mathematics, 2008.
Google DeepMind.     AI achieves silver-medal standard solving international mathe-
  matical olympiad problems.     https://deepmind.google/discover/blog/
  ai-solves-imo-problems-at-silver-medal-level/, 2024.
Thomas Hales, Mark Adams, Gertrud Bauer, Tat Dat Dang, John Harrison, Hoang Le Truong,
  Cezary Kaliszyk, Victor Magron, Sean McLaughlin, Tat Thang Nguyen, et al. A Formal Proof of
  the Kepler Conjecture. In Forum of Mathematics, Pi, 2017.
Kristian J Hammond and David B Leake. Large language models need symbolic AI. In International
  Workshop on Neural-Symbolic Learning and Reasoning,, 2023.
Jesse Michael Han, Jason Rute, Yuhuai Wu, Edward W Ayers, and Stanislas Polu. Proof Artifact Co-
  Training for Theorem Proving with Language Models. In International Conference on Learning
  Representations (ICLR), 2022.
Godfrey Harold Hardy, John Edensor Littlewood, and George Pólya. Inequalities. 1952.
André Heck and Wolfram Koepf. Introduction to Maple. 1993.
Marijn JH Heule, Oliver Kullmann, and Victor W Marek. Solving and verifying the boolean
 Pythagorean triples problem via cube-and-conquer. In International Conference on Theory and
 Applications of Satisfiability Testing, 2016.
Bruce Ikenaga. Techniques in proving inequalities, Sep 2018. URL https://sites.
  millersville.edu/bikenaga/math-proof/inequalities/inequalities.
  html.
Albert Q Jiang, Alexandre Sablayrolles, Arthur Mensch, Chris Bamford, Devendra Singh Chaplot,
  Diego de las Casas, Florian Bressand, Gianna Lengyel, Guillaume Lample, Lucile Saulnier, et al.
  Mistral 7B. arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.06825, 2023a.
Albert Q Jiang, Sean Welleck, Jin Peng Zhou, Wenda Li, Jiacheng Liu, Mateja Jamnik, Timothée
  Lacroix, Yuhuai Wu, and Guillaume Lample. Draft, sketch, and prove: Guiding formal theorem
  provers with informal proofs. In International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR),
  2023b.
Mats Jirstrand. Cylindrical algebraic decomposition-an introduction. Linköping University, 1995.
Dejan Jovanović and Leonardo de Moura. Solving non-linear arithmetic. ACM Communications in
  Computer Algebra, 2013.
Levente Kocsis and Csaba Szepesvári. Bandit based Monte-Carlo planning. In European conference
  on machine learning, 2006.
Laura Kovács and Andrei Voronkov. First-order theorem proving and Vampire. In International
  Conference on Computer Aided Verification (CAV), 2013.
Gereon Kremer. Cylindrical algebraic decomposition for nonlinear arithmetic problems. PhD the-
  sis, Dissertation, RWTH Aachen University, 2020, 2020.


                                               12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Gereon Kremer, Andrew Reynolds, Clark Barrett, and Cesare Tinelli. Cooperating techniques for
  solving nonlinear real arithmetic in the cvc5 SMT solver (system description). In International
  Joint Conference on Automated Reasoning, 2022.
Guillaume Lample, Timothee Lacroix, Marie-Anne Lachaux, Aurelien Rodriguez, Amaury Hayat,
  Thibaut Lavril, Gabriel Ebner, and Xavier Martinet. Hypertree Proof Search for Neural Theorem
  Proving. In Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS), 2022.
Hojoo Lee. Topics in inequalities-theorems and techniques. Korea Institute for Advanced Study,
  Seoul, 2004.
François Lemaire, M Moreno Maza, and Yuzhen Xie. The regularchains library in Maple. ACM
  SIGSAM Bulletin, 2005.
Kin-Yin Li. Using tangent lines to prove inequalities. Mathematical Excalibur, 2006:1, 2005.
Zenan Li, Zhi Zhou, Yuan Yao, Xian Zhang, Yu-Feng Li, Chun Cao, Fan Yang, and Xiaoxing Ma.
  Neuro-symbolic data generation for math reasoning. Advances in Neural Information Processing
  Systems, 37:23488–23515, 2025.
Zhaoyu Li, Jialiang Sun, Logan Murphy, Qidong Su, Zenan Li, Xian Zhang, Kaiyu Yang, and
  Xujie Si. A survey on deep learning for theorem proving. In Conference on Language Modeling
  (COLM), 2024.
Yong Lin, Shange Tang, Bohan Lyu, Jiayun Wu, Hongzhou Lin, Kaiyu Yang, Jia Li, Mengzhou Xia,
  Danqi Chen, Sanjeev Arora, et al. Goedel-prover: A frontier model for open-source automated
  theorem proving. arXiv preprint arXiv:2502.07640, 2025.
Nelson F Liu, Kevin Lin, John Hewitt, Ashwin Paranjape, Michele Bevilacqua, Fabio Petroni, and
  Percy Liang. Lost in the middle: How language models use long contexts. Transactions of the
  Association for Computational Linguistics, 2024.
Yang Lu. Practical automated reasoning on inequalities: Generic programs for inequality proving
  and discovering. Asian Technology Conference in Mathematics, 1998.
Yi-An Ma, Yuansi Chen, Chi Jin, Nicolas Flammarion, and Michael I Jordan. Sampling can be
  faster than optimization. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences (PNAS), 2019.
Radmila Bulajich Manfrino, José Antonio Gómez Ortega, and Rogelio Valdez Delgado. Inequali-
  ties: a mathematical olympiad approach. 2010.
Aaron Meurer, Christopher P Smith, Mateusz Paprocki, Ondřej Čertı́k, Sergey B Kirpichev, Matthew
  Rocklin, AMiT Kumar, Sergiu Ivanov, Jason K Moore, Sartaj Singh, et al. SymPy: symbolic
  computing in python. PeerJ Computer Science, 2017.
Michał Moskal, Jakub Łopuszański, and Joseph R Kiniry. E-matching for fun and profit. Electronic
 Notes in Theoretical Computer Science, 198(2):19–35, 2008.
Yurii Nesterov. Introductory lectures on convex optimization: A basic course. 2013.
Allen Newell and Herbert Simon. The logic theory machine–a complex information processing
  system. IRE Transactions on information theory, 1956.
Xinpeng Ni, Yulun Wu, and Bican Xia. Solving SMT over non-linear real arithmetic via numer-
  ical sampling and symbolic verification. In International Symposium on Dependable Software
  Engineering: Theories, Tools, and Applications, 2023.
Lawrence C Paulson. Isabelle: A Generic Theorem Prover. 1994.
Bartosz Piotrowski, Ramon Fernández Mir, and Edward Ayers. Machine-learned premise selec-
  tion for Lean. In International Conference on Automated Reasoning with Analytic Tableaux and
  Related Methods, 2023.
Stanislas Polu and Ilya Sutskever. Generative language modeling for automated theorem proving.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2009.03393, 2020.


                                               13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Stanislas Polu, Jesse Michael Han, Kunhao Zheng, Mantas Baksys, Igor Babuschkin, and Ilya
  Sutskever. Formal Mathematics Statement Curriculum Learning. In International Conference
  on Learning Representations (ICLR), 2023.
Daniel A Roberts, Sho Yaida, and Boris Hanin. The principles of deep learning theory. Cambridge
  University Press Cambridge, MA, USA, 2022.
Stephan Schulz. E–a brainiac theorem prover. AI Communications, 2002.
Peiyang Song, Kaiyu Yang, and Anima Anandkumar. Towards large language models as copilots
  for theorem proving in Lean. arXiv preprint arXiv: Arxiv-2404.12534, 2024.
Amitayush Thakur, George Tsoukalas, Yeming Wen, Jimmy Xin, and Swarat Chaudhuri. An
 in-context learning agent for formal theorem-proving. In Conference on Language Modeling
 (COLM), 2024.
Trieu H Trinh, Yuhuai Wu, Quoc V Le, He He, and Thang Luong. Solving olympiad geometry
  without human demonstrations. Nature, 2024.
Nguyen Duy Tung. 567 nice and hard inequality. https://phamtuankhai.wordpress.
  com/wp-content/uploads/2012/04/567-bat-dang-thuc-hay.pdf,               April
  2012.
Ali K Uncu, James H Davenport, and Matthew England. SMT-solving induction proofs of inequal-
  ities. arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.16761, 2023.
Marcell János Uray. On proving inequalities by cylindrical algebraic decomposition. In Annales
 Universitatis Scientiarum Budapestinensis de Rolando Eotvos Nominatae. Sectio Computatorica,
 2020.
Josef Urban, Geoff Sutcliffe, Petr Pudlák, and Jiřı́ Vyskočil. MaLARea SG1—machine learner for
  automated reasoning with semantic guidance. In International Joint Conference on Automated
  Reasoning, 2008.
Ashish Vaswani, Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Jakob Uszkoreit, Llion Jones, Aidan N Gomez,
  Łukasz Kaiser, and Illia Polosukhin. Attention is all you need. In Neural Information Processing
  Systems (NeurIPS), 2017.
Pauli Virtanen, Ralf Gommers, Travis E Oliphant, Matt Haberland, Tyler Reddy, David Courna-
  peau, Evgeni Burovski, Pearu Peterson, Warren Weckesser, Jonathan Bright, et al. SciPy 1.0:
  fundamental algorithms for scientific computing in Python. Nature methods, 2020.
Haiming Wang, Ye Yuan, Zhengying Liu, Jianhao Shen, Yichun Yin, Jing Xiong, Enze Xie, Han
  Shi, Yujun Li, Lin Li, et al. DT-Solver: Automated theorem proving with dynamic-tree sampling
  guided by proof-level value function. In Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational
  Linguistics (ACL), 2023.
Chenrui Wei, Mengzhou Sun, and Wei Wang. Proving olympiad algebraic inequalities without hu-
  man demonstrations. In Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS), Datasets and Bench-
  marks Track, 2024.
Jason Wei, Xuezhi Wang, Dale Schuurmans, Maarten Bosma, Fei Xia, Ed Chi, Quoc V Le, and
  Denny Zhou. Chain-of-thought prompting elicits reasoning in large language models. In Neural
  Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS), 2022.
Max Willsey, Chandrakana Nandi, Yisu Remy Wang, Oliver Flatt, Zachary Tatlock, and Pavel
 Panchekha. egg: Fast and extensible equality saturation. Proc. ACM Program. Lang., 5(POPL),
 January 2021. doi: 10.1145/3434304. URL https://doi.org/10.1145/3434304.
Wolfram Research.      Mathematica, version 14.1.       URL https://www.wolfram.com/
 mathematica.
Wolfram Research. Cylindrical Decomposition, 2020. URL https://reference.wolfram.
 com/language/ref/CylindricalDecomposition.html.

                                               14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Wen-tsün Wu. On the decision problem and the mechanization of theorem-proving in elementary
 geometry. In Selected Works Of Wen-Tsun Wu, pp. 117–138. World Scientific, 2008.
Yuhuai Wu, Albert Q Jiang, Jimmy Ba, and Roger Grosse. INT: An inequality benchmark for
  evaluating generalization in theorem proving. In International Conference on Learning Repre-
  sentations (ICLR), 2021.
Huajian Xin, Daya Guo, Zhihong Shao, Zhizhou Ren, Qihao Zhu, Bo Liu, Chong Ruan, Wenda Li,
  and Xiaodan Liang. DeepSeek-Prover: Advancing theorem proving in llms through large-scale
  synthetic data. arXiv preprint arXiv:2405.14333, 2024a.
Huajian Xin, Haiming Wang, Chuanyang Zheng, Lin Li, Zhengying Liu, Qingxing Cao, Yinya
  Huang, Jing Xiong, Han Shi, Enze Xie, et al. LEGO-Prover: Neural theorem proving with
  growing libraries. In International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR), 2024b.
Kaiyu Yang, Aidan Swope, Alex Gu, Rahul Chalamala, Peiyang Song, Shixing Yu, Saad Godil,
  Ryan Prenger, and Anima Anandkumar. LeanDojo: Theorem proving with retrieval-augmented
  language models. In Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS), 2023.
Kaiyu Yang, Gabriel Poesia, Jingxuan He, Wenda Li, Kristin Lauter, Swarat Chaudhuri, and Dawn
  Song. Formal mathematical reasoning: A new frontier in AI. arXiv preprint arXiv:2412.16075,
  2024.
Lu Yang. Recent advances in automated theorem proving on inequalities. Journal of Computer
  Science and Technology, 1999.
Huaiyuan Ying, Zijian Wu, Yihan Geng, Jiayu Wang, Dahua Lin, and Kai Chen. Lean Workbook:
  A large-scale Lean problem set formalized from natural language math problems. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2406.03847, 2024.
Liao Zhang, Lasse Blaauwbroek, Bartosz Piotrowski, Cezary Kaliszyk, and Josef Urban. Online
  machine learning techniques for Coq: a comparison. In International Conference on Intelligent
  Computer Mathematics, 2021.
Xueliang Zhao, Wenda Li, and Lingpeng Kong. Subgoal-Based Demonstration Learning for Formal
  Theorem Proving. In International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML), 2024.
Chuanyang Zheng, Haiming Wang, Enze Xie, Zhengying Liu, Jiankai Sun, Huajian Xin, Jianhao
  Shen, Zhenguo Li, and Yu Li. Lyra: Orchestrating dual correction in automated theorem proving.
  Transactions on Machine Learning Research (TMLR), 2024.


                                               15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A    S YMBOLIC METHODS VS . N EURAL METHODS

                                   Initial goal (to be proved)             𝑎𝑏 + 𝑏𝑐 + 𝑐𝑎 ≤ 𝑎! + 𝑏! + 𝑐 !

                                                                 Tactic1                     Cauchy-Schwarz

                                         Intermediate goals’                (2a! + 𝑏! )(2𝑐 ! + 𝑏! ) ≤ 𝑎! + 𝑏! + 𝑐 !
                                                                 Tactic2
                                                                                             AM-GM

                                         Intermediate goals’’              (2𝑎 + 𝑏 + 2𝑐 + 𝑏! )/2 ≤ 𝑎! + 𝑏! + 𝑐 !
                                                                              !     !    !

                                                                 Tactic3                     Simplification

                                          Final goal (trivial)             𝑎! + 𝑏! + 𝑐 ! ≤ 𝑎! + 𝑏! + 𝑐 !

     (a) An example of CAD          (b) Inequality proving process                (c) An example of proof

Figure 6: Figure (a) demonstrates how CAD is performed on two intersecting unit circles, deriving
multiple sign-invariant cells (i.e., colored region). Figure (b) illustrates the process of inequality
proving, which constructs a chain of proof goals by iteratively applying tactics; Figure (c) provides
a corresponding instantiation of proving ab + bc + ca ≤ a2 + b2 + c2 .
Figure 6(a) illustrates how symbolic methods work in proving inequalities. Symbolic methods are
based on the CAD algorithm, which divides the underlying space Rn into multiple connected semi-
algebraic sets. In each cell, the sign of every polynomial remains constant (positive, negative, or
zero). Therefore, we just need to sample one point to determine the satisfiability of each cell, rather
than scanning the whole Rn space. One can refer to Caviness & Johnson (2012); Arnon et al. (1984);
Jirstrand (1995) for more details of CAD algorithm.
Figure 6(b) and 6(c) illustrate a commonly used paradigm in inequality proving. In a nutshell, a
theorem prover often starts with the proof goal, and then iteratively transforms it into a simpler form
until the final version can be easily confirmed. This approach has two main advantages. First, it
ensures that the resulting proof can be more easily formalized in formal languages such as Lean.
Second, since the hypotheses involved in inequality proofs are often straightforward, scaling and
rewriting the proof goal is typically more efficient.


B    P SEUDO CODE OF L IPS

Algorithm (3) outlines the overall process of L IPS proof generation. The detailed steps for tactic
generation and pruning are provided in Algorithm 1, while the specifics for goal filtering and ranking
are described in Algorithm 2.

Algorithm 1 Tactic generation and pruning of L IPS
Input: A proof goal g; A lemma library of scaling tactics Φ and a prompt set of rewriting tactics
    Ψ; A language model M .
Output: Tactic set T .
 1: Initialize the tactic set T = {}
 2: for t in Φ do                                                          ▷ Scaling tactic generation
 3:     Obtain arguments of the tactic t using pattern match on the goal Φ.
 4:     Check the tactic t (with derived arguments) via the symbolic solvers.
 5:     if no counterexamples exist then                            ▷ Tactic pruning & Solver update
 6:          Add the tactic t into the tactic set T .
 7:     else
 8:          Update the symbolic solvers by including newly detected counterexamples.
 9:     end if
10: end for
11: for t in Ψ do                                           ▷ Rewriting tactic generation & pruning
12:     Obtain arguments of the tactic t by prompting the LLM.
13:     Add the tactic t (with derived arguments) into the tactic set T .
14: end for



                                                    16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Algorithm 2 Goal filtering and ranking of L IPS
Input: A goal candidate set Ω.
Output: A ranked set Ω′ .
 1: Initialize a new goal set Ω′ = {}.
 2: for g in Ω do                                                           ▷ Symbolic goal filtering
 3:     Compute the homogeneity α and decoupling β for g.
 4:     Define the average score of the goal g by (α + β)/2.
 5: end for
 6: Prompt the LLM to rank the first ten goals in Ω′                           ▷ Neural goal ranking
 7: Obtain arguments of the tactic t by prompting the LLM.
 8: Re-rank the goal set Ω′ according to LLM’s responses.


Algorithm 3 Overall proof generation process of L IPS
Input: A formal inequality problem g0 ; A lemma library of scaling tactics Φ and a prompt set of
    rewriting tactics Ψ; A language model M .
Output: A formal proof or timeout.
 1: Initialize the candidate goal set Ω = {g0 }.
 2: for i = 1, . . . , do
 3:     Select the first goal g in S for exploration.
 4:     Obtain the tactic set T by applying Algorithm (1) on the current goal g.
 5:     for t in T do                                                             ▷ Tactic application
 6:          Apply the tactic to the current g in Lean, deriving a new goal g ′ .
 7:          Add the new goal g ′ into the the candidate goal set Ω.
 8:     end for
 9:     Update the goal set Ω by applying Algorithm (2).
10: end for



C        A DDITIONAL DETAILS FOR EXPERIMENTS

The experiments were conducted on four Linux servers equipped with 4 Intel(R) Xeon(R) Platinum
8280L CPU @ 2.80GHz. Each server ran Ubuntu 22.04 with GNU/Linux kernel 6.5.0-1015-azure.
Each proving task was performed within a docker sandbox, utilizing 192 assigned CPU cores.
Neural provers. For DSP, we directly use the official code, and adapt it to Lean language and
GPT-4o (version Azure-05-01). MCTS is implemented based on classic upper confidence bounds
        to trees algorithm (Kocsis & Szepesvári, 2006). The value function is defined as f (ϕ) =
applied p
vϕ + C log(Nϕ )/nϕ , where nϕ is the number of the proof goal ϕ is selected and explored, Nϕ
            √ number of ϕ’s parent represents selected and explored, and C is a hyperparameter
represents the
set to C = 2. For the average reward vϕ of the proof goal ϕ, we use the same heuristic function
as Wei et al. (2024), which calculates the maximum depth of the expression trees on both sides.
Symbolic provers. For CAD, we utilize a portfolio including a suite of solvers, i.e., Z3, CVC5,
RC-CAD, and Bottema. It will claim the problem is successfully proved if any one of four tools
outputs unsat, and vice vica. Among four tools, Z3 and CVC5 are two popular SMT solvers; RC-
CAD refers to the CylindricalAlgebraicDecompose function in Maple 2024 RegularChain package;1
Bottema is a CAD-based inequality prover developed by Yang (1999).2 As to MMA, we integrate
two commands, i.e., Reduce and FindInstance in Wolfram-Mathematica (version 13.0.1), and
apply the same peripheral logic with CAD.
L IPS. In our framework, the symbolic solver employed for pruning scaling tactics also consists
of solvers Z3, CVC5, RC-CAD, and Bottema, complemented by a numerical optimizer grounded
in SciPy (Virtanen et al., 2020). The time limit of searching counterexamples is set to 5 seconds.
Scaling tactics encompasses a comprehensive array of inequality lemma, including AM-GM, AM-
HM, Cauchy-Schwarz, Power Mean, Chebyshev, Muirhead, Jensen, Titu, Schur, Holder inequalities,

    1
        https://www.maplesoft.com/support/help/maple/view.aspx?path=RegularChains
    2
        https://faculty.uestc.edu.cn/huangfangjian/en/article/167349/content/2378.htm



                                                  17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


as well as a selection of valuable inequalities contributed by Lászió Kozma.3 To facilitate their
application in Lean 4, we have developed multiple variations of each inequality, accounting for
different numbers of variables and directions. Figure 7 illustrates our scaling tactics using two-
variable AM-GM inequality.

theorem NEQ_AM_GM_left_2vars (u v k l right : R) (hk : k ≥ 0) (h : k *
    (u ˆ 2 + v ˆ 2) / 2 + l ≤ right) : k * (u * v) + l ≤ right := by
  suffices (u - v) ˆ 2 ≥ 0 by nlinarith
  positivity

theorem NEQ_AM_GM_right_2vars (u v k l left : R) (hk : k ≥ 0) (h : left
    ≤ 2 * k * (u * v) + l) : left ≤ k * (u ˆ 2 + v ˆ 2) + l := by
  suffices (u - v) ˆ 2 ≥ 0 by nlinarith
  positivity

               Figure 7: Two examples of AM-GM inequality encoded as scaling tactics


  Prompts of Rewriting Tactics Generation (Simplification)

  ### Task
  Your task is to use the condition {condition}, rearrange and rewrite the expression given by the user into
  an absolutely different form.
  ### Notice
  1. Please reason step by step
  2. Only four operators, add, sub, multiply, and division, can be used, and should NOT introduce new
  variables
  3. Put the final results within \\boxed{{}}, e.g., \\boxed{{x + 1/y - z}}
  ### Response
  User:
  {problem}
  Assistant:

  Prompts of Rewriting Tactics Generation (Others)

  ### Task
  You should rewrite the inequality given by the user according to the rule {rule}
  ### Notice
  1. Please reason step by step
  2. Follow the given example, and output the result for the given inequality
  3. Put the final results within \\boxed{{}}, e.g., \\boxed{{x + 1/y - z}}
  ### Example
  User:
  {example problem}
  Assistant:
  {example answer}
  ### Response
  User:
  {problem}
  Assistant:

   Figure 8: Prompts of simplification and other operations used for generating rewriting tactics
For rewriting tactics, we design 16 relevant operations, i.e., simplification w/o assumptions, sim-
plification w/ assumptions, completing the square, variable substitution, expression expansion, ex-
pression rearrangement, expression multiplication, cancellation of denominators/numerators, can-
cellation of powers, extraction/cancellation of common factors, separation/reduction of fractions,
sum-of-squares trick, and tangent line trick. Except for the sum-of-squares trick and tangent line
trick implemented based on SymPy, we use two prompt templates for these operations, shown in
Figure 8. For each operation, we repeatedly query the LLM three times to cover more rewriting tac-
   3
       https://www.lkozma.net/inequalities_cheat_sheet/ineq.pdf



                                                     18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


tics. We use a low-temperature setting of GPT-4o in rewriting tactic generation and neural ranking
(T=0.1, top p=1.0, max token=2048).


D                              A BLATION S TUDY

                      20
                                                                                                     300
                                  CAD                                                                          MMA
                      16                                                                             240
CPU time in seconds


                                                                               CPU time in seconds
                      12                                                                             180

                       8                                                                             120

                       4                                                                             60

                       0                                                                              0
                           0       5    10          15       20   25     30                                0   5         10          15       20   25   30
                                             Solution number                                                                  Solution number

Figure 9: CPU time vs. solution count curves of CAD and MMA. The results show that symbolic
solvers can verify the inequality in less than five minutes. For other problems that cannot be verified
quickly, allocating more time does not improve the results. In addition, it is important to note that
symbolic solvers are unable to construct human-readable proofs for the problems.
Scaling tactics. Figure 4(a) has shown how the performance on the ChenNEQ dataset (Y-axis)
changes as we increase the number of lemmas used by scaling tactics (X-axis). When X = 0 (without
scaling tactics), only 3 out of 41 theorems can be proved, whereas LIPS can prove 39 theorems.
Rewriting tactics. We observed that the successfully proved 3 theorems without scaling tactics
are achieved by two rewriting tactics, sum-of-squares and tangent line trick. Hence, we further
investigate the ablation of these two tactics. We newly evaluated LIPS w/o sum-of-squares and
tangent lines on ChenNEQ. Among the 39 out of 41 proved inequalities, none of them requires
sum-of-squares, and 3 requires the tangent line trick.
Symbolic filtering. Figure 4(b) has shown how the performance on the ChenNEQ dataset (Y-axis)
changes as we increase the size of the filtered set (X-axis). A smaller X means more aggressive
symbolic filtering. When X is large, e.g., 32, the performance drops under 40%, highlighting the
importance of symbolic filtering. We did not test values of X beyond 32, as this consistently caused
GPT-4o to hit the maximum token limit (set at 4096).
Neural ranking. Figure 5 presents an ablation analysis where neural ranking is replaced with ran-
dom selection. The results on ChenNEQ demonstrate a significant drop in LIPS performance, from
95.1% to 41.2%, underscoring the necessity of neural ranking. Additionally, we incorporate a new
ablation analysis that examines the effect of replacing neural ranking with purely symbolic filtering.
The success rate decreased to 43.9%, indicating that symbolic filtering cannot determine an accurate
proof path.
Symbolic solvers. To explore the performance of symbolic solvers, we use the ChenNEQ dataset
and plot the CPU time vs. solution count curves on Figure 9. It can be observed that (1) symbolic
solvers are very fast, they can verify the inequality in less than five minutes; (2) for other problems
that cannot be verified quickly, allocating more time cannot improve the results. It also means that
we only need to set a small time limit for symbolic solvers in L IPS.

                                             Table 2: LIPS proving success rate if different time budgets
                                        Method         <10min     <30min           <50min                      <70min            <90min
                                         LIPS              5%          15%                           35%           60%              80%

As to the results of L IPS, we list the success rate vs. CPU time in Table 2. Additionally, we plan to
further enhance the efficiency of LIPS in the next version, for example, by optimizing the SymPy
pattern matching function.


                                                                              19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


E    C ASE S TUDY

    A Failed Case of D SP
    Prompt: Draft an informal solution similar to below. The informal solution will be used to sketch a
    formal Lean proof. Here are some examples:
    Example:
    Informal:
    (* ### Problem {Problem-1} ### Solution {Solution-1} *)
    Informal:
    (* ### Problem {Problem-2} ### Solution {Solution-2} *)
    Informal:
    (* ### Problem
    if a, b, c are positive real numbers, then
                                               r          r          r
                                a   b     c      a2 + 1     b2 + 1     c2 + 1
                                   + + ≥                +          +          .
                                 b  c     a      b2 + 1     c2 + 1     a2 + 1


    Informal solution:
    ### Solution
    We will use the AM-GM inequality which states that for non-negative      √ real numbers x and y, the
    arithmetic mean is greater than or equal to the geometric mean: x+y2
                                                                           ≥ xy.
    First, let’s consider the terms on the left-hand side one by one and apply AM-GM to each term along
    with its corresponding term on the right-handq side.                                                2
                                                      a2 +1
    For the term ab and its corresponding term        b2 +1
                                                            , we apply AM-GM to ab and ab · a21+1   = b a+1 :
                                                                                            b2 +1
                                       2             r
                                  a
                                    + b a+1
                                                                            r
                                  b                      a     b2 + 1             a2 + 1
                                                 ≥         ·       =              .
                                         2               b    a            b2 + 1
                                         q                     q
                                             b2 +1                 2
    Repeating this process for cb with       c2 +1
                                                   and ac with ac 2+1+1
                                                                        , we obtain:
                                                      2
                                                b
                                                  + c b+1
                                                             r
                                                c               b2 + 1
                                                          ≥              ,
                                                    2           c2 + 1
    and                                             2
                                               c
                                                 + a c+1
                                                                   r
                                               a                       c2 + 1
                                                               ≥              .
                                               2                       a2 + 1
    Adding these three inequalities together, we get:
                                                           r 2     r          r
                            b2 + 1      c2 + 1    a2 + 1

         1 a       b    c                                   a +1     b2 + 1     c2 + 1
               + + +                 +          +         ≥  2
                                                                 +    2
                                                                            +          .
         2 b       c    a       a          b          c     b +1     c +1       a2 + 1
                                                                                                        2
    Notice that the left-hand side contains the terms ab + cb + ac and additional terms. Since b a+1 +
    c2 +1     2
      b
          + a c+1 > 0 (because all terms are positive), we can drop these additional terms to strengthen
    the inequality:
                                            r            r           r
                             a    b   c        a2 + 1      b2 + 1       c2 + 1
                               + + ≥            2
                                                      +      2
                                                                   +           .
                             b    c   a        b +1        c +1         a2 + 1
    Thus, we have shown that the original inequality holds for any positive real numbers a, b, c.*)

    Prompt:
    Translate the informal solution into a sketch of the formal Lean 4 proof. Add ‘suggest tactics’ in the
    sketch whenever possible. ‘suggest tactics‘ will be used to call the automated theorem prover. Here
    are some examples:
    Example:
    Informal:
    (* ### Problem
    {informal problem}
    ### Solution
    {informal solution}



                                                           20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


   Formal:
   {formal problem} *)
   Informal:
   (* ### Problem
   {informal problem}
   ### Solution
   {informal solution}
   Formal:

   Formal solution:
   import Mathlib.Data.Real.Basic
   import Mathlib.Tactic.Linarith
   import Mathlib.Tactic.SuggestTactics

   theorem inequality_amgm (a b c : R) (ha : 0 < a) (hb : 0 < b) (hc
       : 0 < c) :
     (a / b) + (b / c) + (c / a) ≥
       (sqrt ((aˆ2 + 1) / (bˆ2 + 1))) + (sqrt ((bˆ2 + 1) / (cˆ2 +
       1))) + (sqrt ((cˆ2 + 1) / (aˆ2 + 1))) :=
   by
     -- Apply the Arithmetic Mean-Geometric Mean Inequality (AM-GM)
     have am_gm_ab := real.am_gm (a / b) ((bˆ2 + 1) / a),
     have am_gm_bc := real.am_gm (b / c) ((cˆ2 + 1) / b),
     have am_gm_ca := real.am_gm (c / a) ((aˆ2 + 1) / c),

      -- The AM-GM inequality gives us the following:
      -- am_gm_ab : (a / b + (bˆ2 + 1) / a) / 2 ≥ sqrt ((a / b) *
        ((bˆ2 + 1) / a))
      -- am_gm_bc : (b / c + (cˆ2 + 1) / b) / 2 ≥ sqrt ((b / c) *
        ((cˆ2 + 1) / b))
      -- am_gm_ca : (c / a + (aˆ2 + 1) / c) / 2 ≥ sqrt ((c / a) *
        ((aˆ2 + 1) / c))

      -- Now, we sum the three inequalities:
      linarith [am_gm_ab, am_gm_bc, am_gm_ca],

      -- Simplify the right-hand side to match the terms of the
        original inequality
      -- ‘suggest_tactics‘ could assist in automating algebraic
        simplifications here:
      suggest\_tactics,

      -- Conclude the proof using positivity of additional terms
      -- Positivity of terms like (bˆ2 + 1) / a and others should be
        straightforward
      have pos_terms : (bˆ2 + 1) / a + (cˆ2 + 1) / b + (aˆ2 + 1) / c >
        0,
      { apply add_pos, -- breaking it down into multiple positive parts
        all_goals { apply div_pos; linarith } },

      -- Dropping the additional positive terms from the left-hand
        side to strengthen the inequality
      linarith [pos_terms],
   ### Explanation of the Steps:
   1) Initial Setup and Imports: We start by importing necessary modules from Mathlib, such as basic
   real number operations and the linarith tactic for linear arithmetic.
   2) Statement of the Theorem: The theorem inequality amgm is stated for three positive real numbers
   a, b, and c. The assumptions ha, hb, and hc enforce the positivity conditions.
   3) ......
   4) ......
   ### Conclusion
   This sketch outlines the formal structure of the proof and highlights where automation can assist.



                                                  21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


   A Failed Case of OpenAI o1-preview

   Prompt: Please solve the following problem: For a > 0, b > 0, c > 0, d > 0 such that a · b + b · c +
   c · d + d · a = 1, show that:
                            a3      b3      c3      d3    1
                                +       +       +       ≥
                          b+c+d   c+d+a   d+a+b   a+b+c   3


   Informal solution:
   To solve this problem, we aim to show that for positive real numbers a, b, c, d satisfying ab + bc +
   cd + da = 1, the inequality
                            a3      b3      c3      d3    1
                                +       +       +       ≥
                          b+c+d   c+d+a   d+a+b   a+b+c   3
   holds true.
   Step 1: Simplify the Inequality. First, note that
                                 b + c + d = (a + b + c + d) − a = S − a,
   where S = a + b + c + d. Thus, the inequality can be rewritten as:
                                                X        a3    1
                                                              ≥ .
                                                cyclic
                                                       S −  a  3

   Step 2: Analyze the Function. Consider the function
                                                 x3
                                      f (x) =           for x ∈ (0, S).
                                                S−x
   We will investigate the convexity of this function to apply Jensen’s inequality.
   Compute the second derivative:
                                          2S 2 + 2Sx + x2
                             f ′′ (x) =                   >0        for x ∈ (0, S).
                                              (S − x)3
   This shows that f (x) is convex on (0, S).
   Step 3: Apply Jensen’s Inequality. Since f (x) is convex, Jensen’s inequality states that:
                                    4                    4
                                                              !
                                 1X                   1X                S
                                       f (ai ) ≥ f          ai = f
                                 4 i=1                4 i=1             4

   Compute f S4 :

                                                   S 3       S 3

                                                                     S2

                                        S          4         4
                                    f         =        S
                                                         = 3S =
                                        4       S− 4          4
                                                                     48
   Therefore, the sum becomes:
                                           X       a3     S2   S2
                                                      ≥4·    =
                                           cyclic
                                                  S−a     48   12
   Step 4: Relate S to the Given Condition. From the given condition ab + bc + cd + da = 1, and using
   the Cauchy-Schwarz inequality:
                                                         1 2
                                                           a + b2 + c2 + d2

                               (ab + bc + cd + da) ≤
                                                         2
   But since ab + bc + cd + da = 1, we get:
                                             a2 + b2 + c2 + d2 ≥ 2
   Also, note that
                     S 2 = (a + b + c + d)2 ≥ 4(a2 + b2 + c2 + d2 ) ≥ 8,        so S 2 ≥ 8.
   Therefore:
                                          X        a3     S2    8   2
                                                        ≥    ≥    =
                                          cyclic
                                                 S −  a   12   12   3


                                                       22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


   But this contradicts the desired inequality, suggesting a miscalculation.
   Step 5: Test the Equality Case. Consider a = b = c = d = 12 . Then:

                                                               1 1
                                    ab + bc + cd + da = 4        ·     =1
                                                               2 2
   Compute the left-hand side:
                                                   1 3         1

                           X        a3             2                      1 2  1
                                        =4·         3    = 4 · 83 = 4 ·    · =
                           cyclic
                                  b+c+d             2          2
                                                                          8 3  3

   This shows that equality holds when a = b = c = d = 12 .
                                                           x3
   Step 6: Conclude the Proof Since the function f (x) = S−x   is convex, the minimum of the sum occurs
   when all variables are equal, i.e., a = b = c = d. Therefore, the inequality holds true:
                           a3      b3      c3      d3   1
                               +       +       +       ≥ .
                         b+c+d   c+d+a   d+a+b   a+b+c  3


   A Failed Case of L IPS
   Problem (USAMO 2004): Let a, b, c be positive reals. Prove that
                   (a + b + c)3 ≤ (a5 − a2 + 3) ∗ (b5 − b2 + 3) ∗ (c5 − c2 + 3)


   Formal solution:
   theorem Problem_3dP5 {a b c : R} (ha : a > 0) (hb : b > 0) (hc : c
       > 0) : (a + b + c) ˆ 3 ≤ (a ˆ 5 - a ˆ 2 + 3) * (b ˆ 5 - b ˆ 2 +
        3) * (c ˆ 5 - c ˆ 2 + 3) := by
     scale NEQ_Cauchy_Schwarz_left_sqrt_3vars (u1 := 1) (u2 := 1) (u3
       := 1) (v1 := a) (v2 := b) (v3 := c) . . .
     scale NEQ_weighted_AM_GM_left_3vars (u := a + b + c) (v := 3) (w
       := aˆ2 + bˆ2 + cˆ2) (i1 := 1) (i2 := 1/2) (i3 := 1/2) . . .
     llm_frac_reduce . . .
     llm_cancel_denom . . .
     scale NEQ_Cauchy_Schwarz_sqrt_left_2vars (u1 := 1) (u2 := 1) (v1
       := a) (v2 := a) . . .
     llm_simplify . . .
     llm_rearrange . . .
     llm_simplify . . .
     llm_rearrange . . .
     llm_simplify . . .
     llm_rearrange . . .
     llm_frac_apart . . .
     llm_simplify . . .
     llm_rearrange . . .
     llm_frac_apart . . .
     llm_simplify . . .
     llm_simplify . . .
     llm_rearrange . . .
     llm_simplify . . .
     llm_rearrange . . .
     llm_simplify . . .
     llm_factor . . . = 4*sqrt (2)*sqrt (bˆ2 + cˆ2)*(3 + aˆ2 + bˆ2 + cˆ2
       + 2*a + 2*b + 2*c)ˆ2 + (1 + a)ˆ2*(3 + aˆ2 + bˆ2 + cˆ2 + 2*a +
       2*b + 2*c)ˆ2 - (64*(3 + aˆ5 - aˆ2)*(3 + bˆ5 - bˆ2)*(3 + cˆ5 -
       cˆ2))
     FAIL(TIMEOUT)!


                                                     23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


    A Successful Case of L IPS

    Problem (Evan Chen): If a, b, c are positive reals and a2 + b2 + c2 = 1, then
                    1           1             1            1           1         1
                          +            +            ≤            +          +          .
                 a2 + 2       b2 + 2       c2 + 2       6ab + c2   6bc + a2   6ca + b2


    Formal solution:
    theorem Problem_2d4e1 {a b c : R} (ha : a > 0) (hb : b > 0) (hc :
        c > 0) (h : a ˆ 2 + b ˆ 2 + c ˆ 2 = 1) : 1 / (a ˆ 2 + 2) + 1 /
        (b ˆ 2 + 2) + 1 / (c ˆ 2 + 2) ≤ 1 / (6 * a * b + c ˆ 2) + 1 /
        (6 * b * c + a ˆ 2) + 1 / (6 * c * a + b ˆ 2) := by
      scale NEQ_AM_GM_div_square_right_2vars (u := b) (v := c) . . .
      scale NEQ_AM_GM_div_square_right_2vars (u := b) (v := a) . . .
      scale NEQ_AM_GM_div_square_right_2vars (u := a) (v := c) . . .
      llm_simplify . . .
      llm_simplify . . .
      llm_rearrange . . .
      sym_tangent_line . . .
      llm_simplify . . . = 27/49 - (27*aˆ2/49) - (27*bˆ2/49) - (27*cˆ2/49)
      try close
      SUCCESS!


F    S OME MORE CASES OF L IPS

    A Different Proof Generated by L IPS (1)

    Problem: Let a, b, c be three positive reals. Prove that if abc = 1, then
                                           a2 + b2 + c2 ≥ a + b + c
    Source: https://web.evanchen.cc/handouts/Ineq/en.pdf

    Formal solution:
    theorem Example_1d7 {a b c : R} (h : a * b * c = 1) : a + b + c ≤
        a ˆ 2 + b ˆ 2 + c ˆ 2 := by
      scale NEQ_AM_GM_left_square_2vars (u := 1) (v := a) . . .
      scale NEQ_AM_GM_left_square_2vars (u := 1) (v := c) . . .
      scale NEQ_AM_GM_left_square_2vars (u := 1) (v := b) . . .
      llm_rearrange . . .
      llm_simplify . . . = 3/2 - aˆ2/2 - bˆ2/2 - cˆ2/2
      llm_rearrange (left := 3/2) (right := aˆ2/2 + bˆ2/2 + cˆ2/2)
      scale NEQ_AM_GM_right_normal_3vars (u := aˆ2/2) (v := bˆ2/2) . . .
      llm_simplify . . . = (a*b*c)ˆ2 / 8
      llm_simplify . . . = 1 / 8
      try close
    Note: At first glance, “AM-GM alone is hopeless here, because whenever we apply AM-
    GM, the left and right hand sides of the inequality all have the same degree”. However, L IPS
                                    2               2                2
    find a proof by using 1 × a ≤ a 2+1 , 1 × b ≤ b 2+1 , 1 × c ≤ c 2+1 .


                                                        24
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


   A Different Proof Generated by L IPS (2)

   Problem (JMO 2012): Let a, b, c be positive reals. Prove that
                      a3 + 5b3   b3 + 5c3   c3 + 5a3  3
                               +          +          ≥ (a2 + b2 + c2 ).
                       3a + b     3b + c     3c + a   2
   Source: https://artofproblemsolving.com/community/c5h476722p2669114

   Formal solution:
   theorem Problem_3de6’’ {a b c : R} (ha : a > 0) (hb : b > 0) (hc :
       c > 0) : (3 / 2) * (a ˆ 2 + b ˆ 2 + c ˆ 2) ≤ (a ˆ 3 + 5 * b ˆ
       3) / (3 * a + b) + (b ˆ 3 + 5 * c ˆ 3) / (3 * b + c) + (c ˆ 3 +
       5 * a ˆ 3) / (3 * c + a) := by
     llm_cancel_factor . . .
     scale NEQ_Muirhead2_onestep_right_3vars (u := a) (v := b) . . .
     scale NEQ_Muirhead1_left_3vars (u := c) (v := a) (w := b) . . .
     scale NEQ_Muirhead1_left_3vars (u := a) (v := b) (w := c) . . .
     scale NEQ_Muirhead2_onestep_left_3vars (u := a) (v := b) . . .
     llm_cancel_factor . . .
     scale NEQ_Muirhead2_onestep_right_3vars (u := a) (v := b) . . .
     llm_simplify . . .
     scale NEQ_Muirhead2_left_3vars (u := c) (v := b) (w := a) . . .
   Note: A completely mechanical proof, achieved by iteratively applying Muirhead inequality
   six times after canceling the denominator



   L IPS Checks Existing Answers (1)

   Problem (Japan 1997): Prove that
                                    2                      2                   2
                      (b + c − a)           (c + a − b)            (a + b − c)          3
                             2          +         2            +         2          ≥
                      (b + c)    + a2       (c + a)   + b2         (a + b)   + c2       5
   Source: https://artofproblemsolving.com/community/c6h146p537

   Informal solution No.1 (provided by AoPS community):
   Solution:
   Let :
         (b+c−a)2     (c+a−b)2      (a+b−c)2
   P = (b+c) 2
               +a2
                   + (c+a) 2
                             +b2
                                 + (a+b)2
                                          +c2
   By Cauchy Swarchz inequality, we have
              (a2 + b2 + c2 + (a + b)2 + (b + c)2 + (c + a)2 )(P ) ≥ (a + b + c)2
              (3(a2 + b2 + c2 ) + 2(ab + bc + ca))(P ) ≥ (a + b + c)2
              (3(a + b + c)2 − 4(ab + bc + ca))(P ) ≥ (a + b + c)2

   Hence,
                        2
   P ≥ 3(a+b+c)(a+b+c)
                 2 −4(ab+bc+ca)2

   but we know that (a + b + c)2 ≥ 3(ab + bc + ca),
               3(ab+bc+ca)
   P ≥ 9(ab+bc+ca)−4(ab+bc+ca)      = 35
   ...
   Note: the proof is correct if all variables are assumed to be positive. However, without this
   assumption, applying Cauchy-Schwarz is incorrect, and a counterexample is successfully
   found by our symbolic solver [c := 8.0, a := 1/8, b := (−1.0)].
   This problem is proved by L IPS using llm simplification and tangent line trick tactics.



                                                      25
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


   L IPS Checks Existing Answers (2)

   Problem (Japan 1997): Prove that
                                    2                      2                   2
                      (b + c − a)           (c + a − b)            (a + b − c)          3
                             2          +         2            +         2          ≥
                     (b + c)     + a2       (c + a)   + b2         (a + b)   + c2       5
   Source: https://artofproblemsolving.com/community/c6h146p537

   Informal solution No.2 (provided by AoPS community):
   ....
   don’t use so much of mathematics on that simple problem..
   :P :D here’s the solution using TITU’s lemma..
   The lemma-
                                               2   2   (a+b2
   if x, y, a, b are reals and x, y > 0 then ax + by ≥ (x+y)
   simply applying the lemma on the lhs twice
   we get
                       (a+b+c)2
   LHS ≥ 3(a2 +b2 +c     2 )+2(ab+bc+ca)

   by AM-GM
                 2
   (a + b + c) ≥ 3(ab + bc + ca) and 3(a2 + b2 + c2 ) + 2(ab + bc + ca) ≥ 5(ab + bc + ca)
   ...
   Note: it appears that the issue arises from the inequality being in the wrong direction. Ac-
   tually, the problem is unprovable when applying the Titu’s lemma (a counterexample found
   by our symbolic solver: [b = 1.0, a = 1.0, c = 0.5])


                                                      26
