Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


L EARNED R EFERENCE - BASED D IFFUSION S AMPLING
FOR MULTI - MODAL DISTRIBUTIONS

 Maxence Noble∗, Louis Grenioux∗ , Marylou Gabrié & Alain Oliviero Durmus
 CMAP, CNRS
 École polytechnique, Institut Polytechnique de Paris
 91120 Palaiseau, France



                                           A BSTRACT
         Over the past few years, several approaches utilizing score-based diffusion have
         been proposed to sample from probability distributions, that is without having ac-
         cess to exact samples and relying solely on evaluations of unnormalized densities.
         The resulting samplers approximate the time-reversal of a noising diffusion pro-
         cess, bridging the target distribution to an easy-to-sample base distribution. In
         practice, the performance of these methods heavily depends on key hyperparam-
         eters that require ground truth samples to be accurately tuned. Our work aims
         to highlight and address this fundamental issue, focusing in particular on multi-
         modal distributions, which pose significant challenges for existing sampling meth-
         ods. Building on existing approaches, we introduce Learned Reference-based Dif-
         fusion Sampler (LRDS), a methodology specifically designed to leverage prior
         knowledge on the location of the target modes in order to bypass the obstacle of
         hyperparameter tuning. LRDS proceeds in two steps by (i) learning a reference
         diffusion model on samples located in high-density space regions and tailored
         for multimodality, and (ii) using this reference model to foster the training of a
         diffusion-based sampler. We experimentally demonstrate that LRDS best exploits
         prior knowledge on the target distribution compared to competing algorithms on
         a variety of challenging distributions.

1   I NTRODUCTION
We consider the problem of sampling from a probability density known up to a normalizing constant.
More precisely, we consider a target distribution π ∈ P(Rd ) with probability density given by
x 7→ Rγ(x)/Z, where γ : Rd → R+ can be pointwise evaluated and the normalizing constant
Z = Rd γ(x)dx is intractable. This problem appears in a wide variety of applications such as
Bayesian statistics (Liu & Liu, 2001; Kroese et al., 2011), statistical mechanics (Krauth, 2006) or
molecular dynamics (Stoltz et al., 2010). In particular, we are interested in sampling from multi-
modal distributions, i.e., distributions whose density admits multiple local maxima, called modes.
Finding the modes of such distributions is a notoriously hard problem, yet, maybe surprisingly, even
if the location of the modes is known, sampling π remains a very challenging problem (Noé et al.,
2019; Pompe et al., 2020; Grenioux et al., 2023). In this work, we aim to address this specific
issue and will assume that we have access to the location of the modes as prior information on π.
However, we do not assume to have access a priori to ground truth samples from π.
Annealed MCMC. Markov Chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) samplers are among the most popular
approaches for sampling. In particular, gradient-based methods based on discretizations of Langevin
or Hamiltonian dynamics (Roberts & Tweedie, 1996; Neal, 2012; Hoffman & Gelman, 2014) are
guaranteed to be efficient for high-dimensional target distributions that are log-concave or satisfy
functional inequalities (Dalalyan, 2017; Durmus & Moulines, 2017). However, when applied to
multi-modal distributions, these MCMC methods suffer from high mixing time, that dramatically
increases with the magnitude of the energy barriers between the modes, see Appendix I.3 for an il-
lustration. To alleviate this issue, annealing strategies have been proposed. They consist in bridging
an easy-to-sample base distribution π base to the target distribution π via intermediate distributions
  ∗
    Both authors contributed equally.
Corresponding authors: {maxence.noble-bourillot,louis.grenioux}@polytechnique.edu


                                                  1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                 base
{πk }Kk=0 with K ≥ 1, π0 = π          and πK = π. This sequence should form a smooth path in the
distribution space, so that sampling from πk+1 starting from samples from πk is relatively simple.
Typically, up to normalizing constants again, the densities of these annealed distributions are chosen
as geometric interpolation between π base and γ, and are sampled either sequentially (Neal, 2001;
Del Moral et al., 2006) or in parallel (Swendsen & Wang, 1986). However, these approaches may be
prone to mode switching, i.e., the relative weight of the modes of the intermediate distributions may
vary dramatically along the prescribed path (Woodard et al., 2009; Tawn et al., 2020; Syed et al.,
2022). Hence, recovering the proportions of the different modes of π is hard in practice.
Alternatively, the bridging distributions {πk }K k=0 can be implicitly defined as the marginals of a
diffusion process. A particular case of interest is the annealing path given by the time-reversal of
a noising process, which is at the foundation of diffusion-based generative models (Sohl-Dickstein
et al., 2015; Song et al., 2021; Ho et al., 2020), and has been proved to be robust to mode switching
(Phillips et al., 2024). Following this approach, several diffusion-based samplers relying exclusively
on Monte Carlo methods have recently shown promises for sampling from multi-modal distributions
(Huang et al., 2024a;b; Grenioux et al., 2024). However, these non-parametric approaches require
the repeated estimation of an intractable drift at each draw and at each annealing step.
Annealed VI. Due to their ability to amortize inference, Variational Inference (VI) techniques are
a popular alternative to MCMC methods. Given a class of parameterized (variational) distributions
that are easy to sample from, they aim to find the optimal parameters that minimize a fixed discrep-
ancy metric with respect to π. Standard VI settings involve mean-field approximations (Wainwright
& Jordan, 2008), mixture models (Arenz et al., 2023), and more recently normalizing flows (Rezende
et al., 2014; Papamakarios et al., 2021), that typically optimize a reverse Kullback-Leibler (KL) ob-
jective. However, these methods struggle with multi-modal target distributions as they suffer from
mode collapse (Jerfel et al., 2021; Blessing et al., 2024).
To tackle this issue, it has been proposed to follow the annealing paradigm by considering an ex-
tended target distribution with marginals corresponding to the {πk }K k=0 . This approach has been
explored following explicit bridging paths, i.e., {πk }K
                                                       k=0 admit tractable unnormalized densities
(Wu et al., 2020; Arbel et al., 2021; Geffner & Domke, 2021; Matthews et al., 2022; Doucet et al.,
2022; Geffner & Domke, 2023; Vargas et al., 2024), but the resulting samplers may suffer from
mode switching, as explained above. On the other hand, a recent class of annealed VI samplers
using implicit diffusion-based paths has emerged (Tzen & Raginsky, 2019; Holdijk et al., 2023;
Pavon, 2022; Zhang & Chen, 2022; Berner et al., 2023; Vargas et al., 2023a;b; Zhang & Chen, 2022;
Berner et al., 2023; Vargas et al., 2023b; Akhound-Sadegh et al., 2024; Phillips et al., 2024) and
seems well-suited for multi-modal target distributions. As we will further evidence in the present
work, the promising results obtained with the latter methods are nevertheless mitigated by the need
for careful tuning of their hyperparameters, which requires access to ground truth samples.
Contributions Within this context, we propose the Learned Reference-based Diffusion Sampler
(LRDS), a variational diffusion-based sampler specifically designed for multi-modal distributions,
which extends works from Zhang & Chen (2022); Vargas et al. (2023a); Richter et al. (2023):
• In the multi-modal setting, we highlight the sensitivity of previous variational diffusion-based
methods with respect to their hyperparameters, which restrains their use in practice.
• To address this limitation, LRDS leverages the knowledge of the mode locations following two ap-
proaches: (a) GMM-LRDS relies on Gaussian Mixture Models and is well suited for a large variety
of target distributions while being relatively lightweight, and (b) EBM-LRDS, a more computa-
tionally intensive scheme, takes advantage of Energy-Based Models for harder sampling problems.
• We show that GMM-LRDS and EBM-LRDS outperform previous diffusion-based samplers on
challenging multi-modal settings.
Notation. For any measurable space (X, X ), we denote by P(X) the space of probability mea-
sures defined on (X, X ). Unless specified, if X is a topological space, X is defined as the Borel
σ-field of X. For any T > 0, we denote by CT = C([0, T ] , Rd ) the space of continuous functions
from [0, T ] to Rd endowed with the uniform topology; hence P(CT ) is the set of continuous-time
stochastic processes (or path measures) defined on [0, T ]. For any P ∈ P(CT ), we denote by PR
its time-reversal, defined such that if (Xt )t∈[0,T ] ∼ P, then (XT −t )t∈[0,T ] ∼ PR . For any t ∈ [0, T ],
we denote by Pt the marginal distribution of P at time t. The density of the Gaussian distribution
with mean m ∈ Rd and covariance Σ ∈ Rd×d is denoted by x 7→ N(x; m, Σ) and ∆J refers to the
                                                          J    PJ
J-dimensional simplex, i.e., ∆J = {(wj )Jj=1 ∈ [0, 1] :          j=1 wj = 1} where J ≥ 1.


                                                     2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Finally, for ease of understanding, we will denote noising diffusion processes by (Xt )t∈[0,T ] , driven
by Brownian motion (Wt )t∈[0,T ] , while (Yt )t∈[0,T ] will refer to denoising diffusion processes, driven
by Brownian motion (Bt )t∈[0,T ] . In this paper, Θ will refer to as the variational parameter space.

2     R EFERENCE - BASED D IFFUSION S AMPLING
2.1   T HEORETICAL FRAMEWORK

We first recall the variational diffusion-based framework formulated by Richter et al. (2023) in con-
tinuous time, that generalizes the approaches from Zhang & Chen (2022) and Vargas et al. (2023a).
Time-reversed sampling process. Consider a general noising diffusion process defined on [0, T ]
by the linear SDE                                  p
                              dXt = f (t)Xt dt + β(t)dWt , X0 ∼ π ,                               (1)
where the horizon T > 0 is fixed, (Wt )t∈[0,T ] is a standard d-dimensional Brownian motion, β :
[0, T ] → (0, ∞) and f : [0, T ] → R. We denote by P⋆ the path measure associated to the SDE
(1). With appropriate choices of f and β, this SDE admits explicit transition kernels and XT is
approximately, or exactly, distributed according to an easy-to-sample base distribution π base .
In the case where P⋆T = π base , we refer to this setting as an ‘exact’ noising scheme. One particular
instance of this setting the Pinned Brownian Motion (PBM), considered by Tzen & Raginsky (2019);
Zhang & Chen (2022); Vargas et al. (2023b), where π base = δ0 . Otherwise, when we only have P⋆T ≈
π base , we define this setting as an ‘ergodic’ noising scheme. A well-known example is the Variance
Preserving (VP) noising process for which π base = N(0, σ 2 Id ) with σ > 0, proposed by Song
et al. (2021) for score-based generative models and Vargas et al. (2023a) for sampling. Numerical
experiments presented in this paper focus on these two schemes to provide fair comparison with
previous methods, but the presented approach is applicable for an arbitrary noising scheme. We
refer to Appendix C for more details.
Denote by p⋆t the density of P⋆t w.r.t. the Lebesgue measure. Under mild assumptions on π, f and
β, see e.g., Cattiaux et al. (2023), the time-reversal of the noising process P⋆ , i.e., the distribution of
(XT −t )t∈[0,T ] and denoted by (P⋆ )R , is associated to the SDE
           dYt = −f (T − t)Yt dt + β(T − t)∇ log p⋆T −t (Yt )dt +       β(T − t)dBt , Y0 ∼ P⋆T ,
                                                                    p
                                                                                                         (2)
where (Bt )t∈[0,T ] is another standard d-dimensional Brownian motion. By definition of the time-
reversal, it holds that YT ∼ π. Therefore, if we were able to simulate this diffusion process, we
would obtain approximate samples from π. We therefore refer to (Yt )t∈[0,T ] as the target process.
However, the scores (∇ log p⋆t )t∈[0,T ] involved in the drift function of (2) are intractable in general.
In addition, these scores cannot be estimated via usual score matching techniques used in generative
modeling (Hyvärinen & Dayan, 2005; Vincent, 2011) since samples from π are not available a
priori in the setting at hand. This point has been addressed by Richter et al. (2023) who alternatively
proposed a general variational approach on path measure space, which requires the definition of a
reference process as described next.
Variational reference-based approach. This approach relies on a reference process that is so-
lution of SDE (1) with initial condition X0 ∼ π ref , where π ref ∈ P(Rd ) is chosen such that the
marginal scores of the associated path measure Pref are tractable. Similarly to π, we assume that the
probability density of π ref is known up to
                                         R a multiplicative constant and is given by x 7→ γ ref (x)/Z ref ,
         ref                       ref         ref
where γ : R → R+ and Z = Rd γ (x)dx is not necessarily tractable. Finally, for any
                d

t ∈ [0, T ], we denote the marginal scores sref             ref       ref                        ref
                                              t = ∇ log pt , with pt being the density of Pt w.r.t.
the Lebesgue measure. Based on the tractable reference scores, the SDE describing the target pro-
cess (2) can be rewritten as
       dYt = −f (T − t)Yt dt + β(T − t){sref                              β(T − t)dBt , Y0 ∼ P⋆T ,
                                                                         p
                                         T −t (Yt ) + gT −t (Yt )}dt +                                   (3)
where gt = ∇ log p⋆t /pref
                       t is now the only intractable term.       This formulation of the time-reversed
SDE has already been largely used in the diffusion model literature, especially for conditional gen-
erative models; see e.g., Dhariwal & Nichol (2021). In this specific context, gt is called a guidance
term. From a probabilistic perspective, gt can be interpreted as a Doob-h transform control, see Ap-
pendix I.1. Exploiting the reference-based formulation given by (3), Richter et al. (2023) propose to
estimate the guidance terms (gt )t∈[0,T ] rather than the target scores (∇ log p⋆t )t∈[0,T ] .


                                                     3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


      Table 1: Connection to prior works. Here, E φ : [0, T ] × Rd → R refers to a neural network.
 Method                        Noising              γ ref (x)              Z ref         sref
                                                                                          t (x)         Reference parameters
 PIS (Zhang & Chen, 2022)      PBM(σ)                     2
                                                N(x; 0, σ T Id )            1               2
                                                                                     −x/σ (T − t)             σ (tuned)
 DDS (Vargas et al., 2023a)     VP(σ)           N(x; 0, σ 2 Id )            1           −x/σ 2                σ (tuned)
                                           PJ
 GMM-LRDS (Section 3.2)        arbitrary      j=1 wj N(x; mj , Σj )         1          analytical    {wj , mj , Σj }Jj=1 (learned)
 EBM-LRDS (Section 3.3)        arbitrary             φ
                                           exp(−E (t = 0, x))          unknown                  φ
                                                                                     −∇x E (t, x)            φ (learned)


To this end, the authors consider the class of variational path measures (Pθ )θ∈Θ ⊂ P(CT ) where
for any θ ∈ Θ, Pθ is associated to the diffusion process
   dYtθ = −f (T − t)Ytθ dt + β(T − t){sref     θ     θ       θ
                                                                                            β(T − t)dBt , Y0θ ∼ π base ,
                                                                                        p
                                       T −t (Yt ) + gT −t (Yt )}dt +                                                             (4)
                                                                                                             ref
where g : [0, T ]×R → R is typically a neural network. In particular, choosing π as a Gaussian
          θ              d        d

distribution recovers exactly the previous VI methods Path Integral Sampler (PIS) (Zhang & Chen,
2022) and Denoising Diffusion Sampler (DDS) (Vargas et al., 2023a), see Table 1. Furthermore,
Richter et al. (2023) propose to minimize the following LV-based objective
                                   h                            i
                                                         θ̂
                    LLV (θ) = Var log{(dPθ /d(P⋆ )R )(Y[0,T          θ̂       θ̂
                                                            ] )} , Y[0,T ] ∼ P ,             (5)

where θ̂ is a detached version of θ, meaning that gradients with respect to θ will not see θ̂. In contrast
to the reverse KL divergence (previously used in PIS and DDS), which is notably known to suffer
from mode collapse (Midgley et al., 2023), the LV divergence (Nüsken & Richter, 2021) has the
benefits to improve mode exploration, to avoid costly computations of the loss gradients and to have
zero variance at the optimal solution (Richter et al., 2023, Section 2.3). Finally, the LV loss (5) can
be further explicited, as detailed in the following proposition.
                                                                                                                   ⋆
Proposition 1. Assume that P⋆T = Pref T = π
                                              base
                                                   and there exists θ⋆ ∈ Θ such that gtθ = gt . Then,
the loss defined in (5) achieves optimal solution at θ⋆ and, setting ϱ = log(γ ref /γ), it simplifies as
                        Z T                                            Z Tp
                               β(T − t) θ            2
       LLV (θ) = Var                    gT −t (Ytθ̂ ) dt +                      β(T − t)gTθ −t (Ytθ̂ )⊤ dBt + ϱ(YTθ̂ )       .   (6)
                           0      2                                    0


This result is an adaptation of (Richter et al., 2023, Lemma 3.1), which proof is restated in Ap-
pendix D.1 for completeness. We also emphasize that the assumption made in Proposition 1 is only
needed for ergodic noising schemes. In practice, Richter et al. (2023) only consider two specific ver-
sions of this continuous-time variational loss, where π ref is determined by the PIS and DDS settings.
In the following, we will refer to these extensions of PIS and DDS as LV-PIS and LV-DDS. In con-
trast, we keep a general perspective, by letting π ref completely arbitrary, and describe our proposition
of practical implementation of a Reference-based Diffusion Sampler (RDS) in this context.

2.2     R EFERENCE - BASED D IFFUSION S AMPLING IN PRACTICE

Discrete-time setting. In practice, the parameterized process (Ytθ̂ )t∈[0,T ] cannot be simulated ex-
actly and SDE (4) can only be numerically solved with a small step-size using, for example, the
Euler-Maruyama (EM) or Exponential Integration (EI) (Durmus & Moulines, 2015) discretization
schemes, see Appendix B for additional details. Consider a time discretization of the interval [0, T ]
given by an increasing sequence of timesteps {tk }K k=0 such that t0 = 0, tK = T and K ≥ 1. Given
an arbitrary reference distribution π ref , we propose to approximate the continuous-time objective
defined in (6) by the following discrete time RDS objective
                   "K−1                                                     K−1                             #
                                                             1 θ             X √
                                          ⊤                                                     ⊤
                    X
                               θ                θ̂                                   θ
LRDS (θ) = Var             wk gT −tk (Yk )     gT −tk (Yk ) − gT −tk (Yk ) +     wk gT −tk (Yk ) Zk + ϱ(YK ) ,
                     k=0
                                                             2               k=0
                                                                                                          (7)
where {Zk }K−1
            k=0  are independently   distributed  according   to N(0, I d ), {Yk }K
                                                                                  k=0 is recursively defined
by Y0 ∼ π base and for any k ∈ {0, . . . , K − 1},
                                                                              √
                     Yk+1 = ak Yk + bk {sref                θ̂
                                             T −tk (Yk ) + gT −tk (Yk )} +      ck Zk ,                   (8)


                                                                   4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                               K−1
with θ̂ being a detached version of θ and {wk , ak , bk , ck }k=0  being tractable coefficients that de-
pend on the choice of discretization and noising schemes. In particular, if K is sufficiently large,
     k=0 has approximately the same distribution as {Ytk }k=0 . We refer to Appendix D.2 for a
{Yk }K                                                        θ̂ K

detailed explanation on the computation of our loss and explicit values of the coefficients. We
emphasize that this variational objective can be implemented with any reference distribution. In
comparison, the practical loss functions1 exhibited by Richter et al. (2023) are only designed for
LV-PIS and LV-DDS, and may be seen as particular instances of (7).

Training and sampling with RDS. The training stage of RDS consists in running N iterations of
Stochastic Gradient Descent (SGD) to minimize the discrete-time objective (7), for some N ≥ 1.
Like other variational diffusion-based objectives, the RDS loss is simulation-based, meaning that,
the whole process {Yk }K  k=0 defined in (8) must be simulated at each SGD step. The complete
training procedure of RDS is summarized in Algorithm 2, stated in Appendix A. After training, the
final parameter θ⋆ is fixed, and approximate samples from π are obtained by simulating {Yk }K k=0
        ⋆
from g θ , using (8), and taking YK .


3     L EARNED RDS FOR MULTI - MODAL DISTRIBUTIONS

In this section, we highlight the crucial role played by the reference distribution π ref in RDS when
targeting multi-modal distributions. We first show in Section 3.1 the limitations of previous vari-
ational reference-based methods and give intuition on how π ref should be chosen. Based on this
observation, we introduce Learned Reference-based Diffusion Sampler (LRDS), a novel diffusion-
based sampler defined as a practical instance of RDS, where π ref is learned from prior knowledge
on π, namely the location of their modes. We present two approaches based on Gaussian Mixture
Models (GMM-LRDS), see Section 3.2, and Energy-Based Models (EBM-LRDS), see Section 3.3.

3.1   O N THE IMPORTANCE OF THE REFERENCE DISTRIBUTION

Choosing a Gaussian distribution for π ref ensures that the entire reference process is Gaussian.
Therefore, the scores (sref
                         t )t∈[0,T ] can be analytically computed. We will refer to this case as Gaus-
sian RDS (G-RDS). In this setting, previous variational reference-based methods (PIS, DDS and
their log-variance version) focused on using isotropic centered Gaussian distributions as reference
distributions (see Table 1), i.e., π ref = N(0, σ 2 Id ) where the hyperparameter is σ ∈ (0, ∞). This
parameter is fixed before running the optimization over θ and a priori disconnected from the target
distribution. To assess the sensitivity of the algorithms with respect to the hyperparameter σ, we run
LV-DDS and LV-PIS on a simple multi-modal distribution – a 16-dimensional bi-modal Gaussian
mixture with two distinct weights – and examine the accuracy of estimation of these weights (see
Figure 1, left). We observe that the performance is highly dependent on the value of σ, with an
optimal accuracy achieved when the isotropic variance is directly related to statistics of the target
distribution; see Appendix I.2 for details. However, it is hard to estimate this quantity without access
to ground truth samples.

Towards a multi-modal reference distribution. The previous experiment suggests that choosing
a reference distribution that is close to the target distribution improves the performance of the VI
sampler. To validate this intuition, we target the same Gaussian mixture as above using RDS with
PBM and VP noising schemes, setting π ref as a Gaussian mixture with the same components as
the target with their relative weights as hyperparameter (see Figure 1, right). We find that this
design of π ref , with a well adjusted Gaussian mixture reference, enables RDS to robustly recover the
information of the relative weight of the target modes. These observations motivate us to adopt the
following paradigm for RDS: given a multi-modal target distribution π, we aim to design π ref close
to π, sharing the same multi-modality characteristics. Below, we present Learned Reference-based
Diffusion Sampler (LRDS), a complete sampling methodology relying on the RDS framework that
leverages prior knowledge on the target modes to learn a well-suited reference distribution.
    1
      Although the authors do not provide any expression of a discrete-time version of (6) in their paper, a
discrete-time loss is implemented for LV-PIS and LV-DDS in their official codebase available at https:
//github.com/juliusberner/sde sampler.


                                                     5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                   0.4


estimation error
 Mode weight
                                          LV-PIS                    LV-DDS                              PBM
                   0.3
                                                                                                        VP
                   0.2

                   0.1

                   0.0
                         10−1       100            10−1       100        101   0.2   0.4          0.6   0.8
                                σ                             σ                            wref

Figure 1: Illustration of the decisive role of the reference distribution. Here, we target a 16-
dimensional Gaussian mixture with two modes, that have respective weights w = 2/3 and 1 − w =
1/3, and display the estimation error of w with different methods. (Left): Results for LV-PIS and
LV-DDS when varying the value of their hyperparameter σ (which directly determines π ref as shown
in Table 1). The green dotted line represents the optimal variance for Gaussian approximation of π,
see Appendix I.2 for related computations. (Right) Results for RDS in PBM and VP settings when
setting π ref as a Gaussian mixture with the same modes as π, but w is replaced by wref . Details on
the design of this experiment are given in Appendix H.1.


LRDS pipeline. Our algorithm LRDS proceeds in three main steps:

(a) Obtain reference samples. Given a standard MCMC sampler which targets π, such as the
Metropolis-Adjusted Langevin Algorithm (MALA) (Roberts & Tweedie, 1996), we simulate multi-
ple Markov chains that are initialized in the target mode locations. We refer to the obtained samples
as the reference samples and denote by π̂ ref the corresponding empirical distribution. As recalled
in Appendix I.3, in presence of high energy barriers between the modes, π̂ ref fails at estimating the
global energy landscape. Moreover, π̂ ref does not admit a density w.r.t. the Lebesgue measure.
(b) Define the reference process. In this stage, we aim at (i) learning π ref as a continuous approxi-
mation of π̂ ref , and (ii) computing the marginal scores at times {T −tk }K−1
                                                                           k=0 of the induced reference
process P , i.e., the noising process defined by SDE (1), where X0 ∼ π ref . In practice, we set π ref
           ref

either as a Gaussian Mixture Model, which relies on a light parameterization, or as an Energy-Based
Model, which is more expressive at the cost of higher computational budget.
(c) Run the RDS variational optimization. Once the reference distribution is learned and the
reference scores are computed, we run the RDS procedure described in Section 2.2.

In the next sections, we describe two practical implementations of stage (b) in LRDS using different
parameterizations of the reference distribution.

 3.2               G AUSSIAN M IXTURE M ODEL LRDS

We first propose to set π ref as a Gaussian mixture to integrate multi-modality in RDS. In particular,
                                                                                PJ
we have Z ref = 1 and any reference density is parameterized as γ ref (·) = j=1 wj N(·; mj , Σj )
where J ≥ 1 is the number of reference modes, {wj }Jj=1 ∈ ∆J are the reference weights, mj ∈ Rd
and Σj ∈ Rd×d are respectively the mean and the covariance of the j-th reference mode. In this set-
ting, each marginal of Pref is also a Gaussian mixture whose parameters can be simply deduced from
γ ref , making their score fully tractable, see Appendix B. Therefore, the only difficulty at stage (b)
lies in the estimation of the reference parameters φ = {wj , mj , Σj }Jj=1 for some J ≥ 1 fixed in ad-
vance. If J > 1, we refer to this version of the algorithm as Gaussian Mixture Model LRDS (GMM-
LRDS). In this case, we learn φ by running the Expectation Minimization (EM) algorithm (Dempster
et al., 1977) with samples from π̂ ref . If J = 1, LRDS reduces to Gaussian LRDS (G-LRDS), and we
learn parameters (m1 , Σ1 ) by Maximum Likelihood (ML) estimation. In practice, we observe that
setting J equal or larger to the number of target modes can lead to better performance. We summa-
rize the whole GMM-LRDS methodology in Algorithm 3, provided in Appendix A, and illustrate in
Figure 2 the behaviours of GMM-LRDS and G-LRDS for a bi-modal target distribution. Our results
show that choosing a Gaussian reference distribution leads to mode collapse, while defining π ref as
in GMM-LDRS enables RDS to recover the relative weights accurately.


                                                          6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 2: Comparison between G-LRDS and GMM-LRDS. Here, the target distribution is the
same 16-dimensional Gaussian mixture as in Figure 1 (top left), see Appendix H.1 for more details.
For illustration purpose, projections along the first two coordinates are used. In each cell, the value
of ’Mode weight’ refers to the effective weight of the left mode. Reference samples (bottom left)
are obtained by running MALA sampler initialized in both target modes: each color (orange/purple)
depicts one MALA Markov chain. In particular, none of them mixes between the modes. Running
G-LRDS with an ML-estimated Gaussian reference (top middle) leads to mode collapse (bottom
middle). Conversely, GMM-LRDS with an EM-estimated Gaussian mixture reference (top right)
appropriately recovers the target distribution and the true mode proportions (bottom right).

3.3   E NERGY-BASED M ODEL LRDS

Although GMM-LRDS efficiently introduces multi-modality in the reference distribution while con-
serving the tractability of the reference scores, we anticipate that in some cases, a Gaussian mixture
may not provide a correct approximation of π̂ ref , regardless of the number of reference modes J,
see Appendix I.4 for illustrations. To provide more flexibility, we propose a second version of
LRDS where the reference distribution is parameterized by an Energy-Based Model (EBM), i.e.,
γ ref (x) = exp(−E φ (x)) where R E : R φ → R is a neural network with parameters φ and the
                                      φ      d
                          ref
normalizing constant Z = Rd exp(−E (x))dx is intractable. In contrast to GMM-LRDS, the
corresponding reference scores cannot be computed analytically anymore; hence, we suggest to
estimate them with neural networks. In the following, we will denote π ref by pφ to insist on its
parametric nature.
At first sight, it seems natural to learn the density γ ref and the scores (sref
                                                                             t )t∈[0,T ] independently from
each other. Indeed, following the diffusion model literature (Song et al., 2021; Karras et al., 2022),
the reference scores could be easily learned using a Score Matching (SM) objective with samples
from π̂ ref (Hyvärinen & Dayan, 2005; Vincent, 2011). On the other hand, one could learn pφ by
maximizing the standard Maximum Likelihood (ML) objective LML : φ 7→ E [log pφ (X)], where
X ∼ π̂ ref , with corresponding gradient given by φ 7→ E[∇φ E φ (X − )] − E[∇φ E φ (X + )], where
X − ∼ pφ and X + ∼ π̂ ref . Nevertheless, computing gradients of objective LML requires to sample
from pφ (negative sampling), which is a well known hurdle in EBM training since pφ is expected to
be as multi-modal as π̂ ref , and thus π.
Therefore, we rather suggest to learn a path of parametric distributions (pφ       t )t∈[0,T ] as the marginal
distributions of (X̂tref )t∈[0,T ] , defined as the noising process induced by SDE (1), starting at
X̂0ref ∼ π̂ ref . To do so, we set (pφ                                        φ
                                     t )t∈[0,T ] as a multi-level EBM, i.e., pt (x) = exp(−E (t, x))/Zt ,
                                                                                                 φ           φ

where E φ : [0, T ] × Rd → RRis now a time-dependent neural network with parameters φ and the
normalizing constants Ztφ = Rd exp(−E φ (t, x))dx are still intractable. In the RDS framework,
this amounts to consider γ ref (x) = exp(−E φ (0, x)) and sref      t (x) = −∇x ER (t, x). To learn this
                                                                                       φ
                                                                                        T               ref
multi-level EBM, we propose to maximize the integrated ML objective φ 7→ 0 E[log pφ                t (X̂t )]dt.
In this case, we can leverage the correlations between the single-level EBMs to alleviate their in-
dividual issue of negative sampling, a strategy that has already been investigated in several works
(Gao et al., 2021; Zhu et al., 2024; Zhang et al., 2023).


                                                      7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Here, since (X̂tref )t∈[0,T ] defines a path of increas-
ingly simpler distributions, annealed MCMC sam-
plers can be conveniently used to sample from
the multi-level EBM densities. This allows us to
kill two birds in one stone: (i) we obtain nega-
tive samples for each single-level EBM, which is
needed to compute the gradient of the ML objec-
tive, and (ii) we overcome the individual sampling
issues at every level thanks to annealing. This
method is completely detailed in Algorithm 11 of
Appendix F together with previous literature on
multi-level EBMs. Morever, Appendix E provides
details on annealed MCMC samplers.
This version of LRDS called Energy-Based Model             Figure 3: Comparison between GMM-LRDS
LRDS (EBM-LRDS) is summarized in Algo-                     and EBM-LRDS in a multi-modal setting.
rithm 4 of Appendix A. In Figure 3, we illustrate          Here, we target the 2-dimensional Rings distri-
the superiority of EBM-LRDS over GMM-LRDS                  bution, which has 3 unbalanced modes repre-
for a target distribution π that exhibits complex ge-      sented by the rings. (Left): Target density (top)
ometry. While the GMM fails at capturing the lo-           and exact samples (bottom). (Middle): 16-
cal energy landscape of π, which results in a poor         component GMM reference distribution (top)
performance of GMM-LRDS, EBM-LRDS cap-                     and resulting GMM-LRDS samples (bottom).
tures well the target distribution since the reference     (Right): EBM reference distribution (top) and
EBM recovers the complex geometry of the target.           resulting EBM-LRDS samples (bottom).

4    R ELATED WORKS
In the past years, numerous parametric methods have been proposed to approximate a diffusion
process (Yt )t∈[0,T ] ∼ P induced by an SDE with intractable drift, such as (2), bridging an easy-to-
sample distribution π base to a target distribution π. Based on deep learning techniques, they suggest
to learn a path measure Pθ , induced by a neural SDE that admits a neural network (parameterized
by θ ∈ Θ to be optimized) as drift function. Below, we review two main classes of such algorithms.
Variational diffusion-based methods. To optimize θ, several approaches have adopted a varia-
tional formulation on path measure space, which consists in minimizing a divergence-based loss
with samples from Pθ . We adopt the same perspective in the present work. For instance, a recent
line of works has defined P as the time-reversal of a noising diffusion process, such as PIS (Zhang &
Chen, 2022), DDS (Vargas et al., 2023a) and Time-reversed Diffusion Sampler (DIS) (Berner et al.,
2023). In these methods, the neural network used in Pθ is crucially required to be target-informed,
i.e., it is parameterized with the score of the target distribution. For a large number of variational
training steps, this may result in a costly procedure, since each training step requires a full simula-
tion of Pθ . While those algorithms were originally implemented with the largely used reverse KL
divergence, Richter et al. (2023) demonstrate the benefits of using the Log-Variance (LV) divergence
to avoid mode collapse in the variational optimization stage. However, even combined with a LV-
based loss, these variational methods still require a target-informed parameterization. On the other
hand, Vargas et al. (2024) propose a different perspective by defining P as a controlled version of an
annealed Langevin diffusion, that is expected to follow a prescribed path of tractable marginal den-
sities. Here, both P and Pθ are induced by neural SDEs. The authors present two versions of their
algorithm, Controlled Monte Carlo Diffusion (CMCD), using either reverse KL or LV divergence.
For clear comparison with the RDS discrete-time setting presented in Section 2.2, we describe all of
these approaches (PIS, DDS, DIS, CMCD) under the discrete time scope in Appendix D.2.
Adaptive diffusion-based approaches. To alleviate the computational difficulties of divergence-
based losses, recent works have proposed to learn Pθ with an adaptive procedure (Phillips et al.,
2024; Akhound-Sadegh et al., 2024). These methods iterate two steps which consist of (a) ob-
taining approximate target samples by sampling from Pθ and (b) optimizing θ using those samples
via learning techniques usually restricted to generative modeling. In particular, Akhound-Sadegh
et al. (2024) present Iterated Denoising Energy Matching (iDEM), where P corresponds to the time-
reversal of a Variance-Exploding noising diffusion process (Song et al., 2021). In their setting, stage
(a) is conducted by running the SDE induced by Pθ and stage (b) relies on a novel energy-matching
loss which directly depends on π. On the other hand, the Particle Denoising Diffusion Sampler

                                                      8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


(PDDS) (Phillips et al., 2024) (a) introduces a SMC-based scheme when sampling from Pθ , see
Appendix E for more details, and (b) implements an extension of the Target Score Matching loss
(De Bortoli et al., 2024). When it comes to practice, we find that both of these algorithms face
significant limitations: while PDDS performance is highly sensitive to the choice of the initial Pθ ,
the iDEM energy-matching loss suffers from very high variance.

5    N UMERICAL EVALUATION OF RDS
To validate our approach, we compare GMM-LRDS and EBM-LRDS on a variety of multi-modal
distributions against the following annealed methods: (a) annealed MCMC methods – Sequential
Monte Carlo (SMC) (Del Moral et al., 2006) and Replica Exchange (RE) (Swendsen & Wang,
1986); (b) variational diffusion-based methods, implemented with the LV loss – LV-PIS (Zhang
& Chen, 2022), LV-DDS (Vargas et al., 2023a), LV-DIS (Berner et al., 2023) and LV-CMCD (Vargas
et al., 2024); (c) adaptive diffusion-based approaches – iDEM (Akhound-Sadegh et al., 2024) and
PDDS (Phillips et al., 2024). To assess the performance of each sampler in multi-modal settings, we
will evaluate how well the obtained samples are able to recover the weights of the target modes2 .
The details of each target distribution can be found in Appendix H.1.

General experimental setting. To ensure fair comparison with previous approaches, we make
sure that all competing methods are as informed as LRDS of prior knowledge on the target distri-
bution. More specifically: we set π base as a Gaussian approximation of π̂ ref in SMC, RE or CMCD;
we choose σ based on a Gaussian isotropic approximation of π̂ ref for PIS, DDS or DIS (see Sec-
tion 3.1); we standardize the target distributions using the empirical mean and variances of π̂ ref for
iDEM and PDDS. Additionally, we pre-fill iDEM’s training buffer with samples from π̂ ref . Note that
all competing methods use the score of the target distribution, either in their training procedure when
computing the loss (iDEM, PDDS) or in the sampling procedure : through a target-informed neural
network parameterization in PIS, DDS and DIS; through the target-informed base drift in CMCD;
through the MCMC gradient steps in SMC or RE. In contrast, LRDS only requires evaluations of the
target density, which makes it an interesting alternative in settings where the score of π is expensive
to compute. We refer to Appendix H.3 for complete details of the implementation of these methods.

High-dimensional Gaussian mixtures. We first consider a synthetic but challenging setting,
where π is a bi-modal Gaussian mixture whose modes are N(−1d , Σ1 ), with weight w1 = 2/3,
and N(1d , Σ2 ), with weight w2 = 1/3, where 1d is the d-dimensional vector with all components
equal to 1, and for i ∈ {1, 2}, Σi ∈ Rd×d is a diagonal positive matrix with conditioning number
equal to 100. For each method, the ground truth weight w1 is estimated by a Monte Carlo estimator
ŵ1 . We report the estimation error |w1 − ŵ1 | for increasing values of d in Table 2. Note that mode
collapse occurs when ŵ1 ∈ {0, 1}. We observe that GMM-LRDS outperforms competing methods
in all the considered dimensions. In Appendix I.5.1, we complete these mode weight results with
probability metrics (see Appendix B), present further experiments with bi-modal Gaussian mixtures
with lower condition numbers and dimension, which show that competing algorithms are able to
perform on par with LRDS in these simpler settings, and conduct ablation studies on this two-mode
type of target (by lightly perturbing the reference distribution or increasing the distance between the
modes). To further assess the performance and robustness of LRDS, we also consider the extension
to more than two modes in Appendix I.5.2, where LRDS still outperforms its competitors.

Field system ϕ4 from statistical mechanics. Next, we sample from the 1D ϕ4 model, previously
studied (Gabrié et al., 2022; Grenioux et al., 2024). At the chosen temperature, the distribution has
two well distinct modes with respective weights w− and w+ such that the relative weight w− /w+
can be adjusted through a ‘local-field’ parameter h. We discretize this continuous model with a grid
size of 32 (i.e., d = 32). For each method, we compute a Monte Carlo estimation of w− /w+ and
compare the results with a Laplace approximation (0-th and 2-nd orders), see Appendix H.1 for the
computations. In this setting, all competing approaches suffer from mode collapse while GMM-
LRDS is close to the ground truth as shown by Figure 4. Complete results showing the failure of the
competing methods are provided in Appendix I.5.4. Given the satisfying results obtained with the
lightweight GMM-LRDS sampler, we did not run EBM-LRDS for this target distribution.
   2
     In Appendix G, we give expressions of additional variational metrics proposed by Blessing et al. (2024) to
quantify mode collapse in the specific case of RDS.


                                                      9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Table 2: Absolute mode weight estimation error for a bi-
modal Gaussian mixture with growing d, averaged over 16                            Laplace approx.
                                                                     3.0
sampling runs. Bold font indicates best result, orange cells                       Laplace approx.
refer to settings with uninformative mode weight estimation                        (2nd order)
                                                                     2.5


                                                                w− /w+
                                                                                   GMM-LRDS
(i.e., uniform mixture), red cells denote mode collapse. N/A
denotes settings with numerical issues.                              2.0

                                                                     1.5
 Algorithm           d = 16 ↓       d = 32 ↓       d = 64 ↓
                                                                     1.0
 SMC              11.4%±9.1%     15.8%±8.5%     15.2%±7.5%
 RE               16.5%±1.3%     15.9%±1.4%     17.0%±1.4%                 0.000   0.001      0.002   0.003
 LV-PIS            6.0%±3.4%     33.2%±0.1%     33.0%±0.1%                                   h
 LV-DDS           11.8%±9.3%     31.5%±2.9%     33.1%±0.1%
 LV-DIS           16.4%±0.5%     16.5%±0.4%     16.8%±0.6%
 LV-CMCD         32.2%±15.4%     50.1%±8.8%    16.3%±10.6%      Figure 4: Estimation of the relative
 iDEM             33.3%±0.0%     66.7%±0.0%     11.7%±0.4%      weight of ϕ4 modes with increasing
 PDDS             0.8%±0.6%      66.7%±0.0%           N/A       h, averaged over 16 sampling runs.
 GMM-LRDS          1.7%±0.6%     2.7%±0.8%       4.1%±0.6%


Figure 5: Samples obtained for Rings distribution. Reasonable results could not be obtained with
PDDS due to numerical issues.
Compactly supported multi-modal distributions. Then, we
aim to sample from 2-dimensional multi-modal distributions with
complex geometries. We consider (a) Rings distribution, which
has 3 ring-shaped modes, and (b) Checkerboard distribution, which
has 8 square-shaped modes. In both cases, the modes are not
evenly weighted. In this setting, we consider J = 64 compo-
nents for GMM-LRDS and leverage the Replica Exchange algo-
rithm as backbone annealed MCMC sampler in the EBM-LRDS
training algorithm. Apart from adaptive methods, the structure of
Rings modes are well recovered by all approaches, see Figure 5.
However, we observe that non diffusion-based approaches fail to
                                                                           Figure 6: Samples obtained
recover the ground truth mode weights. On the other hand, LRDS
                                                                           for Checkerboard distribu-
is the only sampling method to obtain samples that are close to ex-
                                                                           tion. All sampling methods
act for the Checkerboard distribution, see Figure 6, while being able
                                                                           except LRDS fail to provide
to correctly estimate the ground truth mode weights.
                                                                           accurate samples.
Bayesian logistic regression models. Lastly, we provide in Appendix I.5.5 sampling results on
standard Bayesian posterior distributions, which are not however explicitly multi-modal.

6   D ISCUSSION
Building on the class of recently developed annealed VI methods, this paper presents the Learned
Reference-based Diffusion Sampler (LRDS), which specifically addresses the challenging case of
multi-modal target distributions. In essence, LRDS aims at learning a reference process – based
on GMMs or multi-level EBMs – adapted to the target distribution by using samples obtained via
local MCMC samplers initialized in the modes. Our numerical experiments show that GMM-LRDS
accurately recovers the global information of the relative weights of the modes in several tens of
dimensions, unlike competing methods, and that EBM-LRDS can help tackling distributions with
non-Gaussian properties such as sharp supports. However this advantage of LRDS comes at the
computational cost of the necessary pre-training of the reference process model. Concerning future
work, we note in particular that EBM-LRDS is a promising tool for real-world sampling tasks on
non-euclidean spaces which may benefit from the flexible definition of the reference process as an
EBM. An interesting test case of this kind that shall be considered is the sampling of the Boltzmann
distribution of proteins in internal coordinates.


                                                 10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
We would like to thank Lorenz Richter, Julius Berner, Denis Blessing, Junhua Chen, Francisco Var-
gas and Yazid Janati for many stimulating discussions. LG and MG acknowledge funding from Hi!
Paris. AD and MN would like to thank the Isaac Newton Institute for Mathematical Sciences and the
Alan Turing Institute for support and hospitality during the programme Diffusions in machine learn-
ing: Foundations, generative models and non-convex optimisation when work on this paper was
undertaken. Part of the work of AD is funded by the European Union (ERC, Ocean, 101071601).
Views and opinions expressed here are however those of the authors only and do not necessarily
reflect those of the European Union or the European Research Council Executive Agency. Neither
the European Union nor the granting authority can be held responsible for them. This work was
partially performed using HPC resources from GENCI–IDRIS (AD011015234).

R EFERENCES
Tara Akhound-Sadegh, Jarrid Rector-Brooks, Joey Bose, Sarthak Mittal, Pablo Lemos, Cheng-Hao
  Liu, Marcin Sendera, Siamak Ravanbakhsh, Gauthier Gidel, Yoshua Bengio, Nikolay Malkin,
  and Alexander Tong. Iterated denoising energy matching for sampling from boltzmann densi-
  ties. In Proceedings of the 41st International Conference on Machine Learning, volume 235
  of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pp. 760–786. PMLR, 21–27 Jul 2024. URL
  https://proceedings.mlr.press/v235/akhound-sadegh24a.html.
Michael Arbel, Alex Matthews, and Arnaud Doucet. Annealed flow transport Monte Carlo. In
 International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 318–330. PMLR, 2021.
Oleg Arenz, Philipp Dahlinger, Zihan Ye, Michael Volpp, and Gerhard Neumann. A unified per-
  spective on natural gradient variational inference with gaussian mixture models. Transactions
  on Machine Learning Research, 2023. ISSN 2835-8856. URL https://openreview.net/
  forum?id=tLBjsX4tjs.
Julius Berner, Lorenz Richter, and Karen Ullrich. An optimal control perspective on diffusion-
  based generative modeling. Transactions on Machine Learning Research, 2023. URL https:
  //openreview.net/forum?id=oYIjw37pTP.
Denis Blessing, Xiaogang Jia, Johannes Esslinger, Francisco Vargas, and Gerhard Neumann. Be-
  yond ELBOs: A large-scale evaluation of variational methods for sampling. In Proceed-
  ings of the 41st International Conference on Machine Learning, volume 235 of Proceedings
  of Machine Learning Research, pp. 4205–4229. PMLR, 21–27 Jul 2024. URL https://
  proceedings.mlr.press/v235/blessing24a.html.
Steve Brooks, Andrew Gelman, Galin Jones, and Xiao-Li Meng. Handbook of Markov Chain Monte
  Carlo. Chapman and Hall/CRC, May 2011. ISBN 9780429138508. doi: 10.1201/b10905. URL
  http://dx.doi.org/10.1201/b10905.
Patrick Cattiaux, Giovanni Conforti, Ivan Gentil, and Christian Léonard. Time reversal of diffusion
  processes under a finite entropy condition. Annales de l’Institut Henri Poincaré, Probabilités et
  Statistiques, 59(4):1844 – 1881, 2023. doi: 10.1214/22-AIHP1320. URL https://doi.org/
  10.1214/22-AIHP1320.
Marco Cuturi. Sinkhorn distances: Lightspeed computation of optimal transport. 26,
 2013.     URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper files/paper/2013/
 file/af21d0c97db2e27e13572cbf59eb343d-Paper.pdf.
Yin Dai, Yuan Gao, Jian Huang, Yuling Jiao, Lican Kang, and Jin Liu. Lipschitz transport maps via
  the Föllmer flow. arXiv preprint arXiv:2309.03490, 2023.
Arnak S Dalalyan. Theoretical guarantees for approximate sampling from smooth and log-concave
  densities. Journal of the Royal Statistical Society Series B: Statistical Methodology, 79(3):651–
  676, 2017.
Valentin De Bortoli, Michael Hutchinson, Peter Wirnsberger, and Arnaud Doucet. Target score
  matching. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.08667, 2024.


                                                 11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Pierre Del Moral, Arnaud Doucet, and Ajay Jasra. Sequential Monte Carlo samplers. Journal of the
  Royal Statistical Society Series B: Statistical Methodology, 68(3):411–436, 2006.
Arthur P Dempster, Nan M Laird, and Donald B Rubin. Maximum likelihood from incomplete data
  via the em algorithm. Journal of the royal statistical society: series B (methodological), 39(1):
  1–22, 1977.
Prafulla Dhariwal and Alexander Quinn Nichol. Diffusion models beat GANs on image syn-
  thesis. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2021. URL https://
  openreview.net/forum?id=AAWuCvzaVt.
Arnaud Doucet, Will Grathwohl, Alexander G Matthews, and Heiko Strathmann. Score-based diffu-
  sion meets annealed importance sampling. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
  35:21482–21494, 2022.
Simon Duane, A.D. Kennedy, Brian J. Pendleton, and Duncan Roweth.      Hybrid monte
  carlo. Physics Letters B, 195(2):216–222, 1987. ISSN 0370-2693. doi: https://doi.org/
  10.1016/0370-2693(87)91197-X. URL https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/
  article/pii/037026938791197X.
Alain Durmus and Éric Moulines. Quantitative bounds of convergence for geometrically ergodic
  Markov chain in the Wasserstein distance with application to the Metropolis Adjusted Langevin
  Algorithm. Statistics and Computing, 25:5–19, 2015.
Alain Durmus and Eric Moulines. Nonasymptotic convergence analysis for the unadjusted Langevin
  algorithm. 2017.
Marylou Gabrié, Grant M Rotskoff, and Eric Vanden-Eijnden. Adaptive Monte Carlo augmented
 with normalizing flows. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 119(10):e2109420119,
 2022.
Marylou Gabrié, Grant M. Rotskoff, and Eric Vanden-Eijnden. Adaptive Monte Carlo aug-
 mented with normalizing flows. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 119(10):
 e2109420119, 2022. doi: 10.1073/pnas.2109420119. URL https://www.pnas.org/doi/
 abs/10.1073/pnas.2109420119.
Ruiqi Gao, Yang Song, Ben Poole, Ying Nian Wu, and Diederik P Kingma. Learning energy-based
  models by diffusion recovery likelihood. In International Conference on Learning Representa-
  tions, 2021. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=v 1Soh8QUNc.
Tomas Geffner and Justin Domke. Mcmc variational inference via uncorrected hamiltonian anneal-
  ing. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 34:639–651, 2021.
Tomas Geffner and Justin Domke. Langevin diffusion variational inference. In International Con-
  ference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics, pp. 576–593. PMLR, 2023.
Louis Grenioux, Alain Oliviero Durmus, Eric Moulines, and Marylou Gabrié. On sampling with
  approximate transport maps. In Proceedings of the 40th International Conference on Machine
  Learning, volume 202 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pp. 11698–11733. PMLR,
  23–29 Jul 2023. URL https://proceedings.mlr.press/v202/grenioux23a.html.
Louis Grenioux, Maxence Noble, Marylou Gabrié, and Alain Oliviero Durmus. Stochastic lo-
  calization via iterative posterior sampling. In Proceedings of the 41st International Confer-
  ence on Machine Learning, volume 235 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pp.
  16337–16376. PMLR, 21–27 Jul 2024. URL https://proceedings.mlr.press/v235/
  grenioux24a.html.
Arthur Gretton, Karsten M Borgwardt, Malte J Rasch, Bernhard Schölkopf, and Alexander Smola.
  A kernel two-sample test. The Journal of Machine Learning Research, 13(1):723–773, 2012.
Jonathan Ho, Ajay Jain, and Pieter Abbeel. Denoising diffusion probabilistic models. Advances in
  neural information processing systems, 33:6840–6851, 2020.


                                                12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Matthew D. Hoffman and Andrew Gelman. The no-u-turn sampler: Adaptively setting path lengths
 in hamiltonian monte carlo. Journal of Machine Learning Research, 15(47):1593–1623, 2014.
 URL http://jmlr.org/papers/v15/hoffman14a.html.
Lars Holdijk, Yuanqi Du, Ferry Hooft, Priyank Jaini, Bernd Ensing, and Max Welling. PIPS: Path
  integral stochastic optimal control for path sampling in molecular dynamics, 2023. URL https:
  //openreview.net/forum?id=TnIZfXSFJAh.
Xunpeng Huang, Hanze Dong, Yifan HAO, Yian Ma, and Tong Zhang. Reverse Diffusion Monte
  Carlo. In The Twelfth International Conference on Learning Representations, 2024a. URL
  https://openreview.net/forum?id=kIPEyMSdFV.
Xunpeng Huang, Difan Zou, Hanze Dong, Yi-An Ma, and Tong Zhang. Faster sampling with-
  out isoperimetry via diffusion-based monte carlo. In Proceedings of Thirty Seventh Conference
  on Learning Theory, volume 247 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pp. 2438–
  2493. PMLR, 30 Jun–03 Jul 2024b. URL https://proceedings.mlr.press/v247/
  huang24a.html.
Aapo Hyvärinen and Peter Dayan. Estimation of non-normalized statistical models by score match-
  ing. Journal of Machine Learning Research, 6(4), 2005.
Ghassen Jerfel, Serena Wang, Clara Wong-Fannjiang, Katherine A. Heller, Yian Ma, and Michael I.
  Jordan. Variational refinement for importance sampling using the forward Kullback-Leibler di-
  vergence. In Proceedings of the Thirty-Seventh Conference on Uncertainty in Artificial Intelli-
  gence, pp. 1819–1829. PMLR, December 2021. URL https://proceedings.mlr.press/
  v161/jerfel21a.html. ISSN: 2640-3498.
Tero Karras, Miika Aittala, Timo Aila, and Samuli Laine. Elucidating the design space of diffusion-
  based generative models. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 35:26565–26577,
  2022.
Beomsu Kim and Jong Chul Ye. Denoising MCMC for accelerating diffusion-based generative
  models. In Proceedings of the 40th International Conference on Machine Learning, volume 202
  of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pp. 16955–16977. PMLR, 23–29 Jul 2023. URL
  https://proceedings.mlr.press/v202/kim23z.html.
Werner Krauth. Statistical mechanics: algorithms and computations. OUP Oxford, 13, 2006.
Dirk P. Kroese, Thomas Taimre, and Zdravko I. Botev. Handbook of Monte Carlo methods. Number
  706 in Wiley series in probability and statistics. Wiley, Hoboken, 2011. ISBN 978-0-470-17793-8.
Christian Léonard. Some properties of path measures. Séminaire de Probabilités XLVI, pp. 207–230,
  2014.
Jun S Liu and Jun S Liu. Monte Carlo strategies in scientific computing, volume 10. Springer, 2001.
Alex Matthews, Michael Arbel, Danilo Jimenez Rezende, and Arnaud Doucet. Continual repeated
  annealed flow transport monte carlo. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp.
  15196–15219. PMLR, 2022.
Nicholas Metropolis, Arianna W. Rosenbluth, Marshall N. Rosenbluth, Augusta H. Teller, and Ed-
  ward Teller. Equation of State Calculations by Fast Computing Machines. The Journal of Chem-
  ical Physics, 21(6):1087–1092, 06 1953. ISSN 0021-9606. doi: 10.1063/1.1699114. URL
  https://doi.org/10.1063/1.1699114.
Laurence Illing Midgley, Vincent Stimper, Gregor N. C. Simm, Bernhard Schölkopf, and
  José Miguel Hernández-Lobato. Flow annealed importance sampling bootstrap. In The
  Eleventh International Conference on Learning Representations, 2023. URL https://
  openreview.net/forum?id=XCTVFJwS9LJ.
Radford M Neal. Annealed importance sampling. Statistics and computing, 11:125–139, 2001.
Radford M Neal. Mcmc using hamiltonian dynamics. arXiv preprint arXiv:1206.1901, 2012.


                                                13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Alexander Quinn Nichol and Prafulla Dhariwal. Improved denoising diffusion probabilistic models.
  In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 8162–8171. PMLR, 2021.
Frank Noé, Simon Olsson, Jonas Köhler, and Hao Wu. Boltzmann generators: Sampling equilib-
  rium states of many-body systems with deep learning. Science, 365(6457):eaaw1147, Septem-
  ber 2019. ISSN 0036-8075, 1095-9203. doi: 10.1126/science.aaw1147. URL https:
  //www.science.org/doi/10.1126/science.aaw1147.
Nikolas Nüsken and Lorenz Richter. Solving high-dimensional hamilton–jacobi–bellman pdes using
  neural networks: perspectives from the theory of controlled diffusions and measures on path
  space. Partial differential equations and applications, 2(4):48, 2021.
George Papamakarios, Eric Nalisnick, Danilo Jimenez Rezende, Shakir Mohamed, and Balaji Lak-
  shminarayanan. Normalizing flows for probabilistic modeling and inference. Journal of Machine
  Learning Research, 22(57):1–64, 2021.
Michele Pavon. On local entropy, stochastic control, and deep neural networks. IEEE Control
 Systems Letters, 7:437–441, 2022.
Fabian Pedregosa, Gaël Varoquaux, Alexandre Gramfort, Vincent Michel, Bertrand Thirion, Olivier
  Grisel, Mathieu Blondel, Peter Prettenhofer, Ron Weiss, Vincent Dubourg, et al. Scikit-learn:
  Machine learning in python. Journal of machine learning research, 12(Oct):2825–2830, 2011.
Gabriel Peyré, Marco Cuturi, et al. Computational optimal transport: With applications to data
  science. Foundations and Trends® in Machine Learning, 11(5-6):355–607, 2019.
Angus Phillips, Hai-Dang Dau, Michael John Hutchinson, Valentin De Bortoli, George Deli-
  giannidis, and Arnaud Doucet. Particle denoising diffusion sampler. In Proceedings of
  the 41st International Conference on Machine Learning, volume 235 of Proceedings of Ma-
  chine Learning Research, pp. 40688–40724. PMLR, 21–27 Jul 2024. URL https://
  proceedings.mlr.press/v235/phillips24a.html.
Emilia Pompe, Chris Holmes, and Krzysztof Łatuszyński. A framework for adaptive
  MCMC targeting multimodal distributions.   The Annals of Statistics, 48(5):2930–
  2952, October 2020. ISSN 0090-5364, 2168-8966. doi: 10.1214/19-AOS1916. URL
  https://projecteuclid.org/journals/annals-of-statistics/volume-
  48/issue-5/A-framework-for-adaptive-MCMC-targeting-multimodal-
  distributions/10.1214/19-AOS1916.full. Publisher: Institute of Mathematical
  Statistics.
Teodora Reu, Francisco Vargas, Anna Kerekes, and Michael M. Bronstein. To smooth a cloud or
  to pin it down: Expressiveness guarantees and insights on score matching in denoising diffusion
  models. In The 40th Conference on Uncertainty in Artificial Intelligence, 2024. URL https:
  //openreview.net/forum?id=BV2STKHKE6.
D J Rezende, S Mohamed, and D Wierstra.         Stochastic backpropagation and ap-
 proximate inference in deep generative models.    Proceedings of The 31st Inter-
 national Conference in Machine Learning, Beijing China, 32:1278–, 2014.      URL
 http://jmlr.org/proceedings/papers/v32/rezende14.html%5Cnpapers3:
 //publication/uuid/F2747569-7719-4EAC-A5A7-9ECA9D6A8FE6.                    arXiv:
 1401.4082v3 ISBN: 9781634393973.
Lorenz Richter, Julius Berner, and Guan-Horng Liu. Improved sampling via learned diffusions. In
  ICML Workshop on New Frontiers in Learning, Control, and Dynamical Systems, 2023. URL
  https://openreview.net/forum?id=uLgYD7ie0O.
Gareth O. Roberts and Richard L. Tweedie. Exponential convergence of Langevin distributions and
  their discrete approximations. Bernoulli, 2(4):341–363, 1996. ISSN 13507265. URL http:
  //www.jstor.org/stable/3318418.
Tim Salimans and Jonathan Ho. Should EBMs model the energy or the score?, 2021. URL https:
  //openreview.net/forum?id=9AS-TF2jRNb.


                                               14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Jascha Sohl-Dickstein, Eric Weiss, Niru Maheswaranathan, and Surya Ganguli. Deep unsupervised
  learning using nonequilibrium thermodynamics. In International conference on machine learn-
  ing, pp. 2256–2265. PMLR, 2015.
Yang Song and Stefano Ermon. Generative modeling by estimating gradients of the data distri-
  bution. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 32. Curran Associates,
  Inc., 2019. URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper files/paper/2019/
  file/3001ef257407d5a371a96dcd947c7d93-Paper.pdf.
Yang Song and Stefano Ermon. Improved techniques for training score-based generative models. In
  Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 33, pp. 12438–12448. Curran Asso-
  ciates, Inc., 2020. URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper files/paper/
  2020/file/92c3b916311a5517d9290576e3ea37ad-Paper.pdf.
Yang Song, Jascha Sohl-Dickstein, Diederik P Kingma, Abhishek Kumar, Stefano Ermon, and
  Ben Poole. Score-based generative modeling through stochastic differential equations. In
  The Ninth International Conference on Learning Representations, 2021. URL https://
  openreview.net/forum?id=PxTIG12RRHS.
Gabriel Stoltz, Mathias Rousset, et al. Free energy computations: A mathematical perspective.
  World Scientific, 2010.
Robert H. Swendsen and Jian-Sheng Wang. Replica Monte Carlo Simulation of Spin-Glasses. Phys-
  ical Review Letters, 57(21):2607–2609, November 1986. doi: 10.1103/PhysRevLett.57.2607.
  URL https://link.aps.org/doi/10.1103/PhysRevLett.57.2607.                        Publisher:
  American Physical Society.
Saifuddin Syed, Alexandre Bouchard-Côté, George Deligiannidis, and Arnaud Doucet. Non-
  reversible parallel tempering: a scalable highly parallel mcmc scheme. Journal of the Royal
  Statistical Society Series B: Statistical Methodology, 84(2):321–350, 2022.
Nicholas G Tawn, Gareth O Roberts, and Jeffrey S Rosenthal. Weight-preserving simulated temper-
  ing. Statistics and Computing, 30(1):27–41, 2020.
Belinda Tzen and Maxim Raginsky. Theoretical guarantees for sampling and inference in generative
  models with latent diffusions. In Conference on Learning Theory, pp. 3084–3114. PMLR, 2019.
Francisco Vargas, Will Sussman Grathwohl, and Arnaud Doucet. Denoising diffusion samplers.
  In The Eleventh International Conference on Learning Representations, 2023a. URL https:
  //openreview.net/forum?id=8pvnfTAbu1f.
Francisco Vargas, Andrius Ovsianas, David Fernandes, Mark Girolami, Neil D Lawrence, and Niko-
  las Nüsken. Bayesian learning via neural Schrödinger–Föllmer flows. Statistics and Computing,
  33(1):3, 2023b.
Francisco Vargas, Shreyas Padhy, Denis Blessing, and Nikolas Nüsken. Transport meets variational
  inference: Controlled monte carlo diffusions. In The Twelfth International Conference on Learn-
  ing Representations, 2024. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=PP1rudnxiW.
Pascal Vincent. A connection between score matching and denoising autoencoders. Neural compu-
  tation, 23(7):1661–1674, 2011.
Martin J. Wainwright and Michael I. Jordan. Graphical Models, Exponential Families, and
 Variational Inference. Foundations and Trends® in Machine Learning, 1:1–305, 2008. doi:
 10.1561/2200000001. URL http://discovery.ucl.ac.uk/185880/.
Dawn Woodard, Scott Schmidler, and Mark Huber. Sufficient conditions for torpid mixing of parallel
  and simulated tempering. 2009.
Hao Wu, Jonas Köhler, and Frank Noé. Stochastic normalizing flows. Advances in Neural Informa-
  tion Processing Systems, 33:5933–5944, 2020.
Qinsheng Zhang and Yongxin Chen. Path Integral Sampler: a stochastic control approach for sam-
  pling. In The Tenth International Conference on Learning Representations, 2022.


                                               15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Xinwei Zhang, Zhiqiang Tan, and Zhijian Ou. Persistently trained, diffusion-assisted energy-
  based models. Stat, 12(1):e625, 2023. doi: https://doi.org/10.1002/sta4.625. URL https:
  //onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1002/sta4.625.
Yaxuan Zhu, Jianwen Xie, Ying Nian Wu, and Ruiqi Gao. Learning energy-based models by co-
  operative diffusion recovery likelihood. In The Twelfth International Conference on Learning
  Representations, 2024. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=AyzkDpuqcl.


                                               16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


O RGANIZATION OF THE SUPPLEMENTARY
The appendix is organized as follows. In Appendix A, we provide the pseudo-codes of every RDS
instance presented in the main part of this paper (standard RDS, GMM-LRDS & EBM-LRDS).
Appendix B summarizes general facts that will be useful for proofs and corresponding computa-
tions. In Appendix C, we describe the noising diffusion schemes considered in this work, namely
the Pinned Brownian Motion and the Variance-Preserving setting, and propose novel schemes. For
RDS and related variational diffusion-based methods, we dispense details on their continuous-time
and corresponding discrete-time variational objectives in Appendix D. We respectively provide an
overview of existing annealed MCMC methods and multi-level Energy-Based models in Appendix E
and Appendix F. In Appendix G, we provide expressions of additional variational metrics proposed
by Blessing et al. (2024) in the RDS setting. Details on our experimental settings, our implementa-
tion of RDS and other competing methods are given in Appendix H. Finally, we present additional
theoretical and experimental results in Appendix I.
Our codebase is available at https://github.com/h2o64/sde sampler lrds.

Notation. Let P ∈ P(CT ) and t ∈ [0, T ]. For any xt ∈ Rd , we denote by Px|tt ∈ P(CT ) the path
measure associated to the stochastic process (Xt )t∈[0,T ] ∼ P conditioned on Xt = xt . Furthermore,
for any π ∈ P(Rd ), π ⊗ Px|tt ∈ CT stands for the path measure Rd Px|tt dπ(xt ). For any K ≥ 1,
                                                                    R

we denote the set of joint distributions P((Rd )K+1 ) by P (K+1) . Finally, we adopt the following
                                                                                           L:L̄
notation to design sample batches: for any L̄ ≥ L ≥ 0 and K̄ ≥ K ≥ 0, we denote by XK:K̄ the
                          K̄,L̄
sequence of samples {Xkℓ }k=K,ℓ=L .

A     P SEUDO - CODES OF RDS- BASED ALGORITHMS
We respectively give sampling procedures and training procedures of a general version of RDS in
Algorithm 1 and Algorithm 2. Relying on this, we derive the complete training schemes for GMM-
LRDS (Algorithm 3) and EBM-LRDS (Algorithm 4).

Algorithm 1: Reference-based Diffusion Sampling (RDS) : sampling stage
                                                                        ref    K−1
Input: Time discretization {tk }K   k=0 of [0, T ], reference scores {sT −tk }k=0 , neural network
         g θ : [0, T ] × Rd → Rd , variational coefficients {ak , bk , ck }K−1
                                                                            k=0 defined in Appendix D.2
▷ Initialization
Y0 ∼ π base
     K−1 i.i.d.
(Zk )k=0      ∼ N(0, Id )
for k = 0, . . . , K − 1 do
    ▷ Compute the k-th diffusion step
                                                             √
    Yk+1 = ak Yk + bk {sref                  θ̂
                             T −tk (Yk ) + gT −tk (Yk )} +     ck Zk
Output: Discrete time process Y0:K approximating (Ytθ̂k )K
                                                         k=0


Algorithm 2: Reference-based Diffusion Sampling (RDS) : training stage
                                                                                         ref
Input: Time discretization {tk }K k=0 of [0, T ], target density γ, reference density γ      and scores
          ref      K−1
       {sT −tk }k=0 , neural network g : [0, T ] × R → R initialized such that g θ0 = 0, number of
                                         θ                d      d

       training iterations N , batch size B, variational coefficients {wk , ak , bk , ck }K−1
                                                                                          k=0 defined in
       Appendix D.2
for n = 0, . . . , N − 1 do
    ▷ Simulate B trajectories of the process (Ytθ̂ )t∈[0,T ]
      1:B i.i.d.
    Y0:K  ∼ SamplingRDS(g θn ), see Algorithm 1
    ▷ Apply a stochastic gradient descent step on θn
                                                                                            1:B
    Compute a MC estimator L̂RDS (θn ) of the loss LRDS (θn ) defined in (7) with samples Y0:K
    Compute the gradient ∇θ L̂RDS (θn ) and update θn to θn+1 with Adam optimizer
Output: Learned guidance g θN



                                                        17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Algorithm 3: Gaussian Mixture Model LRDS (GMM-LRDS) : training stage
Input: Time discretization {tk }K                                                                       I
                                    k=0 of [0, T ], target density γ, location of the target modes {xi }i=1 ,
         number of Markov chains per target mode M ≥ 1, size of Markov chains Ntot ≥ 1, effective size
         of Markov chains Neff ∈ J1, Ntot K, number of reference modes J ≥ I
▷ (a) Obtain reference samples
                                                                        i,m
For each i ∈ {1, . . . , I}, build via MALA M Markov chains {X0:N              }M of size Ntot starting at xi
                                                                           tot m=1
                                                                   ref ∼
Keep the last Neff samples of each Markov chain to define π̂ = {XNtot −Neff +1:Ntot }I,M
                                                                             i,m
                                                                                               i=1,m=1
▷ (b) Define the reference process
if J = 1 then
     Fit on π̂ ref a Gaussian model with parameterized density γ φ (Maximum Likelihood estimation)
else
     Fit on π̂ ref a J-component Gaussian Mixture Model with parameterized density γ φ (EM algorithm)
Set γ ref = γ φ and compute {sref    K−1
                              T −tk }k=0 analytically, see Appendix B
▷ (c) Run the RDS variational optimization
Run Algorithm 2
Output: Trained GMM-LRDS sampler


Algorithm 4: Energy-Based Model LRDS (EBM-LRDS) : training stage
Input: Time discretization {tk }K                                                                        I
                                     k=0 of [0, T ], target density γ, location of the target modes {xi }i=1 ,
          number of Markov chains per target mode M ≥ 1, size of Markov chains Ntot ≥ 1, effective size
          of Markov chains Neff ∈ J1, Ntot K
▷ (a) Obtain reference samples
                                                                         i,m
For each i ∈ {1, . . . , I}, build via MALA M Markov chains {X0:N               }M of size Ntot starting at xi
                                                                            tot m=1
                                                                    ref ∼     i,m
Keep the last Neff samples of each Markov chain to define π̂ = {XNtot −Neff +1:Ntot }I,M        i=1,m=1
▷ (b) Define the reference process
Based on π̂ ref , fit a multi-level EBM E φ using Algorithm 11
Set γ ref (x) = exp(−E φ (0, x)) and sref                       φ
                                          T −tk (x) = −∇x E (T − tk , x) for any k ∈ {0, . . . , K − 1}
▷ (c) Run the RDS variational optimization
Run Algorithm 2
Output: Trained EBM-RDS sampler


B     P RELIMINARIES
Linear SDE integration. We first dispense a useful lemma to compute exact integration in SDEs
with linear drift.
A0 (Integrability conditions on f and β). Coefficients f : [0, T ] → R and β : [0, T ] → (0, ∞) are
such that (a) f is integrable on (0, T ) and (b) β is integrable on (0, T ).
Lemma
p          2. Let T > 0 and b ∈ Rd . Consider the SDE defined on [0, T ] by dYt = f (t)(Yt + b)dt +
  β(t)dBt , where coefficients f and β verify A0. Then, for any pair of time-steps (s, t) such that
T ≥ t > s ≥ 0, the conditional distribution of Yt given Ys = ys ∈ Rd , denoted by pt|s (·|ys ),
verifies
                       Rt                      Rt                 R
                                                                      t         Rt
pt|s (·|ys ) = N exp( s f (u)du)ys + exp( s f (u)du) − 1 b, s β(u) exp(2 u f (r)dr)du Id .

                                                                        Rt
Proof. Assume A0. Define the function ζ : t ∈ [0, T ] → exp(− 0 f (u)du) and consider the
stochastic process (Zt )t∈[0,T ] defined by Zt = ζ(t)Yt for any t ∈ [0, T ]. By Îto’s formula, we have
dZt = f (t)ζ(t)bdt + ζ(t) β(t)dBt = −ζ̇(t)bdt + ζ(t) β(t)dBt . Therefore, for any time-steps
                            p                              p
(s, t) such that T ≥ t > s ≥ 0, we have
                                                            Rt     p
                     ζ(t)Yt − ζ(s)Ys = {ζ(s) − ζ(t)}b + s ζ(u) β(u)dBu ,
and then
               Rt                       Rt                    Rtp             Rt
     Yt = exp( s f (u)du)Ys + exp( s f (u)du) − 1 b + s β(u) exp( u f (r)dr)dBu ,

which gives the result using Îto’s isometry and the fact that Ys is independent from (Bt − Bs )t∈[s,T ] .



                                                        18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


General  SDE integration. Consider a general SDE of the form dYt = f (t)(Yt + gt (Yt ))dt +
  β(t)dBt defined on [0, T ], where f , β satisfy A0 and g : [0, T ] × Rd → Rd is a black-box
p
function. Let (s, t) be a pair of time-steps such that T ≥ t > s ≥ 0. We aim to compute the
conditional distribution of Yt given Ys = ys ∈ Rd . While this distribution is intractable for general
function g, it can be approximated by a tractable Gaussian kernel if t is close enough to s. Below,
we restate two common first-order methods that produce such approximation following the result of
Lemma 2.

(a) Euler-Maruyama (EM) scheme, which consists
                                             p of exactly integrating on time interval [s, t] the
SDE defined by dYu = f (s)(ys +gs (ys ))du+ β(s)dBu with constant drift and constant volatility.
(b) Exponential Integration (EI) scheme (Durmus & Moulines, 2015), more precise than the EM
scheme, which consists pof exactly integrating on time interval [s, t] the SDE defined by dYu =
f (u)(Yu + gs (ys ))du + β(u)dBu with linear drift, where the intractable term is frozen at gs (ys ).

Computation of scores for Gaussian mixtures. Below, we provide a useful lemma to compute
the marginal scores of a noising diffusion process applied to a general Gaussian mixture.
Lemma 3. Let π ∈ P(Rd ). Consider the noising process (Xt )t∈[0,T ] defined by SDE (2) where
X0 ∼ π. Then, for any t ∈ (0, T ), the conditional distribution of Xt given X0 = x0 ∈ Rd is defined
by the Gaussian kernel
                           qt|0 (·|x0 ) = N(S(t)x0 , S(t)2 σ 2 (t) Id ) ,                          (9)
                 Rt                        Rt
where S(t) = exp( 0 f (u)du) and σ 2 (t) = 0 β(u)/S(u)2 du.
In particular, if π is a Gaussian distribution i.e., π = N(m, Σ) with mean m ∈ Rd and covariance
Σ ∈ Rd×d , then for any t ∈ [0, T ], the marginal distribution of Xt is Gaussian, defined by
                             pt = N(S(t)m, S(t)2 Σ + S(t)2 σ 2 (t) Id ) .                         (10)
                                                        PJ
On the other hand, if π is a Gaussian mixture i.e., π = j=1 wj N(mj , Σj ) where J ≥ 1 is the
number of components, {wj }Jj=1 ∈ ∆J are the component weights, mj ∈ Rd and Σj ∈ Rd×d are
respectively the mean and the covariance of the j-th component, for any t ∈ [0, T ], the marginal
distribution of Xt is a Gaussian mixture, defined by
                               J
                               X
                        pt =         wj N(S(t)mj , S(t)2 Σj + S(t)2 σ 2 (t) Id ) .                (11)
                               j=1

Note that differentiating (11) provides closed-form solutions of the score of the stochastic process.

Proof. The proof of (9) directly follows from Lemma 2. Then, (10) and (11) are obtained by apply-
ing the affine mapping defined by the transition kernel (9) to the target distribution π.

In particular, (11) demonstrates that any noising diffusion scheme applied to a Gaussian mixture
does not show any mode switching.

Integral probability Metrics. Finally, we dispense the definition of standard probability metrics,
that will be used to assess the performance of the considered samplers, when having access to ground
truth samples. Consider two distributions µ ∈ P(Rd ) and ν ∈ P(Rd ) that we aim to compare.
We recall that the 2-Wasserstein distance between µ and ν is given by
 W2 (µ, ν) = inf{ Rd ×Rd ∥x1 − x0 ∥2 dπ(x0 , x1 ) : π ∈ P(Rd × Rd ), π0 = µ, π1 = ν}1/2 ,
                    R

where πi denotes the i-th marginal of π for i ∈ {0, 1}. In practice, we rather turn to its entropy
regularized version (Peyré et al., 2019)
W2,ε (µ, ν) = inf{ Rd ×Rd ∥x1 − x0 ∥2 dπ(x0 , x1 ) − H (π) : π ∈ P(Rd × Rd ), π0 = µ, π1 = ν}1/2 ,
                    R

where ε > 0 is a regularization hyper-parameter and H (π) = − Rd ×Rd log π(x0 , x1 )dπ(x0 , x1 )
                                                                  R

refers to as the entropy of π. When having access to samples from µ and ν, we compute a statistical


                                                     19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


estimation of W2,ε (µ, ν) via Sinkhorn algorithm (Cuturi, 2013) with ε = 10−3 , based on the GPU-
oriented implementation from https://github.com/fwilliams/scalable-pytorch-
sinkhorn.
We also consider the Maximum Mean Discrepancy (MMD) (Gretton et al., 2012), which quantifies
the dissimilarity between µ and ν by comparing their mean embeddings in a reproducing kernel
Hilbert space Hk with kernel k, as followed
                 MMD(µ, ν) =           sup            E[f (X) − f (Y )], X ∼ µ, Y ∼ ν .
                                 f ∈HK :∥f ∥H    ≤1
                                             K


In particular, MMD(µ, ν) = 0 if and only if µ = ν almost surely. When having access to samples
{xi }ni=1 from µ and {yi }m
                          i=1 from ν, we compute an unbiased statistical estimation of MMD(µ, ν)
given by
   q                                                                     Pn Pm
          2                             2                             2
              P                              P
       n(n−1)   1≤i<j≤n k(xi , xj ) + m(m−1)   1≤i<j≤m k(yi , yj ) − mn     i=1   j=1 k(xi , yj ) ,

                                       2
where k(x, y) = exp − ∥x − y∥ /(2α) is the squared exponential kernel whose positive
bandwidth is fixed as the median of the squared pairwise distances computed on the joint set
                 j=1 (Gretton et al., 2012).
{xi }ni=1 ∪ {yj }m
Finally, we recall that the Kolmogorov-Smirnov (KS) distance between µ and ν is defined by
                                KS(µ, ν) = sup |Fµ (x) − Fν (x)| ,
                                                x∈Rd

where Fµ (respectively Fν ) denotes the cumulative distribution function of µ (respectively ν). When
having access to samples from µ and ν, we implement a statistical estimation of the sliced KS
distance (Grenioux et al., 2023) using 128 random projections.

C     D ETAILS ON NOISING DIFFUSION PROCESSES
In this section, we consider a noising diffusion process (Xt )t∈[0,T ] induced by SDE (1) for an
arbitrary target distribution π ∈ P(Rd ) and T > 0, and denote by P⋆ ∈ P(CT ) the corresponding
path measure. Below, we provide detailed results on this diffusion process, depending on the choice
of f and β: we first provide details on the general setting in Appendix C.1; then, we fully describe the
Pinned Brownian Motion and the Variance-Preserving scheme in Appendix C.2 and Appendix C.3,
that are used in our experiments; finally, we present novel noising schemes in Appendix C.4.

C.1   G ENERAL NOISING SCHEME

Here, we consider the most general form of SDE (1).
Lemma 4. Let π ∈ P(Rd ). Assume that f and β both verify A0. Then, for any pair of time-steps
(s, t) such that T ≥ t > s ≥ 0, the conditional distribution of Xt given Xs = xs ∈ Rd is defined
by the Gaussian kernel
              qt|s (·|xs ) = N exp(log S(t) − log S(s))xs , S(t)2 {σ 2 (t) − σ 2 (s)} Id ,  (12)


                      Rt                     Rt
where S(t) = exp( 0 f (u)du) and σ 2 (t) = 0 β(u)/S(u)2 du.

Proof. The proof of (12) directly follows from Lemma 2.

C.2   P INNED B ROWNIAN MOTION
                                  Rt
For any t ∈ [0, T ], define α(t) = 0 β(t)dt and consider the case where f (t) = − α(Tβ(t)
                                                                                     )−α(t) . Then,
SDE (1) can be rewritten as
                                     β(t)Xt         p
                        dXt = −                 dt + β(t)dWt , X0 ∼ π .
                                   α(T ) − α(t)


                                                      20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


This noising scheme, known as the Pinned Brownian Motion (PBM) and previously considered by
Tzen & Raginsky (2019); Zhang & Chen (2022); Vargasp          et al. (2023b), can be obtained by applying
a Doob’s h-transform on the uncontrolled SDE dXt = β(t)dWt , associated to path measure Q,
to hit 0 at time T . Interestingly, it can be shown that the resulting path measure (P⋆ )R is solution to
the following stochastic optimal control problem
                           arg min{KL(P | Q) : P ∈ P(CT ), PT = π} ,
which is often referred to as a half Schrödinger Bridge problem.
Lemma 5. Let π ∈ P(Rd ). Assume that f (t) = − α(Tβ(t)      )−α(t) and β verifies A0. Then, for any pair
of time-steps (s, t) such that T ≥ t > s ≥ 0, the conditional distribution of Xt given Xs = xs ∈ Rd
is defined by the Gaussian kernel

                                   α(T ) − α(t)      (α(T ) − α(t))(α(t) − α(s))
                qt|s (·|xs ) = N                xs ,                               Id .             (13)
                                   α(T ) − α(s)               α(T ) − α(s)
Since p⋆T (x) = Rd qT |0 (x|x0 )dπ(x0 ), it results that P⋆T = δ0 .
                 R


Proof. The proof of (13) directly follows from Lemma 2.

Following Lemma 5, the PBM is an ’exact’ noising scheme and we have π base = δ0 in this setting.
Moreover, under mild assumptions on π, the time-reversed SDE (2) writes as

                           Yt                   ⋆
                                                              p
  dYt = β(T − t)                     + ∇ log pT −t (Yt ) dt + β(T − t)dBt , Y0 = 0 .
                    α(T ) − α(T − t)

On the choice of the β-schedule. Previous works have considered constant schedule β(t) = σ 2
(and therefore, α(t) = σ 2 t), where σ > 0 can be arbritrarily chosen, see e.g., Zhang & Chen (2022);
Richter et al. (2023). We also follow this setting in practice.

C.3   VARIANCE -P RESERVING DIFFUSION
                                  Rt
For any t ∈ [0, T ], denote α(t) = 0 β(t)dt and consider the case where f (t) = −β(t)/2σ 2 with
                             RT
σ > 0 and β being such that 0 β(s)ds ≫ 1. Then, SDE (1) can be rewritten as
                                   β(t)Xt      p
                           dXt = −        dt +    β(t)dWt , X0 ∼ π .
                                     2σ 2
This noising scheme, known as the Variance-Preserving (VP) scheme (Song et al., 2021) and previ-
ously considered by Vargas et al. (2023a), is an Ornstein-Uhlenbeck diffusion process and is largely
used in score-based generative models.
Lemma 6. Let π ∈ P(Rd ) and σ > 0. Assume that f (t) = −β(t)/2σ 2 and β verifies A0 such that
RT
 0
    β(s)ds ≫ 1. Then, for any pair of time-steps (s, t) such that T ≥ t > s ≥ 0, the conditional
distribution of Xt given Xs = xs ∈ Rd is defined by the Gaussian kernel
                                              p
                            qt|s (·|xs ) = N     1 − λs,t xs , σ 2 λs,t Id ,                    (14)

where λs,t = 1 − exp(α(s) − α(t)). Since p⋆T (x) = Rd qT |0 (x|x0 )dπ(x0 ), it results that P⋆T ≈
                                                         R

N(0, σ 2 Id ).

Proof. The proof of (14) directly follows from Lemma 2, along with fact that λ0,T ≈ 1.

Following Lemma 6, the VP scheme is an ’ergodic’ noising scheme, converging exponentially fast
to the Gaussian distribution N(0, σ 2 Id ); therefore, we have π base = N(0, σ 2 Id ) in this setting.
Moreover, under mild assumptions on π, the time-reversed SDE (2) writes as
                  β(T − t)                                      p
          dYt =             {Yt + 2σ 2 ∇ log p⋆T −t (Yt )}dt + σ β(T − t)dBt , Y0 ∼ P⋆T ,
                       2
after simple linear time reparameterization.


                                                   21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


On the choice of the β-schedule. Previous works have considered a linear schedule β(t) =
βmin (1 − t/T ) + βmax (t/T ) where βmin = 0.1, βmax ∈ {10, 20} and T = 1, see e.g., Song
et al. (2021); Richter et al. (2023); Reu et al. (2024) or cosine parameterization (Nichol & Dhari-
wal, 2021; Vargas et al., 2023a), which has been proved to perform better in generative modeling.
In our sampling experiments, we did not observe any significant difference between these two set-
tings. Hence, we fix the linear β-schedule to be the default setting for our numerics (except DDS,
originally implemented with the cosine schedule), and let σ be arbitrarily chosen.

C.4   A DDITIONAL EXAMPLES OF NOISING DIFFUSION PROCESSES

Below, we present original noising schemes, but did not consider them in our experiments.

Pinned Ornstein-Uhlenbeck Motion. We first propose to consider the case where f (t) =
          R T β(u)
− β(t)
   2 coth( t   2 du). Then, SDE (1) can be rewritten as

                               β(t)       RT
                                    coth( t β(u)
                                                               p
                  dXt = −                      2  du)Xt dt + β(t)dWt , X0 ∼ π .
                                 2
Analogously to the PBM, one can show that this noising scheme can be obtained by applying a
Doob’s h-transform on the Ornstein-Uhlenbeck process induced by the SDE dX̃t = − β(t)       2 X̃t dt +
   β(t)dWt to hit 0 at time T . We refer to this noising diffusion scheme as the Pinned Ornstein-
p
Uhlenbeck Motion (POUM).
                                                                   R T β(u)
Lemma 7. Let π ∈ P(Rd ). Assume that f (t) = − β(t)      2 coth( t      2 du) and β verifies A0. Then,
for any pair of time-steps (s, t) such that T ≥ t > s ≥ 0, the conditional distribution of Xt given
Xs = xs ∈ Rd is defined by the Gaussian kernel qt|s (·|xs ) given by
                                                                                            o
        |sinh( tT β(u)
                   2 du)|
              R                                     n
                                      R T β(u)    2
                                                            R T β(u)           R T β(u)
   N                      xs , 2 sinh( t 2 du) coth( s 2 du) − coth( t 2 du) Id .
        |sinh( sT β(u)
                   2 du)|
              R

                                                                                                  (15)
Since p⋆T (x) = Rd qT |0 (x|x0 )dπ(x0 ), it results that P⋆T = δ0 .
                 R


Proof. The proof of (15) directly follows from Lemma 2.

Following Lemma 7, the POUM scheme is an ’exact’ noising scheme and we have π base = δ0 in this
setting. Moreover, under mild assumptions on π, the time-reversed SDE (2) writes as
           β(T − t)       RT
                    {coth( T −t β(u)
                                                                     p
   dYt =                         2   du)Yt + 2∇ log p⋆T −t (Yt )}dt + β(T − t)dBt , Y0 = 0 .
              2

Gaussianized Pinned Brownian Motion. Let ζ : [0, T ] → (0, ∞) be a square integrable function
                          Rt
on (0, T ). Denote α(t) = 0 ζ(u)du. Inspired by Dai et al. (2023), we propose to consider f (t) =
− α(Tζ(t)                  2ζ(t)
      )−α(t) and β(t) = α(T )−α(t) . Then, SDE (1) can be rewritten as
                                                s
                                 ζ(t)Xt               2ζ(t)
                    dXt = −                dt +                dWt , X0 ∼ π .
                             α(T ) − α(t)         α(T ) − α(t)

Lemma 8. Let π ∈ P(Rd ). Assume that f (t) = − α(Tζ(t)                                  2ζ(t)
                                                                )−α(t) and β(t) = α(T )−α(t) , where
ζ : [0, T ] → (0, ∞) is a square integrable function on (0, T ). Then, for any pair of time-steps (s, t)
such that T ≥ t > s ≥ 0, the conditional distribution of Xt given Xs = xs ∈ Rd is defined by the
Gaussian kernel
                                                              (α(T ) − α(t))2

                                      α(T ) − α(t)
                   qt|s (·|xs ) = N                xs , 1 −                    Id .                (16)
                                      α(T ) − α(s)            (α(T ) − α(s))2
Since p⋆T (x) = Rd qT |0 (x|x0 )dπ(x0 ), it results that P⋆T = N(0, Id ).
                 R


Proof. The proof of (16) directly follows from Lemma 2.


                                                  22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Following Lemma 7, the noising scheme given above is ’exact’ with base distribution given by
π base = N(0, Id ), this setting being quite unusual in diffusion model community. Based on this,
we refer to this noising diffusion process as the Gaussianized Pinned Brownian Motion (GPBM).
Moreover, under mild assumptions on π, the time-reverse SDE (2) writes as
                                                            s
            ζ(T − t)                                             2ζ(T − t)
                              Yt + 2∇ log p⋆T −t (Yt ) dt +

dYt =                                                                          dBt , Y0 ∼ N(0, Id ) .
        α(T ) − α(T − t)                                      α(T ) − α(T − t)

D     VARIATIONAL OBJECTIVES FOR DIFFUSION - BASED METHODS
In this section, we first provide details on the continuous-time framework of variational diffusion-
based methods (including RDS) in Appendix D.1. Then, we describe in Appendix D.2 the RDS
discrete-time formulation, related to the variational loss LRDS given in (7), and compare this frame-
work to discrete-time formulations of previous variational methods.
In the rest of the section, we consider a target distribution π ∈ P(Rd ) and recall that P⋆ denotes
the path measure associated to the noising SDE (1) initialized at X0 ∼ π.

D.1     C ONTINUOUS TIME FORMULATION

D.1.1    RDS SETTING
Let π ref ∈ P(Rd ). We recall that Pref denotes the path measure associated to the noising SDE (1)
starting at X0 ∼ π ref . First note that P⋆ = π ⊗ Pref  |0 . Therefore we have the following relation P =
                                                                                                        ⋆

 dπ
dπ ref
       ·Pref , i.e., P⋆ is absolutely continuous with respect to Pref , with Radon-Nikodym derivative given
by (dP⋆ /dPref )(X[0,T ] ) = (dπ/dπ ref )(X0 ), for any diffusion process (Xt )t∈[0,T ] with forward time
direction.
Below, we first provide the proof of Proposition 1.
                                                                                                    ⋆
Proof of Proposition 1. Assume that P⋆T = Pref T ⋆= π
                                                      base
                                                           and there exists θ⋆ ∈ Θ such that gtθ = gt .
Under those two assumptions, it is clear that (Yt )t∈[0,T ] ∼ (P⋆ )R ; therefore, we have LLV (θ⋆ ) = 0,
                                                 θ

i.e., θ⋆ achieves optimal solution. We now detail how to obtain (6).
                                                                                                   ref
Consider the detached diffusion process (Ytθ̂ )t∈[0,T ] ∼ Pθ̂ . Using the fact that P⋆ = dπ
                                                                                          dπ
                                                                                            ref · P    , the
log-ratio in the objective (5) can be computed as
             dPθ                      dPθ   θ̂               γ ref   θ̂
      log          (Y θ̂
                          ) =  log            Y       +  log        YT − log Z ref + log Z .           (17)
           d(P⋆ )R [0,T ]          d (Pref )
                                            R  [0,T ]
                                                               γ

Moreover, by applying Girsanov’s theorem to the path measures (Pref )R and Pθ with the assumption
Pref
 T =π
       base
            , we have
                          Z T                               Z Tp
       dPθ        θ̂          β(T − t) θ        θ̂
                                                     2
 log           (Y     ) =              g     (Y
                                        T −t t     )   dt +     β(T − t)gTθ −t (Ytθ̂ )⊤ dBt . (18)
     d(Pref )R [0,T ]      0     2                           0


Since the Radon-Nikodym derivative between path measures and their respective time-reversals is
the same, we obtain the explicit LV objective combine the previous results to obtain the LV objective
(6) by combining (17) and (18).

In contrast, previous reference-based works from Zhang & Chen (2022); Vargas et al. (2023a) relied
on the reverse KL continuous-time objective
                                                    dPθ   θ

               LcKL (θ) = KL(Pθ | (P⋆ )R ) = E log         Y[0,T ]
                                                                         θ
                                                                     , Y[0,T ] ∼P
                                                                                  θ
                                                                                              (19)
                                                   d(P⋆ )R
where the expectation is taken w.r.t. to the parameterized process, not the detached one. In this case
too, the objective may be simplified as presented next.


                                                    23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                                    ⋆
Proposition 9. Assume there exists θ⋆ ∈ Θ such that gtθ = gt . Then, the loss defined in (19)
achieves optimal solution at θ⋆ and, setting ϱ = log(γ ref /γ), it simplifies as
                                 "Z                                             #
                                      T
                      c                 β(T − t) θ           θ 2             θ
                    LKL (θ) = E                    gT −t (Yt ) dt + ϱ(YT ) ,             (20)
                                    0       2

where the equality holds, up to constants independent of θ.

Proof. For any θ ∈ Θ, we have by the KL chain rule
                                                               h                   i
                          LcKL (θ) = KL(π base | P⋆T ) + Eπbase KL(Pθ|0 | (P⋆ )R
                                                                               |0 )  ,

where the first term does not depend on θ. Then, it is clear that LcKL is minimized when θ = θ⋆ .
The result of (20) directly follows from (17) and (18); in particular, the additional constants are
− log Z ref and log Z.

Based on the simplification (20), one may recognize a standard formulation of stochastic control-
affine problem with terminal cost ϱ, where the uncontrolled process is given by Pref .

D.1.2       DIS SETTING
In their paper, Berner et al. (2023) seek to approximate the time-reversal of P⋆ for the VP noising
scheme, see Appendix C.3. To do so, they consider the class of variational path measures (Pθ )θ∈Θ ⊂
P(CT ) where for any θ ∈ Θ, Pθ is associated to the SDE
             β(T − t) θ                                     p
  dYtθ =             Yt dt + σ 2 β(T − t)sθT −t (Ytθ )dt + σ β(T − t)dBt , Y0θ ∼ N(0, σ 2 Id ), (21)
                2
where the β-schedule is detailed in Appendix C.3, and sθ : [0, T ] × Rd is a neural network that
aims at approximating the marginal scores of P⋆ , i.e., sθ (t, ·) ≈ ∇ log p⋆t . The resulting variational
method, DIS, then consists in minimizing the KL-based objective θ 7→ KL(Pθ | (P⋆ )R ), later
extended by Richter et al. (2023) to the LV-based setting. We refer to (Richter et al., 2023, Section
3.2.) for detailed expressions of these continuous-time losses.

D.1.3       CMCD SETTING
Alternatively, Vargas et al. (2024) propose to approximate a diffusion process with marginals pre-
scribed by a curve of distributions (πt )t∈[0,T ] , such that π0 = π base and πT = π, with unnnormalized
densities that are assumed  to be tractable. To do so, they consider the class of pairs of variational
path measures (Pθ , Qθ ) θ∈Θ ⊂ P(CT )2 where, for any θ ∈ Θ, Qθ is associated to the SDE

                            σ2
                   dXtθ =      (∇ log πT −t (Xtθ ) − hθT −t (Xtθ ))dt + σdWt ,      X0θ ∼ π .              (22)
                            2
and Pθ is associated to the SDE
                              σ2
                     dYtθ =      (∇ log πt (Ytθ ) + hθt (Ytθ ))dt + σdBt ,     Y0θ ∼ π base ,              (23)
                              2
with hθ : [0, T ] × Rd → Rd being a neural network. The resulting variational method, CMCD,
consists in minimizing the KL-based objective θ 7→ KL(Pθ | (Qθ )R ) or the LV-based extension.
We refer to the original paper for detailed expressions of these continuous-time losses.

D.2      D ISCRETE TIME FORMULATION

Following the setting of Section 2.2, we consider a time discretization of the interval [0, T ] given by
                                                               3
an increasing sequence of timesteps {tk }Kk=0 such that t0 = 0 , tK = T and K ≥ 1. In the rest of
the section, we denote δk = tk+1 − tk .
   3
       In the only case of PBM, we consider t0 > 0 to avoid numerical integration error (typically t0 = 10−4 ).


                                                        24
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


This section is organized as follows. We first explain in Appendix D.3 the discretization setting
that we adopt for RDS, before deriving the RDS variational objective obtained by EM integration
(Appendix D.3.1), EI integration in the PBM case (Appendix D.3.2) and EI integration in the VP
case (Appendix D.3.3). Finally, for comparison purpose, we provide a discrete time approach to
DIS in Appendix D.4 and CMCD in Appendix D.5. All of the presented settings are implemented
in our code.

D.3     G ENERAL RDS SETTING

Let θ ∈ Θ and let π ref ∈ P(Rd ) be an arbitrary reference distribution. Consider the variational
diffusion process (Ytθ )t∈[0,T ] defined by SDE (4). We recall that under mild assumptions on π ref ,
see e.g., Cattiaux et al. (2023), the time-reversal of Pref is associated to the SDE
     dYtref = −f (T − t)Ytref dt + β(T − t)sref        ref
                                                                   β(T − t)dBt , Y0ref ∼ Pref
                                                                 p
                                               T −t (Yt )dt +                             T . (24)

Assume that we are given transition kernels (A, yk ) 7→ pθk+1|k (A|yk ) and (A, yk ) 7→ prefk+1|k (A|yk )
respectively approximating P(Ytθk+1 ∈ A | Ytθk = yk ) and P(Ytref   k+1
                                                                        ∈ A | Y ref
                                                                               tk   = yk ). Then, for K
                                                  ref R
sufficiently large, the path measures P and (P ) may respectively be approximated by the joint
                                           θ
                                                                                     QK−1
distributions pθ0:K ∈ P (K+1) and pref   0:K ∈ P
                                                   (K+1)
                                                         , defined by pθ0:K = π base k=0 pθk+1|k and
                QK−1 ref
pref
 0:K = π
           base                                       ⋆     dπ    ref
                  k=0 pk+1|k . Using the relation P = dπ ref · P , (P ) may also be approximated
                                                                        ⋆ R

                                             ref
by the joint distribution p⋆0:K = dπ ref · p0:K ∈ P        .
                                   dπ                (K+1)

Using this correspondence between path measures and joint distributions, we propose to approxi-
mate LLV defined in (5) by the discrete time LV-based objective
                                             dpθ

                                                      θ̂         θ̂
                      LRDS (θ) = Var log 0:K       (Y    )   , Y0:K ∼ pθ̂0:K .             (25)
                                             dp⋆0:K 0:K
In a similar manner, LcKL defined in (19) may be approximated by the discrete time KL-based objec-
tive
                                           dpθ

                                                    θ        θ
                         LKL (θ) = E log ⋆0:K (Y0:K    ) , Y0:K  ∼ pθ0:K .                    (26)
                                           dp0:K
By definition of the joint distributions, and similarly to the continuous-time relation , the log-ratio
in (25) and (26) can be simplified as
                 dpθ                   dpθ0:K θ̄            γ ref θ̄
             log 0:K   (Y  θ̄
                              ) = log         (Y    ) + log      (YK ) + log Z − log Z ref .       (27)
                 dp⋆0:K 0:K            dpref
                                          0:K
                                                0:K
                                                             γ
where θ̄ ∈ {θ, θ̂}. In the following sections, building upon (27), we derive the exact expression of
the variational loss (25) for each combination of noising and discretization schemes. We emphasize
that these derivations are in particular applicable to PIS and DDS settings by taking π ref as given in
Table 1.

D.3.1    EM- BASED RDS
In this section, we consider an arbitrary noising scheme that fits within the framework detailed in
Appendix C.1. For any k ∈ {0, . . . , K − 1}, define the coefficients
                                      wkEM = β(T − tk )δk ,
                                       aEM
                                        k = 1 − f (T − tk )δk ,
                                       bEM
                                        k = β(T − tk )δk ,
                                       cEM
                                        k = β(T − tk )δk .

To approximate SDEs (24) and (4) on time interval [tk , tk+1 ], we may define the following transition
kernels
              pref                 EM       EM ref             EM
                k+1|k (·|yk ) = N(ak yk + bk sT −tk (yk ), ck Id ) ,                              (28)
                pθk+1|k (·|yk ) = N(aEM      EM ref             θ              EM
                                     k yk + bk {sT −tk (yk ) + gT −tk (yk )}, ck Id ) ,             (29)


                                                   25
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


that can be obtained by applying the EM integration scheme, see Appendix B. In this case, the
log-ratio log dpθ /dpref can be computed as follows.
Lemma 10. Assume that the joint distributions pθ and pref are respectively induced by the transition
kernels defined in (28) and (29). Then, for any y0:K ∈ (Rd )K+1 , we have
                                   K−1                       K−1
                   dpθ             X wEM
                                            θ            2
                                                             Xq
                   log   (y0:K ) =     k
                                         ∥gT  −t  (yk )∥   +     wkEM gTθ −tk (yk )⊤ ϵk ,
                   dpref               2        k
                                   k=0                       k=0
                    1                     EM ref

        where ϵk = p EM yk+1 − ak yk − bk {sT −tk (yk ) + gTθ −tk (yk )} .
                                    EM
                                                                                                     (30)
                    ck

Proof. In this proof, for ease of reading, we will respectively denote aEM   EM EM       EM
                                                                        k , bk , ck and wk by ak ,
bk , ck and wk . Let y0:K ∈ (R )
                               d K+1
                                      . We have
                                    K−1
                   dpθ              X       dpθk+1|k (yk+1 |yk )
             log         (y 0:K ) =     log
                   dpref
                                    k=0
                                            dpref
                                              k+1|k (yk+1 |yk )
                                    K−1
                                    X       1      2    1             √     θ           2
                                  =       − ∥ϵk ∥ +         ϵk + (bk / ck )gT −tk (yk )
                                            2           2
                                   k=0
                                   K−1                        K−1
                                   X      b2k              2  X bk
                               =              gTθ −tk (yk ) +   √ gTθ −tk (yk )⊤ ϵk ,
                                         2ck                     ck
                                   k=0                         k=0

where ϵk is defined by (30). The result of Lemma 10 directly follows by noting that wk = b2k /ck .

By combining Lemma 10 with (27), we deduce the expression of the RDS loss in this setting.
Corollary 11 (Expression of RDS loss – EM setting). When using the EM scheme to integrate the
SDE (4), the RDS loss simplifies as
                               "K−1
                                 X                                        1
              LRDS (θ) = Var         wkEM gTθ −tk (Yk )⊤ {gTθ̂ −tk (Yk ) − gTθ −tk (Yk )}
                                                                          2
                                 k=0
                                    K−1
                                                                                      #
                                                                             ref
                                     Xq                                    γ
                                  +         wkEM gTθ −tk (Yk )⊤ Zk + log         (YK ) ,
                                                                            γ
                                         k=0

where {Zk }K−1                                                                 K
            k=0 are independently distributed according to N(0, Id ), and {Yk }k=0 is recursively
                 base
defined by Y0 ∼ π , and for any k ∈ {0, . . . , K − 1},
                                                                          q
                                    EM ref             θ̂
                    Yk+1 = aEM
                            k Yk + bk {sT −tk (Yk ) + gT −tk (Yk )} +         cEM
                                                                               k Zk ,                (31)

with θ̂ being a detached version of θ.

Proof. Consider the discrete time process {Yk }K
                                               k=0 defined by recursion (31). With the same nota-
tion as in Lemma 10, we have for any k ∈ {0, . . . , K − 1}
                                     q
                         ϵk = Zk + wkEM {gTθ̂ −tk (Yk ) − gTθ −tk (Yk )} ,

recalling that wkEM = (bEM 2 EM
                        k ) /ck . Using (27), we finally obtain the expression of the RDS loss.


For completeness, we also provide a similar result for the KL-based objective given in (26).
Corollary 12 (Expression of reverse KL loss – EM setting). When using the EM scheme to integrate
the SDE (4), up to additional constants independent of θ, the discrete time KL loss simplifies as
                                 "K−1                                          #
                                   X wEM                    2      γ ref
                    LKL (θ) = E           k
                                              gTθ −tk (Ykθ ) + log       (YKθ ) ,
                                         2                           γ
                                     k=0



                                                   26
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


where {Zk }K−1                                                               θ K
            k=0 are independently distributed according to N(0, Id ), and {Yk }k=0 is recursively
             θ   base
defined by Y0 ∼ π , and for any k ∈ {0, . . . , K − 1}
                                                                      q
                  θ          θ     EM ref        θ     θ     θ
                Yk+1  = aEM
                         k Yk + bk {sT −tk (Yk ) + gT −tk (Yk )} +      cEM
                                                                         k Zk .


As observed by Vargas et al. (2023a), there may be a significant bias raising from the use of the
Euler-Maruyama discretization when using diffusion-based sampling methods. This motivates us to
consider EI discretization in the RDS setting.

D.3.2    EI- BASED RDS (PBM)
We first provide the expression of the RDS loss in the case
                                                        R t of the PBM noising scheme, which is
detailed in Appendix C.2. We recall the notation α(t) = 0 β(u)du. For any k ∈ {0, . . . , K − 1},
define the coefficients
                          (α(T ) − α(T − tk ))(α(T − tk ) − α(T − tk+1 ))
                  wkPBM =                                                 ,
                                       α(T ) − α(T − tk+1 )
                          α(T ) − α(T − tk+1 )
                   aPBM
                    k   =                      ,
                           α(T ) − α(T − tk )
                   bPBM
                    k   = α(T − tk ) − α(T − tk+1 ) ,
                          (α(T ) − α(T − tk+1 ))(α(T − tk ) − α(T − tk+1 ))
                   cPBM
                    k   =                                                   .
                                         α(T ) − α(T − tk )

To approximate SDEs (24) and (4) on time interval [tk , tk+1 ], we may define the following transition
kernels
              pref                PBM
               k+1|k (·|yk ) = N(ak   yk + bPBM
                                            k   sref           PBM
                                                 T −tk (yk ), ck   Id ) ,                        (32)
              pθk+1|k (·|yk ) = N(aPBM
                                   k   yk + bPBM
                                             k   {sref            θ              PBM
                                                   T −tk (yk ) + gT −tk (yk )}, ck   Id ) ,      (33)

that can be obtained by applying the EI scheme, see Appendix B. In this case, the log ratio
log dpθ /dpref can be computed as follows.
Lemma 13. Assume that the joint distributions pθ and pref are respectively induced by the transition
kernels defined in (32) and (33). Then for any y0:K ∈ (Rd )K+1 , we have
                                   K−1                        K−1
                   dpθ             X wPBM
                                              θ           2
                                                              Xq
                 log     (y0:K ) =       k
                                           ∥gT  −t  (yk )∥  +     wkPBM gTθ −tk (yk )⊤ ϵk ,
                   dpref                 2        k
                                   k=0                        k=0
                     1                        PBM ref

        where ϵk = p PBM yk+1 − ak yk − bk {sT −tk (yk ) + gTθ −tk (yk )} .
                                     PBM
                    ck

Proof. The proof is exactly the same as Lemma 10, noting that we still have wkPBM = (bPBM
                                                                                      k   )2 /cPBM
                                                                                               k   .


By combining Lemma 13 with (27), we deduce the expression of the RDS loss in this setting. The
proof of the following is the same as in Corollary 11.
Corollary 14 (Expression of RDS loss – EI setting – PBM scheme). When using the EI scheme to
integrate SDE (4) implemented with PBM, the RDS loss simplifies as
                             "K−1
                               X                                         1
              LRDS (θ) = Var       wkPBM gTθ −tk (Yk )⊤ {gTθ̂ −tk (Yk ) − gTθ −tk (Yk )}
                                                                         2
                               k=0
                                  K−1
                                                                                     #
                                                                            ref
                                   Xq                                     γ
                                +         wkPBM gTθ −tk (Yk )⊤ Zk + log         (YK ) ,
                                                                           γ
                                      k=0



                                                   27
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


where {Zk }K−1                                                                  K
            k=0 are independently distributed according to N(0, Id ), and {Yk }k=0 is recursively
                 base
defined by Y0 ∼ π , and for any k ∈ {0, . . . , K − 1}
                                                                        q
                                   PBM ref                θ̂
                Yk+1 = aPBM
                        k   Yk + b k   {sT −tk  (Yk ) + gT −tk (Yk )} +  cPBM
                                                                          k   Zk ,

with θ̂ being a detached version of θ.

For completeness, we also provide a similar result for the KL-based objective given in (26).
Corollary 15 (Expression of reverse KL loss – EI setting – PBM noising). When using the EI
scheme to integrate SDE (4) implemented with PBM, up to additional constants independent of θ,
the discrete time KL loss simplifies as
                                  "K−1                                      #
                                   X wPBM                2      γ ref
                    LKL (θ) = E         k
                                           gTθ −tk (Ykθ ) + log       (YKθ ) ,
                                        2                        γ
                                   k=0

where {Zk }K−1                                                               θ K
            k=0 are independently distributed according to N(0, Id ), and {Yk }k=0 is recursively
             θ   base
defined by Y0 ∼ π , and for any k ∈ {0, . . . , K − 1}
                                                                          q
                  θ
                Yk+1 = aPBM
                        k   Ykθ + bPBM
                                   k   {sref      θ     θ        θ
                                         T −tk (Yk ) + gT −tk (Yk )} +        cPBM
                                                                               k   Zk .

D.3.3    EI- BASED RDS (VP)
Here, we provide the expression of the RDS loss in the Rcase of the VP noising scheme, which is
                                                          t
detailed in Appendix C.3. We recall the notation α(t) = 0 β(u)du. For any k ∈ {0, . . . , K − 1},
define λk = exp ((α(T − tk ) − α(T − tk+1 )) − 1 and the coefficients
                          √
                    4σ 2 ( 1 + λk − 1)2

                                                        α(T − tk ) − α(T − tk+1 )
             wkVP =                       = 4σ 2 tanh
                             λk                                     4
               VP
                    p
              ak = 1 + λk
              bVP
                          p
                       2
               k = 2σ { 1 + λk − 1}
              cVP   2
               k = σ λk


To approximate SDEs (24) and (4) on time interval [tk , tk+1 ], we may define the following transition
kernels
                pref                VP      VP ref           VP
                 k+1|k (·|yk ) = N(ak yk + bk sT −tk (yk ), ck Id ) ,                            (34)
                pθk+1|k (·|yk ) = N(aVP      VP ref             θ              VP
                                     k yk + bk {sT −tk (yk ) + gT −tk (yk )}, ck Id ) ,

that can be obtained by applying the EI scheme, see Appendix B. In this case, the log ratio
log dpθ /dpref can be computed as follows.
Lemma 16. Assume that the joint distributions pθ and pref are respectively induced by the transition
kernels defined in (34) and (34). Then, for any y0:K ∈ (Rd )K+1 , we have
                                     K−1                        K−1
                    dpθ              X wVP
                                               θ            2
                                                                Xq
                   log    (y 0:K ) =      k
                                            ∥gT  −t  (y k )∥  +        wkVP gTθ −tk (yk )⊤ ϵk
                    dpref                2         k
                                     k=0                        k=0
                     1                       VP ref

         where ϵk = q        yk+1 − ak yk − bk {sT −tk (yk ) + gTθ −tk (yk )}
                                      VP

                     cVP
                      k


Proof. The proof is exactly the same as Lemma 10, noting that we still have wkVP = (bVP 2 VP
                                                                                     k ) /ck .


By combining Lemma 16 with (27), we deduce the expression of the RDS loss in this setting. The
proof of the following is the same as in Corollary 11.


                                                  28
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Corollary 17 (Expression of RDS loss – EI setting - VP scheme). When using the EI scheme to
integrate SDE (4) implemented with VP , the RDS loss simplifies as
                              "K−1
                               X                                         1
               LRDS (θ) = Var       wkVP gTθ −tk (Yk )⊤ {gTθ̂ −tk (Yk ) − gTθ −tk (Yk )}
                                                                         2
                               k=0
                                   K−1
                                                                                     #
                                                                            ref
                                   Xq                                     γ
                                +           wkVP gTθ −tk (Yk )⊤ Zk + log        (YK ) ,
                                                                           γ
                                         k=0

where {Zk }K−1                                                                 K
            k=0 are independently distributed according to N(0, Id ), and {Yk }k=0 is recursively
                 base
defined by Y0 ∼ π , and for any k ∈ {0, . . . , K − 1}
                                                                       q
                                   VP ref             θ̂
                   Yk+1 = aVP
                           k Yk + bk {sT −tk (Yk ) + gT −tk (Yk )} +        cVP
                                                                             k Zk ,

with θ̂ being a detached version of θ.

For completeness, we also provide a similar result for the KL-based objective given in (26).
Corollary 18 (Expression of reverse KL loss – EI setting - VP noising). When using the EI scheme
to integrate SDE (4) implemented with VP, up to additional constants independent of θ, the discrete
time KL loss simplifies as
                                 "K−1                                       #
                                  X wVP                           γ ref θ
                                        k      θ        θ 2
                     LKL (θ) = E             gT −tk (Yk ) + log        (YK ) ,
                                        2                          γ
                                   k=0

where {Zk }K−1                                                               θ K
            k=0 are independently distributed according to N(0, Id ), and {Yk }k=0 is recursively
             θ   base
defined by Y0 ∼ π , and for any k ∈ {0, . . . , K − 1},
                                                                        q
                    θ         θ   VP ref       θ     θ        θ
                  Yk+1 = aVP
                          k Yk + bk {sT −tk (Yk ) + gT −tk (Yk )} +         cVP
                                                                             k Zk .


D.4   DIS SETTING

Here, we propose a discrete time alternative to the continuous time objective proposed by Berner
et al. (2023) and Richter et al. (2023). Let θ ∈ Θ. Consider the variational diffusion process
(Ytθ )t∈[0,T ] defined by SDE (21).
Assume that we are given transition kernels (A, yk ) 7→ pθk+1|k (A|yk ) and (A, yk+1 ) 7→
p⋆k|k+1 (A|yk+1 ) respectively approximating P(Ytθk+1 ∈ A | Ytθk = yk ) and P(Xtk ∈ A | Xtk+1 =
yk+1 ). Then, for K sufficiently large, the path measures Pθ and (P⋆ )R may be approximated by the
                                                                                 QK−1
joint distributions pθ0:K ∈ P (K+1) and p⋆0:K ∈ P (K+1) defined by pθ0:K = π base k=0 pθk+1|k and
              K−1
p⋆0:K = π k=0 p⋆k|k+1 .
            Q

Following the RDS methodology, we propose to approximate the KL-based continuous-time DIS
objective by
                                      dpθ0:K θ

                      DIS                               θ
                     LKL (θ) = E log ⋆ (Y0:K ) , Y0:K      ∼ pθ0:K ,                  (35)
                                      dp0:K
and the LV-based continuous-time DIS objective by
                                          dpθ0:K θ̂

                        DIS                            θ̂
                       LLV (θ) = Var log ⋆ (Y0:K ) , Y0:K ∼ pθ̂0:K .                            (36)
                                          dp0:K

To approximate SDEs (21) and (1) on time interval [tk , tk+1 ] in the case of the VP noising scheme,
we may define the following transition kernels
                                    q
             p⋆k|k+1 (·|yk+1 ) = N( 1 − λT −tk+1 ,T −tk yk+1 , σ 2 λT −tk+1 ,T −tk Id ) ,        (37)
                 pθk+1|k (·|yk ) = N(aVP      VP   θ             VP
                                      k yk + bk + sT −tk (yk ), ck Id ) ,                       (38)


                                                 29
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


where λs,t is defined in Lemma 6 with s = T −tk+1 and t = T −tk , and {aVP       VP VP
                                                                            k , bk , ck } are defined
via the VP-EI integration scheme detailed in Appendix D.3.3. In particular, the following equalities
hold:

                q                              1                                   1
                   1 − λT −tk+1 ,T −tk = exp     [α(T − tk+1 ) − α(T − tk )] = VP ,
                                               2                                  ak
                                                                                    cVP
              σ 2 λT −tk+1 ,T −tk = σ 2 [1 − exp (α(T − tk+1 ) − α(T − tk ))] =      k
                                                                                          .
                                                                                  (aVP
                                                                                     k )
                                                                                        2


Therefore, we have p⋆k|k+1 (yk |yk+1 ) = N(yk+1 ; aVP          VP
                                                       k yk , ck Id ). In this case, the log-ratio
log dp /dp can be computed as follows.
      θ     ⋆

Lemma 19. Assume that the joint distributions p⋆ and pθ are respectively induced by the transition
kernels defined in (37) and (38). Then, for any y0:K ∈ (Rd )K+1 , we have
                                            K−1
     dpθ                      π base (y0 ) X       dpθk+1|k (yk+1 |yk )
  log ⋆ (y0:K ) = log Z + log             +     log ⋆
     dp                        γ(yK )              dpk|k+1 (yk |yk+1 )
                                                 k=0
                                                 K−1                       K−1 q
                                      base
                                    π (y0 )      X     wkVP θ                X
                   = log Z + log            +              ∥sT −tk (yk )∥2 +       wkVP sθT −tk (yk )⊤ ϵk
                                     γ(yK )             2
                                                 k=0                       k=0
                    1                    VP θ
                         yk+1 − aVP

        where ϵk = q             k yk − bk sT −tk (yk )
                     cVP
                      k


Proof. This result lies on the following identity
                    dpθk+1|k (yk+1 |yk )    1     2  1
                                                                 q                   2
                                         = − ∥ϵk ∥ +   ϵk +       wkVP sθT −tk (yk )
                    dp⋆k|k+1 (yk |yk+1 )    2        2



Based on Lemma 19, we simply deduce the expression of the discrete time versions of LV-based and
KL-based DIS losses.
Corollary 20 (Expression of LV-DIS loss). When using the EI scheme to integrate SDE (21), the
LV-based discrete time DIS loss (36) simplifies as
                               "K−1
                                 X                                          1
                 DIS
               LLV (θ) = Var         wkVP sθT −tk (Yk )⊤ {sθ̂T −tk (Yk ) − sθT −tk (Yk )}
                                                                            2
                                 k=0
                             K−1
                                                                                 #
                             Xq
                                      VP θ            ⊤             π base (Y0 )
                          +         wk sT −tk (Yk ) Zk + log                       ,
                                                                     γ(YK )
                                k=0

where {Zk }K−1                                                                 K
            k=0 are independently distributed according to N(0, Id ), and {Yk }k=0 is recursively
defined by Y0 ∼ π base , and for any k ∈ {0, . . . , K − 1},
                                                                 q
                                              VP θ̂
                              Yk+1 = aVP
                                      k Yk + bk sT −tk (Yk ) +    cVP
                                                                   k Zk ,

with θ̂ being a detached version of θ.
                                                                                  q
Proof. This result is an application from Lemma 19, where we have ϵk = Zk +        wkVP {sθ̂T −tk (Yk )−
sθT −tk (Yk )} for any k ∈ {0, . . . , K − 1}.
Corollary 21 (Expression of KL-DIS loss). When using the EM scheme to integrate SDE (21), up
to additional constants independent of θ, the KL-based discrete time DIS loss (35) simplifies as
                                "K−1                                              #
                                  X wVP                              base     θ
                                                            2      π      (Y 0  )
                    LDIS
                     KL (θ) = E
                                         k
                                              sθT −tk (Ykθ ) + log         θ)
                                                                                    ,
                                         2                           γ(Y   K
                                  k=0



                                                    30
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


where {Zk }K−1                                                               θ K
            k=0 are independently distributed according to N(0, Id ), and {Yk }k=0 is recursively
             θ   base
defined by Y0 ∼ π , and for any k ∈ {0, . . . , K − 1},
                                                            q
                           θ           θ    VP θ        θ
                         Yk+1 = aVP
                                  k Yk + bk sT −tk (Yk ) +    cVP
                                                               k Zk .


D.5     CMCD SETTING

Here, we propose a discrete time alternative to the continuous time objective proposed by Vargas
et al. (2024). Let θ ∈ Θ. Consider the variational diffusion processes (Ytθ )t∈[0,T ] defined by SDE
(23), and (Xtθ )t∈[0,T ] , defined by (22).
Assume that we are given transition kernels (A, yk ) 7→ pθk+1|k (A|yk ) and (A, yk+1 ) 7→
 θ
qk|k+1 (A|yk+1 ) respectively approximating P(Ytθk+1 ∈ A | Ytθk = yk ) and Qθ (Xtθk ∈ A | Xtθk+1 =
yk+1 ). Then, for K sufficiently large, the path measures Pθ and (Qθ )R may be approximated by the
                                                                                  QK−1
joint distributions pθ0:K ∈ P (K+1) and q0:K
                                           θ
                                               ∈ P (K+1) defined by pθ0:K = π base k=0 pθk+1|k and
           QK−1 θ
 θ
q0:K  = π k=0 qk|k+1      .
Following the RDS methodology, we propose to approximate the KL-based continuous-time CMCD
objective by
                                        dpθ0:K θ

                        CMCD                               θ
                      LKL (θ) = E log θ (Y0:K ) , Y0:K          ∼ pθ0:K ,               (39)
                                        dq0:K
and the LV-based continuous-time CMCD objective by
                                         dpθ0:K θ̂

                       CMCD                                  θ̂
                     LLV (θ) = Var log θ (Y0:K ) , Y0:K          ∼ pθ̂0:K .             (40)
                                         dq0:K

For any k ∈ {0, . . . , K − 1}, let us define wkCMCD = σ 2 δk /4.
To approximate SDEs (22) and (23) on time interval [tk , tk+1 ], we may define the following transi-
tion kernels
           θ                             σ 2 δk
         qk|k+1  (·|yk+1 ) = N(yk+1 +           (∇ log πtk+1 (yk+1 ) − hθtk+1 (yk+1 )), σ 2 δk Id ) , (41)
                                            2
                                      σ 2 δk
             pθk+1|k (·|yk ) = N(yk +        (∇ log πtk (yk ) + hθtk (yk )), σ 2 δk Id ) ,            (42)
                                        2
that can be obtained by applying the EM integration scheme, see Appendix B. In this case, the
log-ratio log dpθ /dq θ can be computed as follows.
Lemma 22. Assume that the joint distributions q θ and pθ are respectively induced by the transition
kernels defined in (41) and (42). Then, for any y0:K ∈ (Rd )K+1 , we have
                                                   K−1
         dpθ                         π base (y0 ) X        dpθk+1|k (yk+1 |yk )
   log        (y 0:K ) = log Z + log             +     log    θ
         dq θ                         γ(yK )               dqk|k+1  (yk |yk+1 )
                                                  k=0
                                      base          K−1                    K−1 q
                                   π (y0 ) 1 X CMCD      2
                                                            X
                     = log Z + log         +   wk   ∥uk ∥ +                        wkCMCD u⊤
                                                                                           k ϵk ,
                                    γ(yK )   2
                                                     k=0                    k=0
where
                uk = ∇ log πtk (yk ) + ∇ log πtk+1 (yk+1 ) + hθtk (yk ) − hθtk+1 (yk+1 ) ,
                                            σ 2 δk

                       1
                ϵk = √        yk+1 − yk −          {∇ log πtk (yk ) + hθtk (yk )} .
                     σ δk                     2

Proof. Based on the notation of uk and ϵk , we obtain the result by noting that
                    dpθk+1|k (yk+1 |yk )     1      2    1
                                                                    q           2
                log θ                    = − ∥ϵk ∥ +        −ϵk − wkCMCD uk
                    dqk|k+1 (yk |yk+1 )      2           2



                                                    31
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Based on Lemma 22, we simply deduce the expression of the discrete time versions of LV-based and
KL-based CMCD losses.
Corollary 23 (Expression of LV-CMCD loss). When using the EM scheme to integrate SDE (23),
the LV-based discrete time CMCD loss (40) simplifies as
                                          K−1
                       "
                            π base (Y0 ) X CMCD 1 θ 2

      CMCD
     LLV (θ) = Var log                  +      wk       uk + (hθ̂tk (Yk ) − hθtk (Yk ))⊤ uθk
                             γ(YK )                   2
                                           k=0
                    K−1
                                             #
                     Xq
                  +         wkCMCD (uθk )⊤ Zk ,
                     k=0
           with uk = ∇ log πtk (Yk ) + ∇ log πtk+1 (Yk+1 ) + hθtk (Yk ) − hθtk+1 (Yk+1 ) ,
                 θ


where {Zk }K−1                                                                        K
            k=0 are independently distributed according to N(0, Id ), and {Yk }k=0 is recursively
                   base
defined by Y0 ∼ π , and for any k ∈ {0, . . . , K − 1},
                                   σ 2 δk                                    p
                    Yk+1 = Yk +           {∇ log πtk (Yk ) + hθ̂tk (Yk )} + σ δk Zk .
                                     2
                                                                                   q
Proof. This result is an application from Lemma 22, where we have ϵk = Zk + wkCMCD {hθ̂tk (Yk )−
hθtk (Yk )} for any k ∈ {0, . . . , K − 1}.
Corollary 24 (Expression of KL-CMCD loss). When using the EM scheme to integrate SDE (23),
up to additional constants independent of θ, the KL-based discrete time CMCD loss (39) simplifies
as
                                               K−1
                        "                                      #
           CMCD               π base (Y0θ ) 1 X CMCD θ 2
         LKL (θ) = E log                   +       wk     uk      ,
                                γ(YKθ )      2
                                                k=0
               with uθk = ∇ log πtk (Ykθ ) + ∇ log πtk+1 (Yk+1
                                                            θ
                                                               ) + hθtk (Ykθ ) − hθtk+1 (Yk+1
                                                                                           θ
                                                                                              ),

where {Zk }K−1                                                                  θ K
            k=0 are independently distributed according to N(0, Id ), and {Yk }k=0 is recursively
             θ   base
defined by Y0 ∼ π , and for any k ∈ {0, . . . , K − 1},
                   θ           σ 2 δk                                     p
                 Yk+1  = Ykθ +        {∇ log πtk (Ykθ ) + hθtk (Ykθ )} + σ δk Zk .
                                 2

E    A NNEALED MCMC SAMPLERS
In this section, we present a line of Monte Carlo algorithms that aim at sampling from a sequence of
                   k=0 ⊂ P(R ), with K ≥ 1, defined such that p0 is an easy-to sample distribution
distributions {pk }K             d

and pk is harder and harder to sample as k increases. In this section, we assume that each distribution
pk is absolutely continuous with respect to the Lebesgue measure, with tractable unnormalized
density and tractable score, where both can be evaluated pointwise.

Reminders on the Metropolis-Adjusted Langevin Algorithm (MALA). This sampling algo-
rithm is the only one in this section to be designed so as to sample from a single distribution
π ∈ P(Rd ) with density γ : Rd → R+ known up to a normalizing constant. It is an extension
of the largely used Unadjusted Langevin Algorithm (ULA) (Roberts & Tweedie, 1996).
Given a number of steps L ≥ 1, a step-size λ > 0 and an easy-to-sample distribution pinit ∈ P(Rd ),
                                                        init
ULA builds a Markov chain (X ℓ )Lℓ=0 defined by X ∼ p
                                                   0
                                                             and for any ℓ ∈ {0, . . . , L − 1},
                                                     √
                    X ℓ+1 = X ℓ + λ∇ log γ(X ℓ ) + 2λZ ℓ , Z ℓ ∼ N(0, Id ) ,
which reduces to a time discretization of the Langevin diffusion that admits π as invariant distribu-
tion. Building upon this recursion, MALA (Roberts & Tweedie, 1996) addresses the discretization
bias by adding a Metropolis-Hastings acceptance/rejection step at each iteration, see Algorithm 5.
In practice, one can easily adapt the step-size λ by targeting a specific acceptance ratio. We follow
this paradigm in our numerical experiments, see Appendix H for more details.


                                                   32
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Algorithm 5: Metropolis-Adjusted Langevin Algorithm (MALA)
Input: Target distribution π with unnormalized density γ, step size λ > 0, number of steps L ≥ 1, initial
         distribution pinit
▷ Initialization
X 0 ∼ pinit
for ℓ ∈ {0, . . . , L − 1} do
    ▷ Propose a new sample                     √
    X̃ ℓ+1 = X ℓ + λ∇ log γ(X ℓ ) + 2λZ ℓ , Z ℓ ∼ N(0, Id )
    ▷ Compute     the acceptance      ratio
                       X̃ ℓ+1 )q(X ℓ |X̃ ℓ+1 )
    α = min 1, γ(γ(X        ℓ )q(X̃ ℓ+1 |X ℓ )  where q(y | x) = N(y; x + λ∇ log γ(x), 2λ Id )
    ▷ Accept or reject depending on α
    U ∼ U([0, 1])
    if U ≤ α then
          X ℓ+1 = X̃ ℓ+1
    else
          X ℓ+1 = X ℓ
                                                    iid
Output: Sequence of samples X 0:L such that X 0:L ∼ π (approximately)



Annealed Langevin MCMC (AL-MCMC). Based on exact samples from p0 , the Annealed
Langevin MCMC algorithm (Song & Ermon, 2019; 2020) consists in sequentially sampling from
pk+1 with MALA (Algorithm 5) initialized in the last samples obtained at step k. The core idea
behind this procedure is that the warm initialization obtained by the easy-to-sample distributions
(i.e., when k is low) can help to overcome sampling issues, such as high energy barriers, in the more
complex distributions (i.e., when k is large). We refer to Algorithm 6 for the pseudo-code of this
approach.

Algorithm 6: Annealed Langevin MCMC (AL-MCMC) algorithm
Input: Sequence of target distributions {pk }K                     K           K
                                             k=0 , step-sizes {λk }k=1 ∈ (0, ∞) , number of MALA
         steps per level L ≥ 1
▷ Initialization
       iid
X00:L ∼ p0
for k = 0, . . . , K − 1 do
    ▷ Sample from pk+1 by starting at samples obtained from pk
        0:L
    Xk+1    = MALA(pk+1 , λk+1 , L, δX L ), see Algorithm 5
                                        k
                                                 iid
                             0:L
Output: Sequence of samples X0:K such that Xk0:L ∼ pk (approximately)



Sequential Monte Carlo (SMC) and extension. The Sequential Monte Carlo (Neal, 2001;
Del Moral et al., 2006) algorithm lies on the same paradigm as Algorithm 6 but proceeds in parallel
over N chains (which are referred as particles) while ensuring that the warm initialization is correct.
To do so, SMC relies on an additional resampling step that may occur before certain MALA run,
based on accumulated importance weights that we next define.
Let N ≥ 1, k ∈ {0, . . . , K − 1}, (w̃kn )N
                                          n=1 be unnormalized importance weights accumulated
on each chain up to step k (w̃kn = 1/N if k = 0), and (xnk )N n=1 be samples from pk obtained
independently as the last samples of N parallel MALA runs (or exactly obtained if k = 0). Then,
the SMC importance weights designed to sample from pk+1 , denoted by (w̃k+1 n
                                                                                  n=1 , and their
                                                                                 )N
renormalized versions, denoted by (wk+1 )n=1 , are defined as
                                     n    N


                                     pk+1 (xnk ) n                   w̃n
                             n
                           w̃k+1 =              w̃ ,         n
                                                            wk+1 = PN k+1j    .
                                      pk (xnk ) k                   j=1 w̃k+1

The SMC resampling step then consists in obtaining N new samples (yk+1
                                                                    n
                                                                         n=1 by random selection
                                                                        )N
among the original samples (xk )n=1 via a multinomial distribution (with replacement) defined by
                             n N

the normalized weights (wk+1
                         n
                              n=1 . These novel samples will then be used as starting points for
                             )N


                                                       33
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


running MALA on the target pk+1 . In practice, this resampling step only occurs adaptively based
on the value of the accumulated Effective Sample Size (ESS) defined at step k by
                                              P           2
                                                 N     n
                                                 n=1 w̃k
                                    ESSk = PN               .
                                                       n 2
                                                n=1 (w̃k )

We detail the whole SMC procedure in Algorithm 7.

Algorithm 7: Sequential Monte Carlo (SMC) algorithm with adaptive resampling
Input: Sequence of target distributions {pk }K                       K           K
                                               k=0 , step-sizes {λk }k=1 ∈ (0, ∞) , number of MCMC
         steps per level L ≥ 1, number of particles N ≥ 1, ESS resampling threshold α ∈ (0, 1]
▷ Initialization
       iid
X01:N ∼ p0 , W̃01:N = 1/N
for k = 0, . . . , K − 1 do
    ▷ 1. Compute the SMC importance weights (in parallel, for n = 1, . . . , N )
        n
    W̃k+1    = (pk+1 (Xkn )/pk (Xkn )) W̃k+1
                                         n

    ▷ 2. Compute the accumulated ESS (in parallel, for n = 1, . . . , N )
                    P           2  P
                      N      n          N       n 2
    ESSk+1 =          n=1 W̃k     /     n=1 (W̃k )

    ▷ 3. Resample Xk1:N if the ESS too low
    if ESSk+1 < αN then
         ▷ Normalize the importance weights (in parallel, for n = 1, . . . , N )
             n       n
                         / N           j
                           P
         Wk+1   = W̃k+1        j=1 W̃k+1
         ▷ Resample the particles
         I 1:N ∼ M(Wk+1 1              N
                            , . . . , Wk+1 )
            1:N    I 1:N        1:N
         Yk+1 = Xk        , W̃k = 1/N
    else
           n
         Yk+1 = Xkn
                                                     n
    ▷ 4. Sample from pk+1 by starting from sample Yk+1   (in parallel, for n = 1, . . . , N )
      1:L                               n ), see Algorithm 5
    X̃k+1 = MALA(pk+1 , λk+1 , L, δYk+1
     n       L
    Xk+1 = X̃k+1
                                                       iid
                             1:N
Output: Sequence of samples X0:K such that Xk1:N ∼ pk (approximately)


Recently, Phillips et al. (2024) proposed an extension of the SMC algorithm, Particle Denoising
Diffusion Sampler (PDDS), where they consider the specific case where the intermediate distribu-
           k=0 are defined as the approximate marginals of a denoising diffusion process. Below, we
tions {pk }K
explain the fundamentals of PDDS.
Let π ∈ P(Rd ) be a hard-to-sample distribution. With the same notations as in Section 2.1, consider
the noising process (X ⋆ )t∈[0,T ] induced by the following SDE
                                                   p
                            dXt⋆ = f (t)Xt⋆ dt + β(t)dWt , X0⋆ ∼ π .                            (43)

Then, assuming that XT⋆ ∼ π base , the time-reversal of SDE (43) is given by

                                                                                         Y0⋆ ∼ π base ,
                                                                p
    dYt⋆ = −f (T − t)Yt⋆ dt + β(T − t)∇ log p⋆T −t (Yt∗ )dt + β(t)dBt ,                                   (44)
where p⋆t is the density of the marginal distribution associated to Xt⋆ , which is intractable in gen-
eral. Assume that we are given a sequence of intermediate unnormalized densities (pt )t∈[0,T ] that
approximate the target densities (p⋆t )t∈[0,T ] .
In particular, the time-reversed SDE (44) can be approximated by

     dYt = −f (T − t)Yt dt + β(T − t)∇ log pT −t (Yt )dt + β(T − t)dBt , Y0 ∼ π base .
                                                            p
                                                                                                          (45)

Consider a time discretization {tk }K
                                    k=0 such that t0 = 0 and tK = T , and the sequence of target
distributions {pk }K
                   k=0 defined by p k = pT −tk , such that pk is expected to be harder and harder to
sample from as k increases.


                                                        34
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Let k ∈ {0, . . . , K − 1}, define δk = tk+1 − tk . Since SDE (43) is linear, it can be exactly
integrated on time interval [T − tk+1 , T − tk ], see Lemma 2. We denote by p⋆k|k+1 the correspond-
ing transition density. On the other hand, SDE (45) can only be approximately integrated on time
interval [tk , tk+1 ] (due to the score term in the drift). For instance, this can be done using the
Euler-Maruyama transition kernel4

  pk+1|k (·|yk ) = N(yk − f (T − tk )δk yk + β(T − tk )δk ∇ log pT −tk (yk ), β(T − tk )δk Id ) .

To sample sequentially from {pk }K k=0 , Phillips et al. (2024) suggest to apply the SMC procedure
detailed in Algorithm 7, where the k-th resampling step (1-3) is now defined as follows.

0. Sample X̂k+1
            n
                ∼ pk+1|k (· | Xkn ) (in parallel, for n = 1, . . . , N );
1. Compute the importance weights (in parallel, for n = 1, . . . , N )
                                              n
                             n
                                      pk+1 (X̂k+1 )p⋆k|k+1 (Xkn | X̂k+1
                                                                    n
                                                                        )
                           W̃k+1 =                                          W̃kn ;
                                         pk (Xkn )pk+1|k (X̂k+1
                                                            n   | Xkn )

2. Apply the resampling procedure (based on the ESS value) to the particles X̂k+1
                                                                              1:N
                                                                                  with importance
weights given by {Wk+1 }n=1 .
                    n    N


Hence, this novel resampling step amounts to reweight the samples obtained from the approximate
time-reversed SDE (45) by using the exact noising scheme as proposal.

Replica Exchange (RE). The Replica Exchange algorithm (Swendsen & Wang, 1986) aims at
sampling from the annealed distributions {pk }Kk=0 with K + 1 parallel Markov chains, i.e., the k-th
chain targets pk . For the sake of pedagogy, we assume here that K is even.
At each level, RE sampling is done via a local MCMC sampler, such as MALA, which is expected
to have poor performance for large k. To alleviate this issue, every L MALA steps, RE randomly
performs a swapping between Markov chains. More specifically, each consecutive pair (k, k + 1) of
Markov chains (i.e., either (k, k+1) ∈ {(0, 1), . . . , (K−2, K−1)} or (k, k+1) ∈ {(1, 2), . . . , (K−
1, K)}), with respective current states Xk and Xk+1 , is swapped with probability

                                                 pk (Xk+1 )pk+1 (Xk )
                             pk,k+1 = min 1,                            .
                                                 pk (Xk )pk+1 (Xk+1 )
We provide the pseudo-code of this algorithm in Algorithm 9.

Algorithm 8: Swapping step of Replica Exchange
Input: Sequence of target distributions {pk }K
                                             k=0 with even K, current samples X1:K , swapping state
        s ∈ {0, 1}
if s = 0 then
     Indexes = {0, 2, . . . , K − 2}
else
     Indexes = {1, 3, . . . , K − 1}
▷ Compute the  swapping probability between
                                              k and k + 1 (in parallel, for k ∈ Indexes)
                   pk (Xk+1 )pk+1 (Xk )
pk,k+1 = min 1, pk (Xk )pk+1 (Xk+1 )
▷ Swap depending on pk,k+1 (in parallel, for k ∈ Indexes)
U ∼ U([0, 1])
if U < pk,k+1 then
     (Xk , Xk+1 ) = (Xk+1 , Xk )
Output: Randomly swapped sequence X0:K


   4
     In the original paper, the authors consider the VP noising scheme and compute pk+1|k as the transition
kernel obtained by Exponential Integration of SDE (45) on [tk , tk+1 ].


                                                    35
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Algorithm 9: Replica Exchange (RE) algorithm
Input: Sequence of target distributions {pk }K                                   K           K
                                                k=0 with even K, step-sizes {λk }k=1 ∈ (0, ∞) , total
         number of MCMC steps M ≥ 1, swap frequency S ≥ 1
▷ Initialization
  0    iid
X0:K   ∼ p0
s=0
for m = 0, . . . , M − 1 do
    if (m + 1) mod S == 0 then
          ▷ Swap Markov chains for indexes determined by s
            m+1                  m
          X0:K    = swapRE(X0:K     , s), see Algorithm 8
          s = (s + 1) mod 2
    else
          ▷ Sample locally (in parallel, for k = 0, . . . , K)
          Xkm+1 = MALA(pk , λk , 1, δXkm ), see Algorithm 5
                                                      iid
                             0:M
Output: Sequence of samples X0:K such that Xk0:M ∼ pk (approximately)



Known limitations of annealed MCMC samplers. In general, annealed MCMC samplers usu-
ally target a sequence of distributions {pk }K
                                             k=0 , which forms a geometric bridge between an easy-
to-sample distribution π base and a hard-to-sample distribution π, i.e., pk ∝ (π base )(K−k)/K π k/K .
However, this scheme suffer from mode-switching for multi-modal distribution π (Phillips et al.,
2024), i.e., the mode weights of the intermediate distributions may vary a lot as k increases. There-
fore, transitions between annealing levels is hard in practice, as samples can easily get stuck in a
high-probability modes. Moreover, due to the use of reweighting schemes, SMC and RE are highly
sensitive to the overlap between consecutive distributions, which requires to take K large in complex
multi-modal settings, hence increasing the complexity of the methods.


F     E NERGY- BASED M ODELS

This section is dedicated to describing Energy-Based Models.

F.1   S INGLE -L EVEL EBM S

Let p ∈ P(Rd ). We assume having access to samples from p but not to its density. Energy-
based Models (EBM) perform a density estimation task by modeling the density of p with pφ (x) =
exp(−E (x))/Z , where E : R → R is a neural network and Z = Rd exp(−E φ (x))dx is
       φ        φ          φ    d                                 φ
                                                                       R
an unknown normalizing constant. This model is trained by maximizing the log-likelihood of the
model L(φ) = E[log pφ (X)] where X ∼ p, whose gradients can be computed as

              ∇φ L(φ) = E[∇φ E φ (X − )] − E[∇φ E φ (X + )],           X − ∼ pφ , X + ∼ p .             (46)

Given samples from p (referred to as positive samples) and samples from pφ (referred to as negative
samples), one can compute a Monte-Carlo estimator of ∇φ L(φ) using (46). In practice, the negative
samples are usually obtained by running a MCMC sampler on pφ (which is possible because it is
known up to a normalizing constant). However, obtaining truthful negative samples is the main
challenge of the EBM training procedure as pφ is expected to be as multi-modal as p.

F.2   M ULTI - LEVEL EBM S

Let p ∈ P (K+1) , with K ≥ 1. For k = 1, . . . , K, we assume having access to samples from pk
but not to its density. Regarding p0 , we assume it to be known entirely. Our goal is to approximate
the density of pk at every level k ∈ {1, . . . , K}. A naive approach would consist in defining single-
level EBMs for each k. Assuming that the distributions pk are not completely unrelated, doing this
would be however very inefficient. This section presents alternatives to this approach, which are all
implemented in our code.


                                                     36
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


F.2.1    P RIOR WORKS
Diffusion Recovery Likelihood (DRL). Recently, Gao et al. (2021); Zhu et al. (2024) proposed
the DRL framework, based on the extra assumption that for any k ∈ {0, . . . , K − 1}, the condi-
tional distribution pk|k+1 is known and given by pk|k+1 (· | xk+1 ) = N(αk+1 xk+1 , σk+1       2
                                                                                                   Id ) for
some αk+1 ∈ R and σk+1 > 0. This is typically the case when the joint distribution p is de-
fined via a discrete time approximation of a linear SDE, see Appendix C. In the following, we
denote Yk = αk Xk where Xk ∼ pk . In DRL, the authors suggest to use a multi-level EBM
pφ                     φ          φ
  k (·) = exp(−E (k, ·))/ZkR, where E
                                              φ
                                                 : {1, . . . , K} × Rd → R is a neural network and the
                             φ
normalizing constant Zk = Rd exp(−E (k, x))dx is intractable. In this case, the density of pk
                                               φ

is approximated, up to a multiplicative constant, by exp(−E φ (k, ·)). Using Bayes rule, they define
for any k ∈ {0, . . . , K − 1} the following conditional EBM
   pφ                                                   φ
     k+1|k (yk+1 | xk ) ∝ pk|k+1 (xk | yk+1 /αk+1 )pk+1 (yk+1 )

                                φ            −1                1              2     φ
                         = (Z (k + 1, xk )) exp − 2 ∥xk − yk+1 ∥ − E (k + 1, yk+1 ) ,
                                                            2σk+1

                                                    −1            2
where Z φ (k + 1, xk ) = Rd exp − 2σk+1      2
                                                       ∥xk − y∥ − E φ (k + 1, y) dy. Note that if σk+1 2
                              R

is small enough, for instance when K is large, then the quadratic term dominates in the expression of
log pφ k+1|k (· | xk ), which means that this conditional distribution localizes on xk . Therefore, by ap-
plying a first order Taylor expansion of the energy term at xk , the following Gaussian approximation
holds
                      pφ                                2        φ             2

                       k+1|k (yk+1 | xk ) ≈ N xk − σk+1 ∇E (k + 1, xk ), σk+1 Id .
Hence, if σk+1
           2
               is chosen small enough, this conditional distribution will be very easy to sample
from. Based on this observation, the authors suggest to use the following maximum likelihood
objective
                 K−1                                h                             i
      LDRL (φ) =      LDRL             DRL                φ
                  X
                       k (φ) , with Lk (φ) = E log pk+1|k (αk+1 Xk+1 | Xk ) ,               (47)
                     k=0
where Xk+1 ∼ pk+1 and Xk ∼ pk|k+1 (·|Xk+1 ). In particular, the gradient of the single-level DRL
loss defined in (47) can be expressed as
                     ∇φ LDRL             φ     −              φ        +
                          k (φ) = E[∇φ E (k, Yk )] − E[∇φ E (k, αk Xk )] ,
where Xk ∼ pk , Yk+1−
                        ∼ pφ                     +
                            k+1|k (· | Xk ) and Xk+1 ∼ pk+1 . Up to a multiplicative constant, the
density of pk can then be approximated by xk 7→ pφk (αk xk ).


Algorithm 10: Gibbs-within-Langevin MCMC transition kernel
Input: Previous state (k, x) ∈ {0, . . . , K} × Rd , step-size λ > 0
▷ Sample x̃ given k with standard MCMC
x̃ = MALA(pφ (· | k), λ) where pφ (· | k) ∝ pφ   k (·)
▷ Sample k̃ given x̃ with a multinomial distribution
k̃ ∼ M (exp(−E φ (0, x̃)), . . . , exp(−E φ (K, x̃)))
Output: Next state (k̃, x̃)


Diffusion Assisted EBM (DA-EBM). On the other hand, (Zhang et al., 2023) suggest to solve
the problem by jointly modeling indexes and states. Here, the multi-level EBM is expressed as
pφ                φ
 k (x) = exp(−E (k, x))/Z
                               φ
                                 , where E φ : {0, . . . , K} × Rd → R is a neural network and the
                                K
normalizing constant Z φ = k=0 Rd exp(−E φ (k, x))dx, which can be learn by maximizing the
                             P      R
following maximum likelihood objective
                LDAEBM (φ) = E [log pφ  k (Xk )] , k ∼ U({0, . . . , K}), Xk ∼ pk .           (48)
The gradient of objective (48) can be written as
                  ∇φ LDAEBM (φ) = E[∇φ E φ (k − , X − )] − E[∇φ E φ (k + , Xk+ )] ,
where (k − , X − ) ∼ pφ , k + ∼ U({0, . . . , K}) and Xk+ ∼ pk+ . In the same fashion as Kim &
Ye (2023), the authors suggest to perform the negative sampling from pφ by doing a Gibbs-within-
Langevin procedure, whose transition kernel is summarized in Algorithm 10.


                                                       37
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


F.2.2   O UR APPROACH : USING AN ANNEALED MCMC SAMPLER AS BACKBONE
In this paper, we also suggest to learn a multi-level EBM approximating p, defined by pφ     k (x) =
                     φ
exp (−E φ (k, x)) /Z k , where E φ
                                   : {0, . . . , K} × R d
                                                          → R is a neural network and the normalizing
constant Zkφ = Rd exp (−E φ (k, x)) dx. We propose to learn φ by maximizing a simple yet novel
                R
maximum likelihood joint objective
                               K
                 Lours (φ) =         Lours     ours            φ
                               X
                                      k (φ) , Lk (φ) = E [log pk (Xk )] , Xk ∼ pk ,                 (49)
                               k=0

with single-level gradient given by
         ∇φ Lours          φ     −            φ     +       −    φ    +
             k (φ) = E[∇φ E (k, Xk )] − E[∇φ E (k, Xk )] , Xk ∼ pk , Xk ∼ pk .


Unlike previous multi-level EBM algorithms, the negative sampling phase can be simply done in
our framework by leveraging annealed MCMC algorithms presented in Appendix E on the sequence
of EBM densities {pφ (k, ·)}K
                            k=0 . This allows us to kill two birds in one stone as (i) we get negative
samples for each single-level EBM and (ii) we overcome the negative sampling limitations of each
EBM by leveraging the correlation between the consecutive levels. In practice, we use Replica
Exchange as default annealed MCMC sampler because of its massively parallel capabilities. We
summarize our training procedure in Algorithm 11. For ease of reading, we presented the continuous
time analog of this approach in the main part of the paper, see Section 3.3.

Algorithm 11: Multi-level EBM training using annealed MCMC samplers
Input: Number of traing iterations N ≥ 1, initial parameter φ0 , batch size B ≥ 1, number of MCMC
        steps L ≥ 1, predefined annealed MCMC sampler
for n = 0, . . . , N − 1 do
    ▷ Get B samples from pk (in parallel, for k = 0, . . . , K)
        + B        iid
    {Xk,b  }b=1 ∼ pk
    ▷ Get B samples from each pφ    k using the annealed MCMC
                                      n
                                                                      sampler
    {Xk,b }b=1,k=0 = annealedMCMC {pφ
        − B,K                                      n K

                                                 k  } k=0 , B
    ▷ Apply a stochastic gradient descent on φn
    Compute the MC estimator
                           P      ĝn of the
                                             gradient  of the loss Lours (φn ) defined
                                                                                       in (49)
             −1    P  K      B          φn        −       P  B          φn         +
    ĝn = B           k=0    b=1 ∇φ E        k, Xk,b − b=1 ∇φ E              k, Xk,b
    Update φn to φn+1 with Adam optimizer based on ĝn
Output: Optimized parameter φN


Multi-level EBM parameterization as GMM tilting. To reduce the computational footprint of
multi-level EBMs in the context of LRDS, we suggest to define our EBM model as a tilting of a
learned GMM. Let φ̄ = {wj , mj , Σj }Jj=1 be the parameters learned by GMM-LRDS (Algorithm 3)
to approximate π̂ ref and denote by pφ̄
                                      t the t-th marginal density of the resulting reference process.
Building on this, we define pφ                  φ̄
                             t as a tilting of pt by

                                 log pφ            φ̄        φ
                                      t (x) = log pt (x) − NN (t, x) ,

where NNφ : [0, T ] × Rd → R is a neural network with parameter φ. In this scenario, we design
the initial φ0 to ensure that NNφ0 = 0. In practice, in the case where the GMM shares very few
similarities with π̂ ref close to t = 0, we rather consider
                         log pφ                          φ̄        φ
                              t (x) = 1t>tlim (t) × log pt (x) − NN (t, x) ,

where tlim ∈ [0, T ]. For most of our numerical experiments, we found that tlim = 0.2 brought
satisfying results.


                                                   38
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


G     A DDITIONAL METRICS FOR VARIATIONAL DIFFUSION - BASED METHODS

When specifically using annealed VI methods, one may consider additional metrics to evaluate the
performance of the corresponding samplers. For completeness purpose, we provide in this section
the expressions of the sampling metrics presented by Blessing et al. (2024), for all discrete time
variational diffusion-based methods presented in this paper: RDS (including PIS and DDS), DIS
and CMCD. All of these metrics are implemented in our code.
Given a fixed level of time discretization K ≥ 1, these performance criteria require the evaluation
of a variational importance weight function w : (Rd )K+1 → R+ , assessing the quality of the
variational approximation, that is specific to each variational setting.

• For RDS (including PIS and DDS), we define
                                    Z ref dpθ0:K (y0:K )   dpθ0:K (y0:K )γ ref (yK )
                       w(y0:K ) =                        =                           ,
                                     Z dp⋆0:K (y0:K )       dpref
                                                               0:K (y0:K )γ(yK )

where pθ ∈ P (K+1) and pref ∈ P (K+1) are respectively defined as discrete time approximations
of the path measures Pθ and (Pref )R ; see Appendix D.3 for more details.
• For DIS, we define
                                                   1 dpθ0:K (y0:K )
                                     w(y0:K ) =                     ,
                                                   Z dp⋆0:K (y0:K )

where pθ ∈ P (K+1) and p⋆ ∈ P (K+1) are respectively defined as discrete time approximations of
the path measures Pθ , induced by SDE (21), and (P⋆ )R ; see Appendix D.4 for more details.
• For CMCD, we define
                                                    1 dpθ0:K (y0:K )
                                      w(y0:K ) =         θ (y
                                                    Z dq0:K    0:K )

where pθ ∈ P (K+1) and q θ ∈ P (K+1) are respectively defined as discrete time approximations
of the path measures Pθ , induced by SDE (23), and (Qθ )R , where Qθ is induced by SDE (22); see
Appendix D.5 for more details.

Note that, for each variational setting, w does not depend on the normalization constant of the target
distribution : in particular, Z simplifies in the DIS and CMCD expressions. This also stands for Z ref
in the RDS setting.

G.1   ’R EVERSE ’ PERFORMANCE CRITERIA

Definition. Standard variational metrics, referred to as ’reverse’ performance criteria by Blessing
et al. (2024), are defined as expectations with respect to the variational distribution.

(a) The Evidence Lower Bound (ELBO), expected to be maximized, defined by
                                              θ         θ
                            ELBO = −E[log w(Y0:K )] , Y0:K ∼ pθ0:K .

For any RDS setting with intractable Z ref , this criterion may assess the performance of the RDS
sampler itself, but cannot be used for numerical comparison with different variational settings.
(b) The MC estimation of the normalizing constant Ẑr , expected to be close to Z, defined by
                                             θ         θ
                                 Ẑr = E[w(Y0:K )] , Y0:K ∼ pθ0:K .

For any RDS setting with intractable Z ref , this criterion cannot be used.
(c) The normalized Explained Sum of Squares (nESSr ), expected to be close to 1, defined by
                                                 θ
                                           E[w(Y0:K )]2     θ
                              nESSr =            θ )2 ]
                                                        , Y0:K ∼ pθ0:K .
                                           E[w(Y0:K

                                                    39
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Computation. Based on the results from Appendix D.2, we detail the simulation of Y0:K
                                                                                   θ
                                                                                      and the
computation of log w(Y0:K ) for each setting.
                       θ


• RDS setting: Y0θ ∼ π base , and for any k ∈ {0, . . . , K − 1},
                                                                    √
              θ
            Yk+1 = ak Ykθ + bk {sref      θ     θ        θ
                                 T −tk (Yk ) + gT −tk (Yk )} +          ck Zk , Zk ∼ N(0, Id ) ,
and the importance weight function is given by
                      K−1                          K−1
              θ
                      X     wk θ            2  X√                             γ ref θ
      log w(Y0:K )=            gT −tk (Ykθ ) +    wk gTθ −tk (Ykθ )⊤ Zk + log      (YK ) ,
                            2                                                  γ
                      k=0                           k=0

where {wk , ak , bk , ck }K−1
                          k=0 depend on the noising scheme and the discretization setting.

• DIS setting: Y0θ ∼ π base , and for any k ∈ {0, . . . , K − 1},
                      θ                                    √
                    Yk+1   = ak Ykθ + bk sθT −tk (Ykθ ) + ck Zk , Zk ∼ N(0, Id )
and the importance weight function is given by
                      K−1                         K−1
              θ
                      X     wk θ                 X√                             π base (Y0θ )
      log w(Y0:K )=           ∥sT −tk (Ykθ )∥2 +    wk sθT −tk (Ykθ )⊤ Zk + log               ,
                      k=0
                            2
                                                   k=0
                                                                                  γ(YKθ )

where {wk , ak , bk , ck }K−1
                          k=0 come from the EI discretization of the VP noising scheme.

• CMCD setting: Y0θ ∼ π base , and for any k ∈ {0, . . . , K − 1},

            θ               σ 2 δk                                     p
          Yk+1 = Ykθ +             {∇ log πtk (Ykθ ) + hθtk (Ykθ )} + σ δk Zk , Zk ∼ N(0, Id ) ,
                              2
and the importance weight function is given by
                         K−1                     K−1 q
                       1 X CMCD θ 2 X                                               π base (Y0θ )
               θ
       log w(Y0:K )=      wk    uk +                      wkCMCD (uθk )⊤ Zk + log                 ,
                       2
                       k=0                   k=0
                                                                                      γ(YKθ )
                   θ                θ                   θ
             with uk = ∇ log πtk (Yk ) + ∇ log πtk+1 (Yk+1 ) + hθtk (Ykθ ) − hθtk+1 (Yk+1
                                                                                       θ
                                                                                          ).

G.2    ’F ORWARD ’ PERFORMANCE CRITERIA

Definition. As observed by Blessing et al. (2024), the ’reverse’ variational metrics presented above
may not be able to quantify mode collapse. Hence, the authors propose novel variational metrics,
referred to as ’forward’ performance criteria, that are defined as expectations with respect to the
ground truth distribution.

(a) The Evidence Upper Bound (EUBO), expected to be minimized, defined by
                               EUBO = E[log w(Y0:K )] , Y0:K ∼ p⋆0:K .

For any RDS setting with intractable Z ref , this criterion may assess the performance of the RDS
sampler itself, but cannot be used for numerical comparison with different variational settings.
(b) The MC estimation of the normalizing constant Ẑf , expected to be close to Z, defined by
                                              −1
                         Ẑf = E[w(Y0:K )−1 ]     , Y0:K ∼ p⋆0:K .

For any RDS setting with intractable Z ref , this criterion cannot be used.
(c) The normalized Explained Sum of Squares (nESSf ), expected to be close to 1, defined by
                                                    −1
                  nESSf = E[w(Y0:K )−1 ]E[w(Y0:K )]     , Y0:K ∼ p⋆0:K .


                                                    40
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Computation. Based on the results from Appendix D.2, we detail the simulation of Y0:K and the
computation of log w(Y0:K ) for each setting.

• RDS setting with EM scheme: YK ∼ π, and for any k ∈ {0, . . . , K − 1},
                  Yk = Sk+1 (tk )Yk+1 + Sk+1 (tk )σk+1 (tk )Zk , Zk ∼ N(0, Id ) ,
                     R
                         T −t                   R T −t
where Sk (t) = exp T −tk f (u)du , σk2 (t) = T −tk Sβ(u)  k (u)
                                                               2 du, and the importance weight function

is given by
                                         K−1
                                                                                    1 θ
                                             wkEM gTθ −tk (Yk )⊤ sref
                                         X
                       log w(Y0:K ) = −                               T −tk (Yk ) +  g      (Yk )
                                                                                    2 T −tk
                                         k=0
      K−1                               K−1
                                        X
      X                                           1
    −     σk+1 (tk )gTθ −tk (Yk )⊤ Zk +                   − 1 + f (T − tk )δk gTθ −tk (Yk )⊤ Yk
                                             Sk+1 (tk )
      k=0                                k=0
                                                                                                 γ ref
                                                                                         + log         (YK ) ,
                                                                                                  γ
as a consequence of Lemma 10.
• RDS setting with EI scheme (PBM): YK ∼ π, and for any k ∈ {0, . . . , K − 1},
                                     q
                              Yk+1     cPBM
                                         k
                         Yk = PBM + PBM Zk , Zk ∼ N(0, Id ) ,
                              ak      ak
and the importance weight function is given by
                                  K−1
                                                                             1 θ
                                         wkPBM gTθ −tk (Yk )⊤ {sref
                                  X
               log w(Y0:K ) = −                                 T −tk (Yk ) + gT −tk (Yk )}
                                                                             2
                                   k=0
                                K−1
                                Xq                                       γ ref
                            −            wkPBM gTθ −tk (Yk )⊤ Zk + log         (YK ) ,
                                                                          γ
                                 k=0

as a consequence of Lemma 13.
• RDS setting with EI scheme (VP): YK ∼ π, and for any k ∈ {0, . . . , K − 1},
                                      q
                               Yk+1     cVP
                                          k
                          Yk = VP + VP Zk , Zk ∼ N(0, Id ) ,
                                ak     ak
and the importance weight function is given by
                                   K−1
                                                                            1 θ
                                         wkVP gTθ −tk (Yk )⊤ {sref
                                   X
               log w(Y0:K ) = −                                T −tk (Yk ) + gT −tk (Yk )}
                                                                            2
                                   k=0
                                 K−1
                                 Xq                                      γ ref
                             −           wkVP gTθ −tk (Yk )⊤ Zk + log          (YK ) ,
                                                                          γ
                                 k=0

as a consequence of Lemma 16.
• DIS setting: YK ∼ π, and for any k ∈ {0, . . . , K − 1},
                                         q
                                 Yk+1        cVP
                                               k
                          Yk = VP + VP Zk , Zk ∼ N(0, Id ) ,
                                  ak      ak
and the importance weight function is given by
                      K−1                           K−1 q
                    1 X VP θ          2                                                           π base (Y0 )
                                                            wkVP sθT −tk (Yk )⊤ Zk + log
                                         X
 log w(Y0:K ) = −      wk sT −tk (Yk ) −                                                                       ,
                    2                                                                              γ(YK )
                      k=0                            k=0

as a consequence of Lemma 19.


                                                    41
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


• CMCD setting: YK ∼ π, and for any k ∈ {0, . . . , K − 1},

                   σ 2 δk                                           p
    Yk = Yk+1 +           {∇ log πtk+1 (Yk+1 ) − hθtk+1 (Yk+1 )} + σ δk Zk , Zk ∼ N(0, Id ) ,
                     2
and the importance weight function is given by
                             K−1                     K−1 q
                           1 X CMCD θ 2 X                                             π base (Y0 )
        log w(Y0:K ) = −      wk    uk −                    wkCMCD (uθk )⊤ Zk + log
                           2                                                           γ(YK )
                           k=0                    k=0
                with uk = ∇ log πtk (Yk ) + ∇ log πtk+1 (Yk+1 ) + hθtk (Yk ) − hθtk+1 (Yk+1 ) ,
                      θ


as a consequence of Lemma 22.


H     I MPLEMENTATION DETAILS

H.1   D ETAILS ON TARGET DISTRIBUTIONS

Gaussian mixture from Figure 2. The distribution from Figure 2 is a 16-dimensional mixture
between N(m1 , Σ1 ) and N(m2 , Σ2 ) with weights 0.7 and 0.3 respectively. Let 1d be the d-
dimensional vector with all components equal to 1, then we have
                              m1 = −0.6 × 116 , m2 = +0.6 × 116 .
Moreover, denote Rθ a rotation matrix with angle θ between the first and last axes, then

 Σ1 = Rπ/4 diag(10−2 , . . . , 10−2 , 10−1 )Rπ/4
                                             T
                                                 , Σ2 = Rπ/6 diag(10−1 , 10−2 , . . . , 10−2 )Rπ/6
                                                                                               T
                                                                                                   .

In practice, we estimate the weight of the first mode w1 by computing a Monte Carlo estimator of
                              Z
                                 1N(x;m1 ,Σ1 )>N(x;m2 ,Σ2 ) (x)π(x)dx .                      (50)


Bi-modal Gaussian mixture. This Gaussian mixture is used in Figure 1 and also in Section 5. It is
a d-dimensional mixture between N(−1d , Σ) and N(1d , Σ) with weights 2/3 and 1/3 respectively.
The different values of Σ are recapped in Table 3. Just like the previous experiment, we also use the
formula (50) to estimate the strongest mode weight with Monte Carlo approach.

Multi-modal Gaussian mixtures. Given a number of mixture components L > 2, we define a
                                               PL
d-dimensional Gaussian mixture x ∈ Rd 7→ ℓ=1 wℓ N(x; mℓ , 0.5 Id ), where the mean locations
{mℓ }Lℓ=1 are independently distributed according to U [−L, L]    and the mixture weights {wℓ }L
                                                                d
                                                                                                 ℓ=1
are strictly increasing, defined with a constant geometrical increment such that wL /w1 = 3. To
assess the mode weight recovery in this multi-modal setting, we compute the total variation distance
between the exact mode weight histogram and the mode weight histogram computed from Monte
Carlo approximation.

Rings distribution. Let T : R+ × [0, 2π] → R2 be the transformation from polar to cartesian
coordinates. Let θ ∼ U([0, 2π]) and R ∼ N(r, σ 2 ) with r, σ > 0, we say that T (R, θ) is distributed
as a ring of radius r and width σ. The Rings distribution is a mixture of rings with radiuses r = 1, 3, 5
and width σ = 0.1. The weights of each ring within the mixture are 1/9, 3/9 and 5/9. In this specific
case, we use more MCMC chains and GMM components than the number of modes. The initial
points of the MCMC samplers are fetched by drawing the same amount of uniformly distributed
points on each ring.

Checkerboard distribution. We divide the square [−4, 4]2 into 16 squares of size 2 × 2. This
distribution is defined as a mixture of uniform distributions on those squares in an interleaving
fashion. We assign a weight of 18.75% to each 4 squares on the left and 6.25% to each 4 squares on
the right. The initial points of the MCMC samplers are taken as the middle of each square.


                                                   42
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Table 3: Covariance settings for the bi-modal Gaussian mixture. We denote by logdiag(a, b)
with 0 < a < b the diagonal matrix in Rd×d whose diagonal is a log-linear interpolation between a
and b. Moreover, Qd ∈ Rd×d is a random orthogonal matrix built by doing the QR decomposition
of a random matrix distributed according to U([0, 5]d×d ). The seed used to generate this last matrix
is fixed at 42.

        Type      Difficulty    Cond. number                       Covariance
     Diagonal     Isotropic           1                        (5 × 10−2 )2 × Id
     Diagonal     Medium             102                (5 × 10−2 )2 × logdiag(10−2 , 1)
     Diagonal       Hard             104                (5 × 10−2 )2 × logdiag(10−4 , 1)
       Full       Medium             102          (5 × 10−2 )2 × Qd × logdiag(10−2 , 1) × QTd
       Full         Hard             104          (5 × 10−2 )2 × Qd × logdiag(10−4 , 1) × QTd



The ϕ4 field system. The ϕ4 model is a simplified framework often used as a continuous version
of the Ising model, aiding in the exploration of phase transitions within statistical mechanics. As per
Gabrié et al. (2022), we focus on a discretized version of this model, set on a one-dimensional grid
with size d = 32. Each configuration is represented as a d-dimensional vector (ϕi )di=1 . To further
constrain the system, we fix the field to zero at both ends by setting ϕ0 = ϕd+1 = 0.
The negative log-density of the distribution is then expressed as follows
                                    d+1                      d
                                                                                     !
                                 ad X                    1 X
               ln πh (ϕ) = −β           (ϕi − ϕi−1 )2 +         (1 − ϕ2i )2 + hϕi        .        (51)
                                  2 i=1                 4ad i=1

We selected parameter values that make the system bimodal, setting a = 0.1 and the inverse tem-
perature β = 20, while adjusting the value of h. We define w+ as the statistical frequency of
configurations where ϕd/2 > 0, and w− as the frequency where ϕd/2 < 0. When h = 0, the system
is symmetric under the transformation ϕ → −ϕ, so we anticipate w+ = w− . However, for h > 0,
the negative mode becomes more prevalent.
For large values of d, the relative likelihood of the modes can be approximated using Laplace ex-
pansions at the 0th and 2nd orders. Letting ϕh+ and ϕh− represent the local maxima of (51), these
approximations provide the following results respectively
                     w−   πh (ϕh− )        w−   πh (ϕh− ) × | det Hh (ϕh− )|−1/2
                        ≈           ,         ≈                                  ,                (52)
                     w+   πh (ϕh+ )        w+   πh (ϕh+ ) × | det Hh (ϕh+ )|−1/2
where Hh is the Hessian of the function ϕ → ln πh (ϕ). We compute the modes ϕh+ and ϕh− using a
gradient descent on the distribution’s potential. Since we do not have access to ground truth samples
in practice, we compare the Laplace approximations defined in (52), considered as our ground truth,
to a Monte Carlo estimation of w− /w+ .

Bayesian logistic regression models. Finally, we evaluate the performance of a Bayesian lo-
gistic model, defined for any pair (x, y) ∈ Rdim × {0, 1} by the likelihood p(y|x; w, b) =
Bernoulli(y; σ(wT x + b)), where w ∈ Rdim is a weight vector, b ∈ R is an intercept and σ is the
                                                             dim
sigmoid function. Given a dataset D = {(xj , yj )}M  j=1 ⊂ R     × {0, 1} of size M , we aim to sample
                                                       QM
from the posterior distribution p(w, b|D) ∝ p(w, b) j=1 p(yj |xj ; w, b) where p(w, b) = p(w)p(b)
is a fixed prior distribution. Following Blessing et al. (2024), we consider four real-world settings
of binary classification problem: Ionosphere (dim = 35, M = 351), Sonar (dim = 61, M = 208),
German Credit (dim = 25, M = 1000), Breast Cancer (dim = 31, M = 569). Each of these
datasets is randomly split into a training subset Dtrain of size 0.8M and a test subset Dtest of size
0.2M . In this setting, we define the target distribution π = p(w, b|Dtrain ) and evaluate the sampling
quality by computing the (unnormalized) average predictive log-likelihood log p(w, b|Dtest ), which
is expected to be maximized.


                                                  43
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Table 4: Complexity of each algorithm during the overall sampling procedure. We track the
number of target evaluations and neural network evaluations. We consider that computing π is as
expensive as computing ∇ log π. We assume an infinite parallel computational capabilities. Note
that the cost of the training procedure can be amortized to sample multiple times.


 Method                     Number of target evaluations    Number of neural network evaluations
 SMC                                O(KM )                                   0
 RE                                  O(M )                                   0
 PIS/DDS/DIS/CMCD                   O(N K)                                O(N K)
 PDDS                            O(A(N + KM ))                         O(A(N + KM ))
 iDEM                               O(AN )                               O(AN K)
 LRDS                                  O(N )                               O(N K)


In each case, the prior is carefully chosen as a Gaussian distribution with the following parameters:
       • Ionosphere: p(w) = N(0, 5.25 I34 ) and p(b) = N(4.25, 0.252 ),
       • Sonar: p(w) = N(0, 4.5 I60 ) and p(b) = N(−2.5, 0.52 ),
       • German Credit: p(w) = N(0, 1.25 I24 ) and p(b) = N(3.25, 0.55 ),
       • Breast Cancer: p(w) = N(0, 3.75 I30 ) and p(b) = N(31, 22 ).
We draw the reader’s attention to the fact that these posterior distributions don’t exhibit explicit
multi-modality features. Therefore, for EBM-LRDS, the tilting EBM parameterization is rather
based on a Gaussian approximation of the target distribution than a GMM approximation. The
initial point of the MCMC samplers are sampled from the prior distribution.

H.2   C OMPUTATIONAL COMPARISON OF THE PRESENTED METHODS
This section aims at comparing the computational budget of each algorithm. In particular, we track
the number of neural network evaluations and the number of target evaluations. For each algorithm,
we take the following notations.
• For SMC : K (number of annealing steps), M (number of MCMC steps per level)
• For RE : M (total number of MCMC steps)
• For RDS (PIS/DDS/LRDS), DIS and CMCD : N (number of training steps), K (number of dis-
cretization steps)
• For PDDS : N (number of training steps), M (number of MCMC steps per level), K (number of
discretization steps), A (number of adaptation steps)
• For iDEM : N (number of training steps), K (number of discretization steps), A (number of
adaptation steps)
We detail the complexities of each algorithm in Table 4. Note that, in LRDS, the complexity of
MCMC sampling (to compute π̂ ref ) or the complexity of learning the reference process were ignored
as they are negligeable compared to the training and sampling budgets; see Appendix H.3 for details.

H.3   H YPER - PARAMETERS OF EACH SAMPLING ALGORITHM
In this section, we detail every hyper-parameter for each algorithm involved in the computations of
the results in Section 5. The computationally-related parameters were chosen to ensure a comparable
execution clock-time between the different algorithms on the same hardware.

Construction of the MCMC dataset for π̂ ref . We build the dataset of reference samples by run-
ning MCMC samplers initialized in the modes of the target distribution. We run 4 chains per mode.
We use the Metropolis-Adjusted Langevin algorithm (MALA), see Algorithm 5, as default sam-
pler, except for the Checkerboard distribution where we use the Random Walk Metropolis Hastings
(RWMH) algorithm as the score is constant. In both cases, we adapt the step size automatically for
8192 warmup steps to aim at a 70% acceptance rate. The datasets are 60000 samples long.


                                                 44
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Annealed MCMC methods (SMC, RE). For both algorithms, we incorporate prior knowledge
into the base distribution by taking π base = N(m, Σ) where m and Σ are computed using maxi-
mum likelihood on samples from π̂ ref . In each case, the annealed density path is a linearly-spaced
geometric interpolation, where πk ∝ (π base )(K−k)/K π k/K . For SMC (see Algorithm 7), we use
K = 128 annealing levels with N = 1024 particles and L = 64 MCMC steps per level (with a 4096
steps warmup) and set the ESS resampling threshold as α = 1. For RE (see Algorithm 9), we use
K = 128 annealing levels with 256 independent chains per level and a swapping frequency every
S = 8 steps for a total of M = 32 steps (with a 8192 steps warmup). Both algorithms use MALA
as MCMC backbone with a step-size automatically tuned to achieve 70% acceptance rate.

Variational diffusion-based methods (PIS, DDS, DIS, CMCD, LRDS). For PIS and DDS we
use the implementation provided by Richter et al. (2023), while we use the implementation provided
by Blessing et al. (2024) for DIS and CMCD. For PIS, DDS and DIS, we set the hyper-parameter σ
as advised by Appendix I.2 by computing the mean and the variance of the samples from π̂ ref to add
prior knowledge. For CMCD, we sample a version of π which is shifted by m, defined as the mean
computed on samples from π̂ ref , and we set σ as the square root of the average variance estimated
on those samples. For PIS, DIS and DDS, we use K = 100 linearly spaced time discretization steps
while CMCD learns its own time discretization grid of size K = 128 with a final time set at T = 10.
For all of them, we perform 4096 optimization steps with a batch of size 2048. The neural network
at stake is a Fourier MLP, as in Zhang & Chen (2022), with 4 layers of width 64. In the case of PIS,
DDS and DIS, we use a target-informed parameterization by adding NN(t) × ∇ log π(x) (where
NN is a time-dependent scalar neural network) to the Fourier MLP, as suggested by the respective
authors. As recommended by Vargas et al. (2024), we do not consider this extra-parameterization
in CMCD, since the drift of the generative process is already informed by π. We highlight that,
by default, we do not use this target-informed parameterization in LRDS, since the reference pro-
cess is specifically designed to be it-self target-informed, hence avoiding useless evaluations of
the target score. Additionally, as recommended by Zhang & Chen (2022), we design the LRDS
guidance network such that g θ0 = 0. This ensures that the very first sampling phase is driven solely
using the reference process.
For all diffusion-based algorithms and target distributions, we ensured that the noising schedules
were chosen to ensure that the target distribution gets successfully noised at time T . For LRDS, we
use an exponential integration of the respective time-reversed SDE as default transition kernel; see
Appendix D.3.2 and Appendix D.3.3.

Adaptive diffusion-based methods (iDEM, PDDS). For iDEM, we use the implementation pro-
vided by the original paper (Akhound-Sadegh et al., 2024). In order to provide prior information
leveraging π̂ ref , (i) we standardize the target distribution by using the empirical mean and variance
of π̂ ref (ii) we preload the buffer with samples from π̂ ref . Following the design choices of the original
paper, we use a Variance Exploding noising scheme with a geometric variance schedule σt . Because
we standardized the target distribution, we decided to take σT = 5 for each target distribution to en-
sure that the distribution is properly noised. We used the same hyper-parameters as in their Gaussian
mixture experiment with 400 epochs instead of 1000 to ensure computational fairness. For PDDS,
we also use the implementation provided by the original paper (Phillips et al., 2024). In order to
provide prior information leveraging π̂ ref , we standardized the target distribution by leveraging the
empirical mean and variance of π̂ ref thus bypassing the original VI step of their algorithm. We also
significantly increased the default computational budget by using 128 discretization steps, 2048 par-
ticles and training for 100000 steps with a batch size of 512. The rest of the hyper-parameters are
the default ones.

LRDS reference fitting details. For GMM-LRDS, the EM algorithm is taken from Pedregosa
et al. (2011). We use a diagonal covariance for Rings distribution, Checkerboard distribution, di-
agonal Gaussian mixtures and Bayesian posterior distributions, and use a full covariance otherwise.
In the full covariance case, we regularize the covariance to ensure their positivity. For EBM-RDS,
we fit multi-level EBMs with Algorithm 11 using the Replica Exchange annealed sampler (see Al-
gorithm 9) as backbone. This sampler has the advantage of being massively parallel and thus suited
for GPU computations. We perform 200 epochs with a batch size of 32 for each noise level. To
increase gradient accuracy and enhance efficiency, we accumulate the gradients over 10 steps where


                                                    45
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


we keep the same negative samples but update the positive ones. We perform 32 MCMC steps to
sample a batch of negative samples with a swap happening every 8 steps. We keep 16 MCMC steps
out of 32 to compute the expectations. To compensate the short length of our MCMC chains, we
leverage a persistent buffer to kickstart the chains at each noise level. Lastly, we utilise the GMM
tilting EBM parameterization detailed at the end of Appendix F where the neural network parame-
terized as x 7→ NN(t, x)T x as suggested by Salimans & Ho (2021). We leverage the GMM tilting
initialization of the EBM to perform exact MCMC sampling at the very first gradient step. More-
over, we preconditioned the network as advised by Karras et al. (2022) by leveraging the Gaussian
approximation of π̂ ref .

I     A DDITIONAL RESULTS
I.1   L INK BETWEEN THE TARGET AND THE REFERENCE PROCESSES

Let π ref ∈ P(Rd ) be an arbitrary distribution. We recall that under mild assumptions on π ref , see
e.g., Cattiaux et al. (2023), the time-reversal of Pref is associated to the SDE
      dYtref = −f (T − t)Ytref dt + β(T − t)sref        ref
                                                                   β(T − t)dBt , Y0ref ∼ Pref
                                                                p
                                                T −t (Yt )dt +                            T .    (53)

Link with Schrödinger Bridge. Since P⋆ and Pref are based on the same noising diffusion pro-
cess, these path measures are linked by the relation P⋆ = π ⊗ Pref      |0 . Hence, using the KL chain
rule (Léonard, 2014), it is clear that P⋆ is solution to the following minimization problem over path
measure space
                          arg min{KL(P | Pref ) : P ∈ P(CT ), P0 = π} ,
which is often referred to as a half-Schrödinger bridge problem in stochastic control literature.

Link with Doob’s h-transform. This relation on path measure space can also be written as P⋆ =
 dπ
dπ ref
       · Pref , see Appendix D.1. Therefore, solely based on the SDE (53) describing (Pref )R , (P⋆ )R
may be expressed as a Doob’s h-transform of (Pref )R via the SDE
    dYt = −f (T − t)Yt dt + β(T − t){sref
                                                                        p
                                          T −t (Yt ) + hT −t (Yt )}dt +   β(T − t)dBt , Y0 ∼ P⋆T ,
where the Doob’s control function h : [0, T ] × Rd → Rd is defined, for any yt ∈ Rd and any
t ∈ [0, T ], by

                                       dπ                                        dπ
   hT −t (yt ) = ∇ log E(Pref )R             (YT ) | Yt = yt = ∇ log EPref             (X0 ) | Xt = yt .
                               T |t   dπ ref                           0|T −t   dπ ref
Additionally, we have for any xt ∈ Rd ,
                           p⋆t
                                                  Z
                                            1
                                (xt ) = ref             p⋆ (xt |x0 )dπ(x0 )
                           pref
                            t           pt (xt ) Rd t|0
                                        Z
                                              dπ           pref             ref
                                                            t|0 (xt |x0 )dπ (x0 )
                                      =             (x 0 )
                                         Rd dπ
                                                ref                pref
                                                                     t (xt )

                                                 dπ
                                      = EPref          (X   0 ) | X t =  xt .
                                          0|t   dπ ref
By combining previous computations, we obtain ht = ∇ log p⋆t /pref
                                                               t = gt for any t ∈ [0, T ].


I.2   O PTIMAL SETTING OF ISOTROPIC G AUSSIAN REFERENCE DISTRIBUTION

The goal of this section is to explain how to set the hyperparameter σ ∈ (0, ∞) in PIS and DDS set-
tings so as to ‘optimize’ the reference distribution π ref = N(0, σ 2 Id ), when targeting a multi-modal
distribution. The same reasoning can also be applied in the DIS setting to set the base distribution
π base , chosen as an isotropic Gaussian distribution.
Let π ∈ P(Rd ) be our target distribution. Assume that we are given a diagonal Gaussian approx-
imation π̃ = N(m, Σ) of π, with mean m ∈ Rd and covariance Σ = diag(Γ2 ) ∈ Rd×d , where


                                                    46
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Γ ∈ (0, ∞)d . We propose to set π ref as ’close’ as possible to π̃ in PIS and DDS by solving the
following variational problem
                            arg min{KL(π̃ | N(0, σ 2 Id )) : σ ∈ (0, ∞)} .
Let σ > 0. We have
                                     |σ 2 Id |

                             1
      KL(π̃ | N(0, σ 2 Id )) =  log            − d + σ −2 mT m + Tr(σ −2 Σ)
                             2         |Σ|
                                                                                          
                                                  d                                 d
                             1                 X                                  X
                           =     d log(σ 2 ) −      log Γ2j − d + σ −2 mT m + σ −2     Γ2j  .
                             2                  j=1                                j=1

Moreover, the derivative with respect to σ 2 is given by
                                                                         
                                                                    d
                ∂                            1                     X
                    KL(π̃ | N(0, σ 2 Id )) = dσ −2 − σ −4 mT m +     Γ2j  .
               ∂σ 2                          2                     j=1

In particular, the optimal solution of this variational problem is
                                                                 
                                                           Xd
                                   σπ2 = d−1 mT m +          Γ2j  ,
                                                                  j=1

which motivates us to set π ref = N(0, σπ2 Id ).
In practice, when we do not have samples from the target distribution, we rather rely on a diagonal
Gaussian approximation of the empirical distribution π̂ ref (obtained with local MCMC samplers)
and set π ref = N(0, σπ̂2 ref Id ).

Application to Gaussian mixtures. In the particular case where π is a Gaussian mixture, we have
an analytical formula for π̃.
         PJ
Let π = j=1 wj N (mj , Σj ) be our target distribution with w1:J ∈ ∆J , where the j-th component
has mean mj ∈ Rd and covariance Σj = diag(λj ) ∈ Rd×d with λj ∈ (0, ∞)d . Consider X ∼ π
and Z ∼ M(w1 , . . . , wJ ). We first have
                                                                   J
                                                                   X
                                 E[X] = E [E [X | Z]] =                  wj mj .
                                                                   j=1

We define the diagonal variance of π by diagVar(π) = (Var[X]1 , . . . , Var[X]d ) ∈ (0, ∞)d where
Var[X]i = E[(Xi − E[X]i )2 ] for any i ∈ {1, . . . , d}. By the law of total variance, we have
                        Var[X]i = E [Var [X | Z]i ] + Var [E [X | Z]]i
                                     J                    J
                                                                                    2
                                     X                    X
                                 =         wj (λ2j )i +         wj ((mj )i − E [X]i ) .
                                     j=1                  j=1

By characterisation of Gaussian distributions, N(E[X], diagVar(π)) is the closest diagonal Gaussian
distribution to π in the Kullback-Leibler sense. Therefore, in this particular setting, π̃ may be defined
by m = E[X] and Γ2 = diagVar(π). We use this approach when computing σπ2 in the numerical
experiment commented in Figure 1.

I.3    FAILURE OF LOCAL MCMC SAMPLERS ON MULTIMODAL DISTRIBUTIONS

As we show in Figure 7, local MCMC samplers such as the Random Walk Metropolis Hastings
(RWMH) algorithm (Metropolis et al., 1953), the Metropolis-adjusted Langevin Algorithm (MALA)
(Roberts & Tweedie, 1996), the Hamiltonian Monte Carlo (HMC) algorithm (Duane et al., 1987;
Brooks et al., 2011) or the No-U Turn Sampler (NUTS) (Hoffman & Gelman, 2014) tend to produce
Markov chains that get trapped in modes. The resulting samples are thus not representative of the
global landscape.


                                                      47
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 7: Samples from different MCMC samplers when sampling from a bi-modal Gaussian mix-
ture in 2 dimensions - There are 4 different chains (in different colors). The MCMC samplers ran for
4096 warmup steps before producing those 1024 samples. We only display 1 sample every 4 steps.


Figure 8: Increasingly expressive GMM approximations of the rings distribution - (Top) Approxi-
mation using diagonal covariances (Bottom) Approximation using full covariances


I.4     L IMITATIONS OF G AUSSIAN M IXTURE M ODELS

Figure 8 shows the progressive GMM approximation of the Rings distribution by leveraging an
increasing number of components. This figure shows that, in this case, getting a good approximation
of the distribution requires significantly more components that the number of modes (here, 3). This
highlights the limitation of the approximation power of Gaussian Mixture models.

I.5     F URTHER EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS

In this section, we display detailed results for the experimental settings presented in Section 5, as
well as additional results that assess the robustness and the superiority of LRDS compared to its
competitors for a large diversity of settings. When ground truth samples are available (i.e., in all set-
tings except ϕ4 and Bayesian regression), we display statistical estimations of the integral probabil-
ity metrics defined in Appendix B, namely, the regularized Wasserstein distance with regularization
ε = 10−3 (W2,ε ), the Maximum Mean Discrepancy (MMD) and the sliced Kolmogorov-Smirnov
distance (KS).

I.5.1    H IGH - DIMENSIONAL BI - MODAL G AUSSIAN MIXTURES
Below, we display the results of all considered samplers, including LRDS, when targeting the bi-
modal Gaussian mixtures defined in Appendix H.1 with increasing dimension d ∈ {8, 16, 32, 64}.
To assess the sampling quality at a global level, we compute for each sampler the absolute error
’Mode Err.’ when estimating the strongest mode weight (in %, comprised between 0%, the best,
and 66.7%, the worst) via Monte Carlo approximation. All metrics are computed based on 8192
samples. In particular,


                                                   48
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Table 5: Results for bi-modal Gaussian mixtures with diagonal covariance and medium condi-
tioning, averaged over 16 sampling runs (same setting as Table 2). Bold font indicates best result,
orange cells refer to settings with uninformative mode weight estimation (i.e., uniform mixture),
red cells denote mode collapse. N/A denotes settings where results could not be obtained due to
numerical issues. The MMD and KS results are displayed with 100-factor rescaling.

                                  d = 16                                                    d = 32                                                        d = 64
Algorithm   Mode Err. ↓      W2,ε ↓        MMD ↓             KS ↓     Mode Err. ↓       W2,ε ↓         MMD ↓             KS ↓      Mode Err. ↓         W2,ε ↓       MMD ↓            KS ↓
SMC          11.4%±9.1%    0.38±0.00   13.91±10.68      10.80±7.84    15.8%±8.5%     0.70±0.01       18.68±9.67     14.63±7.59     15.2%±7.5%       1.16±0.01     17.87±8.72   14.14±6.71
RE           16.5%±1.3%    0.38±0.00    20.57±1.78      15.20±1.31    15.9%±1.4%     0.70±0.00       19.23±2.03     14.54±1.55     17.0%±1.4%       1.17±0.00     20.36±1.83   15.68±1.39
LV-PIS        6.0%±3.4%    0.43±0.00     7.63±3.07       6.86±2.49    33.2%±0.1%     1.01±0.03       34.90±0.58     28.43±1.52     33.0%±0.1%       1.62±0.02     34.03±0.71   29.33±0.75
LV-DDS       11.8%±9.3%    0.40±0.01   13.83±10.23      11.29±8.06    31.5%±2.9%     0.86±0.04       33.96±3.29     28.00±2.65     33.1%±0.1%       1.49±0.02     34.45±0.61   28.95±0.89
LV-DIS      16.4%±0.50%    0.42±0.00    21.36±0.75      16.16±0.54   16.5%±0.40%     0.77±0.00       21.13±0.96     16.18±0.76    16.8%±0.50%       1.24±0.01     20.71±0.81   15.93±0.56
LV-CMCD     32.2%±15.4%    0.60±0.06   46.89±17.35     33.46±13.03    50.1%±8.8%     1.96±0.52      76.17±13.71     48.79±8.03    16.3%±10.6%       3.47±0.31     53.15±1.85   41.79±2.64
iDEM         33.3%±0.0%    1.75±0.17    53.82±0.36      36.86±0.92    66.7%±0.0%     4.16±0.22       85.52±0.53     61.10±1.26     11.7%±0.4%     117.82±0.14     90.13±0.12         N/A
PDDS         0.8%±0.6%     0.40±0.00    1.66±0.68       2.59±0.29     66.7%±0.0%    11.22±0.08      105.11±0.24           N/A            N/A             N/A            N/A          N/A
GMM-LRDS     1.7%±0.6%     0.38±0.00      2.58±0.96      2.69±0.66    2.7%±0.8%       0.71±0.00      3.64±1.07      3.38±0.76      4.1%±0.6%        1.19±0.00      5.25±0.98    4.50±0.70


Table 6: Results for bi-modal Gaussian mixtures with diagonal covariance and isotropic condition-
ing, averaged over 16 sampling runs. Bold font indicates best result, orange cells refer to settings
with uninformative mode weight estimation (i.e., uniform mixture), red cells denote mode collapse.
N/A denotes settings where results could not be obtained due to numerical issues. The MMD and
KS results are displayed with 100-factor rescaling.

                                  d = 16                                                    d = 32                                                       d = 64
Algorithm    Mode Err. ↓      W2,ε ↓        MMD ↓            KS ↓     Mode Err. ↓      W2,ε ↓         MMD ↓             KS ↓     Mode Err. ↓          W2,ε ↓        MMD ↓           KS ↓
SMC         16.0%±10.1%    0.65±0.01   19.11±12.55      14.06±8.74    12.3%±9.6%    1.18±0.01      14.57±11.46     11.03±8.03    11.0%±8.8%        1.94±0.00    12.98±10.51     9.80±7.38
RE           15.2%±1.2%    0.66±0.00    18.72±1.66      13.42±1.23    16.1%±1.3%    1.19±0.00       19.50±1.70     14.14±1.26    16.5%±1.3%        1.94±0.00     19.46±1.71    14.39±1.24
LV-PIS        1.9%±1.2%    0.66±0.00     2.66±1.45       2.63±0.89     1.3%±0.6%    1.20±0.00        2.15±0.68      2.23±0.42     2.8%±0.6%        1.98±0.00      2.94±0.90     2.81±0.61
LV-DDS        0.7%±0.5%    0.65±0.00    0.86±0.70       1.59±0.30     0.8%±0.5%     1.19±0.00       1.09±0.60      1.56±0.24      1.6%±0.8%        1.95±0.00     2.13±0.97     2.23±0.61
LV-DIS       16.4%±1.3%    0.66±0.00    19.99±1.73      14.16±1.21    16.7%±0.7%    1.20±0.00       20.12±1.00     14.54±0.70    16.6%±0.6%        1.96±0.00     19.79±0.90    14.59±0.65
LV-CMCD     0.90%±0.60%    0.68±0.00     2.84±0.55       2.92±0.45     1.7%±0.7%    1.24±0.00        2.77±0.36      2.76±0.36     1.1%±0.8%        2.05±0.00      3.43±0.75     3.15±0.65
iDEM         66.7%±0.0%    2.23±0.17    83.92±0.50      59.68±2.16    33.3%±0.0%    2.48±0.15       49.83±0.35     35.02±0.62    0.3%±0.2%       179.86±0.12     97.17±1.05          N/A
PDDS          0.9%±0.6%    0.70±0.00     1.27±1.25       2.50±0.49     0.9%±0.6%    1.22±0.00        1.53±0.87      2.41±0.31     0.9%±0.7%        1.96±0.00      0.85±1.25     2.05±0.56
GMM-LRDS      1.6%±0.6%    0.66±0.00       2.07±0.99     2.23±0.54     2.8%±0.5%    1.19±0.00        3.72±0.89      3.23±0.58     4.6%±0.6%        1.96±0.00       5.65±0.88    4.56±0.61


Table 7: Results for bi-modal Gaussian mixtures with diagonal covariance and hard conditioning,
averaged over 16 sampling runs. Bold font indicates best result, orange cells refer to settings with
uninformative mode weight estimation (i.e., uniform mixture), red cells denote mode collapse. N/A
denotes settings where results could not be obtained due to numerical issues. The MMD and KS
results are displayed with 100-factor rescaling.

                                 d = 16                                                    d = 32                                                        d = 64
Algorithm    Mode Err. ↓     W2,ε ↓        MMD ↓            KS ↓     Mode Err. ↓      W2,ε ↓         MMD ↓              KS ↓     Mode Err. ↓         W2,ε ↓         MMD ↓            KS ↓
SMC          12.4%±8.3%    0.24±0.00   15.40±10.16     12.00±7.57     16.5%±9.5%    0.47±0.00     20.22±11.66      15.71±8.58     11.4%±9.8%       0.80±0.00    13.88±11.92     11.16±8.79
RE           16.3%±1.4%    0.25±0.00    20.76±1.95     15.40±1.38     17.0%±1.7%    0.47±0.00      21.31±2.19      16.11±1.58     16.4%±1.4%       0.81±0.00     19.99±1.75     15.54±1.38
LV-PIS        8.4%±3.4%    0.45±0.00    13.52±2.50     12.48±2.01     32.2%±0.3%    1.29±0.02      33.89±0.60      29.92±0.57     32.5%±0.2%       2.24±0.04     33.91±0.76     30.49±0.61
LV-DDS       24.7%±8.8%    0.32±0.03    26.89±9.03     22.92±7.59    40.5%±13.9%    0.73±0.02     44.97±19.24     37.20±12.88    38.1%±15.4%       1.59±0.04    42.64±20.91    35.46±13.67
LV-DIS       16.6%±0.6%    0.38±0.02    23.00±0.87     19.69±0.69     16.7%±0.7%    0.65±0.03      23.01±1.12      19.33±0.99     16.8%±0.6%       1.06±0.02     22.94±0.84     18.97±0.65
LV-CMCD     21.5%±17.8%    4.37±1.19    62.31±7.46           N/A      31.5%±2.2%    1.54±0.35     46.02±13.29      37.50±1.30    44.1%±15.3%       0.87±0.03    51.17±19.36    41.30±14.11
iDEM         33.3%±0.0%    2.12±0.11    51.43±0.33     38.07±1.02     66.7%±0.0%    7.53±0.52      85.77±0.63      55.56±1.03     33.3%±0.0%     175.16±0.83    102.13±0.20           N/A
PDDS               N/A          N/A           N/A            N/A            N/A          N/A             N/A             N/A            N/A             N/A            N/A            N/A
GMM-LRDS     2.1%±1.0%     0.25±0.00    3.41±1.26      3.46±0.90      1.7%±0.9%     0.47±0.00      3.00±1.12       2.99±0.80      4.5%±1.8%        0.82±0.00      6.12±2.21     5.25±1.62


• Table 5 corresponds to Gaussian mixtures with diagonal covariance and medium conditioning,
completing the results of Table 2 presented in the main paper,
• Table 6 corresponds to Gaussian mixtures with diagonal covariance and isotropic conditioning,
• Table 7 corresponds to Gaussian mixtures with diagonal covariance and hard conditioning,
• Table 8 corresponds to Gaussian mixtures with full covariance and medium conditioning,
• Table 9 corresponds to Gaussian mixtures with full covariance and hard conditioning.

For all of these bi-modal settings, we observe that the mode weight estimation error is consistent
with the values of probability metrics (except for the regularized Wasserstein distance, which is not
discriminative between the methods). In particular, GMM-LRDS is on par or superior to all com-
petitors in each setting, except the least challenging setting (’Isotropic’ conditioning, see Table 6),
where LV-DDS is more performant.


                                                                                     49
 Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


 Table 8: Results for bi-modal Gaussian mixtures with full covariance and medium conditioning,
 averaged over 16 sampling runs. Bold font indicates best result, orange cells refer to settings with
 uninformative mode weight estimation (i.e., uniform mixture), red cells denote mode collapse. N/A
 denotes settings where results could not be obtained due to numerical issues. The MMD and KS
 results are displayed with 100-factor rescaling.

                                                   d=8                                                                       d = 16                                                              d = 32
      Algorithm            Mode Err. ↓      W2,ε ↓           MMD ↓              KS ↓         Mode Err. ↓              W2,ε ↓             MMD ↓              KS ↓           Mode Err. ↓       W2,ε ↓          MMD ↓                   KS ↓
      SMC                  17.3%±7.1%     0.17±0.00        21.55±8.84      16.07±6.33         13.5%±4.5%         0.38±0.00          16.35±5.47         12.52±4.05          10.3%±5.8%     0.70±0.00        12.18±6.67      9.72±5.15
      RE                   16.6%±1.0%     0.17±0.00        21.34±1.54      15.30±1.11         16.4%±1.4%         0.38±0.00          20.65±1.90         15.23±1.34          16.3%±1.2%     0.70±0.00        19.90±1.74     15.04±1.24
      LV-PIS                6.8%±2.4%     0.20±0.00         9.89±2.78       8.67±1.98        25.4%±12.6%         0.52±0.06         28.21±13.13        23.37±10.61          33.1%±0.2%     1.07±0.39        35.02±0.70     27.85±3.09
      LV-DDS               1.6%±0.8%      0.17±0.00        2.64±0.87       2.63±0.53           3.3%±0.9%         0.39±0.00           4.83±1.08          4.27±0.75           4.0%±1.1%     0.75±0.00         6.85±1.23      5.95±1.01
      LV-DIS               16.5%±0.5%     0.22±0.00        22.50±0.88      17.33±0.66         16.3%±1.1%         0.46±0.02          21.65±1.55         16.93±0.13          16.7%±0.6%     0.82±0.01        21.95±0.94     17.16±0.72
      LV-CMCD              16.6%±0.5%     0.18±0.00        21.76±1.04      16.06±0.81        20.8%±12.7%         1.23±0.96          36.92±5.06         26.70±4.59         16.6%±0.50%     0.75±0.00        20.89±0.95     15.90±0.71
      iDEM                 66.7%±0.0%     2.06±0.19        85.27±0.40      61.42±1.09         66.7%±0.0%         3.95±0.20          84.48±0.53         62.98±1.10          66.7%±0.0%     6.89±0.24        85.60±0.41     62.87±1.31
      PDDS                 1.3%±1.1%      0.19±0.00        1.52±1.58       2.65±0.77          1.9%±0.9%          0.40±0.00          2.63±1.53          3.09±0.77           0.7%±0.6%      0.73±0.00        1.56±0.89      2.61±0.37
      GMM-LRDS             1.3%±0.6%      0.17±0.00        1.97±0.85       2.36±0.52          1.8%±0.5%          0.38±0.00           2.65±0.87         2.72±0.58            2.4%±0.5%     0.71±0.00         3.48±0.89          3.24±0.61


 Table 9: Results for bi-modal Gaussian mixtures with full covariance and hard conditioning, av-
 eraged over 16 sampling runs. Bold font indicates best result, orange cells refer to settings with
 uninformative mode weight estimation (i.e., uniform mixture), red cells denote mode collapse. N/A
 denotes settings where results could not be obtained due to numerical issues. The MMD and KS
 results are displayed with 100-factor rescaling.

                                                    d=8                                                                         d = 16                                                           d = 32
      Algorithm            Mode Err. ↓      W2,ε ↓            MMD ↓                 KS ↓      Mode Err. ↓                 W2,ε ↓         MMD ↓             KS ↓           Mode Err. ↓       W2,ε ↓            MMD ↓                  KS ↓
      SMC                  14.2%±15.0%    0.10±0.00        17.83±19.13      13.83±13.58       10.1%±6.9%             0.24±0.00      12.91±8.77        10.03±6.21      17.9%±10.2%         0.47±0.00        21.61±12.58        16.96±9.50
      RE                    16.1%±1.2%    0.11±0.00         20.99±1.86       15.12±1.33       16.8%±1.2%             0.25±0.00      21.54±1.76        15.89±1.22       16.3%±1.3%         0.47±0.00         20.28±1.79        15.39±1.32
      LV-PIS                10.9%±1.1%    0.20±0.01         15.75±1.22       14.13±0.83        2.2%±1.5%             0.43±0.00      10.36±0.80        10.50±0.70       32.7%±0.3%         1.34±0.03         34.25±0.75        30.15±0.78
      LV-DDS                 3.2%±1.8%    0.12±0.01          5.53±1.63        5.36±1.05        7.5%±4.1%             0.29±0.00      11.39±4.88         9.91±3.53       10.5%±7.8%         0.62±0.00         16.62±8.01        14.10±6.05
      LV-DIS                16.9%±0.5%    0.28±0.03         24.00±0.90       21.85±0.90       16.6%±0.6%             0.51±0.03      23.85±0.96         22.1±0.77       16.8%±0.6%         0.91±0.07         24.34±0.91        22.76±0.77
      LV-CMCD               16.6%±0.5%    1.98±0.02         18.76±0.56       34.42±1.16       16.7%±0.6%             3.67±0.02      19.86±0.52        36.03±0.10       16.7%±0.5%         6.05±0.02         22.65±0.42        35.88±0.99
      iDEM                  66.6%±0.0%    0.23±0.00         84.95±0.61       60.96±1.39       66.7%±0.0%             5.49±0.12      86.81±0.47        59.71±1.59       66.7%±0.0%        10.33±0.09         81.57±0.65        53.73±1.36
      PDDS                        N/A          N/A                N/A              N/A              N/A                   N/A             N/A               N/A              N/A               N/A                N/A               N/A
      GMM-LRDS              1.8%±0.7%     0.11±0.00          2.85±1.00       3.22±0.67         1.0%±0.7%             0.25±0.00      2.22±0.91         2.60±0.62           2.2%±1.3%       0.47±0.00         3.19±1.63         3.13±1.17


 Execution time. To demonstrate the applicability of LRDS in practice, we provide in Figure 9 the
 execution clock-time of each sampling method for several Gaussian mixture sampling settings. The
 computations were all ran on the same V100 GPU. We notice that (i) the initial MCMC sampling
 step to build the reference dataset, then used to initialize each sampler, and the reference fitting
 time from GMM-LRDS are completely negligeable compared to the training time, and that (ii) the
 training time of GMM-LRDS is on par with previous variational diffusion-based approaches.

                            d = 16; type : diag                               d = 32; type : diag                                        d = 16; type : full                                d = 32; type : full
                    2000
Clock time (in s)


                    1500

                    1000

                     500

                       0
                                 C   RE        S        DS            DS        C       RE           S          DS           DS            C     RE           S        DS          DS        C        RE           S       DS           DS
                            SM              -PI       -D            LR        SM                  -PI      -D              LR            SM                -PI       -D          LR        SM                   -PI      -D           LR
                                          LV        LV            M-                            LV       LV            M-                                LV        LV         M-                              LV       LV         M-
                                                             GM                                                      GM                                                     GM                                                  GM


                                                  Inference                         Training                               MCMC sampling                                    Reference fitting


 Figure 9: Execution clock-time for bi-modal Gaussian mixtures with diagonal covariance (left) and
 full covariance (right), averaged over the conditioning settings.

 Ablation study on GMM-LRDS: effect of the reference distribution. To asses the robust-
 ness of GMM-LRDS with respect to the setting of the reference distribution, we conduct an
 ablation study that reveals the impact of modifying the location and the entropy of the refer-
 ence modes. To do so, we set d = 8 and define the target distribution π : x ∈ Rd 7→
 (2/3)N(x; −1d , 0.05) + (1/3)N(x; 1d , 0.05), as detailed in Appendix H.1. Instead of defining
 the reference distribution in GMM-LRDS as a Gaussian mixture fitted on MCMC samples, we
 propose to consider a flexible reference distribution given by the Gaussian mixture x ∈ Rd 7→
 (2/3)N(x; m1 , 0.05α2 Id ) + (1/3)N(x; m2 , 0.05α2 Id ) where (m1 , m2 ) ∈ Rd × Rd and α > 0.


                                                                                                                     50
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                  3                                                                           0.20
                                                                                        0.6

Mode Err.
            40                                    2                                                                           0.15


                                                                                  MMD
                                           W2,
                                                                                        0.4


                                                                                                                         KS
                                                                                                                              0.10
            20                                    1
                                                                                        0.2
                                                                                                                              0.05
                                                  0
             0                                                                          0.0
                  0.0       0.5     1.0                 0.0     0.5         1.0                 0.0     0.5        1.0               0.0        0.5        1.0
                   Perturb. intensity                    Perturb. intensity                      Perturb. intensity                   Perturb. intensity

Figure 10: Results of GMM-LRDS for an 8-dimensional bi-modal Gaussian mixture when varying
the location of the reference modes: the performance degrades as soon as the reference modes and
the target modes are further from each other.

                                                                                          0.4                                  0.3
                                                  0.8
            3                                                                             0.3
Mode Err.


                                                                                                                               0.2


                                                                                   MMD
                                          W2,


                                                  0.6


                                                                                                                          KS
            2                                                                             0.2
                                                                                                                               0.1
            1                                                                             0.1
                                                  0.4

            0                                                                             0.0                                  0.0
                        1           2                          1              2                        1              2                     1               2
                  Perturb. intensity                      Perturb. intensity                      Perturb. intensity                   Perturb. intensity

Figure 11: Results of GMM-LRDS for an 8-dimensional bi-modal Gaussian mixture when varying
the variance of the reference modes: except for small reference mode variance, the performance is
unchanged.

            2.5                                  0.2980

            2.0                                                                           0.03                                 0.030
                                                 0.2975
Mode Err.


                                                                                    MMD
                                        W2,


            1.5                                                                                                                0.025
                                                                                                                          KS



                                                 0.2970                                   0.02
            1.0                                                                                                                0.020
                                                 0.2965
            0.5                                                                           0.01
                                                 0.2960                                                                        0.015

                        5    10    15                              5   10    15                         5     10   15                       5         10   15
                        Mode gap                               Mode gap                                Mode gap                            Mode gap

Figure 12: Results of GMM-LRDS for an 8-dimensional bi-modal Gaussian mixture when varying
the distance between the modes of the target distribution: the performance does not significantly
degrades, despite the increasing sampling complexity.


To observe the impact of the location of the reference modes on GMM-LRDS, we take α = 1
(same variance setting as the target) and (m1 , m2 ) ∼ N(−1d , σm
                                                                2                2
                                                                  Id ) ⊗ N(1d , σm Id ) where σm ∈
{0, 0.25, 0.5, 0.75, 1.0} is a mean perturbation parameter. Hence, the higher σm , the further the
reference modes might be with respect to the target modes. We display in Figure 10 the results of
GMM-LRDS for this setting, averaged over 16 sampling runs. This ablation study notably reveals
the major need of precision on the location of the target modes (in practice, brought by MCMC
sampling) to build the reference distribution.
On the other hand, to understand the effect of the entropy of the reference modes, we take
(m1 , m2 ) = (−1d , 1d ) (same mean setting as the target), and α ∈ {0.5, 0.75, 1, 1.5, 2}, which can
be seen as a variance perturbation parameter. We display in Figure 11 the results of GMM-LRDS
for this setting, averaged over 16 sampling runs. Interestingly, our ablation study demonstrates that
GMM-LRDS works well as soon as the support of the reference distribution includes the support of
the target distribution. In practice, this is verified by MCMC sampling.


                                                                                  51
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Table 10: Results of GMM-LRDS for bi-modal Gaussian mixtures with diagonal covariance and
various conditioning settings (d = 128), averaged over 16 sampling runs. The MMD and KS
results are displayed with 100-factor rescaling.

              Isotropic conditioning                             Medium conditioning                               Hard conditioning
Mode Err. ↓      W2,ε ↓     MMD ↓          KS ↓    Mode Err. ↓      W2,ε ↓    MMD ↓          KS ↓    Mode Err. ↓     W2,ε ↓     MMD ↓          KS ↓
 6.6%±0.6%     3.04±0.00   7.84±0.92   6.16±0.67   6.8%±0.9%     1.86±0.00   8.33±1.29   6.81±0.98   6.2%±3.6%     1.32±0.00   8.09±3.83   6.73±2.92


Ablation study on GMM-LRDS: effect of the distance between the target modes. To asses
the robustness of GMM-LRDS with respect to the complexity of the target distribution, we con-
duct a second ablation study that illustrates the behaviour of GMM-LRDS for target with higher
energy barrier. To do so, we set d = 8 and define the target distribution π : x ∈ Rd 7→
(2/3)N(x; −a 1d , 0.05)+(1/3)N(x; a 1d , 0.05), where a ∈ {1, 2, 4, 8, 16} indicates the complexity
level of the target. For each target, we conduct 16 sampling runs of GMM-LRDS, and display the
results in Figure 12. Our numerics show that the performance GMM-LRDS remains significantly
consistent with increasing a, proving the interest of our method for complex multi-modal targets.

Limitation of LRDS: high dimension. Although LRDS outperforms its competitors when sam-
pling from challenging bi-modal Gaussian mixtures, its performance tends to decrease when the
dimension is large, like most of samplers. To highlight this limitation, we provide in Table 10 the
results of GMM-LRDS for various mixture settings with d = 128, where we observe that it fails to
recover a good estimation of the strongest mode weight (roughly, 10% of relative error).

I.5.2    M ULTI - MODAL G AUSSIAN MIXTURES
We display in Figure 13 the results of all considered samplers, including LRDS, when targeting
the multi-modal Gaussian mixtures defined in Appendix H.1 with fixed dimension d = 8 and in-
creasing number of modes L ∈ {4, 8, 16, 32, 64}. To assess the sampling quality at a global level,
we dispense for each sampler the total variation distance between the true weight histogram and
the weight histogram obtained via Monte Carlo approximation. All metrics are computed based on
8192 samples. We notably observe that GMM-LRDS has the best performance compared to all other
sampling methods, independently of the number of modes in the target distribution. In particular,
Figure 13 demonstrates that GMM-LRDS is able to recover both global features and local features
for a complex multi-modal distribution.

Execution time. To demonstrate the applicability of LRDS in practice, we provide in Figure 14
the execution clock-time of each sampling method for all multi-modal Gaussian mixture sampling
settings. The conclusions are the same as in the bi-modal setting: GMM-LRDS has equivalent
training time to previous variational diffusion-based approaches, with negligeable extra cost due to
reference fitting.

Limitation of LRDS: high number of modes. As depicted in Figure 13 (top left), the recovery of
the mode weights for a multi-modal target distribution gets worse as soon as the number of modes
is large. Although GMM-LRDS performs better than its competitors, it suffers from this limitation.

I.5.3    R INGS AND C HECKERBOARD DISTRIBUTIONS
In Figure 15 and Figure 16, we illustrate the impact of the number J of Gaussian mixture compo-
nents when running GMM-LRDS to sample from Rings and Checkerboard distributions, detailed
in Appendix H.1,by taking J ∈ {1, 8, 16, 32, 64}. In particular, we consider mixture models with
diagonal covariance (first two rows) and full covariance (last two rows), fitted on MCMC samples
from the target via EM algorithm. For both settings, we observe that setting J large enables to
recover with more precision the support of the target distribution, leading consequently to better
performance of GMM-LRDS. In the special Rings setting, where the target energy landscape is nar-
row and complex, we also notice that mixtures with full covariance provide better estimation of the
support of the distribution. On the other hand, we remark that GMM-LRDS struggles to recover the
geometry of the Checkerboard distribution, while EBM-LRDS is more performant, see Figure 6.


                                                                        52
 Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                    2.0


Total Variation     1.5

                                                                                                                                      101


                                                                                                                              W2,
                    1.0


                    0.5


                    0.0                                                                                                               100

                    0.6
                                                                                                                                      0.6
                    0.5
                                                                                                                                      0.5
                    0.4
                                                                                                                                      0.4
MMD


                                                                                                                              KS
                    0.3                                                                                                               0.3
                    0.2                                                                                                               0.2
                    0.1                                                                                                               0.1

                    0.0                                                                                                               0.0
                                     10         20               30              40          50         60                                             10         20                30        40        50              60
                                                   Number of modes                                                                                                      Number of modes
                                                    SMC                           LV-PIS                            LV-DIS                        PDDS                           GMM-LRDS
                                                    RE                            LV-DDS                            CMCD                          iDEM


 Figure 13: Results for multi-modal Gaussian mixtures, averaged over 16 sampling runs. (Top Left):
 Total variation distance between weight histograms. (Top Right): Results with regularized Wasser-
 stein distance. (Bottom Left): Results with MMD distance. (Bottom Right): Results with KS
 distance. Incomplete curves refer to settings with missing results due to numerical issues.
                                               J =8                                               J = 16                                           J = 32                                           J = 64
                    2000
Clock time (in s)


                    1500

                    1000

                     500

                          0
                                     C    RE         S        DS            DS          C     RE         S          DS           DS           C   RE         S       DS          DS        C       RE        S       DS          DS
                                SM                -PI       -D            LR          SM              -PI      -D              LR           SM            -PI      -D          LR        SM               -PI      -D          LR
                                                LV        LV            M-                          LV       LV            M-                           LV       LV         M-                          LV       LV         M-
                                                                   GM                                                    GM                                               GM                                              GM


                                                        Inference                           Training                          MCMC sampling                               Reference fitting


 Figure 14: Execution clock-time for multi-modal Gaussian mixtures with increasing number of
 mixture components (from left to right).
  I.5.4                       ϕ4 FIELD SYSTEM
 Table 11 shows that all competing algorithms fail at recovering the weight ratio of the ϕ4 system as
 they are highly prone to mode collapse either on the ’negative’ mode or on the ’positive’ mode.

  I.5.5                       BAYESIAN LOGISTIC REGRESSION MODELS
 Finally, we display in Table 12 the results of all considered samplers, including LRDS, when target-
 ing the Bayesian posterior distributions obtained from real-world data and defined in Appendix H.1.
 To assess the sampling quality, we compute the average predictive log-likelihood (i.e. the expected
 posterior distribution on the test dataset) via Monte Carlo approximation with 8192 samples. Since
 these distributions do not exhibit explicit multi-modal characteristics, we observe that standard
 MCMC-based techniques such as SMC and RE perform better than deep learning-based approaches.
 Interestingly, LRDS is on par or superior to previous diffusion-based approaches. For completeness,
 we also provide in Figure 17 the execution clock-time of all samplers in this setting.


                                                                                                                         53
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 15: Results of GMM-LRDS for Rings distribution with increasingly expressive GMM for
reference distribution - (Top two rows) GMM density and GMM-LRDS samples for diagonal co-
variance parameterization (Bottom two rows) GMM density and GMM-LRDS samples for full
covariance parameterization.


Table 11: Estimation of the weight ratio for the ϕ4 system with different values of h, averaged
over 16 runs. The Laplace approximations, that stand for ground truth, are displayed at the bottom
of the table. Orange cells refer to settings with uninformative mode weight estimation (i.e., uniform
mixture), red cells denote mode collapse. N/A denotes settings where results could not be obtained
due to numerical issues.


 Algorithm               h=0      h = 9 × 10−4    h = 2 × 10−3     h = 2.5 × 10−3   h = 3.5 × 10−3
 SMC                  1.28±1.19       1.71±1.47        1.51±1.38        1.60±1.52         1.57±1.43
 RE                   1.00±0.12       1.01±0.12        1.04±0.13        1.11±0.13         1.07±0.14
 LV-PIS                     ∞               ∞                ∞                ∞                 ∞
 LV-DDS               0.00±0.00             ∞          0.00±0.00              ∞                 ∞
 LV-DIS               1.07±0.03       1.05±0.03        1.05±0.06        1.16±0.12         1.17±0.07
 CMCD                 1.01±0.05       0.98±0.07        1.01±0.07        0.96±0.07         0.96±0.02
 iDEM                 0.59±0.01       35.9±1.43        98.6±10.6        1.81±0.03          170±17.8
 PDDS                      N/A             N/A              N/A              N/A               N/A
 Laplace 0th order         1.00            1.35            1.95              2.30              3.22
 Laplace 2nd order         1.00            1.34            1.90              2.23              3.08


                                                  54
 Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


 Figure 16: Results of GMM-LRDS for Checkerboard distribution with increasingly expressive
 GMM for reference distribution - (Top two rows) GMM density and GMM-LRDS samples for
 diagonal covariance parameterization (Bottom two rows) GMM density and GMM-LRDS samples
 for full covariance parameterization.

 Table 12: Average predictive log-likelihood for Bayesian posterior distributions obtained from
 logistic regression tasks, averaged over 16 runs. Bold font indicates best performance.
         Algorithm                  Ionosphere (d = 36) ↑                        Sonar (d = 62) ↑                       German Credit (d = 26) ↑                      Breast Cancer (d = 32) ↑
         SMC                                          −139.4±0.3                      −191.4±0.2                                        −122.2±0.1                                    −89.2±0.5
         RE                                           −139.5±0.2                      −191.3±0.1                                        −122.2±0.1                                     −90.1±0.3
         LV-PIS                                       −156.0±1.0                      −202.2±0.2                                         −153.7±2.2                                   −203.9±3.3
         LV-DDS                                       −147.7±0.5                      −195.2±0.7                                         −151.2±1.3                                   −128.4±0.9
         LV-DIS                                      −224.3±22.6                     −318.7±47.0                                         −206.5±1.0                                   −152.1±1.9
         CMCD                                         −970.6±2.7                     −1645.4±6.2                                         −171.9±0.0                                   −175.3±5.7
         iDEM                                         −153.7±0.2                    −4634.1±12.9                                         −132.4±0.1                                   −320.8±0.9
         PDDS                                         −139.6±0.3                      −191.3±0.1                                        −122.2±0.1                                    −102.2±0.1
         GMM-LRDS                                    −138.0±0.5                         −190.5±1.0                                       −129.0±2.7                                   −100.1±2.1
         EBM-LRDS                                    −148.0±15.4                         −191.8±0.9                                      −131.2±5.2                                    −92.7±4.0


                                         Cancer                                         Credit                                         Sonar                                  Ionosphere
                    3000
Clock time (in s)


                    2000


                    1000


                       0
                                C   RE         S        DS            DS     C     RE         S          DS          DS       C   RE         S       DS          DS       C   RE        S       DS          DS
                           SM               -PI       -D            LR     SM              -PI      -D             LR       SM            -PI      -D          LR       SM           -PI      -D          LR
                                          LV        LV            M-                     LV       LV            M-                      LV       LV         M-                     LV       LV         M-
                                                             GM                                               GM                                          GM                                         GM


                                                  Inference                      Training                          MCMC sampling                          Reference fitting


 Figure 17: Execution clock-time for Bayesian posterior distributions obtained from logistic regres-
 sion tasks ’Ionosphere’, ’Sonar’, ’German Credit’ and ’Breast Cancer’ (from left to right).


                                                                                                              55
