Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


W HEN DOES COMPOSITIONAL STRUCTURE YIELD COM -
POSITIONAL GENERALIZATION ? A KERNEL THEORY.

 Samuel Lippl                                         Kimberly Stachenfeld
 Center for Theoretical Neuroscience                  Google DeepMind and
 Columbia University                                  Center for Theoretical Neuroscience
 New York, NY, USA                                    Columbia University
 samuel.lippl@columbia.edu                            New York, NY, USA
                                                      stachenfeld@deepmind.com



                                            A BSTRACT
         Compositional generalization (the ability to respond correctly to novel combina-
         tions of familiar components) is thought to be a cornerstone of intelligent behavior.
         Compositionally structured (e.g. disentangled) representations support this abil-
         ity; however, the conditions under which they are sufficient for the emergence of
         compositional generalization remain unclear. To address this gap, we present a
         theory of compositional generalization in kernel models with fixed, compositionally
         structured representations. This provides a tractable framework for characterizing
         the impact of training data statistics on generalization. We find that these models
         are limited to functions that assign values to each combination of components
         seen during training, and then sum up these values (“conjunction-wise additiv-
         ity”). This imposes fundamental restrictions on the set of tasks compositionally
         structured kernel models can learn, in particular preventing them from transitively
         generalizing equivalence relations. Even for compositional tasks that they can
         learn in principle, we identify novel failure modes in compositional generalization
         (memorization leak and shortcut bias) that arise from biases in the training data.
         Finally, we empirically validate our theory, showing that it captures the behavior
         of deep neural networks (convolutional networks, residual networks, and Vision
         Transformers) trained on a set of compositional tasks with similarly structured
         data. Ultimately, this work examines how statistical structure in the training data
         can affect compositional generalization, with implications for how to identify and
         remedy failure modes in deep learning models.


1    I NTRODUCTION
Humans’ understanding of the world is inherently compositional: once familiar with the concepts
“pink” and “elephant,” we can immediately imagine a pink elephant. Stitching together concepts in
this way lets humans generalize far beyond our prior experience, allowing us to cope with unfamiliar
situations and imagine things that do not yet exist (Fig. 1a) (Lake et al., 2017; Frankland & Greene,
2020). Understanding the basis of compositional generalization in humans and animals, and building it
into machine learning models, is a long-standing and historically vexing problem (Fodor & Pylyshyn,
1988; Battaglia et al., 2018; Lake & Baroni, 2018; Lepori et al., 2023). While a wide range of
studies have investigated the conditions under which compositionally structured (i.e. “disentangled”)
representations can be learned (Hinton et al., 2011; Higgins et al., 2017; Träuble et al., 2021;
Whittington et al., 2023; Ren et al., 2023), it remains unclear when learning these representations is
actually useful to a downstream neural network. Some work suggests that disentangled representations
improve compositional generalization (Esmaeili et al., 2019; van Steenkiste et al., 2019). Other
studies challenge this view (Locatello et al., 2019; Schott et al., 2022). In general, a systematic
understanding of the relationships among compositional tasks remains elusive (Hupkes et al., 2020).
To make progress on this question, we focus on standard statistical learning, a fundamental basis for
generalization that affects almost any machine learning model. Generalization in statistical learning
depends on the similarities between different inputs. In compositionally structured representations,
inputs that have components in common (say, a red circle and a blue circle) are more similar to each


                                                  1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


 a, Compositional generalization            b, Compositionally structured                     c, Example                              d, Conjunction-wise
                                                  representations                           representations                                additivity
                                                    Definition 4.1                           Proposition 4.2                              Theorem 4.3
                    z1=0 z1=1                                                                                                           Familiar conjunctions
 Compositionality                                                     e.g.                 Multi-hot         Random        Test set
                                                                                                                                         (seen during training)
      + +           Shading                                        100 vs 111           representation      projection      input            z1=1
                                                                                                                                                             Linear
      =                 z1                                                              z1=1     Random weights                              z2=1            combination
                                                                  Rep.


                                                                                                                                 ⇔
                                                                                                  neural network                             z3=1
                                                                  similarity                                             111
    z2=0 z2=1                   z3=0 z3=1                                                                                                  z1=1,z2=1
                                                                    overlap three
                                                                    overlap two         z2=1
                                                                                                                                           z1=1,z3=1
                                                                    overlap one
    Shape                       Color                               overlap zero                                                       Unfamiliar conjunctions
       z2                         z3                                                    z3=1                                           (not seen during training)
            train                               Training   Test                                                                            z2=1,z3=1        Not
                 test                                                                    →compositionally structured                                        usable
                                                  set       set                                                                          z1=1,z2=1,z3=1


Figure 1: Overview of main theoretical findings (Section 4). a, We consider inputs with several
categorical components and study compositional generalization to novel combinations of components.
b, We assume compositionally structured representations for which trials with the same number
of overlaps have identical similarities. c, We find that a random weights neural network conserves
compositional structure: if its input is compositionally structured then so is its output. d, We find that
compositionally structured kernel models are constrained to adding up values for each conjunction
seen during training (“conjunction-wise additivity”).


other than inputs that do not (say, a red circle and a blue square). As a result, the compositional
structure of a task is reflected in its dataset statistics, influencing the model’s generalization behavior.
To understand when and how statistical learning leads to successful compositional behavior, we
developed a theory for the behavior of kernel models on compositional tasks. Kernel models are an
important class of statistical models that are able to provide a simplified approximation to neural
networks while maintaining analytical tractability (Jäkel et al., 2008; 2009). For example, kernel
models accurately describe the behavior of learning and fine-tuning in neural networks under certain
conditions (Jacot et al., 2018; Malladi et al., 2023). More broadly, they provide a tractable framework
for characterizing the impact of dataset statistics on generalization (Canatar et al., 2021a;b).
Despite their broad relevance and relative simplicity, it has remained unclear how even kernel models
generalize on compositional tasks (though see Abbe et al., 2023; Lippl et al., 2024, see Section 2). To
address this gap, we present a theory of compositional generalization in kernel models. We define
a general class of “compositionally structured representations” (Fig. 1b) and a general family of
compositional tasks with no constraints on the input-output mapping (ensuring broad applicability
of our theory). We then theoretically characterize the compositional behavior of compositionally
structured kernel models, and go beyond kernel models to empirically validate our theory in several
relevant deep neural network architectures. Our specific contributions are as follows:

                • In Section 4, we show that compositionally structured kernel models are constrained to
                  summing up values implicitly assigned to each component or combination of components
                  seen during training (Fig. 1). We call such computations “conjunction-wise additive.”
                • In Section 5, we then characterize how representational geometry determines whether ker-
                  nel models will generalize successfully on conjunction-wise additive compositional tasks,
                  highlighting two important failure modes (memorization leak and shortcut bias). This demon-
                  strates that disentangled representations are not sufficient for downstream compositional
                  generalization (even on conjunction-wise additive tasks) and explains why.
                • Finally, in Section 6, we validate our theory in several deep neural network architectures,
                  showing that it captures their behavior on conjunction-wise additive tasks.

Overall, we take a step towards a general theory of compositional generalization. Our theory
systematically clarifies the compositional generalization behavior of deep networks and lays a
foundation for the design of new learning mechanisms that overcome their limitations.

2        R ELATED WORK
Compositional generalization. Compositionality is an important theme in both human and machine
cognition, including visual reasoning (Lake et al., 2015; Johnson et al., 2017; Schwartenbeck et al.,
2023), language production (Hupkes et al., 2020), and rule learning (Ito et al., 2022; Abdool et al.,


                                                                                    2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


2023). While recent breakthroughs have led to massive improvements in models’ compositional
capacities, these models can still fail spectacularly (Srivastava et al., 2023; Lewis et al., 2023; West,
2023). Attempts to improve compositional generalization often leverage meta-learning (Mitchell
et al., 2021; Wu et al., 2023; Lake & Baroni, 2023) or modular architectures (Andreas et al., 2017).
Constraining a network’s compositional function (e.g. to adding up a value for each component)
can guarantee modular specialization and compositional generalization (Lachapelle et al., 2023;
Wiedemer et al., 2023a;b; Schug et al., 2024). However, these networks are extremely limited in
the tasks they can learn (as we will show below) and end-to-end training of modular architectures
without such constraints often does not result in the desired specialization (Bahdanau et al., 2019;
Mittal et al., 2022; Jarvis et al., 2023).
Kernel regime. When using gradient descent, ridge regression, or similar learning algorithms
to train the readout weights of a model fw (x) = wT ϕ(x), the behavior of that model can be
described in terms of the kernel Kϕ (x, x′ ) = ϕ(x)T ϕ(x′ ) induced by ϕ(x) (Schölkopf, 2000).
                                                n
Notably, whenPntrained on a dataset {(xi , yi )}i=1 , such “kernel models” can be written in dual form
as fa (x) = i=1 ai Kϕ (x, xi ), for inferred dual coefficients a ∈ Rn . Prior work has shown that
neural networks with large initial weights or wide architectures are well approximated by a kernel
model (“kernel regime”) (Jacot et al., 2018). In contrast, the “feature-learning regime” (which can be
brought forth, for example, by small initial weights or small width) yields more substantial changes
in neural networks’ internal representations (Chizat et al., 2019).
Norm minimization. Gradient descent, ridge regression, and neural networks in the kernel regime
learn the readout weights that describe the training data with minimal ℓ2 -norm (Soudry et al., 2018;
Gunasekar et al., 2018; Ji et al., 2020). Norm minimization is a standard theoretical framework for
analyzing how representational geometry and dataset statistics influence generalization (Canatar et al.,
2021a;b; 2023) and we here apply it to the compositional task setting. This is similar to Lippl et al.
(2024) who characterize model behavior on a specific compositional task (transitive ordering) and
Abbe et al. (2023) who characterize the inductive bias of norm minimization for inputs with binary
components in the limit of infinite components. Compared to these prior works, we analyze a broader
range of compositional tasks and derive exact constraints for finite numbers of components.
Memorization leak. Machine learning models sometimes memorize (parts of) their training data
instead of learning a generalizable rule (Zhang et al., 2020; Dasgupta et al., 2022). This may improve
generalization on long-tailed data (Feldman, 2020), but often impairs out-of-distribution performance
(Elangovan et al., 2021). We find that models partially memorize their training data even when they
extract the correct rule. Jarvis et al. (2023) analyze a related phenomenon in deep linear networks.
Shortcut learning. Shortcut learning refers to models exploiting spurious correlations between certain
features of the input data and the target (Shah et al., 2020; Nagarajan et al., 2021). This substantially
impacts their performance out of distribution, where those correlations may not hold (Geirhos et al.,
2020). We theoretically analyze how shortcut biases impact compositional generalization.

3     M ODEL AND TASK SETUP
3.1   TASK SPACE

We consider an input x representing a set of underlying components z = (zc )C      c=1 , where each
component zc ∈ Zc is drawn from a discrete, finite set of possible components. For example, x could
be a “multi-hot” concatenation of one-hot representations of all components (Fig. 1c). We make a
specific assumption about how the trial-by-trial similarity of input representations x relates to the
underlying components z (Fig. 1b):
Definition 3.1. A representation x is “compositionally structured” iff its kernel K(x, x′ ) = xT x′
only depends on the number of components that are identical between z and z ′ , where z and z ′ are
the components represented by x and x′ respectively.

In particular, the multi-hot representation described above is compositionally structured, but we will
see below that this concept captures a richer set of representations as well. The target, y ∈ R, is given
by an arbitrary function of z, ensuring that our framework is agnostic to the underlying compositional
                                                                                            QC
structure. After training models on certain combinations of components Z train ⊂ Z = c=1 Zc , we
assess generalization on all other combinations Z test := Z \ Z train .


                                                   3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


          a, Symbolic addition            b, Context dependence                         c, Transitive               d, Compositional
                          Extrapolation                                                 equivalence                    task space
      e.g. [-2]+[1]=-1                     Target              Training set
                                                                     CD-3          Target         Split               Conjunction-wise
                Train                               Cat. 1
      Split                                                          CD-2                                              additive tasks
                Test                                Cat. 2                              Eq.           Train    Symbolic                Context
                                                                     CD-1                                                Transitive
                                                                                        Not eq.       Test     addition              dependence
               Interpolation   Both                    Context 1   Context 2                                              ordering
                                                                                                                 AND/OR              Partial
                                                                                        F                       operations          exposure


                                          Feat. 2
                                                                                        E


                                                                               Item 2
                                                                                        D
                                                                                        C                             Non-additive tasks
                                                                                        B                      Symbolic             Modification to
                                                                                        A                     multiplication           context
                                                train                                       A BCDE F                     Transitive  dependence
                                                    test     Feat. 1                                                    equivalence
                                                                                             Item 1

Figure 2: The compositional task space. a, Example training sets for symbolic addition. The grid
represents pairs of components with associated values −4, . . . , 4. The training set consists of certain
rows and columns of this grid. b, Context dependence. In context 1, feat. 1 determines the category;
in context 2, feat. 2 determines the category. The training sets leave out subsets of the lower right
orthant. c, Transitive equivalence: six items are split up into two equivalence classes (e.g. A,B,C
and D,E,F) and generalization requires transitive inference over equivalence classes (e.g. A = B
and B = C implies A = C). d, Our theory partitions the task space into conjunction-wise additive
(which can be solved by kernel models) and non-additive tasks (which cannot).


Our theory characterizes constraints on model behavior for arbitrary tasks within this family, regard-
less of the ground-truth input-output mapping. Below we describe three example tasks that represent
important building blocks for compositional reasoning in machine learning and cognitive science. We
will focus on these tasks in the main text, to illustrate our general theory and analyze its consequences
in more detail. In Appendix E, we describe additional tasks captured by our theory (Fig. 2d).
Symbolic addition. Many tasks involve inferring a magnitude associated with different underlying
components (e.g. adding handwritten digits) (Lorenzi et al., 2021; Sheahan et al., 2021). We consider
two components (z1 , z2 ) with hidden values v1 (z1 ) and v2 (z2 ). The target is the sum of those
values: y = v1 (z1 ) + v2 (z2 ). After sufficient exposure to individual items in different combinations,
an additive model could in principle generalize to novel combinations. We consider training sets
consisting of entire rows and columns of the compositional dataset (Fig. 2a), varying the number of
rows and columns as well as whether generalization involves interpolation or also extrapolation.
Context dependence. The relevance of different stimuli often depends crucially on our current
context (Bouton et al., 1999; Taylor & Ivry, 2013; Parker & Hollister, 2014; Ito et al., 2022). We
consider a task with three input components (zco , zf 1 , zf 2 ). The context (zco ) has two possible values
specifying whether zf 1 or zf 2 determine the response. Features have six possible values which are
divided into two classes. If the model has learned this context dependence, it should generalize to
novel feature combinations. We evaluate on the subset of data for which zf 1 indicates Cat. 2 and zf 2
indicates Cat. 1. In the most extreme generalization test (CD-3), we leave out the entire subset; in
easier versions, we leave out combinations of one or two features (CD-1, CD-2) (Fig. 2b).
Transitive equivalence. Relational reasoning involves extending learned relations to new item
combinations (Halford et al., 2010; Battaglia et al., 2018). Given an unobserved (and arbitrary)
equivalence relation, the task here is to determine whether two presented items (z1 , z2 ) are equivalent.
The model should generalize to novel item pairs using transitivity (A = B and B = C imply A = C)
(Fig. 2c). This is an important instance of relational cognition (often studied as “associative inference”
in cognitive science (Schlichting & Preston, 2015; Spalding et al., 2018)). Although prior work has
found that kernel models often successfully generalize on a transitive ordered relation (A > B and
B > C imply A > C, Lippl et al., 2024), the behavior of kernel models on equivalence relations has
remained unclear.

3.2   M ODELS

Our theory characterizes kernel models with a compositionally structured input x ∈ Rd that apply
a transform ϕ(x) ∈ Rh and learn a linear readout, fw (x) := wT ϕ(x), using gradient descent with
initial weights w0 = 0. For ϕ, we consider a neural network with random weights (in the infinite-
width limit; see Appendix A.3). Our setup captures, for example, the random feature model studied
by Abbe et al. (2023) and training via backpropagation in the kernel regime.


                                                                          4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


4     K ERNEL MODELS ARE CONJUNCTION - WISE ADDITIVE
Our primary theoretical contribution is to characterize the full range of compositional computations
that can be implemented by kernel models with compositionally structured inputs. We find that even
though these models can learn arbitrary training sets, their test set behavior is restricted to adding up
values for each conjunction (combination of components) seen during training. We call this motif
“conjunction-wise additivity.” Below, we formally state our finding and explain its implications.

4.1   R ANDOM NETWORKS YIELD COMPOSITIONALLY STRUCTURED REPRESENTATIONS

We first note that a linear readout of the multi-hot input constrains the model to adding up a value for
                                                            PC
each component (“component-wise additivity”): f (x) = c=1 fc (zc ). Although models of this class
perfectly generalize on component-wise additive tasks, such as symbolic addition, they are incapable
of even learning the training data (much less generalizing) on tasks that are not component-wise
additive. In particular, these models cannot learn context-dependent computations or equivalence
relations — both fundamental instances of compositional reasoning.
The nonlinear transform ϕ(x) can overcome this constraint; in particular, multi-layer nonlinear
neural networks can learn arbitrary training data (in the infinite-width limit) (Hornik et al., 1989;
Cybenko, 1989; Rigotti et al., 2013). Normally, the wide range of possible network architectures
makes it difficult to derive general statements about their representations, but in this case we can take
advantage of the fact that ϕ(x) will also be compositionally structured (Fig. 1c):
Proposition 4.1. For a random weights neural network ϕ with a compositionally structured input x,
in the infinite-width limit, ϕ(x) is also compositionally structured.

Proposition 4.1 holds because in the infinite-width limit, the kernel of random weight neural networks
depends only on the input kernel (Cho & Saul, 2009, see Appendix A.3). We now consider the
constraints that compositional structure imposes on the models’ generalization behavior.

4.2   C OMPOSITIONALLY STRUCTURED KERNEL MODELS ARE CONJUNCTION - WISE ADDITIVE

We find that any kernel model with a compositionally structured representation is constrained to
be conjunction-wise additive. To formally state this finding, we define, for each z ∈ Z, the set of
conjunctions for which z overlaps with some element in the training set z tr ∈ Z train ,
    Conj(z|Z train ) := J ⊆ {1, . . . , C}|there is z tr ∈ Z train such that zc = zctr for all c ∈ J .

                                                                                                       (1)


Theorem 4.2. For any kernel modelQf with a compositionally structured representation, we can
find conjunction-wise functions fJ : c∈J Zc → R, where J ⊆ {1, . . . , C}, such that for any input
x ∈ Rd representing components z ∈ Z, the model response is given by
                                 P
                        f (x) = J∈Conj(z|Z train ) fJ (zJ ), zJ := (zc )c∈J .                  (2)

We prove the theorem in Appendix A.4. It implies that for a given test input, kernel models add
up a value for each component and partial conjunction seen during training (Fig. 1d). We call
this computation “conjunction-wise additive.” In particular, for inputs with two components, the
model’s behavior on the training set can be expressed as f (x) = f1 (z1 ) + f2 (z2 ) + f12 (z1 , z2 ). Thus,
f12 (z1 , z2 ) enables the model to learn arbitrary training data. However, if x represents z ∈ Z test , the
training set does not contain any input with the conjunction (z1 , z2 ) and the model is component-wise
additive: f (x) = f1 (z1 ) + f2 (z2 ). For inputs with more than two components, a conjunction-wise
additive computation additionally encodes partial conjunctions seen during training, e.g., if Z train
contains the conjunction (z1 , z2 ), f (x) = f1 (z1 ) + f2 (z2 ) + f3 (z3 ) + f12 (z1 , z2 ).

4.3   C ONJUNCTION - WISE ADDITIVITY CONSTRAINS THE TASKS KERNEL MODELS CAN SOLVE

Theorem 4.2 implies that compositionally structured kernel models can only solve tasks that can be
expressed in conjunction-wise additive terms. This highlights a fundamental computational restriction,
partitioning the compositional task space into tasks that can and cannot be solved by kernel models


                                                     5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


(Fig. 2d). Intriguingly, these restrictions are not caused by an architectural constraint, as the model
can learn arbitrary training data (at least with a nonlinear transformation ϕ, see Section 5.1). Rather,
we highlight restrictions on how models – without any architectural constraints – can generalize
(Zhang et al., 2021). We now spell out the consequences of the highlighted restrictions.
First, for inputs with two components, we noted above that the model’s behavior on the test set is
component-wise additive. A consequence of this is that compositionally structured models can only
generalize on component-wise additive tasks. In particular, this implies that these models cannot
generalize on transitive equivalence — a fundamental instance of relational reasoning. Intriguingly,
transitive ordering – a superficially similar task – can be solved by a kernel model. This highlights
the importance of a formal perspective on compositional tasks.
More generally, to see whether a kernel model can, in principle, generalize on a task with more than
two input components, we must 1) identify, for each z ∈ Z test , the conjunctions seen during training,
Conj(z|Z train ), and 2) determine whether the target can be written as a conjunction-wise sum (Eq. (2)).
For context dependence for example, for all z ∈ Z test , we have seen the context-feature conjunctions
12 and 13, but not the feature-feature conjunction 23. As a result, model behavior on a test trial x
representing the components zco , zf 1 , zf 2 can be written as f (x) = f1 (zco ) + f2 (zf 1 ) + f3 (zf 2 ) +
f12 (zco , zf 1 ) + f13 (zco , zf 2 ). Importantly, this conjunction-wise additive function can encode context
dependence, specifically with the following schema: f12 (zco , zf 1 ) encodes the target when the context
zco indicates zf 1 as relevant and is zero otherwise; f13 (zco , zf 2 ) works in the opposite way. Thus, the
model can, in principle, identify a set of weights that would allow it to generalize correctly.
This example illustrates that conjunction-wise additivity tells us both whether kernel models with
compositionally structured representations can solve a certain task, and also how they solve it. It
even tells us how to make a task non-additive: in Appendix E.2.3, we describe such a modification to
context dependence that tests generalization to novel context-feature conjunctions. By helping us
design hard benchmark tasks that are not solvable by kernel models, our framework grounds research
into learning mechanisms that can implement other compositional computations.
What do our findings imply about compositional generalization in more general representations?
In this section, we analyzed compositionally structured inputs, as we consider them the best-case
scenario for compositional generalization. Accordingly, we expect that the limitations revealed by our
theory are also relevant for kernel models with non-compositionally structured representations. We
present two pieces of preliminary evidence for this conjecture in the appendix: First, we theoretically
prove that randomly sampled representations (that are only compositionally structured in expectation)
are also conjunction-wise additive in expectation (Appendix A.5). Second, we empirically investigate
compositional generalization in disentangled representation learning models trained on the DSprites
dataset (Locatello et al., 2019), finding that, when averaged across randomly sampled task instances,
these models are also limited to conjunction-wise additive computations (Appendix C). These
findings suggest that the generalization class we have highlighted in this section captures fundamental
limitations of kernel models beyond our theoretical setting.

5     R EPRESENTATIONAL GEOMETRY STILL IMPACTS GENERALIZATION ON
      CONJUNCTION - WISE ADDITIVE TASKS IN KERNEL MODELS

Conjunction-wise additivity only determines whether kernel models can, in principle, solve a certain
task. However, model generalization also depends on whether the model identifies the correct
conjunction-wise function. This depends on the model’s representational geometry and the training
data statistics. As noted in Section 2, the behavior of kernel models depends on their representation
ϕ(x) only through the induced kernel Kϕ (x, x′ ). In this section, we first investigate how different
choices in network architecture influence its induced kernel (Section 5.1). Then, we characterize how
this kernel impacts task performance on symbolic addition and context dependence (Section 5.2).

5.1   OVERLAP SALIENCE CHARACTERIZES COMPOSITIONAL REPRESENTATIONAL GEOMETRY

To characterize compositionally structured representations, we introduce a new metric: representa-
tional salience. We formally define this metric in Appendix B.1. Intuitively, for k = 1, . . . , C, the
salience S(k; C) measures the unique contribution of the subpopulation representing a conjunction
of c components. Further, S(k; C) is normalized so that all saliences sum up to one. For example,


                                                      6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


the multi-hot input only encodes single components and therefore S(1; C) = 1/C and, for all k > 1,
S(k; C) = 0. Note that the model can only use conjunctions whose salience is nonzero. For example,
the multi-hot input is constrained to a component-wise sum (as all other saliences are zero).
S(k; C) is computed from the representational similarities Kϕ (x, x′ ) = ϕ(x)T ϕ(x′ ). This metric is
useful because unlike Kϕ (x, x′ ), it makes immediately apparent how strongly different conjunctions
are encoded (Appendix B.2). Furthermore, it reduces the C +1 similarities characterizing the space of
compositionally structured representations to C − 1 free parameters, removing the overall magnitude
of the representation (by normalizing) and the baseline activity (by not considering the similarity
between inputs with no overlap). This is because these parameters often have negligible impact on
model behavior (Appendix B.3).
We now analyze how S(k; C) evolves over dif-
                                                          S(1;3)       S(2;3)     S(3;3)
ferent layers of a random network, using three                                1.0         Nonlinearity
components as an example (Fig. 3; see Ap-


                                                     Salience
                                                      0.2         0.2                       Step fun.
pendix B.4 for other values of C). The input                                  0.5           ReLU
only represents individual components and so                                                Leaky ReLU
                                                                                            Rect. quad.
S(2; 3) and S(3; 3) are zero. As the network          0.0         0.0         0.0           Gaussian
gets deeper, these saliences increase and S(1; 3)         0 10 20     0 10 20     0 10 20
decreases. In particular, because S(3; 3) > 0                        # Layers
for all networks with at least one layer, the re-
sulting representations can learn arbitrary train- Figure 3: Representational salience (for three input
ing data (using the full conjunction). As depth components) in a random weight neural network
increases, S(2; 3) eventually decreases again, with variable numbers of layers and nonlinearities.
whereas S(3; 3) continues to increase.
In fact, we prove that for ReLU networks in the limit of infinite depth, S(C; C) → 1 (Proposition B.2).
Put differently, very deep networks exclusively encode the full conjunction. As a result, these models
effectively implement a look-up table, memorizing the training data without generalizing to novel
combinations of components. In the next section, we find that even a moderately conjunctive
representation presents significant challenges to compositional generalization.

5.2   K ERNEL MODELS SUFFER FROM MEMORIZATION LEAK AND SHORTCUT BIAS

While there are many readout weights that can lead to minimal error, kernel models trained with
gradient descent learn the weights with minimal ℓ2 -norm (see Section 2). We now characterize
how this inductive bias influences compositional generalization. To characterize the full range of
compositionally structured representations, we compute the behavior of the model directly using the
kernel (see Appendix D). Importantly, our analysis clarifies the behavior of all random weight neural
networks, including those covered in the previous section.
Symbolic addition suffers from a memorization leak. We first consider an example task (z1 , z2 ∈
{[−4], . . . , [4]}; the training set consists of all trials containing a [0], Fig. 2a) and an example
representation (S(1; 2) = 0.4). We find that though the model perfectly learns the training cases,
it underestimates the test cases by a proportional factor (Fig. 4a). To understand why, we consider
the model’s functional form on the training cases: f (x) = f1 (z1 ) + f2 (z2 ) + f12 (z) (see Section 4).
Intuitively, ℓ2 -norm minimization tends to yield distributed weights. As a result, unless the salience
of the conjunction S(2; 2) is zero, the kernel model will associate some non-zero weight with it (i.e.
f12 (z1 , z2 ) ̸= 0). This distorts the test set generalization, f (x) = f1 (z1 ) + f2 (z2 ).
We call the tendency to use the full conjunction (and its detrimental effect on generalization) “memo-
rization leak.” To characterize it more systematically (and add mathematical rigor to the intuition
above), we analytically characterize model behavior on a general family of symbolic addition tasks:
Proposition 5.1. Consider inputs z1 , z2 ∈ {[v]}v∈V , V ⊂ R, with associated values v. We assume
that the training set contains all pairs such that at least one component is zc ∈ {[w]}w∈W , W ⊂ V
and that the average value in both V and W is zero. Then, model behavior on the test set is given by
                                                            p·S(1;2)
                  f ([v1 ], [v2 ]) = m(v1 + v2 ),   m := 1+(p−2)S(1;2) ,   p := |W|                  (3)

We prove the proposition in Appendix E.1. It implies that for this entire task family, model general-
ization is distorted by a proportional factor m (Fig. 4b). The formula implies that m < 1 as long as


                                                    7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


a                                  b                p                    c                                              d
                                                                                                                                                                    ReLU
                                               1         1   4                1/3                          Generali-


                                                                                                                        Conj. type
Prediction
                                                                                                                                       Right conj.


                                   Slope (m)
              4                                                                                                                                                     CD-3
                                                                                                           zation on ...              Wrong conj.


                                                                         S(2; 3)
              0                                                                                               all                    Sensory feat.                  CD-2
                           train                                                                                                      Context only
                           test                                                                               CD-1,2                                                Rect. quad.
             −4                                                                                                                         Full conj.
                                               0                                   0                          CD-1                                                  CD-3
                    −4 0 4                         0.0             0.5                 0             1/3      none                                   0.0      0.5
                  Ground truth                           S(1; 2)                           S(1; 3)                                                         Value

Figure 4: Kernel models’ behavior on (a,b) symbolic addition and (c,d) context dependence. a, Model
predictions on training and test set plotted against ground truth for an example case (S(1; 2) = 0.4,
W = {0}). b, The slope of the test set as a function of S(1; 2) and the training set size p = |W|.
c, Generalization on context dependence as a function of representational salience. Trajectories of
networks with different nonlinearities are highlighted (color scale see Fig. 3). d, Coefficients of the
different conjunction types for two example networks with three layers and different nonlinearities.


S(1; 2) < 12 (i.e. as long as S(2; 2) > 0). Further, m is smaller for lower S(1; 2) and smaller training
set size p. (Note that W corresponds to the rows/columns making up the example training sets in
Fig. 2a.) Interestingly, these are the only two factors that influence m. In particular, even though
interpolation is often seen as easier than extrapolation, this does not impact model behavior here.
More broadly, the memorization leak is a ubiquitous issue for statistical learning models trained on
compositional tasks: ℓ2 -norm minimization tends to yield distributed weights and so if the conjunctive
population is represented, the model will generally end up partially relying on this conjunction. As
shown above, this necessarily distorts generalization. This issue also arises in tasks that involve
directly decoding specific components, a popular task for evaluating disentangled representations
(Locatello et al., 2019; Schott et al., 2022) (see Appendix E.3 for a minimal example).
Context dependence suffers from a shortcut bias. Next, we empirically analyzed model gener-
alization on context dependence across different representational geometries and training sets. We
found that on a given task, each model either generalizes with 100% or 0% accuracy. For CD-3 (the
task version leaving out the largest subset of feature combinations), the model only generalizes when
S(2; 3) is high relative to S(1; 3) (Fig. 4c, dark green area). As a result, compositional generalization
is highly sensitive to the nonlinearity and depth of the network. In contrast, for CD-2 and CD-1, a
much wider range of representational geometries generalizes successfully.
To understand this phenomenon, we determined the total magnitude of model weights associated with
the different conjunctions (Fig. 4d). We found that unsuccessful models (e.g. the blue color in Fig. 4d)
had much larger magnitudes associated with the context component and the full conjunction. Notably,
on CD-3, context is highly correlated with the target and can predict 23 of the training data. Models
with high S(1; 3) (context) and S(3; 3) (full conjunction) exploit this context shortcut and use the
full conjunction to learn the remaining training data. This strategy explains why these models fail to
generalize to the test set. For CD-2, context is much less predictive on the training data (accuracy of
 9
16 ). This explains why only very low S(2; 3) yields failure to generalize on CD-2 or CD-1.
Our analysis shows how model and task structure interact to either give rise to a generalizable rule or
a statistical shortcut. This highlights that for compositional tasks with strong spurious correlations,
model behavior will be highly sensitive to architectural hyperparameters affecting the representational
geometry such as depth and nonlinearity. Indeed, this sensitivity to minor experimental choices could
explain why the literature has been so divided on the usefulness of disentangled representations.


6             O UR THEORY CAN DESCRIBE THE BEHAVIOR OF DEEP NETWORKS ON
              CONJUNCTION - WISE ADDITIVE TASKS

So far, our analyses have been limited to simple kernel models, for their analytical tractability. We
next tested whether the insights developed from these simple models extend to a broader class of
models: large-scale neural networks. We considered symbolic addition and context dependence
on inputs created by concatenations of images from MNIST (Lecun et al., 1998) or CIFAR-10
(Krizhevsky et al., 2009) (see Appendix D). Each component corresponds to random samples from a
particular category rather than the one-hot input considered so far and we study both in-distribution


                                                                                                 8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


  a                                    b                                        c                 Convnet             ResNet              ViT
                                                                                                  (MNIST)             (CIFAR)           (CIFAR)
                                                     5                                     1.00                 1.0              1.0


                                       Prediction
            0.37
  S(1; 2)


                                                                                Slope
                                                                                                                0.8
                                                     0                                     0.75                                  0.6
                                                                                                                0.6
            0.33
                                                    −5                                                          0.4
                   0              20                      −5 0          5                         0    10 20          0    20          0   20     Split
                        Dist.                            Ground truth                                                 Distance
  d                                                                             e                                                                    Training
                       Convnet                      ResNet           ViT                              Convnet         ResNet             ViT         In−distribution
                       (MNIST)                      (CIFAR)        (CIFAR)                            (MNIST)         (CIFAR)          (CIFAR)       Compositional
             1.0                       1.0                   1.0                            1.0


                                                                                Accuracy
                                                                                                                                                     Interpolation
  Slope


                                       0.8                                                                                                           Extrapolation
             0.8                                             0.6                            0.5
                                       0.6
             0.6                       0.4                                                  0.0
                   1    2     3   4                  1   2          1       2                     CD−3    CD−1 CD−3         CD−1 CD−3      CD−1
                            Training set size (p)                                                                         Task

Figure 5: Testing our theory in deep networks trained on MNIST and CIFAR versions of compositional
tasks. Ranges indicate mean ± one std. error (often too small to be visible). a, S(1; 2) in an
intermediate ConvNet layer for different distances between digits. Lower distance yields a more
conjunctive representation. b, Average model prediction for each combination of components plotted
against the ground truth (MNIST, distance of zero, W = {0}). Generalization on the compositional
split is distorted by a proportional factor. c, d, Slope of this linear relationship across all datasets as a
function of c, distance (each line corresponding to a particular W) and d, training set (for a distance
of zero). For MSE instead of slope, see Fig. 12. e, Accuracy on all variants of context dependence.


and compositional generalization. Notably, different image categories are not necessarily equally
correlated with each other. To control for this, we randomly permuted the assignment of categories
to components for each (n = 10) experiment. We considered several relevant vision architectures,
which we all trained with backpropagation: convolutional networks (ConvNets, LeCun et al., 1989)
(trained on MNIST) and residual networks (ResNets, He et al., 2016) and Vision Transformers (ViTs,
Dosovitskiy et al., 2020) (trained on CIFAR-10).
Spatial distance of components impacts salience in internal representations. First, we examined
how changes in the input structure impact the networks’ representational geometry. We hypothesized
that the ConvNets’ local weight structure should produce a more conjunctive representation for digits
that are closer together. To test this, we determined S(1; 2) in an intermediate layer of the network,
averaging over different instances of all digits. We found that S(1; 2) was indeed smaller for lower
distances (Fig. 5a), indicating a more conjunctive population. This suggests that varying the distance
between two digits provides a practical way of manipulating S(1; 2); below we use this insight to test
predictions about how conjunctivity influences generalization behavior.
Deep networks tend to implement conjunction-wise additive computations. Conjunction-wise
additivity imposes a substantial computational restriction: on test set inputs, models can only add up
values assigned to each conjunction of components seen during training. We therefore investigated
whether the deep networks’ computations could be captured in these terms — a nontrivial prediction
as these networks can in principle express arbitrary compositional computations. Remarkably, we
found that a conjunction-wise additive model was highly predictive of the model responses (see
Appendix D.3). This indicates that large-scale neural networks tend to implement conjunction-wise
additive computations, at least when trained on conjunction-wise additive tasks. Our theory suggests
that they do so because the statistical structure of the dataset makes such a computation natural.
Deep networks are impacted by a memorization leak on symbolic addition. Having found that
our theory captures the networks’ general computational structure, we investigated whether it was
also able to explain their specific performance. We first considered symbolic addition, varying the size
of the training set and whether generalization required interpolation or also extrapolation. We trained
the ConvNets on 20,000 samples and the ResNets and ViTs on 40,000 samples (Appendix E.1.3).
We tested three theoretical predictions made by Proposition 5.1. First, our theory predicts that the
model’s test set response should be distorted by a proportional factor. To test this, we plotted the
average model prediction for each combination of categories against the ground truth. We found


                                                                                                      9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


that model predictions were indeed compressed relative to the ground truth, but still exhibited a
strong linear relationship (Fig. 5b). This was also the case for ResNets and ViTs, which exhibited a
slightly noisier linear relationship (Fig. 11). The memorization leak therefore affects generalization
in large-scale networks as well. This is especially significant as our theoretical argument suggests
that memorization leaks likely arise for a broad range of compositional tasks.
We then estimated the slope of this linear dependency for each dataset. Our theory predicts that the
compositional generalization slope should increase with increasing S(1; 2) (i.e. increasing distance
between components, Fig. 5a). On ConvNets, we found that higher distance indeed increases the
slope (Fig. 5c). This was not due to an increase in task difficulty, as in-distribution generalization is
not systematically affected by distance. On ResNets and ViTs, higher distance also yielded a higher
slope on the compositional generalization set (though the effect was much subtler for ViTs). (Notably,
these networks did not perfectly predict the training split, which may affect the results.)
Finally, our theory predicts that larger training sets should increase the compositional generalization
slope. Our experiments confirmed this prediction (Fig. 5d). Further, whether the training set required
interpolation or also extrapolation did not systematically affect the resulting slope, as predicted by
our theory (though interestingly, it did affect in-distribution generalization). Notably, there was one
exception to the latter finding: for p = 4, the extrapolation dataset had a smaller slope than the
interpolation data set. Our theory can therefore explain much but not all of the deep network behavior.
Deep networks are impacted by a shortcut bias on context dependence. Lastly, we trained
the ConvNets on an MNIST version of context dependence using 30,000 training samples and the
ResNets and ViTs on a CIFAR-10 version of the task using 40,000 training samples. Again, their
behavior was aligned with the kernel theory’s predictions, having better-than-chance accuracy on
CD-1 and CD-2, but having worse-than-chance accuracy on CD-3 (Fig. 5e). This confirms that the
deep networks also suffered from a context-driven shortcut on CD-3 (see also Fig. 16).


7    D ISCUSSION

Humans often generalize to new situations by stitching together concepts and knowledge from prior
experience. Despite the broad importance of this ability (both for cognitive science and machine learn-
ing), a general theory of when and how neural networks accomplish compositional generalization has
remained elusive. Here we have taken a step towards formalizing this relationship by characterizing
kernel models with compositionally structured representations, a framework that captures neural
network training or finetuning in the kernel regime and more broadly lets us understand the impact of
representational geometry on generalization. We found that they implement a specific compositional
computation (“conjunction-wise additivity”). We then investigated how dataset statistics and repre-
sentational geometry impact successful generalization, highlighting two failure modes arising from
the inductive bias of gradient descent (memorization leak and shortcut bias). Finally, we validated
our theory in deep neural networks trained on natural image data.
Our results show how simple statistical models can implement (or at least approximate) abstract rules
like context dependence. However, they also highlight that building in compositional structure is often
insufficient for compositional generalization. Indeed, contextual generalization is highly sensitive
to the specific representational geometry and training data. This may explain why investigations
into compositional generalization and the benefits of disentangled representations have yielded such
inconsistent results. Overall, our insights highlight the utility of kernel models in systematically
investigating model generalization. We here used these models to characterize deep neural networks,
but they could be equally useful for better understanding human compositional generalization.
While our work covers a broad range of different tasks, a number of limitations remain. We
demonstrate that our theory captures many qualitative phenomena in deep neural networks, but do not
provide any quantitative bounds. Further, though out of scope here, it would be interesting to test this
theory in extremely large-scale models, e.g. large language models. Future work should also consider
other input/output formats (e.g. sequences with variable length) and non-compositionally structured
representations. Most importantly, our theory is limited to a particular learning mechanism (kernel
models). Other learning mechanisms could overcome the limitations highlighted in Sections 4 and 5
(we give an initial example in Appendix F). By helping us design new benchmark tasks not solvable
by kernel models, our theory provides an important foundation for such advances.


                                                  10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

We are grateful to the members of the Center for Theoretical Neuroscience for helpful comments and
discussions. We thank Elom Amematsro, Ching Fang, and Matteo Alleman for detailed feedback,
and Zeb Kurth-Nelson for comments on the manuscript. The work was supported by NSF 1707398
(Neuronex), Gatsby Charitable Foundation GAT3708, and the NSF AI Institute for Artificial and
Natural Intelligence (ARNI).

R EFERENCES
Emmanuel Abbe, Samy Bengio, Aryo Lotfi, and Kevin Rizk. Generalization on the Unseen, Logic
 Reasoning and Degree Curriculum. June 2023. URL https://openreview.net/forum?
 id=3dqwXb1te4.

Mustafa Abdool, Andrew J Nam, and James L McClelland. Continual learning and out of distribution
 generalization in a systematic reasoning task. In MATH-AI: The 3rd Workshop on Mathematical
 Reasoning and AI at NeurIPS, volume 23, 2023.

Jacob Andreas, Marcus Rohrbach, Trevor Darrell, and Dan Klein. Neural Module Networks, July
  2017. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/1511.02799. arXiv:1511.02799 [cs].

Dzmitry Bahdanau, Shikhar Murty, Michael Noukhovitch, Thien Huu Nguyen, Harm de Vries, and
  Aaron Courville. Systematic Generalization: What Is Required and Can It Be Learned?, April
  2019. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/1811.12889. arXiv:1811.12889 [cs].

Peter W. Battaglia, Jessica B. Hamrick, Victor Bapst, Alvaro Sanchez-Gonzalez, Vinicius Zambaldi,
  Mateusz Malinowski, Andrea Tacchetti, David Raposo, Adam Santoro, Ryan Faulkner, Caglar
  Gulcehre, Francis Song, Andrew Ballard, Justin Gilmer, George Dahl, Ashish Vaswani, Kelsey
  Allen, Charles Nash, Victoria Langston, Chris Dyer, Nicolas Heess, Daan Wierstra, Pushmeet Kohli,
  Matt Botvinick, Oriol Vinyals, Yujia Li, and Razvan Pascanu. Relational inductive biases, deep
  learning, and graph networks, October 2018. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/1806.01261.
  arXiv:1806.01261 [cs, stat].

Mark E. Bouton, James B. Nelson, and Juan M. Rosas. Stimulus generalization, context change,
 and forgetting. Psychological Bulletin, 125(2):171–186, 1999. ISSN 1939-1455. doi: 10.1037/
 0033-2909.125.2.171. Place: US Publisher: American Psychological Association.

Alon Brutzkus and Amir Globerson. Why do Larger Models Generalize Better? A Theoretical
  Perspective via the XOR Problem. In Proceedings of the 36th International Conference on
  Machine Learning, pp. 822–830. PMLR, May 2019. URL https://proceedings.mlr.
  press/v97/brutzkus19b.html. ISSN: 2640-3498.

Abdulkadir Canatar, Blake Bordelon, and Cengiz Pehlevan. Out-of-Distribution Generalization
  in Kernel Regression. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 34, pp.
 12600–12612. Curran Associates, Inc., 2021a. URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/
  paper/2021/hash/691dcb1d65f31967a874d18383b9da75-Abstract.html.

Abdulkadir Canatar, Blake Bordelon, and Cengiz Pehlevan. Spectral bias and task-model align-
  ment explain generalization in kernel regression and infinitely wide neural networks. Nature
 Communications, 12(1):2914, May 2021b. ISSN 2041-1723. doi: 10.1038/s41467-021-23103-1.
  URL https://www.nature.com/articles/s41467-021-23103-1. Publisher: Na-
  ture Publishing Group.

Abdulkadir Canatar, Jenelle Feather, Albert Wakhloo, and SueYeon Chung. A Spectral Theory
  of Neural Prediction and Alignment. November 2023. URL https://openreview.net/
  forum?id=5B1ZK60jWn.

Stephanie C. Y. Chan, Ishita Dasgupta, Junkyung Kim, Dharshan Kumaran, Andrew K. Lampinen,
  and Felix Hill. Transformers generalize differently from information stored in context vs in weights,
  October 2022. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/2210.05675. arXiv:2210.05675 [cs].


                                                 11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Lénaïc Chizat and Francis Bach. Implicit Bias of Gradient Descent for Wide Two-layer Neural
  Networks Trained with the Logistic Loss. In Proceedings of Thirty Third Conference on Learning
  Theory, pp. 1305–1338. PMLR, July 2020. URL https://proceedings.mlr.press/
  v125/chizat20a.html. ISSN: 2640-3498.

Lénaïc Chizat, Edouard Oyallon, and Francis Bach. On Lazy Training in Differentiable Pro-
  gramming. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 32. Curran As-
  sociates, Inc., 2019. URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper/2019/hash/
  ae614c557843b1df326cb29c57225459-Abstract.html.

Youngmin Cho and Lawrence Saul.   Kernel Methods for Deep Learning. In Ad-
  vances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 22. Curran Asso-
  ciates, Inc., 2009.    URL https://papers.nips.cc/paper/2009/hash/
  5751ec3e9a4feab575962e78e006250d-Abstract.html.

G. Cybenko. Approximation by superpositions of a sigmoidal function. Mathematics of Control,
  Signals and Systems, 2(4):303–314, December 1989. ISSN 1435-568X. doi: 10.1007/BF02551274.
  URL https://doi.org/10.1007/BF02551274.

Ishita Dasgupta, Erin Grant, and Tom Griffiths. Distinguishing rule and exemplar-based generalization
   in learning systems. In Proceedings of the 39th International Conference on Machine Learning,
   pp. 4816–4830. PMLR, June 2022. URL https://proceedings.mlr.press/v162/
   dasgupta22b.html. ISSN: 2640-3498.

Alexey Dosovitskiy, Lucas Beyer, Alexander Kolesnikov, Dirk Weissenborn, Xiaohua Zhai, Thomas
  Unterthiner, Mostafa Dehghani, Matthias Minderer, Georg Heigold, Sylvain Gelly, and others.
  An image is worth 16x16 words: Transformers for image recognition at scale. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2010.11929, 2020.

Aparna Elangovan, Jiayuan He, and Karin Verspoor. Memorization vs. Generalization: Quantifying
  Data Leakage in NLP Performance Evaluation, February 2021. URL http://arxiv.org/
  abs/2102.01818. arXiv:2102.01818 [cs].

Babak Esmaeili, Hao Wu, Sarthak Jain, Alican Bozkurt, N. Siddharth, Brooks Paige, Dana H.
  Brooks, Jennifer Dy, and Jan-Willem Meent. Structured Disentangled Representations. In
  Proceedings of the Twenty-Second International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics,
  pp. 2525–2534. PMLR, April 2019. URL https://proceedings.mlr.press/v89/
  esmaeili19a.html. ISSN: 2640-3498.

Vitaly Feldman. Does learning require memorization? a short tale about a long tail. In Proceedings
  of the 52nd Annual ACM SIGACT Symposium on Theory of Computing, STOC 2020, pp. 954–959,
  New York, NY, USA, June 2020. Association for Computing Machinery. ISBN 978-1-4503-6979-4.
  doi: 10.1145/3357713.3384290. URL https://dl.acm.org/doi/10.1145/3357713.
  3384290.

Jerry A. Fodor and Zenon W. Pylyshyn. Connectionism and cognitive architecture: A
  critical analysis. Cognition, 28(1):3–71, March 1988. ISSN 0010-0277.   doi: 10.
  1016/0010-0277(88)90031-5. URL https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/
  article/pii/0010027788900315.

Steven M. Frankland and Joshua D. Greene. Concepts and Compositionality: In Search
  of the Brain’s Language of Thought.     Annual Review of Psychology, 71(1):273–303,
  2020. doi: 10.1146/annurev-psych-122216-011829. URL https://doi.org/10.1146/
  annurev-psych-122216-011829. _eprint: https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev-psych-122216-
  011829.

Robert Geirhos, Jörn-Henrik Jacobsen, Claudio Michaelis, Richard Zemel, Wieland Brendel, Matthias
  Bethge, and Felix A. Wichmann. Shortcut learning in deep neural networks. Nature Machine
  Intelligence, 2(11):665–673, November 2020. ISSN 2522-5839. doi: 10.1038/s42256-020-00257-z.
  URL https://www.nature.com/articles/s42256-020-00257-z. Number: 11
  Publisher: Nature Publishing Group.


                                                 12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Suriya Gunasekar, Jason Lee, Daniel Soudry, and Nathan Srebro. Characterizing implicit bias in
  terms of optimization geometry. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 1832–1841.
  PMLR, 2018.
Graeme S. Halford, William H. Wilson, and Steven Phillips. Relational knowledge: the foundation
  of higher cognition. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 14(11):497–505, November 2010. ISSN
  1364-6613. doi: 10.1016/j.tics.2010.08.005. URL https://www.sciencedirect.com/
  science/article/pii/S1364661310002020.
Insu Han, Amir Zandieh, Jaehoon Lee, Roman Novak, Lechao Xiao, and Amin Karbasi. Fast Neural
  Kernel Embeddings for General Activations, September 2022. URL http://arxiv.org/
  abs/2209.04121. arXiv:2209.04121 [cs, stat].
Kaiming He, Xiangyu Zhang, Shaoqing Ren, and Jian Sun. Delving Deep into Recti-
  fiers: Surpassing Human-Level Performance on ImageNet Classification. pp. 1026–1034,
  2015. URL https://openaccess.thecvf.com/content_iccv_2015/html/He_
  Delving_Deep_into_ICCV_2015_paper.html.
Kaiming He, Xiangyu Zhang, Shaoqing Ren, and Jian Sun. Deep Residual Learning for Image
  Recognition. pp. 770–778, 2016. URL https://openaccess.thecvf.com/content_
  cvpr_2016/html/He_Deep_Residual_Learning_CVPR_2016_paper.html.
Irina Higgins, Loic Matthey, Arka Pal, Christopher Burgess, Xavier Glorot, Matthew Botvinick,
   Shakir Mohamed, and Alexander Lerchner. beta-VAE: Learning Basic Visual Concepts with a
   Constrained Variational Framework. In International Conference on Learning Representations,
   2017. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=Sy2fzU9gl.
Geoffrey E. Hinton, Alex Krizhevsky, and Sida D. Wang. Transforming Auto-Encoders. In Timo
  Honkela, Włodzisław Duch, Mark Girolami, and Samuel Kaski (eds.), Artificial Neural Networks
  and Machine Learning – ICANN 2011, pp. 44–51, Berlin, Heidelberg, 2011. Springer. ISBN
  978-3-642-21735-7. doi: 10.1007/978-3-642-21735-7_6.
Kurt Hornik, Maxwell Stinchcombe, and Halbert White. Multilayer feedforward networks are
  universal approximators. Neural Networks, 2(5):359–366, January 1989. ISSN 0893-6080. doi:
 10.1016/0893-6080(89)90020-8. URL https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/
  article/pii/0893608089900208.
Dieuwke Hupkes, Verna Dankers, Mathijs Mul, and Elia Bruni. Compositionality Decomposed: How
  do Neural Networks Generalise? Journal of Artificial Intelligence Research, 67:757–795, April
  2020. ISSN 1076-9757. doi: 10.1613/jair.1.11674. URL https://www.jair.org/index.
  php/jair/article/view/11674.
Takuya Ito, Tim Klinger, Douglas H. Schultz, John D. Murray, Michael W. Cole, and Mattia Rigotti.
  Compositional generalization through abstract representations in human and artificial neural net-
  works, September 2022. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/2209.07431. arXiv:2209.07431
  [q-bio].
Arthur Jacot, Franck Gabriel, and Clément Hongler. Neural tangent kernel: Convergence and
  generalization in neural networks. Advances in neural information processing systems, 31, 2018.
Devon Jarvis, Richard Klein, Benjamin Rosman, and Andrew M. Saxe. On The Specialization of
  Neural Modules. In The Eleventh International Conference on Learning Representations, 2023.
  URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=Fh97BDaR6I.
Ziwei Ji, Miroslav Dudík, Robert E Schapire, and Matus Telgarsky. Gradient descent follows the
  regularization path for general losses. In Conference on Learning Theory, pp. 2109–2136. PMLR,
  2020.
Justin Johnson, Bharath Hariharan, Laurens van der Maaten, Li Fei-Fei, C. Lawrence Zitnick, and
  Ross Girshick. CLEVR: A Diagnostic Dataset for Compositional Language and Elementary Visual
  Reasoning. pp. 2901–2910, 2017. URL https://openaccess.thecvf.com/content_
  cvpr_2017/html/Johnson_CLEVR_A_Diagnostic_CVPR_2017_paper.html.


                                               13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Frank Jäkel, Bernhard Schölkopf, and Felix A Wichmann. Generalization and similarity in exemplar
  models of categorization: Insights from machine learning. Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 15:
  256–271, 2008. Publisher: Springer.
Frank Jäkel, Bernhard Schölkopf, and Felix A. Wichmann. Does Cognitive Science Need Ker-
  nels? Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 13(9):381–388, September 2009. ISSN 1364-6613,
  1879-307X. doi: 10.1016/j.tics.2009.06.002. URL https://www.cell.com/trends/
  cognitive-sciences/abstract/S1364-6613(09)00143-0. Publisher: Elsevier.
Alex Krizhevsky, Geoffrey Hinton, and others. Learning multiple layers of features from tiny images.
  2009. Publisher: Toronto, ON, Canada.
Sebastien Lachapelle, Divyat Mahajan, Ioannis Mitliagkas, and Simon Lacoste-Julien. Additive
  Decoders for Latent Variables Identification and Cartesian-Product Extrapolation. November 2023.
  URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=R6KJN1AUAR.
Brenden Lake and Marco Baroni. Generalization without systematicity: 35th International Conference
  on Machine Learning, ICML 2018. 35th International Conference on Machine Learning, ICML
  2018, pp. 4487–4499, 2018. URL http://www.scopus.com/inward/record.url?
  scp=85057241154&partnerID=8YFLogxK. Publisher: International Machine Learning
  Society (IMLS).
Brenden M. Lake and Marco Baroni. Human-like systematic generalization through a meta-
  learning neural network.    Nature, 623(7985):115–121, November 2023.    ISSN 1476-
  4687. doi: 10.1038/s41586-023-06668-3. URL https://www.nature.com/articles/
  s41586-023-06668-3. Publisher: Nature Publishing Group.
Brenden M. Lake, Ruslan Salakhutdinov, and Joshua B. Tenenbaum. Human-level concept
  learning through probabilistic program induction. Science, 350(6266):1332–1338, December
  2015. doi: 10.1126/science.aab3050. URL https://www.science.org/doi/full/10.
  1126/science.aab3050. Publisher: American Association for the Advancement of Science.
Brenden M. Lake, Tomer D. Ullman, Joshua B. Tenenbaum, and Samuel J. Gershman. Building
  machines that learn and think like people. Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 40:e253, January
  2017. ISSN 0140-525X, 1469-1825. doi: 10.1017/S0140525X16001837. URL https:
  //www.cambridge.org/core/journals/behavioral-and-brain-sciences/
  article/building-machines-that-learn-and-think-like-people/
  A9535B1D745A0377E16C590E14B94993. Publisher: Cambridge University Press.
Y. LeCun, B. Boser, J. S. Denker, D. Henderson, R. E. Howard, W. Hubbard, and L. D. Jackel.
  Backpropagation Applied to Handwritten Zip Code Recognition. Neural Computation, 1(4):
  541–551, 1989. doi: 10.1162/neco.1989.1.4.541.
Y. Lecun, L. Bottou, Y. Bengio, and P. Haffner. Gradient-based learning applied to document
  recognition. Proceedings of the IEEE, 86(11):2278–2324, 1998. doi: 10.1109/5.726791.
Michael A. Lepori, Thomas Serre, and Ellie Pavlick. Break It Down: Evidence for Structural
 Compositionality in Neural Networks, November 2023. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/
 2301.10884. arXiv:2301.10884 [cs].
Martha Lewis, Nihal V. Nayak, Peilin Yu, Qinan Yu, Jack Merullo, Stephen H. Bach, and Ellie
 Pavlick. Does CLIP Bind Concepts? Probing Compositionality in Large Image Models, March
 2023. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/2212.10537. arXiv:2212.10537 [cs].
Samuel Lippl, Kenneth Kay, Greg Jensen, Vincent P. Ferrera, and L. F. Abbott. A mathematical
  theory of relational generalization in transitive inference. Proceedings of the National Academy
  of Sciences, 121(28):e2314511121, July 2024. doi: 10.1073/pnas.2314511121. URL https:
  //www.pnas.org/doi/abs/10.1073/pnas.2314511121. Publisher: Proceedings of
  the National Academy of Sciences.
Francesco Locatello, Stefan Bauer, Mario Lucic, Gunnar Raetsch, Sylvain Gelly, Bernhard Schölkopf,
  and Olivier Bachem. Challenging common assumptions in the unsupervised learning of disentan-
  gled representations. In international conference on machine learning, pp. 4114–4124. PMLR,
  2019.


                                                14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Elena Lorenzi, Matilde Perrino, and Giorgio Vallortigara. Numerosities and Other Magnitudes in
  the Brains: A Comparative View. Frontiers in Psychology, 12, April 2021. ISSN 1664-1078.
  doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2021.641994. URL https://www.frontiersin.org/journals/
  psychology/articles/10.3389/fpsyg.2021.641994/full. Publisher: Frontiers.
Kaifeng Lyu and Jian Li. Gradient Descent Maximizes the Margin of Homogeneous Neural Networks.
  In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2020. URL https://openreview.
  net/forum?id=SJeLIgBKPS.
Sadhika Malladi, Alexander Wettig, Dingli Yu, Danqi Chen, and Sanjeev Arora. A Kernel-Based
  View of Language Model Fine-Tuning. In Proceedings of the 40th International Conference on
  Machine Learning, pp. 23610–23641. PMLR, July 2023. URL https://proceedings.mlr.
  press/v202/malladi23a.html. ISSN: 2640-3498.
Brendan O. McGonigle and Margaret Chalmers. Are monkeys logical? Nature, 267:694–696, 1977.
  ISSN 1476-4687. doi: 10.1038/267694a0. Place: United Kingdom Publisher: Nature Publishing
  Group.
Eric Mitchell, Chelsea Finn, and Chris Manning. Challenges of acquiring compositional inductive
  biases via meta-learning. In AAAI Workshop on Meta-Learning and MetaDL Challenge, pp.
  138–148. PMLR, 2021.
Sarthak Mittal, Yoshua Bengio, and Guillaume Lajoie.      Is a Modular Architecture
  Enough? Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 35:28747–28760, Decem-
  ber 2022. URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper_files/paper/2022/
  hash/b8d1d741f137d9b6ac4f3c1683791e4a-Abstract-Conference.html.
Vaishnavh Nagarajan, Anders Andreassen, and Behnam Neyshabur. Understanding the Failure Modes
  of Out-of-Distribution Generalization, April 2021. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/2010.
  15775. arXiv:2010.15775 [cs, stat].
Jeanne E Parker and Debra L Hollister. The Cognitive Science Basis for Context. In Patrick
  Brézillon and Avelino J. Gonzalez (eds.), Context in Computing: A Cross-Disciplinary Ap-
  proach for Modeling the Real World, pp. 205–219. Springer, New York, NY, 2014. ISBN
  978-1-4939-1887-4. doi: 10.1007/978-1-4939-1887-4_14. URL https://doi.org/10.
  1007/978-1-4939-1887-4_14.
Adam Paszke, Sam Gross, Francisco Massa, Adam Lerer, James Bradbury, Gregory Chanan, Trevor
  Killeen, Zeming Lin, Natalia Gimelshein, Luca Antiga, and others. Pytorch: An imperative style,
  high-performance deep learning library. Advances in neural information processing systems, 32,
  2019.
F. Pedregosa, G. Varoquaux, A. Gramfort, V. Michel, B. Thirion, O. Grisel, M. Blondel, P. Pretten-
   hofer, R. Weiss, V. Dubourg, J. Vanderplas, A. Passos, D. Cournapeau, M. Brucher, M. Perrot, and
   E. Duchesnay. Scikit-learn: Machine Learning in Python. Journal of Machine Learning Research,
   12:2825–2830, 2011.
Yi Ren, Samuel Lavoie, Michael Galkin, Danica J. Sutherland, and Aaron C Courville. Im-
  proving Compositional Generalization using Iterated Learning and Simplicial Embeddings.
  In A. Oh, T. Naumann, A. Globerson, K. Saenko, M. Hardt, and S. Levine (eds.), Ad-
  vances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 36, pp. 60547–60572. Curran Asso-
  ciates, Inc., 2023. URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper_files/paper/
  2023/file/be7430d22a4dae8516894e32f2fcc6db-Paper-Conference.pdf.
Mattia Rigotti, Omri Barak, Melissa R Warden, Xiao-Jing Wang, Nathaniel D Daw, Earl K Miller,
 and Stefano Fusi. The importance of mixed selectivity in complex cognitive tasks. Nature, 497
 (7451):585–590, 2013. Publisher: Nature Publishing Group UK London.
Pedro Savarese, Itay Evron, Daniel Soudry, and Nathan Srebro. How do infinite width bounded norm
  networks look in function space? In Alina Beygelzimer and Daniel Hsu (eds.), Proceedings of the
  Thirty-Second Conference on Learning Theory, volume 99 of Proceedings of Machine Learning
  Research, pp. 2667–2690. PMLR, June 2019. URL https://proceedings.mlr.press/
  v99/savarese19a.html.


                                               15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Andrew Saxe, Shagun Sodhani, and Sam Jay Lewallen. The Neural Race Reduction: Dynamics
  of Abstraction in Gated Networks. In Proceedings of the 39th International Conference on
 Machine Learning, pp. 19287–19309. PMLR, June 2022. URL https://proceedings.
  mlr.press/v162/saxe22a.html. ISSN: 2640-3498.
Margaret L Schlichting and Alison R Preston. Memory integration: neural mechanisms and implica-
 tions for behavior. Current opinion in behavioral sciences, 1:1–8, 2015. Publisher: Elsevier.
Lukas Schott, Julius Von Kügelgen, Frederik Träuble, Peter Vincent Gehler, Chris Russell, Matthias
  Bethge, Bernhard Schölkopf, Francesco Locatello, and Wieland Brendel. Visual Representation
  Learning Does Not Generalize Strongly Within the Same Domain. In International Confer-
  ence on Learning Representations, 2022. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=
  9RUHPlladgh.
Simon Schug, Seijin Kobayashi, Yassir Akram, Maciej Wołczyk, Alexandra Proca, Johannes von
  Oswald, Razvan Pascanu, João Sacramento, and Angelika Steger. Discovering modular solutions
  that generalize compositionally, March 2024. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/2312.15001.
  arXiv:2312.15001 [cs].
Philipp Schwartenbeck, Alon Baram, Yunzhe Liu, Shirley Mark, Timothy Muller, Raymond Dolan,
  Matthew Botvinick, Zeb Kurth-Nelson, and Timothy Behrens. Generative replay underlies com-
  positional inference in the hippocampal-prefrontal circuit. Cell, October 2023. ISSN 0092-8674.
  URL https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2023.09.004. Place: United States.
Bernhard Schölkopf. The Kernel Trick for Distances. In Advances in Neural Information Processing
  Systems, volume 13. MIT Press, 2000. URL https://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/
  paper/2000/hash/4e87337f366f72daa424dae11df0538c-Abstract.html.
Harshay Shah, Kaustav Tamuly, Aditi Raghunathan, Prateek Jain, and Praneeth Netrapalli. The
  Pitfalls of Simplicity Bias in Neural Networks, October 2020. URL http://arxiv.org/
  abs/2006.07710. arXiv:2006.07710 [cs, stat].
Hannah Sheahan, Fabrice Luyckx, Stephanie Nelli, Clemens Teupe, and Christopher Summer-
  field. Neural state space alignment for magnitude generalization in humans and recurrent net-
  works. Neuron, 109(7):1214–1226.e8, April 2021. ISSN 0896-6273. doi: 10.1016/j.neuron.
  2021.02.004. URL https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
  S0896627321000787.
Daniel Soudry, Elad Hoffer, Mor Shpigel Nacson, Suriya Gunasekar, and Nathan Srebro. The implicit
  bias of gradient descent on separable data. The Journal of Machine Learning Research, 19(1):
  2822–2878, 2018. Publisher: JMLR. org.
Kelsey N Spalding, Margaret L Schlichting, Dagmar Zeithamova, Alison R Preston, Daniel Tranel,
  Melissa C Duff, and David E Warren. Ventromedial prefrontal cortex is necessary for normal
  associative inference and memory integration. Journal of Neuroscience, 38(15):3767–3775, 2018.
  Publisher: Soc Neuroscience.
Aarohi Srivastava, Abhinav Rastogi, Abhishek Rao, Abu Awal Md Shoeb, Abubakar Abid, Adam
  Fisch, Adam R. Brown, Adam Santoro, Aditya Gupta, Adrià Garriga-Alonso, Agnieszka Kluska,
  Aitor Lewkowycz, Akshat Agarwal, Alethea Power, Alex Ray, Alex Warstadt, Alexander W.
  Kocurek, Ali Safaya, Ali Tazarv, Alice Xiang, Alicia Parrish, Allen Nie, Aman Hussain, Amanda
  Askell, Amanda Dsouza, Ambrose Slone, Ameet Rahane, Anantharaman S. Iyer, Anders An-
  dreassen, Andrea Madotto, Andrea Santilli, Andreas Stuhlmüller, Andrew Dai, Andrew La,
  Andrew Lampinen, Andy Zou, Angela Jiang, Angelica Chen, Anh Vuong, Animesh Gupta, Anna
  Gottardi, Antonio Norelli, Anu Venkatesh, Arash Gholamidavoodi, Arfa Tabassum, Arul Menezes,
  Arun Kirubarajan, Asher Mullokandov, Ashish Sabharwal, Austin Herrick, Avia Efrat, Aykut
  Erdem, Ayla Karakaş, B. Ryan Roberts, Bao Sheng Loe, Barret Zoph, Bartłomiej Bojanowski,
  Batuhan Özyurt, Behnam Hedayatnia, Behnam Neyshabur, Benjamin Inden, Benno Stein, Berk
  Ekmekci, Bill Yuchen Lin, Blake Howald, Bryan Orinion, Cameron Diao, Cameron Dour, Cather-
  ine Stinson, Cedrick Argueta, César Ferri Ramírez, Chandan Singh, Charles Rathkopf, Chenlin
  Meng, Chitta Baral, Chiyu Wu, Chris Callison-Burch, Chris Waites, Christian Voigt, Christo-
  pher D. Manning, Christopher Potts, Cindy Ramirez, Clara E. Rivera, Clemencia Siro, Colin Raffel,


                                               16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


  Courtney Ashcraft, Cristina Garbacea, Damien Sileo, Dan Garrette, Dan Hendrycks, Dan Kilman,
  Dan Roth, Daniel Freeman, Daniel Khashabi, Daniel Levy, Daniel Moseguí González, Danielle
  Perszyk, Danny Hernandez, Danqi Chen, Daphne Ippolito, Dar Gilboa, David Dohan, David
  Drakard, David Jurgens, Debajyoti Datta, Deep Ganguli, Denis Emelin, Denis Kleyko, Deniz
  Yuret, Derek Chen, Derek Tam, Dieuwke Hupkes, Diganta Misra, Dilyar Buzan, Dimitri Coelho
  Mollo, Diyi Yang, Dong-Ho Lee, Dylan Schrader, Ekaterina Shutova, Ekin Dogus Cubuk, Elad
  Segal, Eleanor Hagerman, Elizabeth Barnes, Elizabeth Donoway, Ellie Pavlick, Emanuele Rodola,
  Emma Lam, Eric Chu, Eric Tang, Erkut Erdem, Ernie Chang, Ethan A. Chi, Ethan Dyer, Ethan
  Jerzak, Ethan Kim, Eunice Engefu Manyasi, Evgenii Zheltonozhskii, Fanyue Xia, Fatemeh Siar,
  Fernando Martínez-Plumed, Francesca Happé, Francois Chollet, Frieda Rong, Gaurav Mishra,
  Genta Indra Winata, Gerard de Melo, Germán Kruszewski, Giambattista Parascandolo, Giorgio
  Mariani, Gloria Wang, Gonzalo Jaimovitch-López, Gregor Betz, Guy Gur-Ari, Hana Galijasevic,
  Hannah Kim, Hannah Rashkin, Hannaneh Hajishirzi, Harsh Mehta, Hayden Bogar, Henry Shevlin,
  Hinrich Schütze, Hiromu Yakura, Hongming Zhang, Hugh Mee Wong, Ian Ng, Isaac Noble, Jaap
  Jumelet, Jack Geissinger, Jackson Kernion, Jacob Hilton, Jaehoon Lee, Jaime Fernández Fisac,
  James B. Simon, James Koppel, James Zheng, James Zou, Jan Kocoń, Jana Thompson, Janelle
  Wingfield, Jared Kaplan, Jarema Radom, Jascha Sohl-Dickstein, Jason Phang, Jason Wei, Jason
  Yosinski, Jekaterina Novikova, Jelle Bosscher, Jennifer Marsh, Jeremy Kim, Jeroen Taal, Jesse
  Engel, Jesujoba Alabi, Jiacheng Xu, Jiaming Song, Jillian Tang, Joan Waweru, John Burden,
  John Miller, John U. Balis, Jonathan Batchelder, Jonathan Berant, Jörg Frohberg, Jos Rozen,
  Jose Hernandez-Orallo, Joseph Boudeman, Joseph Guerr, Joseph Jones, Joshua B. Tenenbaum,
  Joshua S. Rule, Joyce Chua, Kamil Kanclerz, Karen Livescu, Karl Krauth, Karthik Gopalakr-
  ishnan, Katerina Ignatyeva, Katja Markert, Kaustubh D. Dhole, Kevin Gimpel, Kevin Omondi,
  Kory Mathewson, Kristen Chiafullo, Ksenia Shkaruta, Kumar Shridhar, Kyle McDonell, Kyle
  Richardson, Laria Reynolds, Leo Gao, Li Zhang, Liam Dugan, Lianhui Qin, Lidia Contreras-
  Ochando, Louis-Philippe Morency, Luca Moschella, Lucas Lam, Lucy Noble, Ludwig Schmidt,
  Luheng He, Luis Oliveros Colón, Luke Metz, Lütfi Kerem Şenel, Maarten Bosma, Maarten Sap,
  Maartje ter Hoeve, Maheen Farooqi, Manaal Faruqui, Mantas Mazeika, Marco Baturan, Marco
  Marelli, Marco Maru, Maria Jose Ramírez Quintana, Marie Tolkiehn, Mario Giulianelli, Martha
  Lewis, Martin Potthast, Matthew L. Leavitt, Matthias Hagen, Mátyás Schubert, Medina Orduna
  Baitemirova, Melody Arnaud, Melvin McElrath, Michael A. Yee, Michael Cohen, Michael Gu,
  Michael Ivanitskiy, Michael Starritt, Michael Strube, Michał Sw˛edrowski, Michele Bevilacqua,
  Michihiro Yasunaga, Mihir Kale, Mike Cain, Mimee Xu, Mirac Suzgun, Mitch Walker, Mo Tiwari,
  Mohit Bansal, Moin Aminnaseri, Mor Geva, Mozhdeh Gheini, Mukund Varma T, Nanyun Peng,
  Nathan A. Chi, Nayeon Lee, Neta Gur-Ari Krakover, Nicholas Cameron, Nicholas Roberts, Nick
  Doiron, Nicole Martinez, Nikita Nangia, Niklas Deckers, Niklas Muennighoff, Nitish Shirish
  Keskar, Niveditha S. Iyer, Noah Constant, Noah Fiedel, Nuan Wen, Oliver Zhang, Omar Agha,
  Omar Elbaghdadi, Omer Levy, Owain Evans, Pablo Antonio Moreno Casares, Parth Doshi, Pascale
  Fung, Paul Pu Liang, Paul Vicol, Pegah Alipoormolabashi, Peiyuan Liao, Percy Liang, Peter Chang,
  Peter Eckersley, Phu Mon Htut, Pinyu Hwang, Piotr Miłkowski, Piyush Patil, Pouya Pezeshkpour,
  Priti Oli, Qiaozhu Mei, Qing Lyu, Qinlang Chen, Rabin Banjade, Rachel Etta Rudolph, Raefer
  Gabriel, Rahel Habacker, Ramon Risco, Raphaël Millière, Rhythm Garg, Richard Barnes, Rif A.
  Saurous, Riku Arakawa, Robbe Raymaekers, Robert Frank, Rohan Sikand, Roman Novak, Roman
  Sitelew, Ronan LeBras, Rosanne Liu, Rowan Jacobs, Rui Zhang, Ruslan Salakhutdinov, Ryan
  Chi, Ryan Lee, Ryan Stovall, Ryan Teehan, Rylan Yang, Sahib Singh, Saif M. Mohammad, Sa-
  jant Anand, Sam Dillavou, Sam Shleifer, Sam Wiseman, Samuel Gruetter, Samuel R. Bowman,
  Samuel S. Schoenholz, Sanghyun Han, Sanjeev Kwatra, Sarah A. Rous, Sarik Ghazarian, Sayan
  Ghosh, Sean Casey, Sebastian Bischoff, Sebastian Gehrmann, Sebastian Schuster, Sepideh Sadeghi,
  Shadi Hamdan, Sharon Zhou, Shashank Srivastava, Sherry Shi, Shikhar Singh, Shima Asaadi,
  Shixiang Shane Gu, Shubh Pachchigar, Shubham Toshniwal, Shyam Upadhyay, Shyamolima,
  Debnath, Siamak Shakeri, Simon Thormeyer, Simone Melzi, Siva Reddy, Sneha Priscilla Makini,
  Soo-Hwan Lee, Spencer Torene, Sriharsha Hatwar, Stanislas Dehaene, Stefan Divic, Stefano
  Ermon, Stella Biderman, Stephanie Lin, Stephen Prasad, Steven T. Piantadosi, Stuart M. Shieber,
  Summer Misherghi, Svetlana Kiritchenko, Swaroop Mishra, Tal Linzen, Tal Schuster, Tao Li,
  Tao Yu, Tariq Ali, Tatsu Hashimoto, Te-Lin Wu, Théo Desbordes, Theodore Rothschild, Thomas
  Phan, Tianle Wang, Tiberius Nkinyili, Timo Schick, Timofei Kornev, Titus Tunduny, Tobias Ger-
  stenberg, Trenton Chang, Trishala Neeraj, Tushar Khot, Tyler Shultz, Uri Shaham, Vedant Misra,
  Vera Demberg, Victoria Nyamai, Vikas Raunak, Vinay Ramasesh, Vinay Uday Prabhu, Vishakh
  Padmakumar, Vivek Srikumar, William Fedus, William Saunders, William Zhang, Wout Vossen,


                                               17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


  Xiang Ren, Xiaoyu Tong, Xinran Zhao, Xinyi Wu, Xudong Shen, Yadollah Yaghoobzadeh, Yair
  Lakretz, Yangqiu Song, Yasaman Bahri, Yejin Choi, Yichi Yang, Yiding Hao, Yifu Chen, Yonatan
  Belinkov, Yu Hou, Yufang Hou, Yuntao Bai, Zachary Seid, Zhuoye Zhao, Zijian Wang, Zijie J.
  Wang, Zirui Wang, and Ziyi Wu. Beyond the Imitation Game: Quantifying and extrapolating the
  capabilities of language models, June 2023. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/2206.04615.
  arXiv:2206.04615 [cs, stat].

Jordan A. Taylor and Richard B. Ivry. Context-dependent generalization. Frontiers in Human Neuro-
  science, 7, May 2013. ISSN 1662-5161. doi: 10.3389/fnhum.2013.00171. URL https://www.
  frontiersin.org/articles/10.3389/fnhum.2013.00171. Publisher: Frontiers.

Frederik Träuble, Elliot Creager, Niki Kilbertus, Francesco Locatello, Andrea Dittadi, Anirudh
  Goyal, Bernhard Schölkopf, and Stefan Bauer. On Disentangled Representations Learned from
  Correlated Data. In Proceedings of the 38th International Conference on Machine Learning,
  pp. 10401–10412. PMLR, July 2021. URL https://proceedings.mlr.press/v139/
  trauble21a.html. ISSN: 2640-3498.

Russell Tsuchida, Farbod Roosta-Khorasani, and Marcus Gallagher. Invariance of Weight Dis-
  tributions in Rectified MLPs, May 2018. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/1711.09090.
  arXiv:1711.09090 [cs, stat].

Russell Tsuchida, Fred Roosta, and Marcus Gallagher. Richer priors for infinitely wide
  multi-layer perceptrons, November 2019. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/1911.12927.
  arXiv:1911.12927 [cs, stat].

Sjoerd van Steenkiste, Francesco Locatello, Jürgen Schmidhuber, and Olivier Bachem.
  Are Disentangled Representations Helpful for Abstract Visual Reasoning?     In Ad-
  vances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 32. Curran Associates, Inc.,
  2019.   URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper_files/paper/2019/
  hash/bc3c4a6331a8a9950945a1aa8c95ab8a-Abstract.html.

Gal Vardi and Ohad Shamir. Implicit Regularization in ReLU Networks with the Square Loss. In
  Proceedings of Thirty Fourth Conference on Learning Theory, pp. 4224–4258. PMLR, July 2021.
  URL https://proceedings.mlr.press/v134/vardi21b.html. ISSN: 2640-3498.

Colin G. West. Advances in apparent conceptual physics reasoning in GPT-4, March 2023. URL
  https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2023arXiv230317012W. Publication Ti-
  tle: arXiv e-prints ADS Bibcode: 2023arXiv230317012W.

James C. R. Whittington, Will Dorrell, Surya Ganguli, and Timothy Behrens. Disentanglement
  with Biological Constraints: A Theory of Functional Cell Types. In The Eleventh International
  Conference on Learning Representations, 2023. URL https://openreview.net/forum?
  id=9Z_GfhZnGH.

Thaddäus Wiedemer, Jack Brady, Alexander Panfilov, Attila Juhos, Matthias Bethge, and Wieland
  Brendel. Provable Compositional Generalization for Object-Centric Learning. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2310.05327, 2023a.

Thaddäus Wiedemer, Prasanna Mayilvahanan, Matthias Bethge, and Wieland Bren-
  del.    Compositional Generalization from First Principles. Advances in Neu-
  ral Information Processing Systems, 36:6941–6960, December 2023b.       URL
  https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/
  15f6a10899f557ce53fe39939af6f930-Abstract-Conference.html.

Bin Wu, Jinyuan Fang, Xiangxiang Zeng, Shangsong Liang, and Qiang Zhang. Adaptive compo-
  sitional continual meta-learning. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 37358–
  37378. PMLR, 2023.

Zhiwei Xu, Yutong Wang, Spencer Frei, Gal Vardi, and Wei Hu. Benign Overfitting and Grokking
  in ReLU Networks for XOR Cluster Data, October 2023. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/
  2310.02541. arXiv:2310.02541 [cs, stat].


                                               18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Chiyuan Zhang, Samy Bengio, Moritz Hardt, Michael C. Mozer, and Yoram Singer. Identity Crisis:
  Memorization and Generalization under Extreme Overparameterization, January 2020. URL
  http://arxiv.org/abs/1902.04698. arXiv:1902.04698 [cs, stat].
Chiyuan Zhang, Samy Bengio, Moritz Hardt, Benjamin Recht, and Oriol Vinyals. Understanding deep
  learning (still) requires rethinking generalization. Communications of the ACM, 64(3):107–115,
  2021. Publisher: ACM New York, NY, USA.


                                               19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A     M ATHEMATICAL ANALYSIS
A.1    G ENERALIZED COMPOSITIONALLY STRUCTURED REPRESENTATIONS

In the main text, we considered “compositionally structured” representations. This is the class
of representations ϕ(z) whose kernel Kϕ (z, z ′ ) = ϕ(z)T ϕ(z ′ ) only depends on the number of
components z and z ′ have in common. Here we define a slightly more general class of representations
whose kernel depends on the identity of the components they have in common, i.e.
                                  O(z, z ′ ) := {c = 1, . . . , C|zc = zc′ }.                      (4)
Thus, pairs of representations overlapping in the first component may have a different similarity
than pairs of representations overlapping in the second component, but any pair of representations
overlapping in the first component still need to have the same similarity. This case captures, for
example, cases where one feature is more salient than another and therefore influences the representa-
tional similarity more strongly, or where conjunctions between certain components are more saliently
represented than conjunctions between other components. For example, perhaps our input consists of
two objects with different shapes and colors. In that case, we may wish to represent the conjunction
between shape and color of the first object more strongly than the conjunction between the shape of
the first object and the color of the second.
Note that we consider the constrained definition of compositionally structured representations in the
main text purely for didactical purposes. In particular, our observations in Appendices A.3 and A.4
extend to all generalized compositionally structured representations.

A.2    W HY ARE WE CONSIDERING COMPOSITIONALLY STRUCTURED REPRESENTATIONS ?

So far, we have motivated the concept of compositionally structured representations in terms of
the fact that disentangled representations as well as many nonlinear transforms of disentangled
representations are compositionally structured. Here we discuss a more conceptual motivation for
them: compositionally structured representations guarantee that the only basis for generalization is
the compositional nature of the data. This is because we ensure that the model has no knowledge
about certain components that may be more similar to each other. Otherwise, the component-wise
similarity could serve as a basis for generalization. For example, in transitive equivalence (Fig. 2d), if
items that are in the same equivalence class are represented as more similar to each other, that would
serve as a basis for generalization on the task that is not compositional in nature. For this reason, we
are particularly interested in compositionally structured representations, as they ensure that kernel
models are only able to generalize compositionally.
Characterizing compositional generalization in non-compositionally structured representations re-
quires us to meaningfully distinguish between compositional and non-compositional aspects of
their generalization. We present an example of such an analysis in Appendix A.5, proving that if
the non-compositional representational components are random, the models still generalize in a
conjunction-wise additive manner in expectation.

A.3    N ONLINEAR TRANSFORMATIONS AND COMPOSITIONAL STRUCTURE

A broad range of transforms ϕ induces a kernel Kϕ (z, z ′ ) = ϕ(z)T ϕ(z ′ ) that only depends on
the input similarity K(z, z ′ ) = z T z ′ . In particular (as noted in the main text), this condition is
satisfied by the hidden layers and neural tangent kernel of randomly initialized neural networks (in
the infinite-width limit) (Han et al., 2022):
Definition A.1. Given an input z ∈ Rd , a network depth L ≥ 2, and a set of widths H1 , . . . , HL ∈ N,
we define a neural network by recursively defining the operation ϕ(l) of the lth layer as

    a(0) := z, a(l) := ϕ(l) (a(l−1) ) := σ √1H W (l) a(l−1) + b(l) , W (l) ∈ RHl ×Hl−1 (5)
                                                  l

          (l)     (l)
where W and b are i.i.d. sampled from a random distribution and σ : R → R is a nonlinearity.
The complete transform is then given by ϕ := ϕ(L) ◦ · · · ◦ ϕ(1) .
The infinite-width limit is characterized by H1 , . . . , HL−1 → ∞ (the order of these limits does not
matter). This setup includes, in particular, the random feature model investigated by Abbe et al.
(2023).


                                                      20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Further, the condition is met by most commonly used kernel functions including any radial basis
function that depends on the Euclidean ℓ2 -norm (e.g. the Gaussian kernel). Any nonlinear transform
that meets this condition also conserves compositional structure, i.e. if x is compositionally structured
then so is ϕ(x). This allows us to derive computational restrictions on this broad range of models.

A.4    P ROOF OF T HEOREM 4.2

Theorem 4.2. For any kernel modelQf with a compositionally structured representation, we can
find conjunction-wise functions fJ : c∈J Zc → R, where J ⊆ {1, . . . , C}, such that for any input
x ∈ Rd representing components z ∈ Z, the model response is given by
                                 P
                        f (x) = J∈Conj(z|Z train ) fJ (zJ ), zJ := (zc )c∈J .                  (2)

Proof. Because the kernel K is compositionally structured, its similarity K(z, z ′ ) only depends on
the overlap O(z, z ′ ) ⊆ {1, . . . , C} (see definition in Eq. (4)). We denote the similarity for inputs
overlapping in S ⊆ {1, . . . , C} by κS and define set of training items overlapping with z ∈ Z test in
S as
                              Z train (z, J) := z tr ∈ Z train |∀c∈J zc = zctr .

                                                                                                     (6)
The key idea is to decompose Z train into these different overlaps in order to separate the sum into its
components. However, by our definition, the datasets Z train (z, J) are not disjoint. Indeed, S ⊆ S ′
implies Z train (z, J) ⊆ Z train (z, J ′ ) and in particular Z train (z, ∅) = Z train . To adjust for this, we define
δJ as the similarity added by κS to the similarity between conjunctions with one component fewer,
recursively defining                                                  X
                                         δ∅ = κ∅ , δJ = κJ −               δJ ′ .                                 (7)
                                                                                  J ′ ⊊J

We then decompose
                                         X                                  X                       X
                       f (z) =                     aztr K(z, z tr ) =                    δS                         aztr .    (8)
                                   z tr ∈Z train                        J⊆{1,...,C}           z tr ∈Z train (z,J)

This equality obtains because for each z ∈ Z, z tr ∈ Z train ,
                    X                              X
                             δJ = δO(z,ztr ) +              δJ ′ = κO(z,ztr ) = K(z, z tr ),                                  (9)
                 J:z tr ∈Z train (z,J)                          J ′ ⊊O(z,z tr )

                                                / Conj(z|Z train ), Z train (z, J) = ∅. Defining
which is true by definition. We note that for J ∈
                                                    X
                                    fJ (z) := δJ             aztr ,                                                          (10)
                                                                   z tr ∈Z train (z,J)

proves the proposition.

A.5    N ON - COMPOSITIONALLY STRUCTURED REPRESENTATIONS

So far, we have considered representations that are compositionally structured. In practice, however,
representations will almost never be exactly compositionally structured. Even when there is no
specific similarity structure within components, there will be random noise in the representations.
Here we characterize one such scenario, demonstrating that in expectation, these representations still
yield conjunction-wise additive computations.
Proposition A.2. Consider an input with C components. We consider a representation that represents
each component and conjunction of components zJ , J ⊆ {1, . . . , C} by a random vector xJ [zJ ] ∈
Rd , xJ ∼ N (0, σk2 ), σk2 P> 0, where k = |J|. The representation itself is given by the sum of
all these vectors: x =       J⊆{1,...,C} xJ [zJ ]. All xJ [zJ ] are sampled independently from each
other. This means that the similarity between different components as well as the entanglement
of different components varies randomly. As a result, the kernel regression estimator f (z) is not
conjunction-wise additive. However, its expectation, E[f (z)], is conjunction-wise additive, indicating
that all deviations from conjunction-wise additivity arise from random noise and cannot be used for
systematic generalization.


                                                                   21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Proof. We consider the training representation X = (x[zJ ])z∈Ltrain , X ∈ RNtrain ×d and the test
representation X̃ = (x[zJ ])z∈Ltest , X̃ ∈ RNtest ×d . This gives rise to the training kernel K = XX T
and the train-test kernel, K̃ = X̃X T . The dual coefficients are given by a = K −1 y. We now
consider a test set input x̃ = x̃[z̃] representing the underlying components z̃. Denoting the similarity
to the training set by k(x̃, X) = X x̃ ∈ RNtrain , the test set behavior is given by
                                 X                                         X
  f (x̃) = aT k(x̃, X) =                         aT XxJ [zJ ] +                           aT XxJ [zJ ] =: f1 (x̃) + f2 (x̃),
                           J∈Conj(z̃|Z train )                     J ∈Conj(z̃|Z
                                                                     /          train )

                                                                                                          (11)
where we’ve simply split up the P   sum into the conjunction-wise additive part and the remainder.
                                                          T
Clearly, this remainder, f2 (x̃) := J ∈Conj(z̃|Z
                                        /        train ) a XxJ [zJ ], will generally not be zero. However,

we will now prove that E[f2 (x̃)] = 0. As f1 (x̃) is conjunction-wise additive, this will prove the
proposition. To do so, we note that we can assume that we have first sampled all Gaussian vectors
relevant for the training set (we will denote this set of random variables by X train ) and subsequently
sample the set of Gaussian vectors only relevant for the test trial, i.e. (x̃J )J ∈Conj(z̃|Z
                                                                                      /       train ) (we will

denote this set of random variables by X test ). Then,
                                                               X
 E[f2 (x̃)] = EX train EX test f2 (x̃)|X train =                               EX train aT XEZ test xJ [z̃J ]|Z train . (12)


                                                        J ∈Conj(z̃|Z
                                                          /          train )



This is zero, as EX test [xJ [zJ ]] = EX test xJ [zJ ]|X train = 0, which follows from the fact that xJ [zJ ]
      / Conj(z̃|Z train ) is sampled independently from X train .
for J ∈


To test our theory empirically, we sample a range of Gaussian representations and train them on
symbolic addition, transitive equivalence, and context dependence. For symbolic addition and
transitive equivalence, we consider representations with expected S(1; 2) ∈ [0.1, 1] using ten equally
spaced values (i.e. 0.1, 0.2, . . . ). For context dependence, we consider two types of representation:
rep. 1, where σ1 = 1, σ2 = 0.5, σ3 = 0.1, (i.e. single components are most saliently represented),
and rep. 2, where σ1 = 0.5, σ2 = 1, σ3 = 0.1 (i.e. conjunctions of two components are most
saliently represented). We consider representations with d = 100 and sample 100 instances of each
representations. We then fit each representation to these three tasks.
We first estimate these models’ additivity on symbolic addition and context dependence. We find that
while many model instance are highly additive, some can be highly non-additive (Fig. 6a). However,
when averaging across the model behavior 100 randomly sampled representations, this average
behavior is perfectly described by a conjunction-wise additive function. This empirically confirms
our proposition.
Our proposition implies that these non-compositionally structured representations can still only
systematically generalize on conjunction-wise additive tasks. To confirm this insight, we plotted the
distribution of accuracies on the transitive equivalence problem across all random model instances.
We found that while the models consistently learned the training set, they were indeed unable to
generalize to the test set (Fig. 6b).
Finally, we investigated whether our analysis in Section 5 predicted the behavior of randomly sampled
representations. Importantly, we have no theoretical guarantees for this scenario. Interestingly,
however, the model behaviors were still well predicted by our theory. Specifically, we estimated
the slopes that best described the compositional generalization behavior on symbolic addition for
different training sets (as in Fig. 5). We found that across different model instances, these slopes were
highly varied (Fig. 6c). However, the average slope across all random samples was well predicted by
our analytical theory.
Similarly, our theoretical insights on context dependence provided meaningful insight into the
generalization behavior of these randomly sampled models. Specifically, on CD-3, the model more
saliently representing the single components failed to generalize, whereas the model more saliently
representing conjunctions of two components generalized above chance. In contrast, on CD-2, both
models generalized above chance. This indicates that our insights on how prevalent shortcut biases
are for different training datasets extends to randomly sampled representations.


                                                             22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


     a                                                        b
                                                                          200

                                                 average                  150
                                                 per sample
       Count


                                                                  Count
                                                                          100                              Train
                                                                                                           Test
                                                 Addition
                                                 CD                       50

                                                                           0
                               0.5         1.0                                  0.00 0.25 0.50 0.75 1.00
                              Additivity                                               Accuracy
     c                                                        d
                                                                                   CD−3        CD−2
                1.00                                                      80
                0.75
                                                                          60
                                                  Size
                                                                  Count
       Slope


                0.50                                                                                       Rep. 1
                                                     1                    40                               Rep. 2
                0.25                                 2
                                                                          20
                0.00

               −0.25                                                       0
                       0.0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5                                  0.0 0.5 1.0 0.0 0.5 1.0
                               S(1;2)                                                  Accuracy


Figure 6: Analysis of randomly sampled representations as considered in Proposition A.2. In all
cases we sample 100-dimensional representations. For addition, we consider representations with
weights that explore S(1; 2) ∈ [0.1, 1] and for context dependence, we consider representations
where (σ1 , σ2 , σ3 ) ∈ {(0.5, 1, 0.1), (1, 0.5, 0.1)}, where σk indicates the standard deviation of the
Gaussian vector representing conjunctions of k components. a, We compare the additivity of
individual models to the additivity of the model behavior averaged across 100 randomly sampled
representations. While individual models may be severely non-additive, their average behavior is
consistently highly additive, empirically confirming our proposition. b, As a result, when these
models are trained on transitive equivalence, they also systematically exhibit chance performance,
as they are still, on average, constrained to be conjunction-wise additive. c, We then estimated the
slope of the model trained on symbolic addition for each random instance of a representation against
corresponding representation’s S(1; 2). The individual slope estimates are depicted by the small
translucent dots, whereas the average across all random instances is depicted by the larger points.
Finally, our theoretical predictions in the exactly compositionally structured case are depicted by the
lines. The average model behaviors are well described by our theory. d, We plot the distribution of
generalization accuracies on context dependence across different model seeds, the two considered
representations, and for CD-3 and CD-2. On CD-3, the representation with a higher salience for
individual components (rep. 1, (σ1 , σ2 , σ3 ) = (0.5, 1, 0.1) performs systematically below chance,
whereas the representation with a higher salience for conjunctions of two components (rep. 2,
(σ1 , σ2 , σ3 ) = (1, 0.5, 0.1)) generalizes above chance. In contrast, on CD-2, both representation
exhibit better-than-chance-accuracy.


                                                         23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


B     R EPRESENTATIONAL SALIENCE : A METRIC FOR COMPOSITIONALLY
      STRUCTURED REPRESENTATIONS

B.1   D EFINITION

Below we formally define representational salience. To do so, we denote the similarity between
two trials z, z ′ by Sim(O(z, z ′ )) := K(z, z ′ ). Note that this is well-defined for compositionally
structured representations, as K(z, z ′ ) is identical for all pairs of trials with the same O(z, z ′ ). We
then define:
Definition B.1. For a generalized compositionally structured representation with kernel K and a
conjunction J ⊆ {1, . . . , C}, we recursively define
                                                 P            ′                      S(J)
        S(∅) := K(∅),      S(J) := Sim(J) −         J ′ ⊊J S(J ),   S(J) = P                         .   (13)
                                                                               ∅̸=J⊆{1,...,C} S(J)



When emphasizing the total number of components, we denote S(J; C) = S(J). Further, for
compositionally structured representation, the similarity only depends on the total number of overlaps
|J|. We therefore write S(k; C) = S(J), where k := |J|.

To illustrate how salience would be computed in practice, we consider an example representation
X ∈ Rn×d . This representation gives rise to a kernel K = XX T ∈ Rn×n . We can also understand
the trial-by-trial similarity in terms of the components it is overlapping in — denoting the set of all
subsets of {1, . . . , C} by J , we denote this by O ∈ J n×n . In particular, Oii = {1, . . . , C}. For
example, if data points 1 and 2 overlap in the third component, O12 = {3}. Sim(J) is then defined as
the entries Kij where Oij = J. Note that in a compositionally structured representation, whenever
Oij = J, Kij takes on the same value, but more generally, we can define Sim(J) by taking the
average similarity. We can then define the unnormalized salience S by recursively computing it from
Sim(J) using Eq. (13). We then normalize the salience to get our final estimate.

B.2   W HY IS REPRESENTATIONAL SALIENCE A USEFUL METRIC ?

Intuitively, the representational salience captures the unique contribution of a population representing
a particular conjunction J (as in our informal definition in the main text). As we noted in the main
text, distinguishing these unique contributions from the similarities directly would be more difficult.
For example, changes in the similarity between inputs having two components in common could arise
from changes in how saliently single components or conjunctions of two components are represented.
To distinguish between these cases, we’d have to additionally look at the similarity between inputs
having a single component in common. Our definition of representational salience avoids this issue;
we therefore believe that this perspective could more broadly be useful for analyzing representations
of compositional data.

B.3   W HY DOES REPRESENTATIONAL SALIENCE LEAVE OUT MAGNITUDE AND BASELINE
      ACTIVITY ?

Notably, many learning models are largely invariant to a constant rescaling of their representation.
For limit behavior (e.g. in the limit of infinite training in gradient descent), this scale has no impact.
We see this, for instance, in Proposition 5.1, where the scaling turns out to be entirely irrelevant. For
regularized models, on the other hand, the scale of the representation is confounded with the strength
of the regularization and so we suggest that it is again best seen as separate from the representational
geometry.
The baseline activity, on the other hand, may determine how easily an intercept is learned. However,
many linear readout models (e.g. support vector machines) do not regularize their intercept, again
rendering this parameter entirely irrelevant. Notably, in the case of gradient descent, the magnitude
of the baseline activity does influence how easily an intercept is learned. However, the impact of this
is often negligible; for example, in Proposition 5.1, we again find that the baseline activity is entirely
irrelevant.


                                                    24
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


 a                                                                                       b
                      Step           Leaky     Rect.
                             ReLU                    Gaussian
                    function          relu     quad.                                                      Overlap 1
             1.00
                                                                                                    0.2
             0.75                                                                                   0.1
             0.50                                                                                   0.0


                                                              1
             0.25                                                                                         Overlap 2
             0.00
             1.00                                                                                   0.1
                                                                        Salience                                        Nonlinearity
                                                                        of first comp.
  Salience


                                                                                         Salience
             0.75                                                                                   0.0
                                                                           0.5                                            Step fun.
             0.50                                                                                                         ReLU


                                                              2
                                                                           0.4                            Overlap 3       Leaky ReLU
             0.25                                                          0.3                                            Rect. quad.
                                                                           0.2                      0.2                   Gaussian
             0.00                                                          0.1                      0.1
             1.00                                                                                   0.0
             0.75
                                                                                                          Overlap 4



                                                              12
             0.50                                                                                   1.0
             0.25                                                                                   0.5
             0.00                                                                                   0.0
                    0 10 20 0 10 20 0 10 20 0 10 20 0 10 20                                               0   10   20
                                    # Layers                                                              # Layers


Figure 7: Extended analysis of overlap salience in random neural networks. a, Salience of the
first component (1), the second component (2), and their conjunction (12), where we vary the two
components’ saliences in the input. b, Salience for inputs with four components.



B.4           E XTENDED REPRESENTATIONAL ANALYSIS

We computed the saliences by iteratively computing the representational similarities using the kernels
derived in prior work (Cho & Saul, 2009; Tsuchida et al., 2018; 2019; Han et al., 2022). In Fig. 7b,
we plot the different saliences for an input with four components. Now the salience of overlap 2
and 3 both first increase and then decrease and, just like for inputs with three components (Fig. 3), a
Gaussian and rectified quadratic nonlinearity yields a particularly high salience for these intermediate
conjunctions. Notably, they appear to be trading off the salience of these conjunctions differently: the
rectified quadratic nonlinearity more strongly emphasizes overlaps of three whereas the Gaussian
nonlinearity more strongly emphasizes overlaps of two. This highlights that for larger numbers of
components, the dependence of generalization behavior on specific architectural choices will likely
be even stronger.
Finally, we consider an example of a generalized compositionally structured representation. Here
we assume that the different input components have different magnitudes. In particular, we consider
a disentangled representation whose first component has a salience between s ∈ [0.1, 0.5] and
whose second component accordingly has a salience 1 − s (Fig. 7a). As the random weight neural
network becomes deeper, the more salient component (in this case component 2) increasingly
dominates the representation. While the salience of the full conjunction still eventually converges
to one for most nonlinearities, it takes longer to do so for a less balanced input representation.
Further, for a Gaussian nonlinearity, an imbalanced representation actually decreases the limit
salience the representation appears to be converging to for the full conjunction. This highlights
that for disentangled representations that do not represent all components with equal magnitude,
compositional generalization behavior may vary strongly with different neural network architectures.


B.5           S ALIENCE IN VERY DEEP R E LU NETWORKS

Proposition B.2. For a random neural network with a (leaky) ReLU nonlinearity, as L → ∞,
S(k; C) → 0 for k < C and S(C; C) → 1.


                                                                   25
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Proof. Note that the proof is a minor extension of Lemma S1.3 in Lippl et al. (2024). We present it
here in a self-contained manner. We consider a nonlinearity
                             σ(u) := A min(u, 0) + max(u, 0),                     A ∈ [0, 1).                       (14)
By prior work (Cho & Saul, 2009; Tsuchida et al., 2018; 2019; Han et al., 2022),
         h                             i
     Ew ϕ(wT h(l) (z))ϕ(wT h(l) (z ′ )) = σ 2 ∥h(l) (z)∥2 ∥h(l) (z ′ )∥2 k ĥ(l) (z)T ĥ(l) (z ′ ) ,                (15)

where
                                 (1 − A)2  p
                       k(u) =                1 − u2 + (π − cos−1 (u))u + Au,                                        (16)
                                    2π
σ 2 is the variance of the sampled weights, and ĥ = h/∥ĥ∥2 .
This means that for any two inputs that have a certain similarity u, their similarity in the L-th layer is
given by k (L) (u), where k (L) denotes the L-times application of k. Let distinct trials in the input have
a similarity of κd and let identical trials have a similarity of κi . Any set of trials with overlapping
components will have a similarity κ, κd < κ < κi . We denote their corresponding similarity in the
                 (L)  (L)
L-th layer by κi , κd , κ(L) . Our goal is now to show that
                                                                                  (L)
                                                                 κ(L) − κd
                                lim s(L) = 0,          s(L) :=     (L)            (L)
                                                                                        = 0.                        (17)
                                L→∞                              κi         − κd
This implies directly that the salience of all partial conjunctions converges to zero, which in turn
implies that the salience of the full conjunction converges to one.
                    (L+1)           (L)     (L) 1+A2
(15) implies that κi         = σ 2 κi k(1) = σ 2 κi2 . Notably, all inputsq
                                                                          have the same magnitude
                                                                             (L)
and therefore have the same magnitude through all layers; this is given by κi . We can therefore
denote
                                                    (L)        (L)
                                      κ(L+1) = σ 2 κi k κ(L) /κi     .                                              (18)
Thus,
                                                          (L)               (L)        (L)
                                               k(κ(L) /κi ) − k(κd /κi )
                                   s(L+1) =                        (L)          (L)
                                                                                                                    (19)
                                                   k(1) − k(κd /κi )
                                                                       (L)       (L)         (L)    (L)
We thus define new normalized variables κ̂(L) := κ(L) /κi , κ̂d                         := κd /κi , i.e.
                                                                      (L)
                                                        κ̂(L) − κ̂d
                                              s(L) =             (L)
                                                                            ,                                       (20)
                                                         1 − κ̂d
and therefore
                                                         (L)                    (L)
                                          κ̂(L) = (1 − κ̂d )s(L) + κ̂d .                                            (21)
                                               (L+1)            (L)
Note that κ̂(L+1) = k(κ̂(L) )/k(1) and κ̂d             = k ( κ̂d )/k(1). We thus define
                             k(u)      ρ p                                                       (1 − A)2
                  k̃(u) :=        = u + ( 1 − u2 − cos−1 (u)u),                           ρ :=            .         (22)
                             k(1)      π                                                         (1 + A)2
Note that

              ′          ρ             u                     u                                     ρ
            k̃ (u) = 1 +           −√      − cos−1 (u) + √                                =1−        cos−1 (u).     (23)
                         π            1−u2                 1 − u2                                  π
                                                                                                                  (L)
Note that k(1) = 1 and as for all 0 ≤ u < 1, k̃ ′ (u) < 1, this is the only fixed point and κ̂(L) , κ̂d →
∞. We can therefore define

                                                  (L)           (L)       (L)
                                     k̃ (1 − κ̂d )s(L) + κ̂d          − κ̂d
                            (L+1)
                          s        =                       (L)
                                                                              .                        (24)
                                                      1 − κd

                                                         26
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                                           (L)
We now determine the fixed mapping to this mapping assuming that κ̂d             is fixed at some value d,
i.e.:
                                            k̃((1 − d)s + d) − k̃(d)
                                 f (s, d) =                          .                               (25)
                                                    1 − k̃(d)
s = 0 is a fixed point. Further,
           ∂f (s, d)   (1 − d)k̃ ′ ((1 − d)s + d)   (1 − d)(1 − πρ cos−1 ((1 − d)s + d)
                     =                            =              √                      .            (26)
              ∂s              1 − k̃(d)              1 − d − πρ ( 1 − d2 − cos−1 (d)d)
We now prove that this for 0 < s ≤ 21 , this derivative is smaller than 1. Specifically,
                           (1 − d)(1 − πρ cos−1 ((1 − d)s + d) =
                                       p                                                             (27)
                           1 − d − πρ ( 1 − d2 − cos−1 (d)d) + πρ r(s, d),
where the residual is given by
                                                               p
                  r(s, d) := (d − 1) cos−1 ((1 − d)s + d) +        1 − d2 − d cos−1 d.               (28)
We now need to prove that r(s, d) < 0. Note that r(s, d) is monotonically increasing in s and
therefore
                                                             p
          r(s, d) ≤ r( 21 , d) = (d − 1) cos−1 ( 21 + 12 d) + 1 − d2 − d cos−1 d < 0,     (29)
where we infer the latter inequality by visual inspection of the plot of this function.

C     DS PRITES REPRESENTATIONS
To investigate whether our theory can describe compositional generalization in practically used
disentangled models, we considered six different model architectures considered in Locatello et al.
(2019) and trained on the DSprites dataset, an important benchmark for disentangled representation
learning. This paper considers fifty random seeds for each model and further considers six different
possible hyperparameters per architectures, resulting in a total of 1,800 models. In our analysis, we
only analyze differences between architectures, pooling across all hyperparameter choices.

C.1   TASK SETUP

DSprites consists of small black-and-white shapes and has five different underlying components:
shape (three categories: hearts, ovals, and squares), size, x-position, y-position, and rotation. We
consistently consider the largest possible size and hold the rotation fixed at zero. While x- and
y-position can each take on 32 possible values, we only consider four different categories for each.
Importantly, this is still a highly non-compositionally structured representation: not only do the
disentangled representation learning methods often fail to discover the underlying factors of variation;
the model also likely represents x- and y-positions that are closer to each other, as more similar,
violating our compositionally structured assumption. These representations therefore present a
particularly challenging test of our framework.
For symbolic addition and transitive equivalence, we consider x- and y-position as the two components.
For each task instance, we randomly determine which position takes on which component’s role.
In total, we consider 50 randomly sampled task instance for each of the 1,800 models. For context
dependence, we subsample two shapes and assume that these shapes provide the context cue. We then
consider x- and y-position as feature 1 and feature 2. While the context dependence considered in the
main text had six possible feature values for each feature, we now only consider four. As a result,
we only consider two different datasets: CD-2, which leaves out all trials where feature 1 indicates
category 2 and feature 2 indicates category 1; and CD-1 which only leaves out one conjunction of
features. Put differently, on a given trial, the task could for example look as follows: if we see a heart
shape, the model should output whether this object is in a certain x-position; if we see a square shape,
the model should output whether this object is in a certain y-position. While the model has seen all x-
and y-positions individually, it has not seen each combination of x- and y-positions.
Finally, we consider either a direct linear readout from the disentangled representation or an initial
transformation by a one-hidden-layer ReLU neural network with random weights.


                                                   27
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


 a
                                          annealed_vae                        beta_tc_vae                                                  beta_vae


                                                                                                                                                                                    Addition
     Count


                                                                                                                                                                                    Addition (ReLU)
                                               dip_vae_i                      dip_vae_ii                                                   factor_vae                               CD
                                                                                                                                                                                    CD (ReLU)


                                     0                             1    0                                       1             0                                              1
                                                                              Additivity
 b                                                                                   c
                            1000
                                                                                                         0.9


                                                                                       Variance ratio
                            750                                                                          0.8
     Count


                            500                                                Train                     0.7
                                                                               Test
                                                                                                         0.6
                            250
                                                                                                         0.5
                               0
                                   0.4     0.6              0.8         1.0
                                                                                                           an


                                                                                                                         be


                                                                                                                                                                   fa
                                                                                                                                                       di
                                                                                                                                           di
                                                                                                                                   be
                                                                                                               ne


                                                                                                                          ta


                                                                                                                                                                      ct
                                                                                                                                                       p_
                                                                                                                                               p_
                                                                                                                                    ta
                                                                                                                al


                                                                                                                              _t


                                                                                                                                                                         o
                                                                                                                                                            va
                                                                                                                                                va


                                                                                                                                                                        r_
                                                                                                                    ed


                                                                                                                                        _v
                                                                                                                     c_


                                                                                                                                                               e


                                                                                                                                                                             va
                                                                                                                                                   e
                                                                                                                                          ae
                                                                                                                       _v


                                                                                                                        va


                                                                                                                                                              _i
                                                                                                                                                    _i


                                                                                                                                                                                e
                                                                                                                          ae


                                                                                                                                                                   i
                                                                                                                           e


                                                 Accuracy                                                                                Model
 d                                                                                     e
                                                                                                                          CD−2                              CD−1
     Generalization error


                            1000
                                                                                       Accuracy


                                                                                                        0.50
                            100                                                                                                                                                         identity
                                                                                                                                                                                        relu
                                                                                                        0.45
                              10


                                   0.0   0.3         0.6          0.9
                                                                                                         an


                                                                                                          an
                                                                                                           be ale


                                                                                                           be ale
                                                                                                            fa va _i


                                                                                                            fa va _i
                                                                                                            di va


                                                                                                            di _va e
                                                                                                             di a_v ae


                                                                                                             di a_v ae
                                                                                                             be tc_ ae


                                                                                                             be tc_ ae
                                                                                                             ne


                                                                                                             ne ae
                                                                                                              ta d_


                                                                                                              ta d_
                                                                                                              ct e_


                                                                                                              ct e_
                                                                                                              p_ e


                                                                                                              p_ e
                                                                                                               p_ ae


                                                                                                               p a
                                                                                                                t v


                                                                                                                t v
                                                                                                                 _ v


                                                                                                                 _ v
                                                                                                                 or ii


                                                                                                                 or ii
                                                                                                                   _v


                                                                                                                   _v
                                                                                                                     ae


                                                   S(1;2)                                                                                Model



Figure 8: Conjunction-wise additivity in empirical disentangled models. a, Additivity across the
different model architectures and four different task settings. All of the model behaviors are gener-
ally highly additive. b, Distribution of accuracies on transitive equivalence when averaged across
different component roles. c, Variance ratio, capturing the ratio between the deviation between the
representational similarity matrix and its compositionally structured approximation and the general
variance of the representational similarity matrix. The numbers indicate that all disentangled models
discover some compositional structure in their representation, but still deviate substantially from
a compositionally structured representation. d, Generalization error on symbolic addition plotted
against the estimated S(1; 2). e, Average accuracy on two versions of context dependence with a
total of four features: CD-2 which now leaves out an entire orthant, and CD-1, which only leaves out
a single data point. Again, models generally perform below chance on CD-2 but above chance on
CD-1, though performance is generally really low.


                                                                                                28
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


C.2    T HE MODELS ARE WELL DESCRIBED BY A CONJUNCTION - WISE ADDITIVE COMPUTATION

We first investigated whether the model predictions on the test set were well characterized by a
conjunction-wise additive computation (see Appendix D.3), averaging this model behavior across
the fifty random task instances. We found that they were generally well captured, though they were
certainly not perfectly conjunction-wise additive (Fig. 8a). Further, none of these models were able
to systematically generalize on transitive equivalence (Fig. 8b). This indicates that conjunction-wise
additivity may characterize the generalization class of these highly non-compositionally structured
representations as well — at least when averaged across task instances.

C.3    T HE REPRESENTATIONS ARE PARTIALLY COMPOSITIONALLY STRUCTURED

We next investigated whether these representations exhibit compositional structure according to our
definition. To determine this, we computed their representational similarity matrix and computed
the average similarity for each set of overlaps. This instantiates the compositionally structured
representational similarity matrix that most closely described the empirical representational similarity.
                                                                            2
We then determined the average squared deviation from this matrix, σcs        , comparing it to the overall
                           2                                  2    2
variance of this matrix, σvar . Overall, the variance ratio, σcs /σvar , characterizes the degree to which
the given representation is compositionally structured. In a fully non-compositionally structured
representation, the variance ratio will be roughly one, whereas in a fully compositionally structured
representation, it will be zero. For the disentangled representation learning models, we found that this
variance ratio took on value between 0.5 and 0.9 (Fig. 8c). Thus, the models’ representation partially
captured compositional structure, but also contained a lot of non-compositional structure.

C.4    T HE NON - COMPOSITIONAL REPRESENTATIONAL STRUCTURE SUBSTANTIALLY IMPACTS
       MODEL BEHAVIOR

Finally, we tested whether our representational geometry analysis in Section 5 extended to the DSprites
representations. We first estimated their salience S(1; 2) by computing the average representational
similarity for each overlap and then computing the salience using Eq. (13). Proposition 5.1 would
predict that the generalization error should decrease with increasing S(1; 2). However, we do not
observe such a trend (Fig. 8d). This indicates that our representational geometry analysis does not
apply to the DSprites representations, due to the way in which they violate the compositional structure
assumption.
Finally, we determined generalization accuracy on CD-2 and CD-1. We found that most models
performed quite poorly, perhaps owing to the fact that shape is barely represented in these models.
Nevertheless, we found that most models performed systematically below chance for CD-2 but
systematically above chance for CD-1. Our analysis of context dependence in compositionally
structured representations suggests that this may be because these models exploit a context-driven
shortcut on CD-2 but not CD-1.
Overall, our analysis therefore paints a nuanced picture of the applicability of our theory to practical
disentangled representations. Our findings suggest that these models may still be well approximated
by conjunction-wise additive computations and that this generalization class may therefore shed light
on fundamental limits to the generalization of linear readout models. At the same time, to understand
how these models generalize on conjunction-wise additive tasks, taking into account the specific
ways in which they violate the compositional structure assumption is likely important.


D     D ETAILED METHODS

D.1    M ODELS

Kernel model. We fit the kernel models by hand-specifying the kernel and fitting either a support
vector regression or classification using scikit-learn (Pedregosa et al., 2011). Note that this is
equivalent to using a feature basis with the same resulting similarities. However, hand-specifying
these similarities enabled us to easily explore the full range of possible representations.


                                                   29
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Rich and lazy ReLU networks. All networks were trained with Pytorch and Pytorch Lightning
                  p We consider ReLU networks with one hidden layer and H = 1000 units.
Paszke et al. (2019).
We initialize by σ 2/H, considering σ ∈ [10−6 , 1]. In particular, when reporting results on rich
networks (without further specification), we assume σ = 10−6 . When reporting results on lazy
network, we assume σ = 1.

Compositional MNIST/CIFAR-10. We create a compositional version of MNIST and CIFAR-10
by concatenating multiple images along different channels. For example, the input to the MNIST
version of the symbolic addition task had two channels, each containing one digit whereas the
CIFAR-10 version of the symbolic addition task had six channels, three for each digit. We further
varied the distance between the concatenated images either presenting them all on top of each other
or presenting them offset by a certain number of pixels. Each image category corresponded to a
certain component, where its role as ranodmly sampled for each task instance. The output was still
given by a single scalar: the total magnitude for symbolic addition and the two categories for context
dependence and transitive equivalence.

Convolutional neural networks. We considered networks with four convolutional layers (kernel
size is five, two layers have 32 filters, two have 64 filters) and two densely connected layers (with
512 and 1024 units). Each layer is followed by a ReLU nonlinearity, and the convolutional stage is
followed by a max pooling operation. All weights are initialized with He initialization (He et al.,
2015). We trained these networks with SGD using a learning rate of 10−4 and momentum of 0.9.

Residual neural networks. We trained a residual neural network with eight blocks in total, two
with 16, 32, 64, and 128 channels, respectively, using the Adam optimizer with a learning rate of
10−3 for 100 epochs.

Vision Transformers. Finally, we trained a Vision Transformer (ViT) with six attention heads, 256
dimensions for both the attention layer and the MLP, and a depth of four, using Adam with a learning
rate of 10−4 for 200 epochs.

Data augmentation. We did not use data augmentation for MNIST. For CIFAR-10, we used a
random flip and a random crop.

D.2    R EPRODUCIBILITY

The code required to reproduce all experiments can be found under https://github.com/
sflippl/compositional-generalization.

D.3    A DDITIVITY ANALYSIS

To analyze how well a conjunction-wise additive computation can describe network behavior, we
considered as the set of possible features a concatenation of one-hot vectors coding for each possible
conjunction. We then removed all features that are constant at zero on the training dataset and used
linear regression to try and predict network behavior on both training and test set for all remaining
features. The resulting R2 defines the “additivity” of the network behavior (i.e. R2 = 1 indicates full
conjunction-wise additivity). Furthermore, we can use the inferred values assigned to these different
conjunctions to compare kernel models, feature-learning networks, and vision networks. Note that for
the vision networks, we first average the model predictions across all different images instantiating a
given compositional input.
Notably, our theory predicts that the constrained conjunction-wise additive function can predict
behavior on the test set, but not necessarily on the training set. To test this prediction in vision
network, we compared the additivity of the test set alone to the additivity of the entire dataset (Fig. 9).
First, we found that the predictivity on the test set was indeed generally very high. Second, we found
that it was substantially higher than on the training and test set taken together.


                                                   30
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                                          Context
                                      Addition
                                                                        Dependence
                  1.000                                    1.0
                  0.995
                                                           0.9
                  0.990
                                                                                                    all


             R²
                                                           0.8                                      test
                  0.985

                  0.980                                    0.7

                  0.975                                    0.6
                          Convnet ResNet    ViT                   Convnet ResNet    ViT
                          (MNIST) (CIFAR) (CIFAR)                 (MNIST) (CIFAR) (CIFAR)


Figure 9: R2 of the conjunction-wise additive predictor on the test set as well as on both the training
and test set.

E     C OMPOSITIONAL TASK SPACE
E.1     S YMBOLIC ADDITION

E.1.1    P ROOF OF P ROPOSITION 5.1
Proposition 5.1. Consider inputs z1 , z2 ∈ {[v]}v∈V , V ⊂ R, with associated values v. We assume
that the training set contains all pairs such that at least one component is zc ∈ {[w]}w∈W , W ⊂ V
and that the average value in both V and W is zero. Then, model behavior on the test set is given by
                                                                     p·S(1;2)
                     f ([v1 ], [v2 ]) = m(v1 + v2 ),         m := 1+(p−2)S(1;2) ,      p := |W|             (3)

Proof. We split up the training data into
                                                 I (1) := {[w]|w ∈ W}2 ,                                   (30)
and
                             [
                  I (2) :=           I (1,w) ∪ I (2,w) ,                                                   (31)
                             w∈W

              I (1,w) := {([w], [v])|v ∈ V \ W} ,                I (2,w) := {([v], [w])|v ∈ V \ W} .       (32)
We denote the dual coefficient associated with each training point ([i], [j]) by aij ∈ R. Note that the
problem is symmetric and therefore we know that aij = aji . We define a few summed coefficients:
                           X                    X                      X
                   bv :=        avw , bw :=           avw , cw :=            aww′ ,                (33)
                              w∈W                          v∈V\W                  w′ ∈W
                                                     X              X                  X
                                             b :=           bv =         bw ,   c :=         cw .          (34)
                                                    v∈V\W          w∈W                 w∈W

Note that the sum over all dual coefficients is given by 2b + c. Let p := |W| and q := |V| − |W|. We
denote by κc the similarity between inputs overlapping in c components. Then, setting δ2 := κ2 − κ0
and δ1 := κ1 − κ0 , the set of dual equations is given by
    ([w], [w′ ]) ∈ I (1) : κ0 (2b + c) + δ1 (bw + bw′ + cw + cw′ ) + (δ2 − 2δ1 )aww′ = w + w′ ,            (35)
                             (1,w)
           ([w], [v]) ∈ I            : κ0 (2b + c) + δ1 (bv + bw + cw ) + (δ2 − 2δ1 )awv = w + v.          (36)
(Note that the equation corresponding to ([v], [w]) is equivalent due to the problem’s symmetry.)
The prediction is given by
                         f ([v1 ], [v2 ]) = κ0 (2b + c) + δ1 (bv1 + bv2 ).                                 (37)
                                         P
We now sum (36) over w (setting w := w∈W w):
                      w + pv = pκ0 (2b + c) + pδ1 bv + δ1 (b + c) + (δ2 − 2δ1 )bv
                                                                                                           (38)
                             = ((p − 2)δ1 + δ2 )bv + (2pκ0 + δ1 )b + (pκ0 + δ1 )c


                                                            31
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                      0                −4, 4                 −2, 2

                           5


                                                                                         Depth: 1
                           0

                          −5


             Prediction    5


                                                                                         Depth: 2
                                                                                                    Split
                           0                                                                           Training
                                                                                                       Compositional
                          −5


                           5


                                                                                         Depth: 3
                           0

                          −5

                                −5    0   5       −5    0      5        −5    0      5
                                                  Ground truth

  Figure 10: Model prediction plotted against ground truth for different training sets and depths.


Thus,
                                           δ1 p
                           δ 1 bv =                  v + δ1 (w − (2pκ0 + δ1 )b − (pκ0 + δ1 )c).                        (39)
                                      (p − 2)δ1 + δ2
Thus, setting
                  δ1 p
      m :=                  ,                 d := 2δ1 (w − (2pκ0 + δ1 )b − (pκ0 + δ1 )c) + κ0 (2b + c),               (40)
             (p − 2)δ1 + δ2
we can write
                                 f ([v1 ], [v2 ]) = m(v1 + v2 ) + d.                                                   (41)
To simplify d, we sum (35) over all w, w′ :
                                     2pw = p2 κ0 (2b + c) + 2pδ1 (b + c) + (δ2 − 2δ1 )c
                                                                                                                       (42)
                            = 2p(pκ0 + δ1 )b + (p2 κ0 + 2(p − 1)δ1 + δ2 )c.
                                            P
We further sum (38) over all v, setting v := v∈V\W v:
                               ((p + q − 2)δ1 + δ2 + 2pqκ0 )b + q(pκ0 + δ1 )c = qw + pv.                               (43)
We can now compute b and c from this system of equations and plug it into d.
Finally, w = v = 0 immediately implies that b = c = 0 and therefore d = 0.

E.1.2    B EHAVIOR OF DEEP R E LU NETWORKS
Next, we examined the behavior of deep ReLU networks with varying depth (Fig. 10). On the
extrapolation task (W = {0}), these networks also had compressed model predictions on the
compositional split that were approximately linearly distorted (though for deeper networks, this
relationship seemed to have a slight S-shape). Intriguingly, these networks perfectly generalized
on the interpolation task (W = {−4, 4}). For W = {−2, 2}, they perfectly generalized on the
interpolation portion, but not the extrapolation portion.

E.1.3    B EHAVIOR OF VISION MODELS
We trained the Convnets on MNIST using seven different training sets W: {[0]}, {[−4], [4]},
{[−2], [2]}, {[−4], [0], [4]}, {[−1], [0], [1]}, {[−4], [−3], [3], [4]}, {[−2], [−1], [1], [2]}. This allowed
us to vary both the size of the training set and whether it involved only interpolation or also extrapo-
lation. We trained these networks for 100 epochs on 20,000 samples. We trained the ResNets and
ViTs on CIFAR-10 using the first three training sets listed above. We trained the ResNets for 100


                                                                   32
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


    a
                                   0             −4, 4       −2, 2          −4, 0, 4                       −1, 0, 1    −4, −3, 3, 4 −2, −1, 1, 2

                            5
                            0


                                                                                                                                                       0
        Model prediction
                           −5

                            5


                                                                                                                                                       10
                            0
                           −5

                            5


                                                                                                                                                       20
                            0
                           −5
                                −5 0 5      −5 0 5          −5 0 5       −5 0 5                            −5 0 5       −5 0 5            −5 0 5                Split
                                                                       Ground truth
                                                                                                                                                                   Training
    b                                                                      c                                                                                       In−distribution
                                   0             −4, 4       −2, 2                                            0           −4, 4            −2, 2                   Compositional

                            5                                                                      4
                            0                                                                      0
                                                                        0


                                                                                                                                                       0
                                                                                                  −4
        Model prediction


                           −5                                                  Model prediction

                            5                                                                      4
                                                                        16


                                                                                                                                                       16
                            0                                                                      0
                           −5                                                                     −4

                            5                                                                      4
                                                                        32


                                                                                                                                                       32
                            0                                                                      0
                           −5                                                                     −4

                                −5 0 5      −5 0 5          −5 0 5                                         −5 0 5       −5 0 5            −5 0 5
                                          Ground truth                                                                Ground truth


Figure 11: Average prediction for each combination of components plotted against the ground
truth for a, ConvNets trained on MNIST, b, ResNets trained on CIFAR-10, and c, ViTs trained on
CIFAR-10.

a                                                                            b
                                Convnet           ResNet             ViT                                   Convnet            ResNet                 ViT
                                (MNIST)           (CIFAR)          (CIFAR)                                 (MNIST)            (CIFAR)              (CIFAR)       split
                                          4000              5000                                                       4000
                 2000                                                                             2000                                                                  Training
                                                                                                                                                                        In−distribution
 MSE


                                                                               MSE


                                                                                                                                           2500                         Compositional
                 1000                     2000              2500                                  1000                 2000


                            0                0                 0                                       0                  0                   0                         Extrapolation
                                0 10 20           0   20           0   20                                   1234              1       2            1        2           Interpolation
                                                 Distance                                                                         p

Figure 12: a, Mean squared error as a function of distance. b, Mean squared error as a function of
training set size p (different dots corresponding to interpolation versus extrapolation.


epochs and the ViTs for 200 epochs, training all networks on 40,000 samples. Our findings on these
experiments are summarized in Section 6. Further, Fig. 11 depicts, for each training set, the average
prediction for each combination of components. We can see that the ConvNet predictions are highly
linearly correlated with the ground truth. The ResNet and ViT predictions are also linearly correlated,
but exhibit a slightly noisier relationship.
Additionally, we also plot the mean squared error of the networks on the different training sets
(Fig. 12). This provides a more conventional (but harder to interpret) measure of performance com-
pared to the slope depicted in Fig. 5. We again see that the mean squared error on the compositional
generalization set is decreasing with increasing distance (Fig. 12a). Further, it is decreasing with
increasing training set size (Fig. 12), though we note that the differences in the scales of the general-
ization set for different sets W renders it harder to directly to compare these values. In contrast, the
slopes described in the main text are more easily comparable.


                                                                                                           33
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                     a                                                                        b
                                 0.30                                                                    1.0


                       S(1; 2)


                                                                                                 Slope
                                 0.24                                      after training                0.5
                                                                           before training

                                 0.18                                                                    0.0
                                        0          10         20                                               0.00    0.25    0.50
                                                  Dist.                                                               S(1;2)


Figure 13: a, S(1; 2) in the convolutional neural network’s neural tangent kernel, before and after
being trained on symbolic addition with W = {0}. b, The estimated slope for each model instance
plotted against S(1; 2). While increased S(1; 2) generally yields a larger slope (as predicted by
our theory), the relationship between S(1; 2) and the slope does not follow the exact quantitative
relationship predicted by our theory.

                                                              Distance: 0                  Distance: 20
                                                                                 3.4
                                                  6.0
                                            MSE


                                                                                 3.2
                                                  5.5                            3.0
                                                  5.0                            2.8
                                                          0        1   2     3         0     1           2      3
                                                                              Depth

Figure 14: Mean squared error on the compositional generalization set for different depths of the
fully connected network at the end of the convolutional neural network architecture.


Overall, our analysis indicates that our theory provides several valuable qualitative insights into the
behavior of deep neural network models. Importantly, however, we are not able to provide quantitative
bounds at the moment. To demonstrate this, we computed the salience S(1; 2) of the neural tangent
kernel of the convolutional neural networks before and after being trained on the MNIST version
of symbolic addition with W = {0} (Fig. 13a). Importantly, S(1; 2) changed substantially during
training, indicating that these networks are not trained in the kernel regime. As such, our theory does
not apply exactly. To see whether it provided appropriate quantitative bounds, we then estimated the
slope of each model instance on the compositional generalization dataset and plotted it against S(1; 2)
of the neural tangent kernel at the beginning of training. We found that higher S(1; 2) generally
resulted in a larger slope, as predicted by our theory. However, the relationship between S(1; 2) and
slope did not adhere exactly to the quantitative predictions made by our theory. This indicates that
while our theory can shed light on certain qualitative behaviors, it still leaves certain generalization
behaviors in deep neural networks unclear.
Finally, our analysis in Section 5.1 suggests that deeper models should yield more conjunctive repre-
sentations, and therefore exhibit worse generalization on symbolic addition. To test this prediction,
we varied the number of fully connected layers in the convolutional neural network and trained
these networks on the symbolic addition task with the training set W = {0}. We found that deeper
networks indeed generalized worse (Fig. 14).

E.2     C ONTEXT DEPENDENCE

E.2.1    G ENERAL TASK DEFINITION
We consider inputs with three components, (zco , zf 1 , zf 2 ). We assume that zco ∈ C1 ∪ C2 , where C1
is the set of possible contexts under which zf 1 is relevant and C2 is the set of possible contexts under
which zf 2 is relevant. We further assume that there are decision functions d1 (zf 1 ), d2 (zf 2 ) ∈ R.
(For example, in the example in the main text, these function map three features to the first category
(i.e. y = −1) and three features to the second category (i.e. y = 1).) The target is then given by

                                                        d1 (zf 1 ) if zco ∈ C1 ,
                              y(zco , zf 1 , zf 2 ) =                                                (44)
                                                        d2 (zf 2 ) if zco ∈ C2 .
Note that in the main text, we consider C1 = {1}, C2 = {2}, and six possible values for zf 1 , zf 2 ,
where the decision function maps three onto 1 and three onto −1.


                                                                            34
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                             CD−3    CD−2     CD−1

                                              Right conj.

                                             Wrong conj.                             Depth


                               Conj. type
                                                                                       4
                                            Sensory feat.                              3
                                                                                       2
                                            Context only
                                                                                       1
                                            Memorization

                                                            0 1 2   0 1 2    0 1 2
                                                                     Value

         Figure 15: Inferred values for different conjunctive groups on context dependence.


E.2.2    N OVEL STIMULUS COMPOSITIONS ARE CONJUNCTION - WISE ADDITIVE

If the test set consists in novel combinations of stimuli, this is a conjunction-wise additive computation.
Namely, suppose that for all test inputs (zco , zf 1 , zf 2 ), the two features have never been observed in
conjunction, but both (zco , zf 1 ) and (zco , zf 2 ) have been. (This includes the case considered in the
main text.) In this case, we can define functions f12 and f13 to implement the appropriate mapping:

                              d1 (zf 1 ) if zco ∈ C1 ,                          0          if zco ∈ C1 ,
       f12 (zco , zf 1 ) :=                              f13 (zco , zf 2 ) :=                            (45)
                              0          if zco ∈ C2 ,                          d2 (zf 2 ) if zco ∈ C2 ,
   f (zco , zf 1 , zf 2 ) = f12 (zco , zf 1 ) + f13 (zco , zf 2 ).                                         (46)

E.2.3    N OVEL RULE COMPOSITIONS ARE NOT CONJUNCTION - WISE ADDITIVE

We could also imagine an alternative generalization rule in a task where there are multiple components
indicating the same context: C1 = {co1 , co2 } and C2 = {co3 , co4 }. We then leave out certain
features with certain contexts. For example, suppose we had never seen two values for zf 1 and
zf 2 in conjunction with zco ∈ {co2 , co4 }. In principle, if the model understood that zco = co1 , co2
(and zco = co3 , co4 resp.) signify the same context (i.e. learned to abstract the context from the
context cue), it could generalize successfully as it had observed these features in conjunction with
zco = co1 , co3 . However, the conjunction-wise additive mapping depends on having observed each
context in conjunction with each feature and this task is therefore non-additive.

E.2.4    C OEFFICIENT GROUPS

In Fig. 4d, we grouped the inferred coefficients into categories. We here explain these categories:

        • Right conj.: This is the correct conjunction the model should use to solve the task, i.e.
          between zco = co1 and zf 1 and between zco = co2 and zf 2 .
        • Wrong conj.: This is the incorrect conjunction between context and feature, i.e. between
          zco = co1 and zf 2 and between zco = co2 and zf 1 .
        • Sensory feat.: This is any conjunction involving sensory features, i.e. zf 1 , zf 2 , (zf 1 , zf 2 ).
        • Context only: This is the component zco by itself.
        • Memorization: This is the full conjunction of all three components (zco , zf 1 , zf 2 ).

We then compute the average absolute magnitude within each of these groups in order to determine
their overall relevance to model behavior.

E.2.5    F EATURE - LEARNING R E LU NETWORKS

We find that feature-learning ReLU networks generalize consistently on CD-1 and CD-2 but not
CD-3. They are also perfectly conjunction-wise additive and fail due to a context shortcut (Fig. 15).


                                                                    35
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


 a                                                                                                b
                                   CD−1          CD−2           CD−3
                        1.0


                                                                                                  Additivity
                                                                             Generalization                                             Task variant
  Acc.

                                                                               Training set                    0.975                      CD−3
                        0.5
                                                                               In−distribution                                            CD−2
                                                                               Compositional                                              CD−1

                        0.0                                                                                    0.950
                               0          20 0           20 0          20                                              0           20
                                                 Dist.                                                                     Dist.
 c
                                           CD−3                             CD−2                                 CD−1

                 Right conj.
                                                                                                                                         Distance
  Conj. type


                Wrong conj.
                                                                                                                                            20
               Sensory feat.
               Context only
                                                                                                                                            0
               Memorization

                               0                            1    0                       1    0                                    1
                                                                       Rel. magnitude


Figure 16: Performance of convolutional neural networks trained on an MNIST version of context
dependence. For different distances and training sets, we plot a, the accuracy on different splits, b,
the additivity of the networks, and c, the magnitude of the different inferred coefficients.


E.2.6             V ISION NETWORKS

We additionally analyzed ConvNets for different distances between the digits. We found that
convolutional neural networks trained on MNIST successfully generalized on CD-1 and CD-2, but
not CD-3 (Fig. 16). For smaller distances between digits, the models tended to generalize worse on
CD-1 and CD-2 and gradually reverted to chance accuracy (i.e. 0.5) for CD-3. Further, the networks
were generally highly additive (R2 > 0.95), but became worse for lower distance (Fig. 16b). Finally,
across all distances, they had a high magnitude associated with the context cue, though this magnitude
decreased for small distances — consistent with the accuracy of the network increasing from below
chance to chance level (Fig. 16c).


E.3             I NVARIANCE AND PARTIAL EXPOSURE

We consider invariance and partial exposure as simple case studies for the memorization leak and
shortcut bias. In both cases, the input consists of two components and the mapping only depends
on the first (Fig. 17a). In the invariance case, we don’t see the second component vary at all, in the
partial exposure case, we see one instance of the second component. Note that the partial exposure
task has previously been studied in the context of network generalization (Dasgupta et al., 2022;
Chan et al., 2022).
To understand the impact of different representational saliences, we consider the generalization
margin m := y ŷ on the test set, where y is the ground-truth label and ŷ is the model’s estimate.
Because we consider support vector machines, the margin on the training set is one; a smaller margin
on the test set indicates worse performance. We determined a mathematical formula for the margins
as a function of S(1; 2). Below we first describe its implications and then how we derived this.

Invariance suffers from a memorization leak. On invariance, we find that the model’s test
                                  S(1;2)
margin is expressed as m = 1−S(1;2)      . This means that for a fully compositional representation
(S(1; 2) = 0.5), its training and test margins are both one. However, as S(1; 2) decreases, the model
increasingly memorizes the training set, resulting in a decreased margin (Fig. 17b).


                                                                             36
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


              a                                                         b
                                           Partial
                             Invariance
                                          exposure
                                                           Class 1               1
                                                           Class 2


                                                                        Margin
               Item 2
                         1                                                                                Invariance
                                                                                                          Partial
                        −1                                                                                exposure
                                                           Train                 0
                              −1   1      −1   1           Test
                                                                                     0.0            0.5
                                    Item 1
                                                                                           S(1;2)

Figure 17: a, Schema for invariance and partial exposure. b, Generalization margin for the two tasks.

Shortcut distortion. On the partial exposure task, if the model used item 1 to solve the task, it
would get two out of three training examples correct and could memorize the last data point. This is
a statistical shortcut and we find that norm minimization (just as for context dependence) ends up
partially relying on this strategy as this decreases the ℓ2 -norm of the readout weights. As a result,
the test margin for the partial exposure task decreases even more strongly as a function of S(1; 2):
        2S(1;2)2
m = 1−2S(1;2)    2 (where we assume that the similarity between identical trials is one and the similarity

between distinct trials is zero) (Fig. 17b).

Derivations. We analytically compute the kernel models’ test set prediction on the invariance task.
The training set is given by {(−1, −1), (−1, 1)} and its kernel is therefore

                                                κ2 κ1
                                         K=                ,                                  (47)
                                                κ1 κ2
where κ2 is the similarity between identical trials and κ1 is the similarity between overlapping trials.
Hence, the dual coefficients are given by

                  −1   1          1         κ2 −κ1          1           1         κ2 + κ1
         a=K                = 2                                  = 2                            .    (48)
                      −1       κ2 − κ21 −κ1 κ2             −1       κ2 − κ21 −(κ2 + κ1 )
The test set is given by {(1, −1), (1, 1)} and its kernel with respect to the training set is therefore

                                                   κ1 κ0
                                           K̃ =              ,                                       (49)
                                                   κ0 κ1
where κ0 is the similarity between distinct trials. Hence the test set predictions are given by

                                          1         (κ2 + κ1 )(κ1 − κ0 )
                           ŷ = K̃a = 2                                                                                (50)
                                      κ2 − κ21 −(κ2 + κ1 )(κ1 − κ0 ).
As the ground truth labels are y = {1, −1}, the margin m = y ŷ is identical for both test set points:
              (κ2 + κ1 )(κ1 − κ0 )     κ1 − κ0       (κ2 − κ0 )S(1; 2)            S(1; 2)
         m=           2     2       =           =                           =               .     (51)
                     κ2 − κ1           κ2 − κ1    (κ2 − κ0 ) − (κ1 − κ0 )      1 − S(1; 2)

For partial exposure, the training set is given by {(−1, −1), (−1, 1), (1, −1)} and its kernel is
therefore
                                                κ2 κ1 κ1
                                                               !
                                        K = κ1 κ2 κ0 .                                      (52)
                                                κ1 κ0 κ2
The test set is given by {(1, 1)} and the test set kernel is therefore
                                                     K̃ = (κ0      κ1       κ1 )                                       (53)
The margin is therefore given by
                                                               1
                                                                 !
                                                                            −1
                                 m = y ŷ = −ŷ = −K̃K        −1 .                            (54)
                                                               1
We solve this equation for the special case where κ0 = 0 and κ1 = 1 using Mathematica and find that
                                                            2S(1; 2)2
                                                     m=                 .                                              (55)
                                                          1 − 2S(1; 2)2

                                                             37
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


a                                   b                         c                                  d
       1.0                      Lazy 0.01    DB   AB           0.005                  Item           Split
                        Train                          Sign                           weights
Acc.                    Test
                                                                                                        Training set
                                                         Pos.                          Eq.              In−distribution
       0.5
                                Rich −0.01   DE   AE
                                                         Neg. −0.005                                    Compositional
                                                                                       Not eq.
                        Train
              10 1000                    −0.01    0.01                 −0.005 0.005
                        Test
              Epoch

Figure 18: Feature learning enables generalization on transitive equivalence. a, Learning curves
in the lazy and rich regime. b, The weights of the network in the subspace corresponding to one
underlying XOR-task. c, Weights for the same unit are plotted against each other and colored by
whether they correspond to equivalent items (purple) or non-equivalent items (green). d, Accuracy of
a ConvNet trained on an MNIST version of transitive equivalence.


E.4          OTHER MATHEMATICAL OPERATIONS

We could consider mathematical operations other than addition as well, considering unobserved
assigned values v1 (z1 ) and v2 (z2 ) together with some composition function C(v1 (z1 ), v2 (z2 )). This
task will only be additive if the composition function is additive (e.g. if it is subtraction). If it is, e.g.
multiplication, division, or exponentiation, the task will be non-additive.

E.5          L OGICAL OPERATIONS

In this task, inputs with two components are presented. Each component zc has an unobserved truth
value T (zc ) associated with it and the target is some logical operation over these two truth values, for
example AND: T (z1 ) ∧ T (z2 ). After inferring the truth value of each component, the model could
generalize towards novel item combinations. As long as the logical operation is additive (e.g. AND,
OR, NEITHER, . . . ), this is an additive task. If the logical operation is non-additive (e.g. XOR),
this would be a non-additive task. Indeed, the XOR case is structurally equivalent to the transitive
equivalence task.

E.6          T RANSITIVE ORDERING

Transitive ordering is a popular task in cognitive science (often called transitive inference, McGonigle
& Chalmers (1977)). Here the subject is presented with two items z1 , z2 drawn from an unobserved
hierarchy >. It should then categorize whether z1 > z2 or z2 > z1 . Crucially, this task can be solved
by assigning a rank r(zc ) to each item and computing the response as f (z) = r(z1 ) − r(z2 ) Lippl
et al. (2024). It is therefore additive, in contrast to transitive equivalence. This is also the case if we
assume that there are multiple such hierarchies (e.g. a1 > . . . , a5 and b1 > . . . , b5 ). In this case, the
model would generalize to comparisons between these different hierarchies as well.

F        A FEATURE - LEARNING MECHANISM FOR NON - ADDITIVE COMPOSITIONAL
         GENERALIZATION

We proved above that compositionally structured kernel models do not generalize on non-additive
tasks, including transitive equivalence. To see if feature learning can overcome this limitation, we
trained ReLU networks through backpropagation on transitive equivalence, using a disentangled and
uncorrelated input. By varying the initial weight magnitude, we either trained these networks in the
kernel/lazy regime or the feature-learning/rich regime. Notably, when trained on symbolic addition
and context dependence, the rich networks were well-described by a conjunction-wise additive model
(Figs. 10 and 15). On transitive equivalence, however, while the kernel-regime models failed to
generalize (as predicted by our theory), the rich networks generalized correctly (Fig. 18a).
To explain why this is the case, we leveraged the insight that rich neural networks are biased to
learning weights with a low overall ℓ2 -norm (Lyu & Li (2020); Chizat & Bach (2020); cf. Vardi
& Shamir (2021)). In particular, a one-hidden-layer ReLU network tends to learn a sparse set of
features Savarese et al. (2019); Chizat & Bach (2020). Transitive equivalence consists of multiple
overlapping equality relations (e.g. A = B ̸= D = E). Notably, ReLU networks such an XOR-type


                                                                  38
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


problem by specializing one unit to each conjunction (Brutzkus & Globerson (2019); Saxe et al.
(2022); Xu et al. (2023); Fig. 18b). Further, their sparse inductive bias incentivizes ReLU networks
to use identical units for overlapping conjunctions (e.g. (A, B), (A, C), and (B, C)). This causes
the unit to generalize to unseen item combinations (e.g. (A, C)), enabling the network to generalize.
Importantly, our theoretical argument is corroborated by empirical simulations: each network unit
has identical weights for equivalent items (Fig. 18c).
Thus, rich networks’ capacity for abstraction gives rise to an additional compositional motif, allowing
them to generalize on transitive equivalence. In particular, our findings highlight that transitive
equivalence and transitive ordering are solved by fundamentally different network motifs.
To see whether large-scale neural networks can also benefit from this feature-learning mechanism,
we trained ConvNets on an MNIST version of transitive equivalence. The networks were trained for
150 epochs on 20,000 samples. We found that if the digits were presented with a distance of zero, the
network did not generalize compositionally at all. However, with increasing distance, the network
started to improve its compositional generalization (Fig. 18d), demonstrating that a convolutional
network can benefit from this rich compositional motif.


                                                  39
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                         Behavior on symbolic addition
                                                                Proposition 5.2
                                                                                                                       p
                                                                                                                  1          1             4


                                                          Prediction


                                                                                                      Slope (m)
                                                                        4
                                                                        0
                                                                                              train
                                                                       −4                     test
                                                                                                                  0
                                                                                    −4 0 4                            0.0                            0.5
                                                                             Ground truth                                     S(1; 2)

        Compositional                                                                This factor                                                                 This factor
        generalization                                                               increases                                                                    increases
       is distorted by a                                                              for lower                                                                  with larger
      proportional factor                                                           conjunctivity                                                               training sets
                                                                                           Convnet                                                             Convnet
                                                                                           (MNIST)                                                             (MNIST)
                                                                                                                                                                                  Split
                          5                                                     1.00                                                             1.0
        Prediction


                                                                                                                                 Slope                                                Training
                                                                        Slope


                                                                                0.75                                                             0.8                                  In−distribution
                          0                                                                                                                                                           Compositional
                                                                                                                                                 0.6
                     −5                                                                                                                                                               Interpolation
                                                                                       0      10 20                                                        1    2    3    4           Extrapolation
                                  −5 0       5
                              Ground truth                                                 Distance                                Training set size (p)


                      Influence of architecture                                                                                                 Behavior on
                            Proposition 5.1                                                                                                 context dependence
                                  Overlap 1         Overlap 2                Overlap 3
                                                                       1.0                                                                  1/3                                Generali-
               Salience


                                                                                                                                                                               zation on ...
                                                                                                                                       S(2; 3)


                          0.2                 0.2
                                                                       0.5
                                                                                                                                                                                  all
                                                                                                                                                                                  CD-1,2
                          0.0                 0.0                      0.0                                                                       0                                CD-1
                                   0 10 20           0 10 20                    0 10 20                                                                0                 1/3      none
                                                    # Layers                                                                                               S(1; 3)

                     Deeper networks generalize                                                                        CD-3 is much more challenging
                     worse on symbolic addition                                                                              than CD-2 or CD-1

                                                                                                                                                       Convnet
                                   Distance: 0                          Distance: 20                                                                   (MNIST)
                                                        3.4                                                                              1.0                                  Split
                                                                                                                            Accuracy


               6.0
       MSE


                                                        3.2
               5.5                                      3.0                                                                                                                      Training
               5.0                                      2.8                                                                              0.5                                     In−distribution
                                                                                                                                                                                 Compositional
                              0      1    2         3              0            1      2      3                                          0.0
                                                     Depth                                                                                           CD−3           CD−1


Figure 19: This figure composes the relevant theoretical insights and empirical experiments to
illustrate how they speak to each other.


                                                                                                  40
