Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


T EACHING LLM S H OW TO L EARN WITH C ONTEX -
TUAL F INE -T UNING

 Younwoo Choi1,2∗ Muhammad Adil Asif1,2∗ Ziwen Han1† John Willes1,2
 Rahul G. Krishnan1,2
 1                                2
     University of Toronto            Vector Institute



                                                    A BSTRACT
              Prompting Large Language Models (LLMs), or providing context on the expected
              model of operation, is an effective way to steer the outputs of such models to
              satisfy human desiderata after they have been trained. But in rapidly evolving do-
              mains, there is often need to fine-tune LLMs to improve either the kind of knowl-
              edge in their memory or their abilities to perform open ended reasoning in new
              domains. When human’s learn new concepts, we often do so by linking the new
              material that we are studying to concepts we have already learned before. To that
              end, we ask, can prompting help us teach LLMs how to learn. In this work, we
              study a novel generalization of instruction tuning, called contextual fine-tuning,
              to fine-tune LLMs. Our method leverages prompts designed to mimic human
              cognitive strategies in learning and problem-solving to guide the learning process
              during training, aiming to improve the model’s interpretation and understanding
              of domain-specific knowledge. We empirically demonstrate that this simple yet
              effective modification improves the ability of LLMs to be fine-tuned rapidly on
              new datasets both within the medical and financial domains. P ROJECT PAGE:
              https://younwoochoi.github.io/cft-iclr/

1        I NTRODUCTION
Large Language Models (LLMs) have demonstrated strong performance across a wide range of tasks
(OpenAI et al., 2024). As model sizes increase, the performance of LLMs on multi-step reasoning,
instruction following, and program execution (Wei et al., 2022b; Du et al., 2024) have been found
to improve empirically. LLMs are trained via a three-step process: pretraining (which results in a
base model) to compress knowledge over a vast text corpus, supervised fine-tuning for instruction
following, and alignment with human expectations of behavior for use as a chat bot (Ouyang et al.,
2022; Lee et al., 2023; Rafailov et al., 2024; Ethayarajh et al., 2024).
However, LLMs remain unaware of information and events occurring after their knowledge cutoff;
in fast-moving domains and in scenarios where deployment requires knowledge of up-to-date infor-
mation, there is a need to remedy this limitation. There are two popular approaches to this problem.
The first is to increase the context length of the model until all anticipated new information fits
within this context (the largest of which is Google’s Gemini-1.5 model (Reid et al., 2024) with a
context length of two million tokens). However, even context lengths this large can be exhausted
and it is unclear whether the model’s attention mechanism is capable of accurately inferring signal
regardless of where it is in the context. The alternate approach uses external knowledge stores via
retrieval augmented systems (Lewis et al., 2021). This approach works well when the reasoning
abilities already learned by the model suffice to process and extract the relevant information. But
gradient-based learning remains vital in scenarios where there is a need to teach the model how to
manipulate new tools or learn new strategies for reasoning.
The simplest approach to update model knowledge via fine-tuning is to continue pretraining the base
model. Unfortunately, the data and training procedure necessary to replicate the additional fine-
tuning and alignment phases are rarely open-sourced in chat-based models. The general practice is
to fine-tune the aligned model with new domain-specific knowledge. Models that have undergone
     * Equal contribution.
     †
         Work conducted while at the Vector Institute


                                                         1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 1: The figure illustrates the distinct approaches of Contextual Fine-Tuning (CFT), Instruction Fine-
Tuning (IFT), and Continued Pretraining (CPT). In CFT, a contextual prompt is highlighted in green “Think
about practical applications of the information in the next text. How could this knowledge be used in real-world
situations?” followed by the main text. IFT employs a direct instruction “What is diabetes?” before presenting
the same text. In contrast, CPT displays only the main text without any preceding prompts or instructions.
The key difference lies in CFT’s use of contextual prompts that guide the model’s semantic understanding and
reasoning, whereas IFT relies on explicit instructions to elicit specific responses. CPT, lacking both prompts
and instructions, focuses solely on processing the main content.

instruction fine-tuning and alignment training are more amenable to interacting with users but are
harder to update with new knowledge. But training to update the knowledge can result in catas-
trophic forgetting of knowledge gained during pretraining, or loss of capabilities like instruction-
following and task-solving (Wang et al., 2023a). There is a need to develop methods that enable us
to quickly improve reasoning and recall in aligned LLMs for domain specific fine-tuning.
Our approach is inspired by the capabilities of LLMs to leverage prompts in question answering.
For example, few-shot prompting popularized by Brown et al. (2020) performs well on a variety
of unseen tasks at prediction time. Wei et al. (2022c) investigated how chain-of-thought (CoT)
prompting can significantly improve a model’s ability to perform complex multi-step reasoning.
Wang et al. (2023b) further improved on CoT by selecting the most consistent answer from a diverse
set of sampled reasoning paths.
Our work investigates a simple question: can prompting improve the efficacy of LLM fine-tuning?
We argue yes, and to this end, we propose a new method for fine-tuning that blends in-context
learning with gradient-based learning. In summary, our contributions are as follows:
     (a) We present contextual fine-tuning, a generalization of instruction tuning, that combines
         in-context learning and fine-tuning. We further investigate the gradients provided by the
         additional context and provide synthetic experiments demonstrating their effectiveness for
         fine-tuning.
     (b) To study the impact of our method, we create two datasets in the biomedical domain: the
         first consisting of 121,489 journal articles from 37 diverse topics in biology and medicine,
         and second comprising 29 open-source medical textbooks.
     (c) We show that contextual fine-tuning can be used to update a model’s knowledge more effi-
         ciently than continued pretraining and instruction tuning. We show increased performance
         on both real-world dataset and Q&A tasks while using carefully constructed synthetic data
         to better understand where performance gains arise from.

2    R ELATED W ORK
Instruction Tuning The common paradigm used in training instruction aligned (”chat”) LLMs
involves three steps: pretraining on unlabeled corpora, performing instruction tuning, followed by
reward-based preference training, as used in Ouyang et al. (2022). The instruction tuning phase is
generally used as a first step to aligning LLMs to human instructions or when access to human-
labeled preference data is limited. Instruction tuning significantly narrows the divide between mod-
els’ traditional next-word prediction objectives and the practical need for models to adhere to explicit


                                                       2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


human instructions. Wei et al. (2022a) have highlighted how this approach markedly boosts zero-
shot performance across previously unseen tasks, underlining its effectiveness. Earlier work (Wei
et al., 2022a; Iyer et al., 2022) have proposed using a large set of instructions for NLP tasks, while
more recent findings (Wang et al., 2023c; Taori et al., 2023; Peng et al., 2023; Zhou et al., 2024) have
found success using increasingly smaller and higher quality instruction datasets on open sourced pre-
trained models such as Llama (Touvron et al., 2023a). Notably, as Gudibande et al. (2023) discovers,
training on instructions in the instruction tuning phase does not improve the underlying capabilities
of the models; these models merely imitate the instruction following template. Recent developments
have explored alternative approaches to standard instruction tuning. Wang et al. (2025) propose Cri-
tique Fine-Tuning, where models learn to critique noisy responses rather than imitate correct ones,
demonstrating improvements over SFT across mathematical reasoning benchmarks.
The primary distinction between contextual fine-tuning and instruction fine-tuning lies in the se-
mantic content of the tokens used as input. Instruction tuning has input-output pairs (x, y) that are
data point specific (e.g., x = ”Who is the current president of the United States?”, y = ”Joe Biden”).
Within instruction tuning, there is a specific, narrow question for which there exists a right an-
swer that the model is expected to identify. In contextual fine-tuning, our intent is to pair y with a
randomly sampled contextual prompt x which serves as guidance for the model to learn the most
important information. x can be specific or general desiderata useful for learning intended to prime
the model to contextualize and incorporate the knowledge in y within its parameters.
Domain-Specific Training While pretraining on trillions of unlabeled tokens creates generalist
foundation models (Bommasani et al., 2021; Touvron et al., 2023a;b; Anil et al., 2023; OpenAI
et al., 2024), injecting domain-specific expertise into models while retaining the generalist remains
an active front of research. Improving the underlying capabilities of LLMs is a more difficult chal-
lenge than simply aligning to instructions, in part due to the much larger dataset requirement. While
smaller LLMs are capable of outperforming the larger monoliths in specific domains (Gunasekar
et al., 2023; Li et al., 2023), or pushing language modeling in a simplified domain to the extreme
(Eldan & Li, 2023). Several lines of work have explored using better datasets to improve perfor-
mance on existing pretrained models as a form of continual learning in areas such as medicine,
finance, chip design, coding, and mathematics (Chen et al., 2023b; Wu et al., 2023; Liu et al., 2023;
Rozière et al., 2024; Paster et al., 2023; Azerbayev et al., 2023). Such continued training runs the
risk of model forgetting, in which general reasoning and capabilities in other domains tend to decline
(Luo et al., 2023; Wang et al., 2023a; Chen et al., 2023a).

3    M ETHODOLOGY
3.1 N OTATION & BACKGROUND
We consider a large language model (LLM) Pθ , parameterized by pretrained weights θ. We have
                                       raw
access to a domain-specific corpus Dtrain     consisting of sequences of tokens. Our objective is to
fine-tune the model to obtain new parameters θ′ that enhance performance on domain-specific down-
stream tasks, evaluated on a test set Dtest .
Continued pretraining. Continued pretraining (CPT) leverages large volumes of unlabeled
domain-specific data to refine the model’s understanding of the domain. Given sequences of to-
                                               raw
kens x = (x1 , x2 , . . . , xn ) sampled from Dtrain , the model is trained using the causal language
modeling objective, which predicts the next token given the previous tokens.
                                                              n
                                                              X
                              LCP T (θ) = −Ex∼Dtrain
                                               raw                 log Pθ (xk | x<k ).              (1)
                                                              k

where x<k = (x1 , x2 , . . . , xk−1 ) represents the sequence of tokens preceding xk .
Instruction fine-tuning. Instruction fine-tuning utilizes a collection of instruction-response pairs
                               IF T
(x, y) sampled from a dataset Dtrain . Here, x is an instruction or prompt, and y is the corresponding
response. The model is trained to generate the response y conditioned on the instruction x.
                                                              m
                                                              X
                           LIF T (θ) = −E(x,y)∼Dtrain
                                                IF T               log Pθ (yk | x, y<k ).           (2)
                                                               k

where y = (y1 , y2 , . . . , ym ) and y<k = (y1 , y2 , . . . , yk−1 ).


                                                          3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


3.2   C ONTEXTUAL F INE - TUNING
We introduce Contextual Fine-tuning (CFT), a method that incorporates contextual prompts into the
training process to guide the model’s learning in a domain-specific manner. Inspired by construc-
tivist learning theory (Piaget, 1952), which emphasizes active engagement and thoughtful process-
ing for effective learning, we hypothesize that contextual prompts can enhance the model’s ability
to internalize and reason about new concepts within the domain.

Designing contextual prompts. We define a set of contextual prompts C = {c(1) , c(2) , . . . , c(L) },
                               (l) (l)       (l)
where each prompt c(l) = (c1 , c2 , . . . , cnl ) is a sequence of tokens for some length nl , designed
to guide the model during training. These prompts mimic effective human learning strategies by
encouraging the model to engage in various cognitive processes such as focusing on key concepts,
critical analysis, and application of knowledge.
Prompt design from educational strategies: We select 10 prompts to provide a diverse yet man-
ageable set of learning strategies to balance between offering sufficient variation to cover different
cognitive approaches and maintaining practicality in training. We present four of these prompts in
the main text and include the remaining six in Appendix A.1. Each prompt is grounded in established
educational theories, as detailed below:
1. Focus on Key Concepts: This prompt aligns with Sweller (2011), which emphasizes the im-
   portance of reducing unnecessary cognitive load to facilitate learning. By focusing on essential
   information, learners can allocate their cognitive resources more effectively.
      • ”Concentrate on understanding the core principles and essential facts in the following text.
        Pay special attention to definitions, examples, and conclusions.”
2. Contextual Understanding: Piaget (1952) suggests that learners build new knowledge upon the
   foundation of their existing understanding by making connections between new and prior infor-
   mation.
      • ”As you read the next passage, relate its content to its broader context and implications.
        Think about how this information connects to what you’ve learned previously.”
3. Critical Analysis: This prompt is supported by Bloom et al. (1956), which encourages higher-
   order thinking skills such as analysis, evaluation, and synthesis, essential for deep learning and
   understanding.
      • ”Critically analyze the upcoming information. Look for underlying assumptions, evaluate
        arguments, and consider different perspectives.”
4. Question-Based Learning: Paul & Elder (2006) promote critical thinking by encouraging learners
   to engage with the material through probing questions, leading to deeper comprehension.
      • ”Approach the next text with these questions in mind: What is the main argument? How is
        evidence used to support it? What are the implications of these findings?”
The selection of prompts inspired by educational theories satisfy two important criteria – they are
compact and general-purpose (in that they are applicable across different domains). Indeed, these
prompts need not necessarily be optimal, rather they need only contain semantic content effective
for modifying the gradients during the process of fine-tuning.
Text-adaptive contextual prompts: As an alternative to manually designed prompts, we study con-
textual prompts generated by instructing GPT-4o-mini (OpenAI, 2024). The LLM was tasked to
create prompts depending on the content of each training batch. This adaptive approach serves as an
alternative to using fixed prompts derived from educational strategies, allowing us to study the value
of adaptive prompts generated by another LLM. For example, GPT4o-mini generated the following
prompt: ’Critically evaluate the methodologies and findings presented in this study on PCR tech-
niques and LeHV-5 detection. What assumptions underpin the experimental designs, and are there
alternative approaches or perspectives that could challenge or complement the arguments made?
Consider the implications of these methodologies for broader scientific research and diagnostics in
veterinary medicine.’ See Appendix D.3 for additional details on the methodology of this approach.


                                                  4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Learning with contextual prompts. For each training example, we integrate a contextual prompt
to guide the model’s focus. The procedure is as follows:
                                                                                             raw
1. Sampling: Given a domain-specific text sequence x = (x1 , x2 , . . . , xn ) sampled from Dtrain
   and we randomly select a contextual prompt c from C.
2. Input Construction: We prepend the prompt c = (c1 , c2 , . . . , cm ) to the text sequence x to form
   the new input sequence: x′ = (c1 , c2 , . . . , cm , x1 , x2 , . . . , xn ).
3. Training Objective: The model is trained to predict the tokens in x, conditioned on both the
   prompt c and the preceding tokens in x. The loss function for CFT is defined as:

                                                        n
                                                        X
                         LCF T (θ) = −Ex∼Dtrain
                                          raw ,c∼C            log Pθ (xk | c, x<k ).               (3)
                                                        k=1

Refer to Algorithm 1 in Appendix A.2 for the detailed algorithm. We hypothesize that by incorpo-
rating contextual prompts during training, we can influence the model’s learning trajectory, aligning
the gradients towards more semantically meaningful representations. These gradients guide the op-
timization process, encouraging the model to develop a deeper understanding of the content.

4   O PEN M ED T EXT
To evaluate the effectiveness of contextual fine-tuning in a domain-adaptive setting, we curated a
dataset consisting of both academic journal articles and educational textbooks. Our objective was to
assemble a corpus that not only covers a wide range of topics within bio-medicine but also provides
structured textual data (of varying levels of quality) suitable to align with our goal of studying how
well LLMs can learn using contextual prompts. The inclusion of textbooks provides structured and
pedagogically organized content, which is conducive to the learning processes we aim to emulate.
The rationale for going for quantity rather than highly curated quality in the data we collected was
to have a realistic representation of internet scale data (albeit within a constrained domain) and to
showcase how contextual fine-tuning could improve learning even-if the data was of mixed quality.
Our dataset differs from existing biomedical corpora such as PubMed Central (PMC) in several
ways. While PMC provides a vast collection of biomedical literature, it predominantly consists of
research articles focused on specific studies and often lacks the pedagogical structure found in text-
books. In contrast, our dataset integrates both detailed research articles and educational textbooks,
offering a combination of depth and structured learning materials. This integration makes it a valu-
able testing ground to assess the viability of prompts that leverage understanding past relationships
when absorbing future ones.
MDPI Journals: We collected 121,489 biomedical journal articles from MDPI, covering 37 diverse
topics such as antibiotics, biomedicines, diseases, and cardiology (see Table 6 and 7 for detailed
lists). The selection of MDPI journals was motivated by their open-access policy and the breadth of
biomedical subjects they cover, ensuring a wide-ranging representation of biomedical research.
Medical Textbooks: We also curated 29 open-source medical textbooks into our dataset. Textbooks
were chosen because they provide structured, comprehensive overviews of medical knowledge, or-
ganized pedagogically to facilitate learning. This aligns with our objective of leveraging contextual
fine-tuning to enhance the learning processes of language models, as textbooks inherently contain
explanations, definitions, and educational narratives beneficial for model training. The data we col-
lect have the following characteristics:
1. Coverage: The dataset incorporates a wide array of topics derived from both medical journals
   and textbooks, ensuring extensive coverage of biomedicine. Unlike existing datasets such as
   PubMed, which primarily consist of research articles and abstracts, our dataset combines journals
   with the structured educational content of textbooks.
2. Alignment with Educational Objectives: The inclusion of textbooks provides structured and
   pedagogically organized material, which is particularly suitable for our contextual fine-tuning
   approach. Textbooks facilitate a learning process analogous to human education, supporting the
   models in acquiring and retaining biomedical concepts effectively.

                                                  5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


3. Quality of text tokens: We have meticulously cleaned and pre-processed the texts to remove
   irrelevant sections and ensure clarity. This cleaning process reduces noise and potential sources
   of error, enhancing the quality of the data, which in turn improves the accuracy and reliability of
   models trained using this dataset.

5   C ONTEXTUAL F INE -T UNING E XPERIMENTS
5.1 E XPERIMENTAL S ETUP
We assess the efficacy of contextual fine-tuning by comparing the performance of large language
models (LLMs) when fine-tuned on domain-specific corpora using both contextual fine-tuning and
standard unsupervised fine-tuning approaches. The performance of LLMs is measured using the
relevant downstream tasks.
Datasets. We evaluate the effectiveness of contextual fine-tuning across two distinct domains: the
financial domain and the biomedical domain. For the financial domain, we use a dataset comprising
306,242 financial news articles (Jeet, 2018). In the biomedical domain, we utilize OpenMedText,
as described in detail in the previous section. When incorporating instruction fine-tuning into our
experiments, we include additional datasets specific to each domain. For the financial domain, we
use FinAlpaca (Gaurang Bharti, 2024), which contains instruction-output pairs tailored for financial
tasks. In the biomedical domain, we supplement with datasets from (OpenGPT, 2023), providing
question-answer pairs bootstrapped from the NHS encyclopedia (NHS UK, 2023). Additionally,
we incorporate UltraChat (Ding et al., 2023), a large-scale, multi-round dialogue dataset, into our
instruction fine-tuning process.
Benchmarks. The effectiveness of the fine-tuning approach in each domain is evaluated using
several domain-specific benchmarks. In the financial domain, we consider (1) the sentiment analysis
task FiQA (Xie et al., 2023) where LLMs predict sentiments categorized as ’positive’, ’neutral’, or
’negative’ in financial texts. (2) The headline classification task MultiFin (Jørgensen et al., 2023;
Xie et al., 2023), where LLMs categorize each news article into one of six categories based on
the headline. (3) Causal20 (Xie et al., 2023), which involves classifying sentences extracted from
financial news as either depicting a ’causal’ or ’noise’ relationship between financial events. For
the biomedical domain, we consider the following multiple-choice question (MCQ) datasets from
Massive Multitask Language Understanding (MMLU) (Hendrycks et al., 2021): (1) Anatomy,
(2) Clinical Knowledge, (3) College Biology, (4) College Medicine, (5) Medical Genetics, and (6)
Professional Medicine. We also use MedQA, a collection of multiple-choice questions from the
professional medical board exams (Jin et al., 2020).
Training and evaluation details. We use several configurations of the Llama-2 models to evaluate
the effectiveness of contextual fine-tuning. More details can be found under Appendix A.3. In
our evaluation, MCQs are formatted with questions followed by several options labeled with ID
symbols (e.g., A/B/C/D). Building on the approach outlined in Zheng et al. (2024), we instruct the
language models to predict an option ID symbol rather than the textual content of the answer. This
method addresses a critical issue: the likelihood of the answer’s text being naturally plausible could
be conflated with its likelihood of being the correct response due to the model’s linguistic biases.
However Robinson & Wingate (2023) raises concerns regarding LLMs’ inherent selection biases,
which highlights that these models may show a preference for specific option IDs. To counteract this
bias and enhance the validity of our evaluations, we adopt one of debiasing techniques as prescribed
in the aforementioned work. See Appendix C.1 for the detailed method.
5.2 R ESULTS
We evaluate the zero-shot performance of large language models (LLMs) trained with different
methods across both medical and financial benchmarks. See Appendix E.3 for extended results on
general-purpose and instruction-following benchmarks. It is important to note that our primary ob-
jective is not to achieve state-of-the-art performance but to assess the relative improvements offered
by contextual fine-tuning (CFT), instruction fine-tuning (IFT), and continued pretraining (CPT)
compared to a baseline model. We focus primarily on a metric for evaluating the effectiveness
of these training approaches: %∆CF     T
                                    CP T , which denotes the performance difference between CFT and
CPT.
Contextual fine-tuning is effective across model scales. We asses how contextual fine-tuning
performs across different model scales. Table 1 presents medical benchmarks for the 7B and 13B


                                                  6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                               Accuracy (↑)
Llama 2 7B    Anatomy   Clinical Knowledge   College Biology    College Medicine   Medical Genetics   Professional Medicine    MedQA     Average
Chat          44.07     46.79                48.61              39.02              49.00              48.90                    38.96     45.05
Chat (CPT)    45.19     47.17                49.31              43.93              50.50              46.32                    39.28     45.96
Chat (CFT)    48.15     48.87                52.08              44.22              54.00              46.69                    40.65     47.81

Llama 2 13B   Anatomy   Clinical Knowledge   College Biology    College Medicine   Medical Genetics   Professional Medicine    MedQA     Average
Chat          51.85     56.60                54.17              46.82              63.50              56.99                    45.33     53.61
Chat (CPT)    50.37     60.00                55.90              50.58              62.00              57.35                    43.95     54.31
Chat (CFT)    53.33     63.21                57.99              56.35              62.50              57.72                    44.85     56.56


Table 1: Medical Benchmarks (Zero-shot). The results show that the 7B model achieved a %∆CF
                                                                                          CP T
                                                                                              T
                                                                       CF T
of 1.85%. The 13B model demonstrated increased effectiveness with a %∆CP T of 2.25%, indicating
that CFT’s impact grows with the model’s scale.

                 FiQA      Causal 20         Multifin                                          FiQA        Causal 20          Multifin
                                                         Average                                                                         Average
 Llama 2 7B       F1          F1               F1                          Llama 2 13B          F1            F1                F1
    Chat         56.40      90.40             38.74        61.48              Chat             61.18        84.77              45.81       63.92
 Chat (CPT)      62.53      90.16             38.23        63.64            Chat (CPT)         66.96        90.06              45.33       67.45
 Chat (CFT)      67.69      90.17             46.01        67.96            Chat (CFT)         70.55        89.87              50.94       70.45

Table 2: Llama 2 7B Financial Benchmarks                                  Table 3: Llama 2 13B Financial Benchmarks
(Zero-shot).                                                              (Zero-shot).



model scales which shows a %∆CF    T
                                CP T = 1.85%. For the 13B model, these metrics increase to
    CF T
%∆CP T = 2.25%. Similarly, Tables 2 and 3 contain financial benchmarks. The 7B model records a
%∆CF    T                                                   CF T
    CP T = 4.32% whereas the 13B model, the results are %∆CP T = 3%. The results demonstrate
that the simple augmentation of contextual prompting can help increase performance across the
board.

Contextual fine-tuning is preferable to existing approaches for improving a model at a fixed
scale. The tables in Appendix D.1 show the performance on the medical and financial benchmarks
while holding the model scale constant. The base non-instruct model holds an average accuracy of
41.34% on the medical benchmarks. Our experiments find that combining training schemes pro-
vides the greatest boost in fine-tuning performance. In particular, combining CFT and IFT gives
                               CF T +IF T
a performance boost of %∆Base             = 2.95% compared to %∆CP        T +IF T
                                                                       Base       = 1.91%. Simi-
lar trends are seen in the financial benchmarks where the same combination led to an increase of
%∆CF    T +IF T
     Base       = 36.28% in F1 score. These results further solidify that augmenting the CPT stage
of fine-tuning to instead use CFT provides a near-free boost in performance. More detailed analy-
ses can be found in Appendix D.1. Additionally, we compare CFT with AdaptLLM (Cheng et al.,
2024), a method of domain-specific continued pretraining on medical benchmarks. Table 4 shows
that CFT consistently achieves higher accuracy across all tasks by 4.89% on average. This result
highlights CFT’s superior effectiveness on our full-text medical datasets compared to AdaptLLM.
Refer to Appendix E.2 for more details on the AdaptLLM methodology.

The semantic content of the contextual prompts are important to improving performance.
The core aspect of our study involves examining the impact of additional context on model perfor-
mance, and specifically how the signal from this context provides a boost in learning performance.
We conduct an ablation by introducing negative contextual prompts, which are designed to mislead
the model by suggesting that the following information is incorrect. These results can be found
in tables under Appendix D.2. In the financial domain, the impact of negative prompts is evident.
The 7B model experienced a performance drop of %∆−CF   CF T
                                                            T
                                                              = −3.41%, and the 13B model sees
a decrease of %∆−CFCF T
                        T
                          =  −2.39%.   All models  undergoing  negative contextual fine-tuning still
perform better than those subjected to CPT. In addition to experiments with negative contextual
prompts, we investigate text-adaptive Contextual Fine-Tuning (TextAdaptCFT) using automatically
generated, text-dependent prompts. As shown in Table 5, TextAdaptCFT achieves an average ac-
curacy of 46.31%, outperforming both the baseline Chat model (45.05%) and the Chat CPT model
(45.96%). This suggests that our manually constructed contextual prompts are not the only viable
solution, and that semantic content within prompts plays a crucial role in enhancing model perfor-
mance. Refer to Appendix D.3 for additional details on our automated prompt construction process.


                                                                      7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                                          Accuracy (↑)
 Llama 2 7B   Anatomy   Clinical Knowledge    College Biology    College Medicine Medical Genetics        Professional Medicine       MedQA    Average
    Chat       44.07           46.79               48.61               39.02           49.00                      48.90                38.96    45.05
 Chat (CPT)    45.19           47.17               49.31               43.93           50.50                      46.32                39.28    45.96
 Chat (CFT)    48.15           48.87               52.08               44.22           54.00                      46.69                40.65    47.81
 AdaptLLM      44.45           47.36               48.27               39.60           45.00                      38.61                37.12    42.92


Table 4: Medical Benchmarks (Zero-shot). The results show that the 7B model trained with CFT
outperforms the model trained with AdaptLLM by 4.89% on average.

                                                                       Accuracy (↑)
Llama 2 7B            Anatomy   Clinical Knowledge   College Biology    College Medicine   Medical Genetics   Professional Medicine   MedQA    Average
Chat                  44.07     46.79                48.61              39.02              49.00              48.90                   38.96    45.05
Chat (CPT)            45.19     47.17                49.31              43.93              50.50              46.32                   39.28    45.96
Chat (CFT)            48.15     48.87                52.08              44.22              54.00              46.69                   40.65    47.81
Chat (TextAdaptCFT)   45.56     48.12                49.31              44.80              52.50              43.57                   40.34    46.31


Table 5: Medical Benchmarks (Zero-shot). TextAdaptCFT outperforms the baseline Chat model
and the Chat CPT model by 1.26% and 0.35% on average, respectively.



5.3    S YNTHETIC E XPERIMENTS
We hypothesize that the effectiveness of CFT stems from changing the gradients obtained via con-
ditioning on prompts. These serve to regularize the learning process during fine-tuning. Testing this
hypothesis directly is challenging since (a) different LLMs might interpret semantic information in
a prompt differently and (b) it requires knowing which neurons are responsible for representing the
inferred semantic information in the prompt. The primary objective of our synthetic experiments is
to analyze how contextual prompts affect the gradients of transformer models during training in a
simplified controlled setting where we can describe the semantic information that is necessary for
learning explicitly via text.

Setup. Using the framework of Garg et al. (2022), we first pre-train a transformer model to learn
a class of linear functions F = {f | f (x) = w⊤ x, w ∈ Rd }, where w ∼ N (0, Id ) and x ∼
N (0, Id ). We then investigate how different fine-tuning strategies affect the model’s ability to learn
a new compositional function class G where each g ∈ G is a composition g(x) = h(f (x)) for
some f ∈ F. This setup models real-world scenarios where a pretrained LLM understands basic
patterns (represented by f ), and needs to quickly learn new tasks (represented by h) that build upon
this understanding. We explore two distinct compositional structures: polynomial combinations
g(x) = f (x) + f (x)2 and multiple linear relationships g(x) = f (x) + w2⊤ x. For each structure, we
evaluate three fine-tuning strategies with that differ in their prompt construction P :

1. Continued Pretraining (CPT): PCP T = (x1 , g(x1 ), x2 , g(x2 ), . . . , xk , g(xk )) only exposes the
   model to inputs and their corresponding outputs under g(x), without explicitly providing f (x).

2. Contextual Fine-Tuning (CFT): PCFT = (x1 , f (x1 ), . . . , xk , f (xk ), x1 , g(x1 ), . . . , xk , g(xk ))
   provides explicit access to both f (x) and g(x) during fine-tuning, allowing the model to learn
   the relationship between them.

3. Negative Contextual Fine-Tuning (NEG-CFT): PNEG-CFT = (x1 , r1 , . . . , xk , rk , x1 , g(x1 ), . . . ,
   xk , g(xk )), where ri ∼ U(0, 1). This is an ablation where random values replace f (x) in the
   context, providing non-helpful information.

This construction allows us to directly measure how different training strategies affect the model’s
ability to efficiently learn compositional functions. We refer the reader to Appendix F for the full
experiment breakdown.

Contextual fine-tuning improves learning dynamics. Figure 4a and 4c illustrate that transform-
ers fine-tuned using CFT achieve lower loss compared to those trained with CPT and NEG-CFT
suggesting that the content of the contextual prompts in both cases better guides training dynamics
when learning a new function class.


                                                                          8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


              (a) Inner product vs Step                             (b) Inner product vs Step

Figure 2: We examine the gradients during Contextual Fine-Tuning (CFT), Continued Pretraining (CPT), and
Negative Contextual Fine-Tuning (NEG-CFT) on learning new function classes—polynomial combination (a)
and multiple linear relationships (b). (a) and (b) illustrate the normalized inner product between the trans-
former’s gradients and the true gradients ∇x g(xquery ), where CFT exhibits a higher alignment, approaching
1, indicating effective learning of the target functions.


Contextual prompts help the model capture the underlying functional relationships. We ex-
amine the gradients of the transformer across different training strategies. We look at the case where
the transformer’s input is of the form P = (x1 , f (x1 ), . . . , xk , f (xk ), xquery ) and its output aims
to approximate f (xquery ). Consequently, the gradient of the transformer’s output with respect to
xquery should align with the gradient ∇x g(xquery ). In our experiments, we compute the normalized
inner product between the gradient of the transformer’s output and the true gradient ∇x g(xquery )
during training. For the polynomial combination class G, the gradient is:
                                 ∇x g(xquery ) = w1 + 2(w2⊤ xquery )w2                                   (4)
and for the multiple linear relationships class,
                                          ∇x g(xquery ) = w1 + w2                                        (5)
Figure 2a demonstrates that the gradients from the CFT-trained transformer exhibit a much higher
alignment with ∇x g(xquery ) compared to those from CPT and NEG-CFT. The inner product be-
tween the gradients approaches 1 for CFT, indicating near-perfect alignment. This close alignment
suggests that the model’s updates are effectively moving in the direction that minimizes the loss
concerning the target function g. Essentially, the transformer not only predicts g(x) accurately but
also captures the underlying functional relationships due to the informative contextual prompts. Fig-
ure 2b highlights the importance of the content within the contextual prompts. Despite NEG-CFT
having a similar prompt structure to CFT, the use of random or non-informative values in place of
f (xi ) results in gradients that do not align well with ∇x g(xquery ). This misalignment indicates that
the relevance and quality of the content of contextual prompts are crucial for guiding the model’s
learning process effectively.

6    C ONCLUSION
This study introduces contextual fine-tuning, a variation of instruction tuning, which leverages con-
textual gradients to guide the learning process through simple, domain-adaptive prompts. Our exper-
iments reveal that the contextual gradients enhance performance by effectively direct model learning,
demonstrating superior results over traditional continued domain pretraining in both financial and
medical domains. Finally, we open-source a biomedical dataset curated from MDPI journals and
other open-source medical textbooks.
Despite these promising results, there remains more to do to better understand this phenomena. We
conjecture that the effectiveness of our method is related to explanatory text present in the training
corpora. Prystawski et al. (2023) suggests that chain-of-thought prompting works because local rea-
soning steps embedded in pretraining corpora simulate sequences of steps that lead to conclusion
which are relied on at test time. We hypothesize that similar such contextual cues exist in pretraining
data. Future studies examining this carefully would be valuable to test this conjecture and shed light


                                                     9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


on the mechanisms by which prompts provide useful supervisory signals during learning. Addition-
ally, we have experimented with CFT with data that likely contain a high density of information
such as medical journals and textbooks. This rich semantic content allows contextual prompts to
effectively guide the learning process by influencing gradient updates. In future work, it would
be valuable to apply contextual fine-tuning to different types of data, including those with longer
context lengths or lower information density, such as Reddit posts.

7   ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We acknowledge Aryan Dhar for early implementations of tools to assist with creating the textbook
datasets. RGK is supported by a Canada CIFAR AI Chair. This research was supported by an Ama-
zon Research Grant and an NFRF Special Call NFRFR2022-00526. Resources used in preparing
this research were provided, in part, by the Province of Ontario, the Government of Canada through
CIFAR, and companies sponsoring the Vector Institute.

R EFERENCES
Rohan Anil, Andrew M Dai, Orhan Firat, Melvin Johnson, Dmitry Lepikhin, Alexandre Passos,
  Siamak Shakeri, Emanuel Taropa, Paige Bailey, Zhifeng Chen, et al. Palm 2 technical report.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.10403, 2023.
Anthropic. Claude (3.7 sonnet). https://www.anthropic.com/claude, 2025. Large lan-
  guage model, accessed 2025.
Zhangir Azerbayev, Hailey Schoelkopf, Keiran Paster, Marco Dos Santos, Stephen McAleer, Al-
  bert Q Jiang, Jia Deng, Stella Biderman, and Sean Welleck. Llemma: An open language model
  for mathematics. arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.10631, 2023.
B. S. Bloom, M. B. Engelhart, E. J. Furst, W. H. Hill, and D. R. Krathwohl. Taxonomy of educational
  objectives. The classification of educational goals. Handbook 1: Cognitive domain. Longmans
  Green, New York, 1956.
Rishi Bommasani, Drew A Hudson, Ehsan Adeli, Russ Altman, Simran Arora, Sydney von Arx,
  Michael S Bernstein, Jeannette Bohg, Antoine Bosselut, Emma Brunskill, et al. On the opportu-
  nities and risks of foundation models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2108.07258, 2021.
Tom Brown, Benjamin Mann, Nick Ryder, Melanie Subbiah, Jared D Kaplan, Prafulla Dhari-
  wal, Arvind Neelakantan, Pranav Shyam, Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, Sandhini Agar-
  wal, Ariel Herbert-Voss, Gretchen Krueger, Tom Henighan, Rewon Child, Aditya Ramesh,
  Daniel Ziegler, Jeffrey Wu, Clemens Winter, Chris Hesse, Mark Chen, Eric Sigler, Mateusz
  Litwin, Scott Gray, Benjamin Chess, Jack Clark, Christopher Berner, Sam McCandlish, Alec
  Radford, Ilya Sutskever, and Dario Amodei. Language models are few-shot learners. In
  H. Larochelle, M. Ranzato, R. Hadsell, M.F. Balcan, and H. Lin (eds.), Advances in Neu-
  ral Information Processing Systems, volume 33, pp. 1877–1901. Curran Associates, Inc.,
  2020. URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper_files/paper/2020/
  file/1457c0d6bfcb4967418bfb8ac142f64a-Paper.pdf.
Lingjiao Chen, Matei Zaharia, and James Zou. How is chatgpt’s behavior changing over time? arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2307.09009, 2023a.
Zeming Chen, Alejandro Hernández Cano, Angelika Romanou, Antoine Bonnet, Kyle Matoba,
  Francesco Salvi, Matteo Pagliardini, Simin Fan, Andreas Köpf, Amirkeivan Mohtashami, Alexan-
  dre Sallinen, Alireza Sakhaeirad, Vinitra Swamy, Igor Krawczuk, Deniz Bayazit, Axel Marmet,
  Syrielle Montariol, Mary-Anne Hartley, Martin Jaggi, and Antoine Bosselut. Meditron-70b: Scal-
  ing medical pretraining for large language models, 2023b.
Daixuan Cheng, Shaohan Huang, and Furu Wei. Adapting large language models via reading com-
  prehension. In The Twelfth International Conference on Learning Representations, 2024. URL
  https://openreview.net/forum?id=y886UXPEZ0.
Fergus I.M. Craik and Robert S. Lockhart. Levels of processing: A framework for memory research.
  Journal of Verbal Learning and Verbal Behavior, 11(6):671–684, 1972. ISSN 0022-5371. doi:

                                                10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


  https://doi.org/10.1016/S0022-5371(72)80001-X. URL https://www.sciencedirect.
  com/science/article/pii/S002253717280001X.
Tri Dao. FlashAttention-2: Faster attention with better parallelism and work partitioning. In Inter-
  national Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR), 2024.
Ning Ding, Yulin Chen, Bokai Xu, Yujia Qin, Zhi Zheng, Shengding Hu, Zhiyuan Liu, Maosong
  Sun, and Bowen Zhou. Enhancing chat language models by scaling high-quality instructional
  conversations. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.14233, 2023.
Zhengxiao Du, Aohan Zeng, Yuxiao Dong, and Jie Tang. Understanding emergent abilities of
  language models from the loss perspective, 2024.
Ronen Eldan and Yuanzhi Li. Tinystories: How small can language models be and still speak
  coherent english? arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.07759, 2023.
Kawin Ethayarajh, Winnie Xu, Niklas Muennighoff, Dan Jurafsky, and Douwe Kiela. Kto: Model
  alignment as prospect theoretic optimization. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.01306, 2024.
Shivam Garg, Dimitris Tsipras, Percy S Liang, and Gregory Valiant. What can transformers learn
  in-context? a case study of simple function classes. Advances in Neural Information Processing
  Systems, 35:30583–30598, 2022.
Gaurang Bharti. finance-alpaca (revision 51d16b6), 2024. URL https://huggingface.co/
  datasets/gbharti/finance-alpaca.
Arnav Gudibande, Eric Wallace, Charlie Snell, Xinyang Geng, Hao Liu, Pieter Abbeel, Sergey
  Levine, and Dawn Song. The false promise of imitating proprietary llms. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2305.15717, 2023.
J.P. Guilford. The Nature of Human Intelligence. McGraw-Hill series in psychology. McGraw-
   Hill, 1967. ISBN 9780070251359. URL https://books.google.ca/books?id=
   T-ZJAAAAMAAJ.
Suriya Gunasekar, Yi Zhang, Jyoti Aneja, Caio César Teodoro Mendes, Allie Del Giorno, Sivakanth
  Gopi, Mojan Javaheripi, Piero Kauffmann, Gustavo de Rosa, Olli Saarikivi, et al. Textbooks are
  all you need. arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.11644, 2023.
Dan Hendrycks, Collin Burns, Steven Basart, Andy Zou, Mantas Mazeika, Dawn Song, and Ja-
  cob Steinhardt. Measuring massive multitask language understanding. In International Confer-
  ence on Learning Representations, 2021. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=
  d7KBjmI3GmQ.
Srinivasan Iyer, Xi Victoria Lin, Ramakanth Pasunuru, Todor Mihaylov, Daniel Simig, Ping Yu,
  Kurt Shuster, Tianlu Wang, Qing Liu, Punit Singh Koura, et al. Opt-iml: Scaling language model
  instruction meta learning through the lens of generalization. arXiv preprint arXiv:2212.12017,
  2022.
Jeet. US Financial News Articles. https://www.kaggle.com/datasets/jeet2016/
  us-financial-news-articles, 2018.
Di Jin, Eileen Pan, Nassim Oufattole, Wei-Hung Weng, Hanyi Fang, and Peter Szolovits. What dis-
  ease does this patient have? a large-scale open domain question answering dataset from medical
  exams. arXiv preprint arXiv:2009.13081, 2020.
Rasmus Jørgensen, Oliver Brandt, Mareike Hartmann, Xiang Dai, Christian Igel, and Desmond
  Elliott. MultiFin: A dataset for multilingual financial NLP. In Andreas Vlachos and Is-
  abelle Augenstein (eds.), Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: EACL
  2023, pp. 894–909, Dubrovnik, Croatia, May 2023. Association for Computational Linguis-
  tics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2023.findings-eacl.66. URL https://aclanthology.org/2023.
  findings-eacl.66.
Diederik Kingma and Jimmy Ba. Adam: A method for stochastic optimization. In International
  Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR), San Diega, CA, USA, 2015.


                                                11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Jean Lave and Etienne Wenger. Situated Learning: Legitimate Peripheral Participation. Learning
  in Doing: Social, Cognitive and Computational Perspectives. Cambridge University Press, 1991.
Harrison Lee, Samrat Phatale, Hassan Mansoor, Kellie Lu, Thomas Mesnard, Colton Bishop, Victor
  Carbune, and Abhinav Rastogi. Rlaif: Scaling reinforcement learning from human feedback with
  ai feedback. arXiv preprint arXiv:2309.00267, 2023.
Patrick Lewis, Ethan Perez, Aleksandra Piktus, Fabio Petroni, Vladimir Karpukhin, Naman Goyal,
  Heinrich Küttler, Mike Lewis, Wen tau Yih, Tim Rocktäschel, Sebastian Riedel, and Douwe
  Kiela. Retrieval-augmented generation for knowledge-intensive nlp tasks, 2021.
Yuanzhi Li, Sébastien Bubeck, Ronen Eldan, Allie Del Giorno, Suriya Gunasekar, and Yin Tat Lee.
  Textbooks are all you need ii: phi-1.5 technical report. arXiv preprint arXiv:2309.05463, 2023.
Mingjie Liu, Teodor-Dumitru Ene, Robert Kirby, Chris Cheng, Nathaniel Pinckney, Rongjian Liang,
 Jonah Alben, Himyanshu Anand, Sanmitra Banerjee, Ismet Bayraktaroglu, et al. Chipnemo:
 Domain-adapted llms for chip design. arXiv preprint arXiv:2311.00176, 2023.
Yun Luo, Zhen Yang, Fandong Meng, Yafu Li, Jie Zhou, and Yue Zhang. An empirical study
  of catastrophic forgetting in large language models during continual fine-tuning. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2308.08747, 2023.
NHS UK. NHS Health A to Z. https://www.nhs.uk/conditions, 2023. URL https:
 //www.nhs.uk/.
OpenAI.           Gpt-4o  mini.          https://openai.com/index/
  gpt-4o-mini-advancing-cost-efficient-intelligence, 2024.
OpenAI, Josh Achiam, Steven Adler, Sandhini Agarwal, Lama Ahmad, Ilge Akkaya, Floren-
  cia Leoni Aleman, Diogo Almeida, Janko Altenschmidt, Sam Altman, Shyamal Anadkat, Red
  Avila, Igor Babuschkin, Suchir Balaji, Valerie Balcom, Paul Baltescu, Haiming Bao, Moham-
  mad Bavarian, Jeff Belgum, Irwan Bello, Jake Berdine, Gabriel Bernadett-Shapiro, Christopher
  Berner, Lenny Bogdonoff, Oleg Boiko, Madelaine Boyd, Anna-Luisa Brakman, Greg Brock-
  man, Tim Brooks, Miles Brundage, Kevin Button, Trevor Cai, Rosie Campbell, Andrew Cann,
  Brittany Carey, Chelsea Carlson, Rory Carmichael, Brooke Chan, Che Chang, Fotis Chantzis,
  Derek Chen, Sully Chen, Ruby Chen, Jason Chen, Mark Chen, Ben Chess, Chester Cho, Casey
  Chu, Hyung Won Chung, Dave Cummings, Jeremiah Currier, Yunxing Dai, Cory Decareaux,
  Thomas Degry, Noah Deutsch, Damien Deville, Arka Dhar, David Dohan, Steve Dowling, Sheila
  Dunning, Adrien Ecoffet, Atty Eleti, Tyna Eloundou, David Farhi, Liam Fedus, Niko Felix,
  Simón Posada Fishman, Juston Forte, Isabella Fulford, Leo Gao, Elie Georges, Christian Gib-
  son, Vik Goel, Tarun Gogineni, Gabriel Goh, Rapha Gontijo-Lopes, Jonathan Gordon, Morgan
  Grafstein, Scott Gray, Ryan Greene, Joshua Gross, Shixiang Shane Gu, Yufei Guo, Chris Hal-
  lacy, Jesse Han, Jeff Harris, Yuchen He, Mike Heaton, Johannes Heidecke, Chris Hesse, Alan
  Hickey, Wade Hickey, Peter Hoeschele, Brandon Houghton, Kenny Hsu, Shengli Hu, Xin Hu,
  Joost Huizinga, Shantanu Jain, Shawn Jain, Joanne Jang, Angela Jiang, Roger Jiang, Haozhun
  Jin, Denny Jin, Shino Jomoto, Billie Jonn, Heewoo Jun, Tomer Kaftan, Łukasz Kaiser, Ali Ka-
  mali, Ingmar Kanitscheider, Nitish Shirish Keskar, Tabarak Khan, Logan Kilpatrick, Jong Wook
  Kim, Christina Kim, Yongjik Kim, Jan Hendrik Kirchner, Jamie Kiros, Matt Knight, Daniel
  Kokotajlo, Łukasz Kondraciuk, Andrew Kondrich, Aris Konstantinidis, Kyle Kosic, Gretchen
  Krueger, Vishal Kuo, Michael Lampe, Ikai Lan, Teddy Lee, Jan Leike, Jade Leung, Daniel
  Levy, Chak Ming Li, Rachel Lim, Molly Lin, Stephanie Lin, Mateusz Litwin, Theresa Lopez,
  Ryan Lowe, Patricia Lue, Anna Makanju, Kim Malfacini, Sam Manning, Todor Markov, Yaniv
  Markovski, Bianca Martin, Katie Mayer, Andrew Mayne, Bob McGrew, Scott Mayer McKinney,
  Christine McLeavey, Paul McMillan, Jake McNeil, David Medina, Aalok Mehta, Jacob Menick,
  Luke Metz, Andrey Mishchenko, Pamela Mishkin, Vinnie Monaco, Evan Morikawa, Daniel
  Mossing, Tong Mu, Mira Murati, Oleg Murk, David Mély, Ashvin Nair, Reiichiro Nakano, Ra-
  jeev Nayak, Arvind Neelakantan, Richard Ngo, Hyeonwoo Noh, Long Ouyang, Cullen O’Keefe,
  Jakub Pachocki, Alex Paino, Joe Palermo, Ashley Pantuliano, Giambattista Parascandolo, Joel
  Parish, Emy Parparita, Alex Passos, Mikhail Pavlov, Andrew Peng, Adam Perelman, Filipe
  de Avila Belbute Peres, Michael Petrov, Henrique Ponde de Oliveira Pinto, Michael, Pokorny,
  Michelle Pokrass, Vitchyr H. Pong, Tolly Powell, Alethea Power, Boris Power, Elizabeth Proehl,


                                               12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


  Raul Puri, Alec Radford, Jack Rae, Aditya Ramesh, Cameron Raymond, Francis Real, Kendra
  Rimbach, Carl Ross, Bob Rotsted, Henri Roussez, Nick Ryder, Mario Saltarelli, Ted Sanders,
  Shibani Santurkar, Girish Sastry, Heather Schmidt, David Schnurr, John Schulman, Daniel Sel-
  sam, Kyla Sheppard, Toki Sherbakov, Jessica Shieh, Sarah Shoker, Pranav Shyam, Szymon Sidor,
  Eric Sigler, Maddie Simens, Jordan Sitkin, Katarina Slama, Ian Sohl, Benjamin Sokolowsky,
  Yang Song, Natalie Staudacher, Felipe Petroski Such, Natalie Summers, Ilya Sutskever, Jie Tang,
  Nikolas Tezak, Madeleine B. Thompson, Phil Tillet, Amin Tootoonchian, Elizabeth Tseng, Pre-
  ston Tuggle, Nick Turley, Jerry Tworek, Juan Felipe Cerón Uribe, Andrea Vallone, Arun Vi-
  jayvergiya, Chelsea Voss, Carroll Wainwright, Justin Jay Wang, Alvin Wang, Ben Wang, Jonathan
  Ward, Jason Wei, CJ Weinmann, Akila Welihinda, Peter Welinder, Jiayi Weng, Lilian Weng, Matt
  Wiethoff, Dave Willner, Clemens Winter, Samuel Wolrich, Hannah Wong, Lauren Workman,
  Sherwin Wu, Jeff Wu, Michael Wu, Kai Xiao, Tao Xu, Sarah Yoo, Kevin Yu, Qiming Yuan, Wo-
  jciech Zaremba, Rowan Zellers, Chong Zhang, Marvin Zhang, Shengjia Zhao, Tianhao Zheng,
  Juntang Zhuang, William Zhuk, and Barret Zoph. Gpt-4 technical report, 2024.
OpenGPT. A large language model for healthcare — nhs-llm and opengpt. https://github.
  com/CogStack/OpenGPT, 2023.
Long Ouyang, Jeffrey Wu, Xu Jiang, Diogo Almeida, Carroll Wainwright, Pamela Mishkin, Chong
  Zhang, Sandhini Agarwal, Katarina Slama, Alex Ray, et al. Training language models to fol-
  low instructions with human feedback. Advances in neural information processing systems, 35:
  27730–27744, 2022.
Keiran Paster, Marco Dos Santos, Zhangir Azerbayev, and Jimmy Ba. Openwebmath: An open
  dataset of high-quality mathematical web text. arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.06786, 2023.
Richard Paul and Linda Elder. The Thinker’s Guide to Socratic Questioning: Based on Critical
  Thinking Concepts & Tools. The Foundation for Critical Thinking, Dillon Beach, CA, USA,
  2006.
Baolin Peng, Chunyuan Li, Pengcheng He, Michel Galley, and Jianfeng Gao. Instruction tuning
  with gpt-4. arXiv preprint arXiv:2304.03277, 2023.
J. Piaget. The Origins of Intelligence in Children. International Universities Press paperback li-
   brary. International Universities Press, 1952. ISBN 9780823682072. URL https://books.
   google.ca/books?id=H7MkAQAAMAAJ.
Ben Prystawski, Michael Y. Li, and Noah Goodman. Why think step by step? reasoning emerges
  from the locality of experience. In Thirty-seventh Conference on Neural Information Processing
  Systems, 2023. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=rcXXNFVlEn.
Alec Radford, Jeff Wu, Rewon Child, David Luan, Dario Amodei, and Ilya Sutskever.
  Language models are unsupervised multitask learners. 2019. URL https://api.
  semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:160025533.
Rafael Rafailov, Archit Sharma, Eric Mitchell, Christopher D Manning, Stefano Ermon, and Chelsea
  Finn. Direct preference optimization: Your language model is secretly a reward model. Advances
  in Neural Information Processing Systems, 36, 2024.
Machel Reid, Nikolay Savinov, Denis Teplyashin, Dmitry Lepikhin, Timothy Lillicrap, Jean-
 baptiste Alayrac, Radu Soricut, Angeliki Lazaridou, Orhan Firat, Julian Schrittwieser, et al. Gem-
 ini 1.5: Unlocking multimodal understanding across millions of tokens of context. arXiv preprint
 arXiv:2403.05530, 2024.
Joshua Robinson and David Wingate. Leveraging large language models for multiple choice ques-
  tion answering. In The Eleventh International Conference on Learning Representations, 2023.
  URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=yKbprarjc5B.
Baptiste Rozière, Jonas Gehring, Fabian Gloeckle, Sten Sootla, Itai Gat, Xiaoqing Ellen Tan, Yossi
  Adi, Jingyu Liu, Romain Sauvestre, Tal Remez, Jérémy Rapin, Artyom Kozhevnikov, Ivan Ev-
  timov, Joanna Bitton, Manish Bhatt, Cristian Canton Ferrer, Aaron Grattafiori, Wenhan Xiong,
  Alexandre Défossez, Jade Copet, Faisal Azhar, Hugo Touvron, Louis Martin, Nicolas Usunier,
  Thomas Scialom, and Gabriel Synnaeve. Code llama: Open foundation models for code, 2024.


                                                13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


D.A. Schon. The Reflective Practitioner: How Professionals Think In Action. Basic Books. Basic
  Books, 1984. ISBN 9780465068784. URL https://books.google.ca/books?id=
  ceJIWay4-jgC.
Bryan Roche Steven C. Hayes, Dermot Barnes-Holmes (ed.). Relational Frame Theory. Springer
  New York, NY, 2001. doi: https://doi.org/10.1007/b108413.
John Sweller. Chapter two - cognitive load theory. volume 55 of Psychology of Learn-
  ing and Motivation, pp. 37–76. Academic Press, 2011.    doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/
  B978-0-12-387691-1.00002-8. URL https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/
  article/pii/B9780123876911000028.
Rohan Taori, Ishaan Gulrajani, Tianyi Zhang, Yann Dubois, Xuechen Li, Carlos Guestrin, Percy
  Liang, and Tatsunori B. Hashimoto. Stanford alpaca: An instruction-following llama model.
  https://github.com/tatsu-lab/stanford_alpaca, 2023.
Hugo Touvron, Thibaut Lavril, Gautier Izacard, Xavier Martinet, Marie-Anne Lachaux, Timothée
  Lacroix, Baptiste Rozière, Naman Goyal, Eric Hambro, Faisal Azhar, Aurelien Rodriguez, Ar-
  mand Joulin, Edouard Grave, and Guillaume Lample. Llama: Open and efficient foundation
  language models, 2023a.
Hugo Touvron, Louis Martin, Kevin Stone, Peter Albert, Amjad Almahairi, Yasmine Babaei, Niko-
  lay Bashlykov, Soumya Batra, Prajjwal Bhargava, Shruti Bhosale, et al. Llama 2: Open founda-
  tion and fine-tuned chat models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.09288, 2023b.
Xiao Wang, Yuansen Zhang, Tianze Chen, Songyang Gao, Senjie Jin, Xianjun Yang, Zhiheng Xi,
  Rui Zheng, Yicheng Zou, Tao Gui, et al. Trace: A comprehensive benchmark for continual
  learning in large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.06762, 2023a.
Xuezhi Wang, Jason Wei, Dale Schuurmans, Quoc Le, Ed Chi, Sharan Narang, Aakanksha Chowdh-
  ery, and Denny Zhou. Self-consistency improves chain of thought reasoning in language models,
  2023b.
Yizhong Wang, Yeganeh Kordi, Swaroop Mishra, Alisa Liu, Noah A. Smith, Daniel Khashabi, and
  Hannaneh Hajishirzi. Self-instruct: Aligning language models with self-generated instructions.
  In Anna Rogers, Jordan Boyd-Graber, and Naoaki Okazaki (eds.), Proceedings of the 61st Annual
  Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers), pp. 13484–
  13508, Toronto, Canada, July 2023c. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/
  v1/2023.acl-long.754. URL https://aclanthology.org/2023.acl-long.754.
Yubo Wang, Xueguang Ma, Ge Zhang, Yuansheng Ni, Abhranil Chandra, Shiguang Guo, Weim-
  ing Ren, Aaran Arulraj, Xuan He, Ziyan Jiang, Tianle Li, Max Ku, Kai Wang, Alex Zhuang,
  Rongqi Fan, Xiang Yue, and Wenhu Chen. MMLU-pro: A more robust and challenging multi-
  task language understanding benchmark. In The Thirty-eight Conference on Neural Information
  Processing Systems Datasets and Benchmarks Track, 2024. URL https://openreview.
  net/forum?id=y10DM6R2r3.
Yubo Wang, Xiang Yue, and Wenhu Chen. Critique fine-tuning: Learning to critique is more effec-
  tive than learning to imitate, 2025. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2501.17703.
Jason Wei, Maarten Paul Bosma, Vincent Zhao, Kelvin Guu, Adams Wei Yu, Brian Lester, Nan Du,
  Andrew Mingbo Dai, and Quoc V. Le. Finetuned language models are zero-shot learners. 2022a.
  URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=gEZrGCozdqR.
Jason Wei, Yi Tay, Rishi Bommasani, Colin Raffel, Barret Zoph, Sebastian Borgeaud, Dani
  Yogatama, Maarten Bosma, Denny Zhou, Donald Metzler, Ed H. Chi, Tatsunori Hashimoto,
  Oriol Vinyals, Percy Liang, Jeff Dean, and William Fedus. Emergent abilities of large lan-
  guage models. Transactions on Machine Learning Research, 2022b. ISSN 2835-8856. URL
  https://openreview.net/forum?id=yzkSU5zdwD. Survey Certification.
Jason Wei, Xuezhi Wang, Dale Schuurmans, Maarten Bosma, Fei Xia, Ed Chi, Quoc V Le, Denny
  Zhou, et al. Chain-of-thought prompting elicits reasoning in large language models. Advances in
  neural information processing systems, 35:24824–24837, 2022c.


                                               14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


M. C. Wittrock. Learning as a generative process 1. Educational Psychologist, 11(2):87–
 95, 1974. doi: 10.1080/00461527409529129. URL https://doi.org/10.1080/
 00461527409529129.
Shijie Wu, Ozan Irsoy, Steven Lu, Vadim Dabravolski, Mark Dredze, Sebastian Gehrmann, Prab-
  hanjan Kambadur, David Rosenberg, and Gideon Mann. Bloomberggpt: A large language model
  for finance, 2023.
Qianqian Xie, Weiguang Han, Xiao Zhang, Yanzhao Lai, Min Peng, Alejandro Lopez-Lira, and
  Jimin Huang. PIXIU: A comprehensive benchmark, instruction dataset and large language model
  for finance. In Thirty-seventh Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems Datasets and
  Benchmarks Track, 2023. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=vTrRq6vCQH.
Chujie Zheng, Hao Zhou, Fandong Meng, Jie Zhou, and Minlie Huang. Large language models
  are not robust multiple choice selectors. In The Twelfth International Conference on Learning
  Representations, 2024. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=shr9PXz7T0.
Chunting Zhou, Pengfei Liu, Puxin Xu, Srinivasan Iyer, Jiao Sun, Yuning Mao, Xuezhe Ma, Avia
  Efrat, Ping Yu, Lili Yu, et al. Lima: Less is more for alignment. Advances in Neural Information
  Processing Systems, 36, 2024.
Jeffrey Zhou, Tianjian Lu, Swaroop Mishra, Siddhartha Brahma, Sujoy Basu, Yi Luan, Denny Zhou,
   and Le Hou. Instruction-following evaluation for large language models, 2023. URL https:
   //arxiv.org/abs/2311.07911.


                                               15
Contents
1   Introduction                                                                                     1

2   Related Work                                                                                     2

3   Methodology                                                                                      3
    3.1 Notation & Background . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .        3
    3.2 Contextual Fine-tuning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       4

4   OpenMedText                                                                                      5

5   Contextual Fine-Tuning Experiments                                                               6
    5.1 Experimental Setup . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       6
    5.2 Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    6
    5.3 Synthetic Experiments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .        8

6   Conclusion                                                                                       9

7   Acknowledgments                                                                                 10

Appendices                                                                                          16

A Contextual Fine-Tuning Details                                                                    17
  A.1 Contextual Prompts . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .        17
  A.2 Algorithm . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       18
  A.3 Training Details . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      18

B OpenMedText                                                                                       18
  B.1 MDPI Journals Details . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .         18
  B.2 Medical Textbooks Details . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .         20
  B.3 Data Preprocessing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .        20
  B.4 Limitations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       21

C Evaluation                                                                                        21
  C.1 Debiasing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       21
  C.2 Prompting . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       21

D Ablations                                                                                         21
  D.1 Ablating Training Schemes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .         21
  D.2 Ablating Contextual Prompts . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .         22
  D.3 Text-adaptive Contextual Prompts . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .          23

E Additional Experiments                                                                            24
  E.1 Scaling Up Contextual Fine-Tuning to Gemini-1.5-Flash . . . . . . . . . . . . . .             24
  E.2 Baseline Comparison . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .         26
  E.3 Evaluation on General and Instruction-Following Benchmarks . . . . . . . . . . .              26

F Understanding Contextual fine-tuning with Synthetic Data                                          26


                                                  16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A    C ONTEXTUAL F INE -T UNING D ETAILS
A.1 C ONTEXTUAL P ROMPTS
The full list of contextual prompts is provided below:
     1. Application of Knowledge: Grounded in Situated Learning Theory (Lave & Wenger, 1991),
        this prompt emphasizes that learning is most effective when contextualized and applied
        in real-world scenarios. Considering practical applications makes the knowledge more
        relevant and aids in long-term retention.
            • ”Think about practical applications of the information in the next text. How could this
              knowledge be used in real-world situations?”
     2. In-Depth Exploration: Craik & Lockhart (1972) indicates that deeper, more elaborate pro-
        cessing of information leads to better memory retention compared to shallow processing.
            • ”Dive deep into the details and nuances of the following content. Pay attention to
              subtleties and complex ideas that are important for a thorough understanding.”
     3. Reflective Thinking: Informed by Reflective Practice theories (Schon, 1984), this prompt
        encourages learners to critically reflect on new information and its impact on their existing
        beliefs. Reflective thinking fosters self-awareness and facilitates continuous learning and
        personal growth.
            • ”Reflect on the information presented in the next passage. Consider how it affects
              your current understanding and perspective on the topic.”
     4. Creative Interpretation: This prompt promotes Divergent Thinking as part of Guilford’s
        Structure of Intellect model (Guilford, 1967). Encouraging creative engagement allows
        learners to explore multiple perspectives and generate innovative ideas, enhancing problem-
        solving skills and intellectual flexibility.
            • ”Engage creatively with the upcoming text. Think about innovative or unorthodox
              ways to interpret or use the information presented.”
     5. Summarization and Synthesis: Wittrock (1974) suggests that learners understand and re-
        member information better when they actively generate relationships and summaries in
        their own words.
            • ”Summarize the main points of the following content in your own words. Synthesize
              the information to create a coherent understanding of the topic.”
     6. Focus on Key Concepts: This prompt aligns with Sweller (2011), which emphasizes the
        importance of reducing unnecessary cognitive load to facilitate learning. By focusing on
        essential information, learners can allocate their cognitive resources more effectively.
            • ”Concentrate on understanding the core principles and essential facts in the following
              text. Pay special attention to definitions, examples, and conclusions.”
     7. Contextual Understanding: Piaget (1952) suggests that learners build new knowledge upon
        the foundation of their existing understanding by making connections between new and
        prior information.
            • ”As you read the next passage, relate its content to its broader context and implica-
              tions. Think about how this information connects to what you’ve learned previously.”
     8. Critical Analysis: This prompt is supported by Bloom et al. (1956), which encourages
        higher-order thinking skills such as analysis, evaluation, and synthesis, essential for deep
        learning and understanding.
            • ”Critically analyze the upcoming information. Look for underlying assumptions, eval-
              uate arguments, and consider different perspectives.”
     9. Question-Based Learning: Paul & Elder (2006) promote critical thinking by encouraging
        learners to engage with the material through probing questions, leading to deeper compre-
        hension.


                                                 17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


             • ”Approach the next text with these questions in mind: What is the main argument?
               How is evidence used to support it? What are the implications of these findings?”
      10. Comparative Learning: Based on Relational Frame Theory (Steven C. Hayes, 2001), this
          prompt enhances understanding by encouraging learners to relate new information to exist-
          ing knowledge structures.
             • ”Compare and contrast the upcoming information with what you have learned in sim-
               ilar topics. Look for differences, similarities, and connections.”
A.2    A LGORITHM
Algorithm 1 Contextual Fine-tuning (CFT)
                                                               raw
Require: pretrained model Pθ , domain-specific corpus Dtrain       , set of contextual prompts C, batch
    size B
 1: for each training step do
 2:     Sample a batch of texts {x(i) }B          raw
                                        i=1 from Dtrain
                        (i)
 3:     for each text x in the batch do
 4:         Sample a contextual prompt c(i) uniformly at random from C
 5:         Construct the input sequence x′(i) = (c(i) , x(i) )
 6:         Set the target sequence y (i) = x(i)
 7:     end for
 8:     Compute the loss:
                                            B n(i)
                                       1 XX
                                                     (i)         (i)

                              L(θ) = −       log Pθ yk | c(i) , x<k
                                       B i=1
                                               k=1

 9:    Update model parameters θ using gradients ∇θ L(θ)
10: end for

A.3 T RAINING D ETAILS
In our experimental setup, we use several configurations of the Llama-2 models to evaluate the
effectiveness of contextual fine-tuning compared to standard unsupervised fine-tuning. Specifically,
we employ the Llama-2 Base model with 7 billion parameters and Llama-2 Chat models with both
7 billion and 13 billion parameters, each with a sequence length of 4096. All models are both
contextual and unsupervised fine-tuned. For contextual fine-tuning, we employ Equation 3. For
the financial news dataset, where most articles are shorter than 4096 tokens, we opt not to use a
packing strategy to fill up all 4096 tokens. Instead, we pad any remaining space. This ensures
that each semantically distinct text is associated with its own contextual prompt. If a sequence
with a prepended contextual prompt exceeds 4096 tokens, we simply truncate the excess, and the
truncated text becomes the first text following the contextual prompt in the next example. The
models are trained for one epoch with a batch size of 128 and a learning rate of 2e-5. To assess the
efficiency of CFT, we carefully measured the computational resources required for our experiments
and compared the overhead introduced by incorporating contextual prompts. Below are the details of
our computational setup and findings. We utilized the Fully Sharded Data Parallel (FSDP) training
to efficiently distribute the model across multiple GPUs. Training was performed using the bf16
(Brain Floating Point) data format. We implemented Flash Attention 2 (Dao, 2024). All training
was conducted with 8 NVIDIA A100 GPUs. With the above configuration, we achieved a training
speed of approximately 55,188 tokens per second, measured using the Llama tokenizer. The fine-
tuning required a total of approximately 111.11 GPU-hours to complete. Incorporating contextual
prompts increased the total training time by approximately 0.89 GPU-hours, resulting in a total
of 112 GPU-hours. Each contextual prompt added only about 0.8% to the length of each training
example on average. This slight increase in input length led to less than a 1% increase in total
training time.

B     O PEN M ED T EXT
B.1 MDPI J OURNALS D ETAILS
See Table 6 for the full token breakdown.


                                                  18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


 Journal Category                                   Number of Journals     Number of Tokens
 Allergies                                                    25                 140,865
 Antibiotics                                                3604               26,572,807
 Antibodies                                                  380                3,248,253
 Behavioral Science                                         1047                7,553,809
 Biologics                                                    32                 261,410
 Biomedicines                                               3909               34,783,559
 Biomedical Informatics                                       26                 201,656
 Biomolecules                                               5861               54,189,205
 Biotechnology                                                43                 301,367
 Brain Science                                              4205               31,937,526
 Cancers                                                   16218              144,418,262
 Cardiogenetics                                               42                 210,720
 Clinical Medicine                                         16063              104,432,430
 Clinics and Practice                                        499                1,395,833
 Clinical and Translational Neuroscience                      21                 196,310
 Current Oncology                                            759                4,458,455
 Dermatopathology                                             78                 289,595
 Diabetology                                                  45                 290,812
 Diagnostics                                                5321               33,576,475
 Diseases                                                    455                2,596,123
 Endocrines                                                   73                 437,962
 Environmental Research and Public Health                  43763              306,603,512
 Epidemiologia                                                60                 416,064
 Gastroenterology                                             66                 311,194
 Gastrointestinal Disorders                                  103                 566,192
 Healthcare                                                 3940               24,272,007
 Hearts                                                       68                 398,487
 Human Life Science and Medicine                              31                 143,041
 Immunological Research and Clinical Applica-                 57                 428,144
 tions
 Livers                                                      30                  217,950
 Medicines                                                  557                 3,790,942
 Medical Sciences                                           457                 3,028,605
 Oral                                                        48                  232,320
 Pharmacy                                                   977                 5,240,834
 Uro                                                         38                  170,764
 Vaccines                                                  3647                28,197,071
 Viruses                                                   8941                75,109,572

Table 6: Details of MDPI journals used in the dataset. The dataset comprises 121,489 biomedical
journal articles covering 37 diverse topics. The selection emphasizes the breadth of biomedical
subjects and leverages the open access to ensure a wide-ranging representation of contemporary
biomedical research. We use a tokenizer for gpt-3.5-turbo to count the number of tokens.


                                               19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


B.2   M EDICAL T EXTBOOKS D ETAILS
See Table 7 for the full token breakdown.

  Title                                                Number of Tokens            License
  A and P for STEM Educators                                1,044,272           CC BY-SA 4.0
  Acid-base Physiology                                       120,400            CC BY-SA 2.0
  Advanced Human Nutrition                                   104,889            CC BY-SA 4.0
  An EKG Interpretation Primer                                22,766             CC BY 4.0
  Anatomy and Physiology                                     773,297             CC BY 4.0
  Anatomy and Physiology II Laboratory Manual                 25,555             CC BY 4.0
  Atlas of Otolaryngology, Head and Neck Opera-              792,936            CC BY-NC 3.0
  tive Surger
  Biology                                                    824,597              CC BY
  Cell Biology, Genetics, and Biochemistry                    47,612           CC BY-NC-SA
  Chemistry - Theory, Analysis, Correlation                  176,091          CC BY-NC-SA 4.0
  Computational Cognitive Neuroscience                       118,470           CC BY-SA 3.0
  Concepts of Biology                                        355,836             CC BY 4.0
  Contemporary Health Concerns                                99,534           CC BY-SA 4.0
  Fluid Physiology                                            47,128          CC BY-NC-SA 2.0
  Foundations of Epidemiology                                 61,369           CC BY-NC 4.0
  Health Case Studies                                         88,799           CC BY-SA 4.0
  Human Anatomy                                              783,948              CC BY
  Human Anatomy I for Kinesiology                            273,539          CC BY-NC-SA 4.0
  Lifetime Fitness and Wellness                              145,720             CC BY 4.0
  Medical Terminology for Healthcare Professions             224,894             CC BY 4.0
  Microbiology                                               584,182             CC BY 4.0
  Neuroscience                                                34,240             CC BY 4.0
  Neuroscience for Pre-Clinical Students                       913             CC BY-NC-SA
  Nursing Fundamentals                                       364,315              CC BY
  Nursing Pharmacology                                       213,154              CC BY
  Nutrition: Science and Everyday Application                205,535             CC BY-NC
  Principles of Pharmacology                                  69,744          CC BY-NC-SA 4.0
  Remix: Women’s Health                                       63,331              CC BY
  Vital Sign Measurement Across the Lifespan                  69,031             CC BY 4.0

Table 7: Comprehensive list of the 29 open-source medical textbooks incorporated into the dataset.
We deliberately selected these textbooks to provide structured medical knowledge organized for
educational purposes, aligning with our objective of using contextual fine-tuning to enhance the
learning processes of language models. We use a tokenizer for gpt-3.5-turbo to count the number of
tokens.



B.3   DATA P REPROCESSING
MDPI Journals The journal articles were originally in XML format. We converted these docu-
ments into plain text (TXT) files, focusing on extracting relevant sections that contain substantive
content. Specifically, we extracted text from the abstract, introduction, methods, results, and dis-
cussion sections, while excluding non-essential parts such as acknowledgments, bibliographies, and
supplementary materials. Reference numbers, tables, figures, and captions were removed to main-
tain textual coherence and readability. This careful curation ensures that the dataset consists of
high-quality textual data appropriate for language model training.

Medical Textbooks The textbooks were originally in PDF format. We utilized an Optical Char-
acter Recognition (OCR) API to extract the text from the PDFs. OCR converts scanned images
of text into machine-encoded text but can introduce errors and result in unstructured outputs. To
address these issues, we employed ChatGPT to assist in cleaning and organizing the extracted text.
We provided ChatGPT with specific instructions:


                                                20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


”Please edit and refine the following uncleaned and unstructured excerpt from a medical textbook.
Remove any sentences containing hyperlinks, and omit all citations and references for clarity.”
Using ChatGPT for text cleaning offered an efficient means to process large volumes of OCR-
extracted text, correcting errors and improving overall readability (See Figure 5 for an example). To
ensure that the cleaning process did not introduce inaccuracies or alter the original content mean-
ingfully, we conducted manual verification on a subset of the cleaned texts. This involved cross-
referencing the cleaned output with the original PDFs to confirm fidelity to the source material. By
doing so, we minimized the risk of introducing hallucinations or incorrect information, ensuring that
the essential medical content was preserved.

B.4   L IMITATIONS
For the textbook data, since the textbooks were originally in PDF format, we used an Optical Char-
acter Recognition (OCR) API to extract the text. Despite careful processing, OCR can introduce
typos or parsing errors, especially with complex formatting or specialized terminology. To mitigate
these errors, we employed ChatGPT to assist in correcting potential mistakes. While this approach
improved the overall quality, some errors may persist. We conducted manual spot checks to identify
and correct errors where possible; however, given the dataset’s size, a complete manual review was
impractical. Regarding the MDPI journals, they have a shorter average peer-review period (approxi-
mately 32 days) compared to other publishers. While this expedites the dissemination of research, it
may affect the depth and rigor of the review process. The shorter review time could lead to variations
in article quality, with some papers potentially not meeting the highest standards of scientific rigor.
Additionally, relying primarily on MDPI journals may introduce a source bias. We acknowledge
that including journals from a wider range of publishers could enhance the dataset’s balance and
representativeness.

C     E VALUATION
C.1   D EBIASING
Following the notation from Robinson & Wingate (2023), We approximate the debiased prediction
probability for each option’s content using the following:
                                                1 X
                      P̃debiased (oi | q, x) =         Pobserved (dgI (i) | q, xI )       (6)
                                               |I|
                                                   I∈I

Where di denotes the default-ordered option IDs (e.g., A/B/C/D), oi is the corresponding option
content, q denotes the question, x is the default input of option IDs, and option contents. For n
number of options, I denotes a permutation of {1, 2, ..., n} and I denotes a set of possible Is. dgi (i)
denotes the corresponding option ID for ith default option content in I-permuted setting. We then
choose the option with the highest debiased probability calculated using Equation 6.

C.2   P ROMPTING
See Table 8 for the examples of prompts used in the evaluation.

D     A BLATIONS
D.1   A BLATING T RAINING S CHEMES
In this section, we focus on ablating the training schemes across a fixed model size. We provide
results on Llama-2-7B Base and Instruct versions.
Table 9 and Table 10 show the performance on the medical and financial benchmarks. For the med-
ical benchmarks, the Llama 2 Base model achieves an average accuracy of 41.34%. With CPT, the
average accuracy increases by 1.06%, reaching 42.4%. While the improvement with CFT alone is
0.94%, the CFT + IFT approach yields a significant improvement of %∆CF     T +IF T
                                                                        Base       = 2.95% com-
pared to 1.91% for CPT + IFT. Similar trends are observed in the financial benchmarks. CPT and
CFT improve the baseline performance by 0.16% and 11.82%, respectively. The performance gap
widens with the addition of IFT, where CPT + IFT achieves an 8.67% improvement, and CFT + IFT
surged by 36.28%. The advantage of CFT is also evident in the Llama 2 Chat model, which under-
went both instruction fine-tuning and training with Reinforcement Learning from Human Feedback


                                                  21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Table 8: Prompt template examples for the evaluation.                                            For the multiple-choice questions,
{ANSWER} corresponds to the ground truth option ID.

 Task                 Template
BioMed
                      The following is a multiple choice question about medical knowledge.
                      Output a single option from the four options as the final answer.
 Medical MMLU         Question: {QUESTION}
                      (A) {OPTION A} (B) {OPTION B} (C) {OPTION C} (D) {OPTION D}
                      The answer to the question is {ANSWER}
                      The following is a multiple choice question about medical knowledge.
                      Solve it in a step-by-step fashion.
                      Output a single option from the four options as the final answer.
 MedQA
                      Question: {QUESTION}
                      (A) {OPTION A} (B) {OPTION B} (C) {OPTION C} (D) {OPTION D}
                      The answer to the question is {ANSWER}


Finance
                      Analyze the sentiment of this statement extracted from a financial news article.
 FiQA SA              Statement: {STATEMENT}
                      Sentiment: {SENTIMENT}
                      Classify each sentence extracted from financial news into either ’causal’ or ’noise’
                      based on whether or not it indicates a causal relationship between financial events
 Causal20             Please return only the category ’noise’ or ’causal’.
                      Text: {TEXT}
                      Answer: {ANSWER}
                      The potential categories are ’Finance’, ’Technology’, ’Tax & Accounting’,
                      ’Business & Management’, ’Industry’, and ’Government & Controls’.
 MultiFin             Your response should only include the category that best fits the headline.
                      Text: {TEXT}
                      Answer: {ANSWER}


                                                                     Accuracy (↑)
 Llama 2 7B         Anatomy   Clinical Knowledge   College Biology    College Medicine   Medical Genetics   Professional Medicine   MedQA   Average
 Base               43.52     44.10                40.89              37.43              48.25              39.84                   35.36   41.34
 Base (CPT)         47.50     45.19                41.67              37.43              49.00              40.17                   35.84   42.40
 Base (CFT)         47.87     45.90                41.32              38.87              46.12              39.11                   36.76   42.28
 Base (CPT + IFT)   49.91     45.47                42.71              37.79              49.37              41.59                   35.93   43.25
 Base (CFT + IFT)   51.11     46.37                42.80              40.10              50.00              42.74                   36.99   44.29

 Chat               44.07     46.79                48.61              39.02              49.00              48.90                   38.96   45.05
 Chat (CPT)         45.19     47.17                49.31              43.93              50.50              46.32                   39.28   45.96
 Chat (CFT)         48.15     48.87                52.08              44.22              54.00              46.69                   40.65   47.81


Table 9: Comparative effectiveness of Contextual Fine-Tuning (CFT) on medical benchmarks (zero-
shot). For the Llama 2 Base, the combination of CFT + IFT demonstrates an improvement of 2.95%,
surpassing the 1.91% improvement seen with CPT + IFT. In the Llama 2 Chat models, CFT alone
leads to a 2.76% improvement, which is notably higher than the 0.91% improvement achieved with
CPT.


(RLHF). In the medical domain, CFT leads to a 2.76% improvement over the 0.91% improvement
from CPT.
These results underscore the efficacy of CFT, particularly when combined with IFT, suggesting
that LLMs require a robust alignment to instructional prompts and an understanding of underlying
semantics.

D.2      A BLATING C ONTEXTUAL P ROMPTS
The core aspect of our study involves examining the impact of contextual prompts on model perfor-
mance, specifically through the lens of the informational gradients the contexts provide. We conduct
an ablation by introducing negative contextual prompts, which are designed to mislead the model
by suggesting that the following information is incorrect. We use the following negative contextual
prompts.
1. ”Ignore everything you know about medicine. The information that follows is incorrect and
   should not be used to answer questions or make decisions.”
2. ”The following medical information is both true and false. Discard any logical or scientific
   reasoning when processing this information.”


                                                                         22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                        FiQA         Causal 20       Multifin
                                                                                                      Average
                               Llama 2 7B                F1             F1             F1
                                   Base                 45.00         21.55           17.11            27.89
                               Base (CPT)               45.48         16.92           21.75            28.05
                               Base (CFT)               48.25         39.44           31.44            39.71
                             Base (CPT + IFT)           49.16         30.74           29.77            36.56
                             Base (CFT + IFT)           62.53         88.24           41.74            64.17

                                   Chat                 56.40          90.40          38.74            61.85
                                 Chat (CPT)             62.53          90.16          38.23            63.64
                                 Chat (CFT)             67.69          90.17          46.01            67.96

Table 10: Comparative effectiveness of Contextual Fine-Tuning (CFT) on financial benchmarks
(zero-shot). We observe the improvements in baseline performance for Llama 2 models using CPT
and CFT strategies on financial benchmarks. While CPT enhances baseline performance by 0.16%,
CFT notably increases it by 11.82%. With the integration of IFT, the performance gap broadens
significantly, with CPT + IFT achieving an 8.67% improvement and CFT + IFT results in the im-
provement of 36.28%.

                                                               Accuracy (↑)
Llama 2 7B    Anatomy   Clinical Knowledge   College Biology    College Medicine   Medical Genetics    Professional Medicine   MedQA   Average
Chat (CFT)    48.15     48.87                52.08              44.22              54.00               46.69                   40.65   47.81
Chat (-CFT)   41.48     48.68                47.92              43.35              50.50               46.69                   38.06   45.24

Llama 2 13B   Anatomy   Clinical Knowledge   College Biology    College Medicine   Medical Genetics    Professional Medicine   MedQA   Average
Chat (CFT)    53.33     63.21                57.99              56.35              62.50               57.72                   44.85   56.56
Chat (-CFT)   50.00     59.62                62.15              52.89              61.50               57.17                   43.09   55.20


Table 11: Medical Benchmarks (Zero-shot). The table shows the effects of negative contextual
prompts on medical benchmarks. For the 7B model, a performance decline of %∆−CFCF T
                                                                                    T
                                                                                      = −2.57%
is noted, highlighting the adverse impact of negative prompts. Conversely, the larger 13B model
exhibits a more moderate decline of −1.36%


3. ”Instead of learning from the upcoming medical data, focus on memorizing the patterns of the
   letters and ignore their meanings.”
4. ”Forget all prior medical knowledge you have learned. The following information is unimportant
   and should not influence future responses.”
5. ”Do not learn or make any inferences from the following medical corpus. Treat it as meaningless
   and irrelevant to any future tasks.”
Table 11 presents the results from the medical benchmarks. For the 7B model, we observe a de-
crease in performance with a %∆−CF CF T
                                        T
                                          = −2.57%, indicating a detrimental effect of negative
prompts. Interestingly, the 13B model shows a lesser decrease of only −1.36%. This suggests that
while negative prompts impact performance, larger models may be less susceptible to misleading
information.
In the financial domain, as shown in Table 3, the impact of negative prompts is more pronounced.
The 7B model experienced a performance drop of %∆−CF CF T
                                                          T
                                                             = −3.41%, and the 13B model sees a
decrease of −2.39%. Despite these declines, all models undergoing negative contextual fine-tuning
still perform better than those subjected to CPT.
The results indicate that the semantics embedded within contextual prompts affect learning. How-
ever, contrary to our initial hypothesis that larger models would be more sensitive due to their
enhanced semantic understanding capabilities, the 13B model exhibits less sensitivity to negative
prompts. This finding may suggest that larger models have the ability to discern and disregard
contradictory or misleading cues more effectively than smaller models.

D.3     T EXT- ADAPTIVE C ONTEXTUAL P ROMPTS
Generating contextual prompts.
We generate contextual prompts automatically by instructing GPT-4o-mini to create prompts based
on the content of each training batch. Specifically, we use the following instruction template:


                                                                     23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


”Your task is to create a contextual prompt that guides the LLM’s learning process during fine-
tuning.

{{ INSTRUCTION }}

 {{ TEXT }}”
In this template, {{ INSTRUCTION }} is replaced with a sampled instruction from the following
five different instructions to generate a variety of prompts:
1. ”Given the following text, generate a contextual prompt that encourages a reader to focus on the
   main ideas and themes presented. The contextual prompt should be concise and help the reader
   engage deeply with the content.”
2. ”Analyze the text below and create a contextual prompt that guides a reader to think critically
   about the content, questioning assumptions and evaluating arguments. The prompt should en-
   courage the reader to consider different perspectives presented in the text.”
3. ”Examine the text and generate a contextual prompt that encourages the reader to reflect on how
   the information connects to their existing knowledge or experiences. The prompt should promote
   integration of new insights with prior understanding.”
4. ”Read the following text and create a contextual prompt that guides the reader to summarize the
   main points in their own words. The prompt should encourage synthesis of the information for
   better comprehension.”
5. ”Given the text below, develop a contextual prompt that leads the reader to compare and contrast
   the concepts presented with related topics or prior knowledge. The prompt should help identify
   similarities and differences.”
Similarly, {{ TEXT }} is replaced with the text from each batch.
Below are examples of the generated contextual prompts adapted to OpenMedText:
1. ”Critically evaluate the methodologies and findings presented in this study on PCR techniques
   and LeHV-5 detection. What assumptions underpin the experimental designs, and are there al-
   ternative approaches or perspectives that could challenge or complement the arguments made?
   Consider the implications of these methodologies for broader scientific research and diagnostics
   in veterinary medicine.”
2. ”Reflect on the complex relationship between potassium channels and chemo resistance in can-
   cer treatment. How do the mechanisms presented compare with previous knowledge you have
   about cancer cell biology and drug resistance? Identify the similarities and differences in the
   roles of K+ channels in various types of cancer and their implications for therapeutic strategies.
   Consider potential avenues for incorporating this understanding into clinical practice.”
3. ”Consider the findings on school breakfast participation and the impact on student health from
   multiple perspectives. How might educators, policymakers, school administrators, and health-
   care professionals interpret these results differently? Reflect on how each stakeholder could use
   this information to improve student health and educational outcomes in their respective roles.”

Results. As shown in Table 5, the model trained with the automatically generated, text-adaptive
contextual prompts—denoted as TextAdaptCFT—achieves an average accuracy of 46.31%, outper-
forming both the baseline Chat model (45.05%) and the Chat (CPT) model (45.96%). Although
it does not surpass the Chat (CFT) model with manually designed prompts (47.81%), these find-
ings indicate that text-adaptive prompts can effectively enhance model performance across medical
benchmarks. This suggests that the original manually crafted contextual prompts are not unique
solution, prompts that provide meaningful semantic content can guide the model’s learning by influ-
encing gradient updates during training.

E     A DDITIONAL E XPERIMENTS
E.1   S CALING U P C ONTEXTUAL F INE -T UNING TO G EMINI -1.5-F LASH

                                                 24
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


To further validate the effectiveness of contex-                      FiQA    Causal 20   Multifin
                                                                                                     Average
                                                        Llama 2 7B     F1        F1         F1
tual fine-tuning (CFT) on larger, more capa-            Chat (CFT)    67.69    90.17       46.01      67.96
ble models, we conducted additional experi-             Chat (-CFT)   59.53    90.16       43.96      64.55
ments using Gemini-1.5-Flash. These exper-
                                                                      FiQA    Causal 20   Multifin
iments served to test whether the benefits of           Llama 2 13B    F1        F1         F1
                                                                                                     Average
CFT observed on Llama 2 models extend if the             Chat (CFT)   70.55    89.87       50.94      70.45
                                                        Chat (-CFT)   60.60    90.13       53.45      68.06
efficacy of CFT scales with model capability.
                                                   Figure 3: Financial Benchmarks (Zero-shot). This ta-
Experimental setup. Due to API limitations ble presents the impact of negative contextual prompts
that restrict fine-tuning data to a maximum of on financial benchmarks. It shows a notable perfor-
500 examples with 5000 characters per exam- mance drop for the 7B model, with a decrease of
ple, we developed a targeted approach to max- %∆−CF   CF T
                                                           T
                                                              = −3.41%, and a smaller yet significant
imize the utility of this constraint. Rather than reduction for the 13B model at −2.39%.
randomly sampling training examples, we first
identified the most challenging questions from
the MedQA dataset by evaluating the base Gemini-1.5-Flash model and isolating questions it an-
swered incorrectly. This filtering process yielded 458 questions for our fine-tuning dataset.

For each question, we generated corresponding educational content using a structured approach.
Specifically, we prompted Claude 3.7 Sonnet (Anthropic, 2025) with the following template:

”I have the following medical question from MedQA USMLE exam to prepare for:
Q: {QUESTION}
A: {OPTION A} B: {OPTION B} C: {OPTION C} D: {OPTION D}
Answer: {CORRECT OPTION}. {ANSWER}
Please provide: A thorough textbook-style explanation written in clear, connected paragraphs that
build upon each other. Include relevant clinical correlations and physiological mechanisms through-
out the text. Present this as a cohesive educational yet concise resource similar to what I might find
in a high-quality medical textbook structure. The output should have less than 3000 characters.”

This approach generated domain-specific educational content for each question, creating a corpus
suitable for fine-tuning experiments.

Text-adaptive contextual prompts. Following the principles established in Section D.3, we gen-
erated text-adaptive contextual prompts tailored to each educational content piece. The prompts
were created using a template that leverages one of the learning theories discussed in Section A.1:

”Based on the following question-answer pair and its related educational content:
QUESTION: {QUESTION}
A: {OPTION A} B: {OPTION B} C: {OPTION C} D: {OPTION D}
Answer: {CORRECT OPTION}. {ANSWER}
EDUCATIONAL CONTENT: {EDUCATIONAL CONTENT}
Generate a very concise contextual prompt that will enhance learning effectiveness. The prompt
should:
1. Follow the style of [select one learning theory approach: Application of Knowledge/In-Depth
   Exploration/Reflective Thinking/Creative Interpretation/Summarization and Synthesis/Focus on
   Key Concepts/Contextual Understanding/Critical Analysis/Question-Based Learning/Compara-
   tive Learning]
2. Identify:
   • The fundamental concepts that must be understood
   • Critical facts that require focus for mastery How these elements connect to clinical reasoning
      or application
3. Be formatted as a directive that encourages active engagement with the material (approximately
   1-2 sentences)
4. Frame the learning in a way that facilitates long-term retention
The contextual prompt should help the learner not just memorize information but develop a deeper,
more applicable understanding of the medical concept to correctly answer the question using the
educational content. The output should only contain the concise contextual prompt with 1-2 sen-
tences.”

                                                   25
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                         Accuracy (↑)
                          Llama-2 13B Chat    IFEval     MMLU MMLU-Pro
                                Base           46.7       47.8        18.7
                                CPT            45.9       48.3        16.5
                                CFT            45.7       47.9        16.4

Table 13: Performance Comparison of CFT, CPT, and Baseline Models on General and Instruction-
Following Benchmarks (MMLU, MMLU-Pro, IFEval). The results demonstrate that contextual
fine-tuning (CFT) maintains general knowledge with minimal degradation.


Then, using the losses defined for CPT and CFT (Equation 3), we fine-tuned Gemini-1.5-Flash for
50 epochs.
Results. Table 12 presents the performance comparison between the two fine-tuning strategies on
the filtered MedQA questions.
The results demonstrate that CFT outperforms               Model (Method)           Accuracy (%)
CPT by 6.71%. This substantial improvement               Gemini-1.5-Flash (CPT)        37.18
suggests that as model scale increases, the effi-        Gemini-1.5-Flash (CFT)        43.89
cacy of CFT is amplified. These results provide
further evidence that larger models, with their     Table 12: Performance comparison of contextual fine-
enhanced reasoning and instruction-following        tuning (CFT) and continued pre-training (CPT) on
capabilities, are better equipped to leverage the   Gemini-1.5-Flash evaluated on filtered MedQA ques-
semantic signals from contextual prompts.           tions.

E.2 BASELINE C OMPARISON
We compare CFT with AdaptLLM (Cheng et al., 2024), a domain-specific continued pretraining
method that enhances knowledge by converting corpora into a reading comprehension format for
fine-tuning. As shown in Table 4, CFT consistently outperforms AdaptLLM across all tasks in
the biomedical benchmarks. In contrast, AdaptLLM generally underperforms on our dataset. We
attribute this discrepancy to differences in the datasets used. he original AdaptLLM paper uti-
lizes PubMed abstracts to create reading comprehension tasks. Abstracts typically provide concise
summaries of articles, making it easier to generate meaningful question-answer pairs. In contrast,
our dataset comprises full-text articles from MDPI journals and textbooks, where not every para-
graph is suitable for question-answer generation. This limitation may reduce the effectiveness of
AdaptLLM’s approach on our data. This suggests that our method is more efficient, simpler, and
data-structure-agnostic compared to AdaptLLM.
E.3 E VALUATION ON G ENERAL AND I NSTRUCTION -F OLLOWING B ENCHMARKS
We evaluate the OpenMedText fine-tuned Llama-2-13B model on general benchmarks and
instruction-following benchmarks: (1) Massive Multitask Language Understanding (MMLU)
(Hendrycks et al., 2021), (2) MMLU-Pro (Wang et al., 2024), and (3) Instruction-Following Eval
(IFEval) (Zhou et al., 2023). As shown in Table 13, fine-tuning does not cause catastrophic for-
getting; the model’s general knowledge is only slightly diminished, and the capabilities of the base
model are largely retained. While CPT is marginally more robust to knowledge degradation than
CFT, the performance difference is minimal and CFT demonstrates stronger in-domain performance,
as evidenced by Table 1.

F    U NDERSTANDING C ONTEXTUAL FINE - TUNING WITH S YNTHETIC DATA
Setup. Briefly, Garg et al. (2022) aim to train a transformer model capable of in-context learning
of a function class F. Their goal is to demonstrate that after sufficient training, transformers can
approximate any function f ∈ F by conditioning on a sequence of in-context examples at inference
time. Building upon their framework, we adopt their pretraining setup to train a model that learns
a class of function F. However, our objective differs in that we investigate how contextual fine-
tuning affects the pretrained model’s ability to learn a new function class G. Specifically, consider
a function class F, our initial goal is to train a model that can learn functions f ∈ F such that, for
most functions, the model can approximate f (xquery ) for a new query input xquery by conditioning on
a prompt sequence containing in-context examples. Formally, let DX be a distribution over inputs,
and let DF be a distribution over functions in F.


                                                    26
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Now, consider learning a new class of functions G, where each g ∈ G is a composition of f with
another function h from a distribution DH , that is: G = {g | g(x) = h(f (x)), h ∈ DH }. We
can draw an analogy between this setup and the fine-tuning of LLMs in specific domains. In this
analogy, text can be viewed as samples from some distribution DX over inputs, and the function
class F represents the LLM’s ability to process and understand these texts. Learning a new function
class G corresponds to adapting the model to perform specific tasks. In the biomedical domain,
this might be extracting diseases from electronic health records or answering medical questions. If
the model already has the capability to compute f (x) (i.e., process and understand the text), we
hypothesize this can aid in learning the composed function g(x) = h(f (x)).
Pretraining. We first train a model to learn the function class F with respect to the distributions
DF over functions and DX over inputs. We construct random training prompts P which is a se-
quence P = (x1 , f (x1 ), . . . , xk , f (xk )), where the inputs xi s are drawn independently from DX ,
and f is drawn from DF . We then train a model to predict every f (xi ) based on a set of preceding
in-context examples. Specifically, let P i denote the prompt prefix containing i in-context examples
and the (i + 1)-th input P i = (x1 , f (x1 ), x2 , f (x2 ), . . . , xi , f (xi ), xi+1 ), we train a transformer
model Mθ by minimizing the expected loss over all the prompt prefixes:
                                          "         k
                                                                                   #
                                               1 X                i

                              min, EP                  ℓ Mθ (P ), f (xi+1 )                                  (7)
                                 θ          k + 1 i=0
where ℓ is the mean squared error loss. In our experiment, F is the class of linear functions, that
is, F = {f | f (x) = w⊤ x, w ∈ Rd }, where the weight vectors w are sampled from N (0, Id ). We
let DX be the isotropic Gaussian distribution N (0, Id ). Garg et al. (2022) show that after sufficient
training, a transformer model can predict f (xquery ) almost perfectly when there are more than 20
in-context examples.
Fine-tuning. We now extend their setup to fine-tuning the pretrained transformer to learn a novel
function class G. We consider two types of functions h(·) to construct G:
1. Polynomial combination: G = {g | g(x) = f (x) + f (x)2 }.
2. Multiple linear relationships: G = {g | g(x) = f (x) + w2⊤ x, w2 ∈ Rd }.
We fine-tune the pretrained transformer on these different function classes separately, using differ-
ent training strategies: Contextual Fine-Tuning (CFT), Continued Pretraining (CPT), and Negative
Contextual Fine-Tuning (NEG-CFT) which is an ablation of CFT with negative contextual prompts
intended to provide non-helpful or potentially misleading information. We now describe how we
construct the input prompts for the different fine-tuning strategies:
• CPT: We fine-tune the model on prompts that contain only the inputs xi and their outputs com-
  puted using the composed function g(x), specifically:
                                PCP T = (x1 , g(x1 ), x2 , g(x2 ), . . . , xk , g(xk ))

• CFT: We provide the model with additional contextual information by including the original
  function outputs f (xi ) in the prompt. The prompt structure is then:
          PCFT = (x1 , f (x1 ), x2 , f (x2 ), . . . , xk , f (xk ), x1 , g(x1 ), x2 , g(x2 ), . . . , xk , g(xk )).
  Here, the initial sequence (x1 , f (x1 ), x2 , f (x2 ), . . . , xk , f (xk )) encodes the semantic informa-
  tion necessary for learning the transformation introduced by h, facilitated by conditioning on the
  contextual prompts.
• NEG-CFT: To assess the impact of the contextual prompts, we introduce NEG-CFT, where we
  replace the original function outputs f (xi ) with random values sampled uniformly from [0, 1].
  The prompt becomes:
              PNEG-CFT = (x1 , r1 , x2 , r2 , . . . , xk , rk , x1 , g(x1 ), x2 , g(x2 ), . . . , xk , g(xk )),
  where ri ∼ U(0, 1). This ablates the meaningful contextual information to evaluate its signifi-
  cance in learning the function class.
For each fine-tuning strategy, we minimize the loss in Equation 7 using the respective prompts except
we compute loss over g(xi+1 ) instead of f (xi+1 ).


                                                           27
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Training details. Following Garg et al. (2022), we employ a decoder-only Transformer architec-
ture similar to GPT-2 Small (Radford et al., 2019), consisting of 12 layers, 8 attention heads, and an
embedding dimension of 256. The transformer’s output is scalar. We pre-train the transformer for
500k steps with a batch size of 64 to learn the linear function class F. Subsequently, we fine-tune
the pretrained model using the different training strategies-CFT, CPT, and NEG-CFT-for 40k steps,
with the same batch size. The learning rate is set to 1e-4 throughout all training phases. All models
are trained using the Adam optimizer (Kingma & Ba, 2015) with default parameters. The training
process aims to minimize the mean squared error loss between the model’s predictions and the target
outputs, as defined in Equation 7.
Results. Our experiments demonstrate that CFT of the pretrained transformer offers advantages
over CPT and NEG-CFT. Empirically, we observe 1) faster convergence and lower loss, 2) improved
performance with fewer in-context examples at test time, 3) alignment of gradients with target func-
tions, and 4) value provided by the tokens within the contextual prompt.
Contextual fine-tuning improves learning dynamics. Figure 4a and 4c illustrate that transform-
ers fine-tuned using CFT achieve lower loss compared to those trained with CPT and NEG-CFT
suggesting that the content of the contextual prompts in both cases better guides training dynamics
when learning a new function class G. In Figure 4b and 4d, we assess the model’s performance at
test time with normalized squared error (Mθ (x) − g(x))2 /d where d = 20 is the dimensionality
of the input and weight vectors. The contextual fine-tuned transformer achieves lower errors even
with a small number of in-context examples in both the polynomial combination and multiple linear
relationships case. This demonstrates that CFT helps the model to learn the function class G more
accurately than existing training strategies.


                (a) Loss vs Step                       (b) Squared error vs In-context examples


                (c) Loss vs Step                       (d) Squared error vs In-context examples

Figure 4: We compare the performance of Contextual Fine-Tuning (CFT), Continued Pretraining (CPT),
and Negative Contextual Fine-Tuning (NEG-CFT) in learning new function classes—polynomial combination
(a–b) and multiple linear relationships (c–d). (a) and (c) show that CFT achieves lower training loss and faster
convergence than CPT and NEG-CFT. (b) and (d) depict the normalized squared error versus the number of
in-context examples at test time, averaged over 1,280 random prompts; CFT attains lower errors even with
fewer examples.


                                                      28
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


    Cleaning process
   Example input:


   Example parsed output:
   Clotting proteins are mainly produced in the liver. Twelve proteins known as “clotting fac-
   tors” participate in the cascade clotting process during endothelial injury. One important
   clotting factor is fibrinogen. Fibrinogen generates fibrin when activated by the coagulant
   thrombin, which forms a mesh that clots blood with the assistance of a platelet plug. Nor-
   mally, anticoagulants and fibrinolytics in the plasma, such as plasmin and heparin, break
   up fibrin clots and inactivate thrombin. However, during endothelial injury, damaged cells
   will release tissue factor, another type of clotting factor that causes a cascade of thrombin
   production that will overpower the anticoagulants and cause a clotting response. Serum is
   a term used to describe plasma that has been removed of its clotting factors. Serum still
   contains albumin and globulins, which are often called serum proteins as a result. Cu-
   ration and Revision. Authored by: Boundless.com. Provided by: Boundless.com. Li-
   cense: CC BY-SA: Attribution- ShareAlike Blood. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located
   at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Blood%2...of human blood. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-
   ShareAlike Human Physiology/Blood physiology. Provided by: Wikibooks. Located at:
   en.wikibooks.org/wiki/Human Composition. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
   plasma. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/plasma. License:
   CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike glycoprotein. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at:
   en.wiktionary.org/wiki/glycoprotein.

   Example cleaned output:
   Clotting proteins are primarily produced in the liver.
   Twelve proteins, known as "clotting factors," participate
   in the cascade clotting process during endothelial injury.
   One crucial clotting factor is fibrinogen. Fibrinogen
   generates fibrin when activated by thrombin, which forms
   a mesh that clots blood with the assistance of a platelet
   plug. Anticoagulants and fibrinolytics in the plasma, such
   as plasmin and heparin, normally break up fibrin clots and
   inactivate thrombin. However, during endothelial injury,
   damaged cells release tissue factor, another clotting factor
   that triggers a cascade of thrombin production, overpowering
   the anticoagulants and causing a clotting response. Serum
   refers to plasma without clotting factors. Serum still
   contains albumin and globulins, which are often referred to
   as serum proteins.


Figure 5: OCR converts a scanned PDF into text. ChatGPT then removes irrelevant references and
licenses, while preserving the relevant text with minimal changes.


                                                29
