Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


S ITCOM -C RAFTER : A P LOT-D RIVEN H UMAN M OTION
G ENERATION S YSTEM IN 3D S CENES
 Jianqi Chen1∗ , Panwen Hu2∗ , Xiaojun Chang3 , Zhenwei Shi1 , Michael Kampffmeyer4 , Xiaodan Liang5†
 1
   Beihang University, 2 The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shenzhen, 3 University of Technology Sydney
 4
   UiT the Arctic University of Norway, 5 Sun Yat-sen University
 cjqchenjianqi@buaa.edu.cn, panwenhu@link.cuhk.edu.cn, cxj273@gmail.com
 shizhenwei@buaa.edu.cn, mka050@post.uit.no, xdliang328@gmail.com


Figure 1: Sitcom-Crafter supports various types of human motion generation within a 3D scene:
human locomotion, human-scene interaction, and human-human interaction, represented by
different colored toruses in the figure. Plots provided by the user effectively guide the generation.

                                                A BSTRACT

             Recent advancements in human motion synthesis have focused on specific types of
             motions, such as human-scene interaction, locomotion or human-human interaction,
             however, there is a lack of a unified system capable of generating a diverse combi-
             nation of motion types. In response, we introduce Sitcom-Crafter, a comprehensive
             and extendable system for human motion generation in 3D space, which can be
             guided by extensive plot contexts to enhance workflow efficiency for anime and
             game designers. The system is comprised of eight modules, three of which are
             dedicated to motion generation, while the remaining five are augmentation mod-
             ules that ensure consistent fusion of motion sequences and system functionality.
             Central to the generation modules is our novel 3D scene-aware human-human
             interaction module, which addresses collision issues by synthesizing implicit 3D
             Signed Distance Function (SDF) points around motion spaces, thereby minimizing
             human-scene collisions without additional data collection costs. Complement-
             ing this, our locomotion and human-scene interaction modules leverage existing
             methods to enrich the system’s motion generation capabilities. Augmentation
             modules encompass plot comprehension for command generation, motion synchro-
             nization for seamless integration of different motion types, hand pose retrieval to
             enhance motion realism, motion collision revision to prevent human collisions,
             and 3D retargeting to ensure visual fidelity. Experimental evaluations validate
             the system’s ability to generate high-quality, diverse, and physically realistic mo-
             tions, underscoring its potential for advancing creative workflows. Project page:
             https://windvchen.github.io/Sitcom-Crafter.
     ∗
         Equal contribution. † Corresponding Author. This work is sponsored by Doubao Fund.


                                                      1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


1 I NTRODUCTION
Recent years have seen significant advancements in automatic human motion synthesis (Guo et al.,
2022; Tevet et al., 2023; Athanasiou et al., 2022; Jiang et al., 2023; Mir et al., 2024; Jiang et al.,
2024), greatly reducing the time and labor costs traditionally associated with 3D animation and
game design, which often require motion capture for diverse characters and motions. These learning-
based methods have successfully generated a wide range of motions, including human locomotion
(Yuan et al., 2023; Zhang & Tang, 2022), human-scene interaction (Mullen et al., 2023; Zhao
et al., 2023), and human-human interaction (Shafir et al., 2024; Liang et al., 2024; Xu et al., 2024),
encompassing nearly all types of human motion. However, existing research has typically focused
on one specific type of motion, and there is no straightforward way to combine these motion
generation methods. This difficulty arises from inconsistencies in motion representation, differences
in generation conditions (such as whether physical scene information is considered), varying types
of guidance (text, single point, multiple points), and incompatibilities (for example, combining
two separate human locomotions may lead to motion collisions, or integrating human locomotions
with human-human interactions may require realignment of motion frames between characters).
Currently, a comprehensive system that supports multiple types of motion generation is still lacking.
This limitation poses challenges for animators and game designers who often need to handle a
variety of motion commands within a long sequence/plot. Due to the absence of a centralized,
open-access system, they are forced to generate specific types of motions using separate methods,
which significantly reduces workflow efficiency.
To address this gap, we propose Sitcom-Crafter, a comprehensive system designed to synthesize
diverse types of human motions. This system can be guided by both the 3D scene structure and a long
plot context, thereby more effectively meeting the demands of designers. Sitcom-Crafter comprises
eight modules, which can be broadly categorized into two parts: three fundamental Generation
modules that produce different types of motions (human locomotion, human-scene interaction, and
human-human interaction), and five peripheral Augmentation modules that ensure the system’s
cohesiveness, capability, user-friendliness, and high-quality results. As a pioneering effort in this
area to explore such a comprehensive system, we describe the challenges encountered in each part, as
well as our solutions and designs.
For the establishment of the generation modules, a straightforward yet effective solution is to integrate
existing state-of-the-art motion generation methods that previously focused on specific motion types.
Accordingly, we base the human locomotion generation module and the human-scene interaction
module on the state-of-the-art methods GAMMA (Zhang & Tang, 2022) and DIMOS (Zhao et al.,
2023), respectively. These methods can generate motions that integrate well within 3D scenes.
However, for human-human interaction, we found that existing works like InterGen (Liang et al.,
2024) are limited to unconstrained synthesis; that is, the generation process ignores surrounding
scene objects. Simply incorporating current human-human interaction methods into the system can
thus lead to severe human-to-scene collisions, thereby reducing the usability of the synthesized
motions. Another significant issue is the inconsistency of motion representations (e.g., marker points
vs. parametric body parameters) between different motion generation methods. To address this, the
system needs to unify its body representation format, thereby reducing unnecessary calculations and
time required for conversions between different formats.
Delving into these problems, we identified that the primary factor hindering current methods from
generating well physics-constrained human-human interactions is the lack of accessible data. Existing
open-source human-human interaction datasets (Liang et al., 2024; Xu et al., 2024) only involve
human motion itself, without including information about the surrounding 3D scene. To avoid the
substantial cost of collecting motion data with 3D scene information, we propose a self-supervised
scene-aware human-human interaction generation module. By processing existing motion data, we
define the region where the motion occurs and randomly set the height and shape of surrounding
objects. We then distribute binary Signed Distance Function (SDF) points in the 3D space around the
motion region to represent these objects. This synthetic scene information can then be leveraged as
conditions for generating better physics-constrained human-human interactions. Regarding the choice
of body representation, we adopt marker points throughout the system. This approach facilitates the
scalability of training data (as discussed in Appendix G), compared to using parameters of a specific
parametric model.
As mentioned earlier, relying solely on individual generation modules is insufficient for creating
a fully functional system due to the inherent incompatibilities among these modules in various


                                                   2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


aspects. To ensure seamless integration and the smooth generation of combined motions, we have
designed five other critical augmentation modules essential for achieving cohesive, high-quality
motion generation. To facilitate user guidance, a plot interpretation module leverages the reasoning
capabilities of large language models to generate (optionally), comprehend, split, and distribute
commands from long plot contexts to the generation modules. For ensuring the consistency of human
motions between different generative modules, a motion synchronization module maintains pose
smoothness for individual characters and frame length consistency between interacting characters. To
address the gap of missing hand poses and enhance the expressiveness of human motions, a hand
pose retrieval module augments synthesized motions by retrieving hand poses from the dataset based
on instructional text. A collision revision module acts as a post-processing unit, employing multiple
rules to prevent collisions between characters when they perform motions independently. Lastly, to
achieve realistic and natural rendering results, a motion retargeting module projects the motions of
the parametric body models onto existing 3D digital human assets.
We evaluate the performance of Sitcom-Crafter using open-source 3D scenes. The experimental re-
sults demonstrate that Sitcom-Crafter can generate high-quality, diverse, and well-physics-constrained
human motions (see examples in Fig. 1). Our key contributions in this work are as follows: 1)
we develop a comprehensive human motion generation system, Sitcom-Crafter, which supports
the synthesis of diverse types of human motions guided by both 3D scene structures and long plot
contexts. The system consists of three motion generation modules and five augmentation modules
that provide a flexible approach to motion generation. 2) We introduce a novel self-supervised, scene-
aware human-human interaction generation method within the generation modules. By synthesizing
binary SDF points around the motion region, we incorporate surrounding scene information into the
generator, addressing the motion-scene collision problem prevalent in existing methods. Additionally,
we unify motion representation using marker points across the different generation modules, ensuring
seamless integration and compatibility of the generated motions. 3) We design five augmentation
modules to enhance the cohesiveness and quality of the generated motions and improve the system’s
user-friendliness. These include modules for plot interpretation and command distribution, motion
synchronization, collision revision, hand pose retrieval, and motion retargeting. Experimental evalu-
ations on open-source 3D scenes demonstrate that our system effectively synthesizes high-quality,
diverse, and well-physics-constrained human motions.

2   R ELATED W ORKS
Human motion synthesis. Synthesizing realistic human motions has long been a popular topic
in the computer vision and graphics fields. Early works (Fragkiadaki et al., 2015; Martinez et al.,
2017; Zhou et al., 2018) adopted a deterministic strategy that predicts a single motion closer to the
ground truth. However, such a deterministic prediction can lead to the averaged generated results.
More recent methods have therefore largely adopted stochastic approaches. These works leverage
generative model structures like GANs (Barsoum et al., 2018), VAEs (Yan et al., 2018; Petrovich et al.,
2021), and recent diffusion models (Tevet et al., 2023; Shafir et al., 2024), and can be conditioned on
diverse signals such as action labels (Athanasiou et al., 2022), music (Li et al., 2021), and text (Guo
et al., 2022). Most of these works mainly pay attention to the movement quality itself. For better
physically plausible motions, other works incorporate physics simulators into the generation pipeline
(Yuan et al., 2023) or design contact rewards with reinforcement learning (Zhang & Tang, 2022).
Human-scene interaction synthesis. Unlike the abovementioned human motion synthesis works that
only focus on the quality and diversity of human movements, research on human-scene interaction
synthesis takes 3D scenes into account. These works involve either static frame affordance (Li et al.,
2019; Zhang et al., 2020) or motion sequences generation (Li et al., 2023; Mir et al., 2024). Hassan
et al. (Hassan et al., 2021) encoded the contact and semantic relationships between the body and
the scene to place a static 3D human scan in the scene. (Mullen et al., 2023) improved upon this by
placing human animations into the scene. Zhao et al. (Zhao et al., 2022) adopted a two-stage pipeline
that first determines the pose of the pelvis that interacts with scene objects and then generates the
detailed body. They then extend it from static pose to motion sequences in (Zhao et al., 2023). Xiao
et al. (Xiao et al., 2024) define interactions as chain of contacts and support versatile interactions.
Human-human interaction synthesis. Compared to motions involving only a single human, relative
few works exist that have focused on interactions between multiple humans. While multiple human-
human interaction datasets (Van der Aa et al., 2011; Von Marcard et al., 2018; Ng et al., 2020) have
been published, these datasets either have a limited number of sequences or lack multimodality


                                                  3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


annotations, hindering the development of this field. Shafir et al. (Shafir et al., 2024) proposed
to address these problems by fine-tuning a single-human motion generator on these datasets in a
few-shot manner, however, the resulting generated interactions lack diversity. Alternative works
(Zanfir et al., 2018; Sun et al., 2021; Müller et al., 2024) have instead explored multiple-person
mesh estimation, however, they are focusing on reconstruction instead of generation. Only recently,
facilitated by the release of large-scale and sufficiently-annotated, human-human interaction datasets
such as InterHuman (Liang et al., 2024) and Inter-X (Xu et al., 2024), has a diffusion-based model
emerged that is able to generate diverse human-human interactions (Liang et al., 2024).
Our Sitcom-Crafter versus others. Previous research has made significant strides in diverse types
of human motion generation and achieved high-quality synthesis. However, these efforts typically
concentrated on one specific motion type, leaving the challenge of establishing a comprehensive
system that supports multiple types of human motions largely unexplored. Our work addresses
this gap by contributing to the development of such a comprehensive system, exploring challenges
encountered during the process, and proposing corresponding solutions. It is worth noting that a
recent project, DLP (Cai et al., 2024), also centers around 3D characters. However, their emphasis lies
more on developing characters’ psychological states and relationships, whereas our work primarily
focuses on advancing human motion generation itself.

3   S ITCOM -C RAFTER
3.1 S YSTEM OVERVIEW
Before delving into our system, we recommend first reviewing Appendix A for an understanding of
the methods closely related to our approach and some denotation symbols, which are placed there due
to page length constraints. Fig. 2 demonstrates the entire workflow of Sitcom-Crafter. The initial input
is a 3D scene with semantic information about its objects. The plot context can either be automatically
generated based on the 3D scene information or manually designed by users. A language model
is then employed to comprehend the plot context and transform it into recognizable commands
for character motions. These commands are distributed to three motion generation modules for
crafting different types of motions: human locomotion, human-scene interaction, and human-human
interaction (for further details, refer to Appendix B.1). During the generation process, a motion
synchronization module ensures consistency between synthesized frames from different generation
modules. A hand pose retrieval module supplements hand poses to enhance the expressiveness of
human motions. To increase the realism and naturalness of the motions, a collision revision module
adjusts the generated motions to prevent collisions between characters, and a retargeting module
maps the generated motions to existing high-quality 3D human assets for improved visual fidelity.
3.2 S CENE -AWARE H UMAN -H UMAN I NTERACTION G ENERATION
In this section, we will introduce our human-human interaction generation module, while the details
and designs of the other two motion generation modules are provided in Appendix B.3.
Our human-human interaction generation module builds upon InterGen (Liang et al., 2024), but
introduces several key modifications to better integrate with the overall system and address motion-
scene collision issues. These changes include a different motion representation, additional network
conditions (last frame condition and synthetic SDF points condition), a body regressor that converts
marker points to body mesh, data canonicalization, and modified training losses and strategies. We
will cover some of these aspects here, while leaving the details of other components to Appendix B.2.
Self-Supervised SDF Condition for Scene-Aware Collision Avoidance. Prior human-human inter-
action generation methods, such as InterGen, do not consider the 3D scene information surrounding
characters in the formulation of its denoiser D(·). If human-human interaction motions generated by
InterGen are directly applied to a 3D scene, severe collisions between characters and scene objects
can occur (as shown in Fig. 5). A straightforward solution is to introduce additional 3D scene
conditions into the network. However, there is currently a lack of human-human interaction data with
3D scene information, and collecting such data is costly.
To address the collision problem, we propose a self-supervised strategy to incorporate 3D scene infor-
mation into existing human-human interaction data by synthesizing Signed Distance Function (SDF)
points (pipeline shown in Fig. 3). Specifically, we preprocess existing human-human interaction data
to obtain the mesh of their motion sequences, denoted as M (X) = {M (x1 ), M (x2 ), ..., M (xN )},
where M (·) denotes the transformation from body representation xi to body mesh (achieved using


                                                   4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 2: The workflow of Sitcom-Crafter. The Sitcom-Crafter system consists of eight modules,
three for motion generation and five for function enhancement. The arrows between modules indicate
the workflow direction. The system supports generation guided by 3D scene structure and long plot
context. The plot comprehension module is for interpreting the guiding context into recognizable
commands and distributing them to the generation modules. The three generation modules synthesize
different motion types: human-scene interaction, human locomotion, and human-human interaction.
The motion synchronization module ensures motion consistency between the different generation
modules. The hand pose retrieval module augments the motion results with hand motion. The
collision revision module corrects frames where characters collide with each other. Finally, the
motion retargeting module converts the plain parametric model into detailed 3D digital human assets.
the SMPL/SMPL-X parameters (Loper et al., 2015; Pavlakos et al., 2019) provided in ground-truth
motion data). We then project the vertices V of this sequence mesh to the ground plane and calculate
the convex hull H of the projected 2D points, representing the “truly” walkable region in the ground
2D space. Next, we construct a Shor × Shor × Sver grid of 3D points (P ∈ RShor ×Shor ×Sver ), where
Shor and Sver denote the horizontal and vertical dimensions, respectively, with the grid center aligned
with the pelvis position of one character. These points have values of either 1 or -1, representing
outside scene objects and inside them, thus forming binary SDF points. Initially, all points are set to
1, indicating all regions are walkable. We then set the points {Pf loor , Pceiling } representing the floor
and ceiling to -1: {Pf loor , Pceiling } = {(px , py , pz ) | pz ≤ Tf loor ∨ pz ≥ Tceiling }, where Tf loor
and Tceiling are the heights of the ground and ceiling.
As for creating objects as obstacle information within 3D scene, an intuitive approach to synthesize
implicit objects is to set a random height for each column of points surrounding the walkable
                     {0,0}   {0,1}      {S   −1,Shor −1}                       {i,j}
region: Pobj = {Pobj , Pobj , ..., Pobjhor               }, where Pobj = {Pobj |(i, j) ∈  / H} and
  {i,j}
Pobj = {p | pz < Rand(Tf loor , Tceiling ), px = i, py = j}. We then assign an SDF value of -1 to
all points within Pobj to represent the surrounding scene objects.


                                                    5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 3: Pipeline for constructing synthetic SDF conditions. Pipeline involves extracting walkable
region from data, simulating random objects around this region, and distributing binary SDF points
in 3D space. This process approximates a concrete scene, as depicted on the rightmost side.

However, the above approach has problems. The random configuration for middle layer points
proved highly susceptible to changes in the SDF during the inference generative process, leading
to severe motion distortion. This issue likely stems from the inconsistency between our synthetic
SDF points and real-world conditions, where 3D objects typically have smooth top surfaces with
minimal height fluctuations between nearby points. Additionally, real-world scenarios often include
multiple walkable regions beyond the original convex hull, whereas the random assignment left only
the original walkable region H free of objects.
We therefore improved the random point-based height assignment by adopting a random plane-based
height assignment. Specifically, we randomly sample K patterns (such as rotated ellipses and rectan-
gles), denoted as Pat, and set a uniform height value for the columns of points within each pattern.
                                    1     2           K             i
This is formulated as Pobj = {Pobj     , Pobj , ..., Pobj }, where Pobj denotes points within a pattern’s
                i
region, and Pobj = {p | pz < TPatk ∧ (px , py ) ∈ Patk } with TPatk = Rand(Tf loor , Tceiling )
shared by all points within the pattern region. This approach ensures that the objects have flat
surfaces parallel to the floor. While extending the setting to sloped surfaces more closely mimicking
real-world conditions could be explored, we leave this as future work. By incorporating this synthetic
surrounding object information into the generator, our human-human interaction module successfully
avoids collisions when applied to a 3D scene. Specifically, we pass these synthesized SDF points
into the generator as additional conditions. The condition is a concatenation of the points’ positions
(relative to one person’s pelvis) and their values, forming a 4-dimensional vector for each point
pcond = {px,y,z , pvalue }. These vectors are processed by several blocks of 3D convolutions and then
flattened into an embedding vector passed into the generator. Details are provided in Appendix B.2.
Data Canonicalization. In InterGen (Liang
et al., 2024), data canonicalization is
achieved by moving one character to the
global coordinate origin, aligning the first
frame’s direction along the Y-axis, and adap-
tively transforming the second character’s
position and rotation. E.g., given the joint
positions jgp ∈ R22×3 (see Appendix A for
definitions), the positions {jgp }A
                                  N of charac-
                                                 Figure 4: Illustration of different canonicalization
ter A are centered around the origin, while strategies. In this example, character A is initially
character B’s positions {jgp }B N , relative to
                                                 canonicalized to the global coordinate origin, while
character A, are more dispersed. Our exper- character B is positioned relative to character A.
iments (see Table 4) reveal that this approach introduces a bias: the character near the origin is
easier to model due to its concentrated joint positions, while the other character, with more dispersed
positions, is harder to learn. This issue is even more pronounced in our marker-based representation,
where we must model the global positions of character B’s 67 markers (see Appendix B.2).
To address this, we propose a new canonicalization method that reduces the complexity of learning
divergent distributions, as shown in Fig. 4. We set each character’s pelvis joint as its local origin and
adjust their marker positions relative to that. This approach concentrates both characters’ marker
distributions around their local origins, leaving only the pelvis joint’s global transition as the primary
divergent distribution to the model. This adjustment simplifies the learning process, reducing the
challenge from 67 divergent distributions to just one, i.e., character B’s pelvis joint position. The


                                                    6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


final motion frame representation of character B is then xi ∈ R(67+1)×3 , consisting of 67 marker
positions and one pelvis joint position.

3.3   AUGMENTATION M ODULE D ESIGNS
Plot Generation, Comprehension, and Command Distribution. A distinctive feature of our system
is its ability to guide motion generation in 3D scenes based on long plot contexts. This capability is
particularly beneficial for designing character movements aligned with a story, dialogue, or script in
fields like anime and gaming. Given a long plot context c, we utilize state-of-the-art large language
models (Reid et al., 2024; Achiam et al., 2023) to comprehend and extract the characters’ instructions.
These models, trained on extensive corpora, are effective tools for this reasoning task.
The language model in Sitcom-Crafter has a dual role. First, if no plot is provided, our system
can generate a random plot based on the information from existing 3D scenes. By providing
prompts, denoted as promptplot , which include information about objects in the 3D scenes and
some plot examples, we can generate rich and vivid plots. This process is formulated as c =
Lang(promptplot , Infoscene ), where Lang represents the language model and Infoscene includes
categorical information about scene objects.
Second, if plot c is available, by carefully illustrating the format and types of orders that can be
interpreted by the generation modules through prompts, denoted as promptorder , the language
model can extract key orders for different characters from the input plot context. These orders are
recognizable and executable by our three motion generation models. This process is formulated as
{OrdersA , OrdersB , . . .} = Lang(c, promptorder ), where A, B, . . . represent different characters.
The language model also rechecks the produced commands to ensure format correctness. These
commands are then distributed to the appropriate generation modules. More details of this module,
including specific prompts and how generation modules interpret and execute commands, are provided
in Appendix C.1.
Motion Synchronization. The motion synchronization module ensures consistency between the
generated motions from different generation modules. This consistency has two key aspects. First,
there should be no drastic changes between last and next pose of a character. Second, the motion frame
lengths of the two characters should be synchronized before starting the human-human interaction
generation. Otherwise, one character may remain static, waiting for the other one’s motions to end.
To address the first issue, we use Spherical Linear Interpolation (Slerp) (Shoemake, 1985) for smooth
rotation transitions and linear interpolation for other transitions. For the second one, we set the
motion length based on the maximum order number of the two characters. If one character has fewer
orders, we extend his motion by generating redundant frames. Details are provided in Appendix C.2.
Hand Pose Retrieval. The default configuration of the 67 marker points (Loper et al., 2014) includes
only two markers at the wrist positions, which limits the expressiveness of human hand motions.
To enhance this aspect, we employ a postprocessing step that retrieves hand poses from a dataset.
Specifically, we utilize CLIP (Radford et al., 2021) to encode all the prompts in the Inter-X dataset
(Xu et al., 2024) (which is in SMPL-X format, including hand poses) during a pre-encoding phase. In
the inference phase, we encode the guided text similarly and compute the cosine similarity between
the embedding of the inference text and the embeddings from the dataset, selecting the motion clip
with the highest similarity. Next, we perform either random segmentation or upsampling on the
selected motion clip to align its frames with the generated motion sequence. These retrieved hand
poses are then integrated into the generated motion sequence. The effectiveness of this approach is
demonstrated in results displayed in Appendix C.3.
Motion Collision Revision. While GAMMA (Zhang & Tang, 2022) and DIMOS (Zhao et al., 2023)
address 3D scene information in individual character motion generation, they overlook collisions
with other characters. Given the complexity and unpredictability of other characters’ motions, this
issue cannot be resolved by integrating other human motions into the generation process.
To mitigate collisions, we instead propose a postprocessing collision revision module. Specifically,
we identify frames in the human locomotion results where collisions with other characters occur.
Subsequently, we adjust the speed of the human motion by either downsampling or upsampling
frames. This adjustment helps in avoiding collisions more effectively. For detailed methodologies,
please refer to Appendix C.4.


                                                  7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 5: Visual comparisons of human-human interaction generative modules. Human-human
interaction prompts are shown at the top, with some keywords highlighted in green. Due to the
randomization inherent in the generation module, the resulting motions may appear in different
positions. Camera positions are adjusted for optimal view. Each row, from left to right, shows
screenshots captured at different times, progressing from earlier to more recent frames.
Motion Retargeting. The original SMPL/SMPL-X body mesh lacks color attributes or patterns.
While applying a texture map can enhance naturalness, the smooth surface of the mesh can still yield
unrealistic results for features like hair or protruding parts such as clothes. To achieve greater realism,
we utilize 3D character assets provided by Mixamo (Adobe, 2015) and employ the Keemap (Keeline,
2023) package within Blender for retargeting SMPL/SMPL-X motions to existing high-quality 3D
characters. More details can be found in Appendix C.5.

4     E XPERIMENTS
Due to page length limitations, please refer to Appendix D for implementation details, and Appendices
E, F and G for more experiments, ablation studies, and explorations.

4.1   E XPERIMENTAL S ETUP
Datasets. We trained our human-human interaction generation module primarily using the InterHu-
man (Liang et al., 2024) dataset, and also incorporated the Inter-X (Xu et al., 2024) dataset specifically
for experiments exploring the effects of data scale (see Appendix G) due to the substantial training
costs. For all experiments except the final system pipeline results on the Replica dataset, we trained


                                                    8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Table 1: Comparisons of Systems with Differ- Table 2: Comparisons with other human-human
ent Human-Human Interaction Generators interaction methods on the InterHuman dataset.
on the Replica Dataset. “Baseline” refers to “Real” represents the performance of real data. The
generations without human-human interactions. best results are in bold.
The best results are highlighted in bold.
                                                Method         FS↓      FP↓   HSP↓       HHP↓
  Method      FS↓      FP↓      HSP↓      HHP↓
                                                      Real         0     0.0037    0.0043     0.0807
 Baseline       0     0.0099    5.5119   0.1991
ComMDM       0.0001   0.0215   10.5532   0.2712
                                                   ComMDM          0     0.0076    6.2802     0.1336
 InterGen    0.0001   0.0242    9.6035   0.1774     InterGen       0     0.0049    6.6408     0.0989
   Ours         0     0.0189    5.7529   0.1687       Ours         0     0.0047    1.6950     0.0742

the network using datasets with a 30 FPS frame rate, consistent with the frame rate employed in
other human-human interaction methods. For the experiments on Replica scenes, to ensure motion
frame rate consistency, we aligned with the frame rates used in GAMMA (Zhang & Tang, 2022) and
DIMOS (Zhao et al., 2023), downsampling the human-human interaction training dataset to 40 FPS.
For evaluating the quality of generated motions, we utilized 11 indoor scenes from the Replica dataset
(Straub et al., 2019) as input 3D scenes in our system. We generated 10 plots for each scene using a
language model, resulting in a evaluation benchmark with 110 samples.
Evaluation Metrics. We evaluated physical compliance of the generated motions using the following
metrics: Foot Velocity to detect foot sliding (FS) artifacts, Foot Penetration (FP) to measure foot
markers’ distances from the ground’s default height, Human-Scene Penetration (HSP) to quantify
negative SDF points of marker points indicating collision with scene objects, and Human-Human
Perturbation (HHP) to measure intersecting vertices between characters. The calculation of these
physical metrics can be directly referred to in the corresponding physics-constraint loss functions
designed in Appendix B.2. Additionally, for a comprehensive evaluation, we followed Guo et al.
(2022) and employed other metrics (experiments with these metrics are shown in the Appendix):
Frechet Inception Distance (FID) to compare data distribution between generated and ground-truth
motions, R Precision Top N (R-P TN) to assess text-motion matching, Diversity to evaluate the
variance in generated motions, MModality to gauge motion diversity under the same text guidance,
and MM Dist to measure the cosine similarity between motions and texts.


4.2   C OMPARISONS

Comparisons of Full Motion Generation on 3D Scenes of the Replica Dataset. We evaluate our
system’s performance in generating diverse human motions. Given the absence of an open-source
comprehensive human motion generation system like ours, we constructed baselines to verify our
method’s performance. Specifically, we kept the human-locomotion and human-scene interaction
modules unchanged, while replacing our human-human interaction module with two existing methods:
InterGen (Liang et al., 2024) and ComMDM (Shafir et al., 2024). Since ComMDM was originally a
few-shot method, we retrained it on the InterHuman dataset to ensure a fair comparison.
To integrate these two methods into our system, we adopted a straightforward approach: first, we
allowed the methods to generate human motions without constraints, relying solely on text guidance.
Then, we aligned the position and body pose of one character in the first frame of the generated
motion to the last frame of the motion generated by the other two modules (either human locomotion
or human-scene interaction). For the second character, we adaptively transformed its position to
maintain its original relationship with the first character. To smooth out any abrupt transitions in
motion, we interpolated the movements at the junctions.
In Table 1, we present the physical metrics comparisons between systems employing different human-
human interaction methods. The results generated by commands without human-human interaction
serve as the baseline, which should approximate the upper bound of FS, FP, and HSP performance.
This is because the human locomotion and human-scene interaction modules are shared across all
compared systems, and these two modules have been well-tuned to avoid physical inconsistencies.
From the results, we observe that our system outperforms those utilizing ComMDM and InterGen as
the human-human interaction module, achieving the best physical-constraint performance. Compared


                                                  9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 6: Visual illustrations of the generations of the whole system guided by long plots. The
plots are shown at the top, with some key motion words highlighted in green. For better illustration,
we include two cameras from different angles. Each row, from left to right, shows screenshots
captured at different times, progressing from earlier to more recent frames.
with the baseline, our system demonstrates that the human-scene perturbation closely aligns with the
baseline while enhancing human-human perturbation. This confirms our design’s effectiveness.
Fig. 5 provides visual comparisons of different human-human interaction modules. It is evident that
without surrounding scene awareness, the other two models tend to penetrate the 3D environment,
whereas our model better avoids such issues. The figure also highlights the ablation of the SDF con-
dition (detailed in Appendix F), which fails to prevent penetration, thus confirming the effectiveness
of our design. Additionally, Fig. 6 illustrates the complete system pipeline guided by long plots,
showcasing our system’s capability to support various types of human motion generation. Further
visual comparisons and pipeline generation results are available in Appendix H. For dynamic video
views of the generated motions and comparisons, please refer to our Supplementary Videos.
Comparisons of Human-Human Interaction Generation on Synthetic Implicit 3D Scenes. We
further isolate the human-human interaction module to evaluate its performance on our synthetic
implicit 3D scenes, as described in Section 3.2. We primarily focus on physical compliance metrics.
For metrics related to motion diversity, alignment with guidance text, and other aspects, please refer
to Appendix E. From Table 2, we observe that our human-human interaction module surpasses the
other two methods in all physical metrics, validating the effectiveness of our design.


5   C ONCLUSION

In this work, we present a comprehensive system capable of generating diverse human motions
in 3D scenes guided by detailed plot texts. Our system comprises three generation modules and
five augmentation modules, collectively designed to ensure robust functionality. Central to our
contributions is the 3D scene-aware human-human interaction generation module, which synthesizes
realistic interactions with strict adherence to physical constraints. Complementing this, our human
locomotion generation module and human-scene interaction module leverage state-of-the-art methods
to complete the trio of generation capabilities. Augmentation modules such as plot comprehension,
motion synchronization, and designs for visual enhancements further enhance the system’s perfor-
mance. Experimental evaluations validate our system’s ability to produce natural, realistic, and
high-quality human motions, making it a promising tool for advancing workflows in anime and game
design industries. Additionally, we address the current limitations of the system and outline future
work directions in Appendix I.


                                                 10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


R EFERENCES
Josh Achiam, Steven Adler, Sandhini Agarwal, Lama Ahmad, Ilge Akkaya, Florencia Leoni Aleman,
  Diogo Almeida, Janko Altenschmidt, Sam Altman, Shyamal Anadkat, et al. Gpt-4 technical report.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.08774, 2023. 7

Adobe. Mixamo. http://www.mixamo.com/, 2015. 8, 27

Nikos Athanasiou, Mathis Petrovich, Michael J Black, and Gül Varol. Teach: Temporal action
  composition for 3d humans. In 2022 International Conference on 3D Vision (3DV), pp. 414–423.
  IEEE, 2022. 2, 3

Emad Barsoum, John Kender, and Zicheng Liu. Hp-gan: Probabilistic 3d human motion prediction
 via gan. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition
 workshops, pp. 1418–1427, 2018. 3

Zhongang Cai, Jianping Jiang, Zhongfei Qing, Xinying Guo, Mingyuan Zhang, Zhengyu Lin, Haiyi
  Mei, Chen Wei, Ruisi Wang, Wanqi Yin, et al. Digital life project: Autonomous 3d characters with
  social intelligence. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
  Recognition, pp. 582–592, 2024. 4

Setareh Cohan, Guy Tevet, Daniele Reda, Xue Bin Peng, and Michiel van de Panne. Flexible motion
  in-betweening with diffusion models. In ACM SIGGRAPH 2024 Conference Papers, pp. 1–9, 2024.
  22

Katerina Fragkiadaki, Sergey Levine, Panna Felsen, and Jitendra Malik. Recurrent network models
  for human dynamics. In Proceedings of the IEEE international conference on computer vision, pp.
  4346–4354, 2015. 3

Chuan Guo, Shihao Zou, Xinxin Zuo, Sen Wang, Wei Ji, Xingyu Li, and Li Cheng. Generating
  diverse and natural 3d human motions from text. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on
  Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 5152–5161, 2022. 2, 3, 9

Mohamed Hassan, Partha Ghosh, Joachim Tesch, Dimitrios Tzionas, and Michael J Black. Populating
 3d scenes by learning human-scene interaction. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on
 Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 14708–14718, 2021. 3

Biao Jiang, Xin Chen, Wen Liu, Jingyi Yu, Gang Yu, and Tao Chen. Motiongpt: Human motion as a
  foreign language. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 36, 2023. 2

Nan Jiang, Zhiyuan Zhang, Hongjie Li, Xiaoxuan Ma, Zan Wang, Yixin Chen, Tengyu Liu, Yixin
  Zhu, and Siyuan Huang. Scaling up dynamic human-scene interaction modeling. In Proceedings
  of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 1737–1747, 2024.
  2

Nick Keeline.      Keemap-blender-rig-retargeting-addon.             https://github.com/nkeeline/
  Keemap-Blender-Rig-ReTargeting-Addon, 2023. 8, 27

Nikos Kolotouros, Georgios Pavlakos, and Kostas Daniilidis. Convolutional mesh regression for
  single-image human shape reconstruction. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on com-
  puter vision and pattern recognition, pp. 4501–4510, 2019. 18

Jiaman Li, Jiajun Wu, and C Karen Liu. Object motion guided human motion synthesis. ACM
   Transactions on Graphics (TOG), 42(6):1–11, 2023. 3

Ruilong Li, Shan Yang, David A Ross, and Angjoo Kanazawa. Ai choreographer: Music conditioned
  3d dance generation with aist++. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on
  Computer Vision, pp. 13401–13412, 2021. 3

Xueting Li, Sifei Liu, Kihwan Kim, Xiaolong Wang, Ming-Hsuan Yang, and Jan Kautz. Putting
  humans in a scene: Learning affordance in 3d indoor environments. In Proceedings of the
 IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, pp. 12368–12376, 2019. 3


                                               11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Han Liang, Wenqian Zhang, Wenxuan Li, Jingyi Yu, and Lan Xu. Intergen: Diffusion-based multi-
  human motion generation under complex interactions. International Journal of Computer Vision,
  pp. 1–21, 2024. 2, 4, 6, 8, 9, 15, 19, 27

Matthew Loper, Naureen Mahmood, and Michael J Black. Mosh: motion and shape capture from
 sparse markers. ACM Trans. Graph., 33(6):220–1, 2014. 7, 15, 18

Matthew Loper, Naureen Mahmood, Javier Romero, Gerard Pons-Moll, and Michael J Black. Smpl:
 a skinned multi-person linear model. ACM Transactions on Graphics (TOG), 34(6):1–16, 2015. 5,
 15, 17

Julieta Martinez, Michael J Black, and Javier Romero. On human motion prediction using recurrent
  neural networks. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition,
  pp. 2891–2900, 2017. 3

Aymen Mir, Xavier Puig, Angjoo Kanazawa, and Gerard Pons-Moll. Generating continual human
  motion in diverse 3d scenes. In 2024 International Conference on 3D Vision (3DV), pp. 903–913.
  IEEE, 2024. 2, 3

James F Mullen, Divya Kothandaraman, Aniket Bera, and Dinesh Manocha. Placing human anima-
  tions into 3d scenes by learning interaction-and geometry-driven keyframes. In Proceedings of the
  IEEE/CVF Winter Conference on Applications of Computer Vision, pp. 300–310, 2023. 2, 3

Lea Müller, Vickie Ye, Georgios Pavlakos, Michael Black, and Angjoo Kanazawa. Generative
  proxemics: A prior for 3d social interaction from images. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF
  Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 9687–9697, 2024. 4, 19

Evonne Ng, Donglai Xiang, Hanbyul Joo, and Kristen Grauman. You2me: Inferring body pose
  in egocentric video via first and second person interactions. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF
  Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 9890–9900, 2020. 3

OpenAI. Chatgpt. https://openai.com/chatgpt, 2022. Large language model. 32

Georgios Pavlakos, Vasileios Choutas, Nima Ghorbani, Timo Bolkart, Ahmed AA Osman, Dimitrios
  Tzionas, and Michael J Black. Expressive body capture: 3d hands, face, and body from a single
  image. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recognition,
  pp. 10975–10985, 2019. 5, 15, 16, 17

William Peebles and Saining Xie. Scalable diffusion models with transformers. arXiv preprint
 arXiv:2212.09748, 2022. 18

Mathis Petrovich, Michael J Black, and Gül Varol. Action-conditioned 3d human motion synthesis
 with transformer vae. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer
 Vision, pp. 10985–10995, 2021. 3

Alec Radford, Jong Wook Kim, Chris Hallacy, Aditya Ramesh, Gabriel Goh, Sandhini Agarwal,
  Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, Pamela Mishkin, Jack Clark, et al. Learning transferable visual
  models from natural language supervision. In International conference on machine learning, pp.
  8748–8763. PMLR, 2021. 7, 24

Machel Reid, Nikolay Savinov, Denis Teplyashin, Dmitry Lepikhin, Timothy Lillicrap, Jean-baptiste
 Alayrac, Radu Soricut, Angeliki Lazaridou, Orhan Firat, Julian Schrittwieser, et al. Gemini
 1.5: Unlocking multimodal understanding across millions of tokens of context. arXiv preprint
 arXiv:2403.05530, 2024. 7, 21

Robin Rombach, Andreas Blattmann, Dominik Lorenz, Patrick Esser, and Björn Ommer. High-
  resolution image synthesis with latent diffusion models. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF confer-
  ence on computer vision and pattern recognition, pp. 10684–10695, 2022. 32

John Schulman, Filip Wolski, Prafulla Dhariwal, Alec Radford, and Oleg Klimov. Proximal policy
  optimization algorithms. arXiv preprint arXiv:1707.06347, 2017. 15


                                                12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Yoni Shafir, Guy Tevet, Roy Kapon, and Amit Haim Bermano. Human motion diffusion as a
  generative prior. In The Twelfth International Conference on Learning Representations, 2024. 2, 3,
  4, 9, 27
Ken Shoemake. Animating rotation with quaternion curves. In Proceedings of the 12th annual
  conference on Computer graphics and interactive techniques, pp. 245–254, 1985. 7, 22
Julian Straub, Thomas Whelan, Lingni Ma, Yufan Chen, Erik Wijmans, Simon Green, Jakob J. Engel,
  Raul Mur-Artal, Carl Ren, Shobhit Verma, Anton Clarkson, Mingfei Yan, Brian Budge, Yajie Yan,
  Xiaqing Pan, June Yon, Yuyang Zou, Kimberly Leon, Nigel Carter, Jesus Briales, Tyler Gillingham,
  Elias Mueggler, Luis Pesqueira, Manolis Savva, Dhruv Batra, Hauke M. Strasdat, Renzo De Nardi,
  Michael Goesele, Steven Lovegrove, and Richard Newcombe. The Replica dataset: A digital
  replica of indoor spaces. arXiv preprint arXiv:1906.05797, 2019. 9
Yu Sun, Qian Bao, Wu Liu, Yili Fu, Michael J Black, and Tao Mei. Monocular, one-stage, regression
  of multiple 3d people. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF international conference on computer
  vision, pp. 11179–11188, 2021. 4
Richard S Sutton, Andrew G Barto, et al. Introduction to reinforcement learning, volume 135. MIT
  press Cambridge, 1998. 15
Guy Tevet, Sigal Raab, Brian Gordon, Yoni Shafir, Daniel Cohen-or, and Amit Haim Bermano.
  Human motion diffusion model. In The Eleventh International Conference on Learning Represen-
  tations, 2023. 2, 3, 19, 27
NP Van der Aa, Xinghan Luo, Geert-Jan Giezeman, Robby T Tan, and Remco C Veltkamp. Umpm
 benchmark: A multi-person dataset with synchronized video and motion capture data for evaluation
 of articulated human motion and interaction. In 2011 IEEE international conference on computer
 vision workshops (ICCV Workshops), pp. 1264–1269. IEEE, 2011. 3
Timo Von Marcard, Roberto Henschel, Michael J Black, Bodo Rosenhahn, and Gerard Pons-Moll.
  Recovering accurate 3d human pose in the wild using imus and a moving camera. In Proceedings
  of the European conference on computer vision (ECCV), pp. 601–617, 2018. 3
Jiashun Wang, Huazhe Xu, Jingwei Xu, Sifei Liu, and Xiaolong Wang. Synthesizing long-term
   3d human motion and interaction in 3d scenes. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on
   Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 9401–9411, 2021. 22
Zeqi Xiao, Tai Wang, Jingbo Wang, Jinkun Cao, Wenwei Zhang, Bo Dai, Dahua Lin, and Jiang-
  miao Pang. Unified human-scene interaction via prompted chain-of-contacts. In The Twelfth
  International Conference on Learning Representations, 2024. 3
Liang Xu, Xintao Lv, Yichao Yan, Xin Jin, Shuwen Wu, Congsheng Xu, Yifan Liu, Yizhou Zhou,
  Fengyun Rao, Xingdong Sheng, et al. Inter-x: Towards versatile human-human interaction analysis.
  In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp.
  22260–22271, 2024. 2, 4, 7, 8, 17, 24
Sirui Xu, Zhengyuan Li, Yu-Xiong Wang, and Liang-Yan Gui. Interdiff: Generating 3d human-object
   interactions with physics-informed diffusion. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International
  Conference on Computer Vision, pp. 14928–14940, 2023. 32
Xinchen Yan, Akash Rastogi, Ruben Villegas, Kalyan Sunkavalli, Eli Shechtman, Sunil Hadap, Ersin
  Yumer, and Honglak Lee. Mt-vae: Learning motion transformations to generate multimodal human
  dynamics. In Proceedings of the European conference on computer vision (ECCV), pp. 265–281,
  2018. 3
Ye Yuan, Jiaming Song, Umar Iqbal, Arash Vahdat, and Jan Kautz. Physdiff: Physics-guided human
  motion diffusion model. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer
  Vision, pp. 16010–16021, 2023. 2, 3
Andrei Zanfir, Elisabeta Marinoiu, and Cristian Sminchisescu. Monocular 3d pose and shape
  estimation of multiple people in natural scenes-the importance of multiple scene constraints. In
 Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, pp. 2148–2157,
  2018. 4


                                                13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Yan Zhang and Siyu Tang. The wanderings of odysseus in 3d scenes. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF
  Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 20481–20491, 2022. 2, 3, 7, 9, 15,
  18, 19, 20
Yan Zhang, Mohamed Hassan, Heiko Neumann, Michael J Black, and Siyu Tang. Generating 3d
  people in scenes without people. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision
  and pattern recognition, pp. 6194–6204, 2020. 3
Yan Zhang, Michael J Black, and Siyu Tang. We are more than our joints: Predicting how 3d bodies
  move. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition,
  pp. 3372–3382, 2021. 18
Kaifeng Zhao, Shaofei Wang, Yan Zhang, Thabo Beeler, and Siyu Tang. Compositional human-scene
  interaction synthesis with semantic control. In European Conference on Computer Vision, pp.
  311–327. Springer, 2022. 3, 16
Kaifeng Zhao, Yan Zhang, Shaofei Wang, Thabo Beeler, and Siyu Tang. Synthesizing diverse
  human motions in 3d indoor scenes. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on
  Computer Vision, pp. 14738–14749, 2023. 2, 3, 7, 9, 15, 18, 19, 20, 31
Yi Zhou, Zimo Li, Shuangjiu Xiao, Chong He, Zeng Huang, and Hao Li. Auto-conditioned recurrent
  networks for extended complex human motion synthesis. In International Conference on Learning
  Representations, 2018. 3


                                               14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A PPENDIX C ONTENTS
       • Appendix A: Preliminaries                                                                     15
       • Appendix B: More Details of Generation Modules                                                16
            – B.1: Detailed Workflow within Generation Modules                                         16
            – B.2: Human-Human Interaction Generation                                                   17
            – B.3: Human Locomotion and Human-Scene Interaction Generation                             20
       • Appendix C: More Details of Augmentation Modules                                               21
            – C.1: Plot Generation, Comprehension, and Command Distribution                             21
            – C.2: Motion Synchronization                                                              22
            – C.3: Hand Pose Retrieval                                                                 23
            – C.4: Collision Revision                                                                  25
            – C.5: Motion Retargeting                                                                   27
       • Appendix D: Implementation Details                                                            27
       • Appendix E: Additional Comparisons of Human-Human Interaction                                 27
       • Appendix F: Ablation Studies                                                                  28
       • Appendix G: Exploration of Training Data Consumption                                          30
       • Appendix H: More Visual Results                                                               30
       • Appendix I: Limitations and Outlooks                                                          30

A    P RELIMINARIES
Body representations. Our work involves the usage of two differentiable parametric body models
SMPL (Loper et al., 2015) and SMPL-X (Pavlakos et al., 2019). By determining several body
parameters, such models can produce a posed body mesh. The parameters we use include body
shape parameters β ∈ R10 (10 components in the body shape PCA space) and body pose parameters
Θ = {tr ∈ R3 , θr ∈ R3 , θb ∈ R21×3 , θh ∈ R30×3 }, denoting the root translation, root orientation
in axis-angle, 21 body joint rotations in axis-angle, and 30 hand joint rotations in axis-angle (only
for SMPL-X), respectively. For the generation of human motions in our system, we uniformly use
the configuration of 67 marker points proposed by Loper et al. (2014) to represent motions. A
sequence of motion is then formulated as X = {x1 , x2 , ..., xN }, where N is the number of frames
and xi ∈ R67×3 denotes the positions of the maker points at the ith frame.
GAMMA and DIMOS. GAMMA (Zhang & Tang, 2022) focused on generating human locomotions
in 3D scenes. They proposed a reinforcement learning-based network, that includes a conditional VAE
to generate a 0.25s motion primitive sequence (represented by marker points) and a policy network
to do the motion sampling. Long-term motion can be achieved by using previous motion frames as
conditions and then doing the generation recursively. The training of the policy network leveraged
the actor-critic framework (Sutton et al., 1998) and the PPO algorithm (Schulman et al., 2017).
They also included a tree-based search during testing that got a better result by generating multiple
candidates and pruning them. Although GAMMA produces high-fidelity motions, its scope is limited
to locomotion. By incorporating human-scene interaction modules, GAMMA was more recently
extended to DIMOS (Zhao et al., 2023), achieving autonomous body-scene collision avoidance by
integrating scene information into the states and rewards.
InterGen. InterGen (Liang et al., 2024) introduces a diffusion-based approach for generating two-
person motion from text prompts, enabling diverse interactions. Their interaction diffusion model
features cooperative denoisers with shared weights and a mutual attention mechanism, effectively
capturing the symmetric nature of human identities during interactions. For motion representation,
InterGen employs a non-canonical format to model global relations between performers in an
interaction. This representation is formulated as xi(IG) = {jgp , jgv , j r , cf }, where xi(IG) is used to
distinguish it from the previously mentioned format xi . Here, jgp are body joints’ global positions,
jgv are joints’ global velocities, jr are 6D representations of local joint rotations, and cf are binary


                                                   15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 7: Workflow within Generation Modules. Given the command lists derived from the Plot
Comprehension module, each command is sequentially processed by the corresponding generation
module based on its type and order. The motion generation of the current module is conditioned on
the motion frames generated in the previous step, ensuring seamless chaining of motion segments.
Note that the flowchart provides a simplified overview of the logic within the generation modules.
For detailed explanations, please refer to the sections dedicated to each system module.


foot-ground contact features. Additionally, they implement a specific damping training scheme to
enhance performance. However, the model lacks scene-awareness, as it does not consider surrounding
scene information, leading to potential collisions with the environment when generating 3D motions
in a 3D scene.

B     M ORE D ETAILS OF G ENERATION M ODULES
B.1   D ETAILED W ORKFLOW WITHIN G ENERATION M ODULES

To clarify the overall logic of the generation modules used for synthesizing human motions and
interactions, we illustrate the workflow using the example in Fig. 2, aiming to facilitate understanding.
Consider the plot:“The scene opens with Jack, a young artist, sitting on the sofa. He stands up
and paces nervously near the window. Amy, his girlfriend, enters the room, stretches out her arms
and hugs him”. The system first employs the Plot Comprehension module to interpret the plot and
generate two motion command lists. For Jack, the commands include: sit on sofa, stand up from
sofa, walk near window, and finally, hug with Amy. For Amy, the commands include: position near
the door, walk through door, and finally, hug with Jack. While these commands are illustrated in a
conceptual and abstract manner for clarity, their actual format is detailed in Appendix B.3 and C.1).
Based on the type and order of the commands, the system invokes the appropriate generation modules.
For Jack, it first calls the Human-Scene Interaction Generation Module (corresponding to stand up
from sofa), then the Human Locomotion Generation Module (corresponding to walk near the window),
and finally the Human-Human Interaction Generation Module (corresponding to hug with Amy).
Similarly, for Amy, the system calls the Human Locomotion Generation Module (corresponding to
walk through door) and then the Human-Human Interaction Generation Module (corresponding to
hug with Jack). The initial poses of Jack (sitting on the sofa) and Amy (positioned near the door) are
generated using either COINS (Zhao et al., 2022) or VPoser (Pavlakos et al., 2019) to establish the
first frame of the human pose.
Regarding the chaining of motions across different modules, it is important to note that motions are
not generated in parallel. Instead, they follow the order of commands in the motion command list:
the first command is processed first, followed by subsequent commands in sequence. Each generation
module conditions its outputs on frames generated by the previously invoked module. For example,
the human locomotion and human-scene interaction modules use recurrent neural networks, enabling
autoregressive generation of subsequent frames (refer to Appendix A), while the human-human


                                                  16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 8: Motion Collapse Case. We visualize an example of motion collapse without order
indication by marker condition. The instruction text for this example is “The other person rushes
towards one, attempting to use his sword to pierce one’s chest. One deflects the attack by swinging
his own sword”. Please refer to our Supplementary Videos for a more comprehensive view.


  Figure 9: Network Structure Illustrating the Integration of Conditions into the Generator.


interaction module explicitly conditions on the last frame (refer to Appendix B.2). This approach
allows the system to generate long-duration motions aligned with the narrative guidance of extended
plot contexts.
To better illustrate the workflow within the generation modules, a visual flowchart is provided in
Fig. 7. It should be noted that we have simplified several technical details, such as handling frame
length misalignment or addressing human collision issues during locomotion, to present a high-level
overview of the logic within the generation modules. For a comprehensive explanation, please refer
to the subsequent sections detailing each module of our system.

B.2   H UMAN -H UMAN I NTERACTION G ENERATION

Unified Body Representation and Frame Condition for Motion Consistency. As mentioned in
Section A, InterGen uses body joint positions and rotations from an SMPL (Loper et al., 2015) model
as body representation. Although this configuration yields satisfactory results, it limits the network’s
ability to process data from different formats. For example, the InterHuman and the Inter-X datasets
(Xu et al., 2024) use SMPL and SMPL-X (Pavlakos et al., 2019) formats, respectively, but the joint
position defaults differ between SMPL and SMPL-X, restricting InterGen’s capacity to leverage both
datasets. Furthermore, relying solely on body joint information does not fully capture the human
body’s shape, which can limit expressiveness and make it challenging to avoid character collisions.


                                                  17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


In contrast, marker points (Loper et al., 2014) can effectively represent body shape, and we can
extract similarly positioned marker points from both SMPL and SMPL-X meshes. This approach
enhances the network’s ability to consume training data from different sources. Our human-human
interaction generator, therefore, uses marker points as body representation, both enabling the model
to consume training data from different sources as well as aligning it with the representations used in
the other two generation modules, GAMMA (Zhang & Tang, 2022) and DIMOS (Zhao et al., 2023).
This results in a single unified body representation across the system. Beyond these benefits, such
3D-point based human representation, as validated by (Kolotouros et al., 2019; Zhang et al., 2021),
captures richer body shape information and avoids periodicity and discontinuity issues in parametric
rotation prediction, improving training and convergence efficiency.
Additionally, InterGen treats human-human interaction generation as commutative, meaning that
{X A , X B } (where A and B denote different characters) and {X B , X A } are considered equiva-
lent despite their different orders. Based on this, InterGen designed an interactively cooperative
transformer-style network where motions A and B are generated by the same weight-sharing denoiser
D(·), conditioned on timestep t, hidden states of the counterpart h, and text guidance c. The denoising
step for motion A is formulated as D(x(t)A , h, t, c), where x(t)A represents the tth denoising step’s
result. While this formulation achieves generally good results, we observed that due to the ambiguity
in person order during inference (both start from random Gaussian noise), the two characters’ motions
sometimes collapse into a single overlapped motion. Examples of this issue are shown in Fig. 8.
To address this issue and ensure consistency between the generated motions across different modules,
we condition the denoiser on the last-frame marker points. This leads to D(x(t)A , h, t, c, xA  −1 ),
where xA−1  denotes  the marker information from the last generated frame. This additional condition
provides the denoiser with more information about the current character’s order, thereby preventing
motion collapse and ensuring coherence with previously generated motions.
First Frame Marker Condition and SDF Condition. Fig. 9 illustrates how the first frame marker
condition and SDF points are integrated into the generator. For the frame condition, we use a GRU
(Gated Recurrent Unit) layer to encode the input into the same embedding dimension as the text
embedding and timestep embedding. Although we only use one frame condition in this paper, the
GRU layer allows for the potential to condition the generation on a sequence of frames, enhancing
the network’s extensibility.
For the SDF grid points, given their dimension of R4×Shor ×Shor ×Sver as mentioned in Section
3.2, we first process them with three 3D convolution layers, each with a stride of 2, reducing
                            Shor  Shor  Sver
the dimensionality to R4× 8 × 8 × 8 to conserve memory. We then flatten and encode the
result using an MLP layer to match the embedding space. The encoded marker embedding and
SDF embedding are directly added to the text embedding and timestep embedding. The combined
embedding is then utilized to guide the generation by influencing the AdaLN layer’s scale and shift
factors within the transformer blocks of the diffusion model, as described in Peebles & Xie (2022).
Body Regressor with Body Shape Prediction.
Since there is no direct parametric conversion be-
tween the generated markers and the body mesh,
we follow the approach of Zhang & Tang (2022)
and pre-train body regressor networks, denoted
as Regre, to convert markers to SMPL/SMPL-
X parameters, thus contextualizing them into
body meshes. However, unlike Zhang & Tang
(2022) that require as input the specification of
a desired body shape β, we ensure the diversity
of the characters by extending the initial body
regressors to also predict the marker point rep-
resentation of the body shape. Additionally, we
found that relying solely on the MSE loss for the Figure 10: Network Structure of Our Body Re-
markers can lead to distortions in the converted gressor. Given input marker points, the regressor
joint rotations. Therefore, we also incorporate outputs SMPL/SMPLX parameters.
losses on body pose to improve the accuracy and stability of the body regressor.


                                                 18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 11: Comparisons of Different Loss Functions. The purple body mesh is derived from the
predicted SMPLX parameters. The ground truth marker points (in green) and the indexed marker
points from the predicted body mesh (in blue) are also visualized. The red circle highlights the
distortion of the joint rotation when only the marker MSE loss is applied.

Fig. 10 illustrates the structure of our body regressor. Compared to the original settings in Zhang &
Tang (2022), our body regressor includes an additional branch for predicting the body shape β. Given
a motion sequence X ∈ RN ×(67×3) , where N is the sequence length and each frame is represented
by the positions of 67 marker points, the body shape β is predicted for each frame, resulting in a
shape of RN ×10 . We then average this across the sequence dimension to obtain the final β ∈ R10 .
We train two regressors: a marker-to-SMPL regressor and a marker-to-SMPLX regressor. Both
regressors are trained on the training and validation sets of the InterHuman dataset (Liang et al., 2024)
and tested on the test set. The optimization loss function used in Zhang & Tang (2022) primarily
involves the MSE loss between the indexed marker points of the converted SMPL model and the
input marker points (excluding the regulation loss on hand poses). From the visualization of the
predicted results shown in Fig. 11, it is evident that while the predicted SMPL body model achieves
similarly positioned marker points, there are noticeable distortions, such as rotations and windings on
the body mesh (e.g., in the neck region).
Upon investigation, we found that these distortions were due to the regressed joint rotations increasing
periodically (by 2π). To address this, for the marker-to-SMPL regressor, we added additional
regression losses on body joint rotations θb , root translation tr , root rotation θr , and body shape β.
For the marker-to-SMPLX regressor, since the body shape parameters and root translation are not
mutually compatible, we only added regression losses on body joint rotations θb and root rotation
θr , assigning them a 0.1 loss weight to avoid potential overfitting. The regression performance is
illustrated in Fig. 12.
Training Loss Functions and Training Strategy for the Human-Human Interaction Generator.
For training loss functions, in addition to the basic MSE loss (LM SE ) for regressing marker points
during generator training, we adopt several other losses to enhance performance. We incorporate the
interactive loss (LDM ) and the relative orientation loss (LRO ) from InterGen (Liang et al., 2024), as
well as the velocity loss (LV el ) from MDM (Tevet et al., 2023), adapted to marker format.
For constraining foot floating and skating, we follow Tevet et al. (2023) by marking frames where
foot markers touch the ground and penalizing their velocities and z-axis heights to be zero. We use a
loss function Lf oot to enforce these constraints.
To further avoid collisions between humans and the scene, we adopt a loss function (LsceneP ene ) from
Zhao et al. (2023) that minimizes the markers’ SDF values from being negative (indicating inside a
                                                       P67
scene object). This is formulated as min LsceneP ene = i=1 (Grid sample(markeri ; Pvalue ) < 0).
Additionally, we include a regularization loss (LsceneReg ) on the relative distance between markers
to prevent them from converging to the pelvis center.
To avoid collisions between two characters, we use a loss function (LhumaP pene ) based on winding
numbers to prevent intersecting vertices between the body meshes, as described by Müller et al.


                                                   19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 12: Visualizations of Marker-to-SMPLX and Marker-to-SMPL Regressors’ Performance.
We display both the ground truth body mesh (in green) and the regressed body mesh (in blue). The
greater the overlap between these two meshes, the better the regressor’s performance.

(2024). We have parallelized this loss function for faster computation. To calculate LhumanP ene , we
use the pre-trained body regressor Regre to transform marker points to SMPL/SMPL-X parameters
and then parametrize the meshes, formulated as M (Regre(X)). To avoid harmful shortcuts during
the Regre(X) phase, we include an L2 regularization loss (LhumanReg ) to ensure that the positions
of markers remain close before and after the transformation. The formulations of LsceneReg and
LhumanReg are as follows:
                                      67 X
                                      X  67
                        LsceneReg =                ∥xj − xk ∥1 − ∥xjgt − xkgt ∥1                     (1)
                                        j    k
                                            67
                                            X
                          LhumanReg =            ∥xj − Ext(M (Regre(x)))j ∥2                         (2)
                                            j
where x and xgt represent the predicted markers and ground truth markers, respectively, and j and k
indicate the indices of the 67 marker points’ positions. The function Ext denotes the marker points
extraction operation from the contextualized body mesh M .
The final loss function is as follows (with different loss weights for each function):
L = LM SE +LDM +LRO +LV el +Lf oot +LsceneP ene +LsceneReg +LhumanP ene +LhumanReg
                                                                                (3)
For the training strategy, we observed that training from scratch with all loss functions leads to
collapse. Therefore, we split the training into three phases: In Phase1, we exclude the physics
penalty terms, including foot contact, human-scene collisions, and human-human collisions. In
Phase2, we include the penalty terms for foot contact and human-scene collisions to fine-tune the
generator. In Phase3, we incorporate the remaining penalty terms for human-human collisions.

B.3   H UMAN L OCOMOTION AND H UMAN -S CENE I NTERACTION G ENERATION

Our system’s human locomotion generation module and human-scene interaction generation module
are based on GAMMA (Zhang & Tang, 2022) and DIMOS (Zhao et al., 2023). For detailed designs of
these generators, we refer to their respective papers. Here, we focus on how we guide their generation
using instructional text.
The original GAMMA and DIMOS methods require explicit spatial inputs: for locomotion, the user
must specify the motion route (e.g., from one point to another), and for human-scene interaction, the
user must manually select the targeted object and input the motion type (e.g., sit or stand). Our system
automates these processes, allowing direct guidance from plot context without any intermediate
manual input.


                                                     20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 13: Visualizations of Instructional Text Guided Human Locomotion and Human-Scene
Interaction Generation. The numbers in the circles denote the execution order of the instructional
text, and the circle positions denote the sampling points. The red 3D bounding boxes wrapping scene
objects indicate the sampling scope of the route points.


Given a long plot context, through our plot comprehension module (details in Section 3.3 and
Appendix C.1), the human locomotion generation module receives two kinds of instructions: None
(indicating a random route point in the scene) or [ObjectName] (indicating a route point near a
specific scene object). For None, the point sampling is random and unconstrained, whereas for
[ObjectName], sampling occurs within a larger 3D bounding box around the object. To ensure the
sampling result is not within unwalkable regions (e.g., inside the object), the system pre-bakes a 2D
navigation plane indicating walkable areas. Illegal points are filtered out, and sampling repeats if
necessary. For sampling around objects, the 3D box scope dynamically increases to avoid dead loops.
If multiple objects share the same ObjectName, one is selected at random. Thus, for a locomotion
instruction like [None, Chair, Table], the system process is as shown in Fig. 13. This module also
aids human-human interaction generation by ensuring that the two characters are not too far apart
when initiating interaction. To achieve this, an additional route point is added around one character,
compelling them to move closer to the other, resulting in more cohesive and natural interaction.
For instructing human-scene interaction generation, the instructional text format is
[[ObjectName], [MotionType]]. This involves first sampling a point near the target object
as described above, and then executing the specific motion. Given an instruction like [Chair, Sit], the
system generates results as shown in Fig. 13.


C     M ORE D ETAILS OF AUGMENTATION M ODULES

C.1   P LOT G ENERATION , C OMPREHENSION , AND C OMMAND D ISTRIBUTION

We adopt Google Gemini 1.5 (Reid et al., 2024) as the large language model used in our system.
Here, we display the prompt design for generating a two-character script and rechecking the extracted
orders to ensure that the generation modules can recognize them.
For random plot generation based on the input 3D scene information, the prompt fed into the language
model is shown in Fig. 14. By providing examples of expected outputs and passing the category
names of objects present in the 3D scene, the language model functions effectively as a scripter,
returning satisfactory orders. These orders include [None, ObjectName] for human locomotion
generation, [MotionType] for human-scene interaction generation, and orders prefixed with “HHI:”
such as [HHI : Two persons hug each other ...]. An example of the language model’s generation
result is shown in Fig. 15.
Due to the inherent stochasticity of the language model, the extracted orders sometimes fail to meet
the specifications required by the generation modules. Therefore, we utilize the language model
again to revise the initial orders, adhering to a series of established rules shown in Fig. 16. This


                                                  21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 14: Prompt for Random Plot Generation. The placeholder “OBJECT NAMES IN THE 3D
SCENE” will be automatically populated with the names of objects in the given 3D scene.


additional revision process ensures that the instructional orders are more satisfactory. An example
of the language model’s generation result is shown in Fig. 17. In practice, we also append this rule
prompt after the generation prompt in random plot generation to ensure successful output.
Besides leveraging the language model, we include a programmatic process with pre-defined rules
to ensure that the input orders are executable, further reducing the indeterminacy of the language
model’s output. For details of this process, please refer to our code. These orders are then distributed
to the corresponding generation modules according to their types.

C.2   M OTION S YNCHRONIZATION

To ensure consistency between motions from different modules, we adopt the Slerp technique
Shoemake (1985). This is primarily applied to transitions between other motions and human-human
interactions, or vice versa, where there can be noticeable motion jumps despite conditioning the
generation on the last frame (as mentioned in Section 3.2). Specifically, we designate the first and
last four frames of generated human-human interactions as buffer areas for interpolation, using Slerp
for rotation interpolation and linear interpolation for translation. This results in smoother motion
transitions. It is worth noting that another potential solution for ensuring consistency is leveraging
learning-based motion interpolation methods (Wang et al., 2021; Cohan et al., 2024), which can
produce more natural human in-between motions. This approach could be seamlessly integrated into
our system framework due to its modular design. However, we currently adopt the more efficient
Slerp-based method and leave the exploration of learning-based solutions for future improvements.
The motion synchronization module also ensures frame length alignment before starting human-
human interaction generation. Upon receiving orders, the system breaks these orders into multiple
segments based on whether the current order is for human-human interaction generation. For example,


                                                  22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


            Figure 15: Example of Generated Plot Context by the Language Model.


if the instruction for Character A is:
              Orders A : [None, sofa, HHI : Two persons hug with each other, None,
                                                                                                      (4)
                           chair, HHI : Two persons fight with each other]
it will then be divided into segments
                 Seg A-1 : [None, sofa, HHI : Two persons hug with each other]
                                                                                                      (5)
                 Seg A-2 : [None, chair, HHI : Two persons fight with each other]

In the first segment, Character A has two locomotion orders before the human-human interaction
order. Suppose Character B’s first segment is
          Seg B-1 : [None, stool, None, None, HHI : Two persons hug with each other]                  (6)
where there are four locomotion orders before the human-human interaction. Suppose each order
consists of five clips, then there is a total of 1.25 seconds of motion sequence at 40 FPS per order (see
related details in Section A). Since Character B has more locomotion orders than Character A before
the human-human interaction order, we set the total generated frame length before the human-human
interaction in this segment to 4×1.25=5 seconds. This means when A or B reaches the target route
point, they generate additional redundant frames at that point until the total motion length reaches
5s. These redundant frames will appear as hovering at the end (as shown in Fig. 2). In this way, the
system prevents one character from ending their motion and remaining static until the other character
finishes, ensuring better naturalness and smoothness in the interactions.

C.3   H AND P OSE R ETRIEVAL

Compared to the human-human interaction generation module, the human locomotion and human-
scene interaction modules have relatively low requirements for hand motion poses. Using the mean


                                                   23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 16: Prompt for Order Revision. The placeholders “ORDER FOR CHARACTER 1”
and “ORDER FOR CHARACTER 2” will be automatically populated based on the context of the
previously generated plot.


pose provided by the SMPL-X module is sufficiently naturalistic for these purposes. Therefore, our
hand pose retrieval module primarily augments the hand poses of human-human interactions.
The fundamental mechanism of the hand pose retrieval module is to retrieve semantically similar
hand poses from an existing dataset. Since Inter-X (Xu et al., 2024) provides hand pose data, we
use it as our retrieval library. We utilize the text encoder in CLIP ViT-B/32 (Radford et al., 2021) to
encode all the text annotations in the Inter-X dataset. For texts that exceed the token limit, we clip out
the excess tokens. During inference, given an instruction for human-human interaction generation,
we encode the instruction into the feature space, calculate the cosine similarity with the pre-calculated
text embeddings from Inter-X, and select the motion data corresponding to the highest similarity
value. This retrieval process takes less than 5 seconds per human-human interaction.
Fig. 18 displays a hand motion sequence before and after retrieval. To ensure the consistency of hand
motion, we also apply Slerp interpolation, as detailed in Appendix C.3.


                                                   24
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                Figure 17: Example of Revised Order by the Language Model.


Figure 18: Visual comparisons of different hand pose strategies. We display Flat hand pose with
pose values set to zero, Mean hand pose with the mean value provided by SMPL-X, and the results
when applying our retrieval module. The instruction for this motion sequence is “One person grabbed
the other person by the shoulder and touched him”.


C.4   C OLLISION R EVISION

The collision revision module of our system primarily functions as a post-processing step. Since
the human-human interaction generator has taken the other character’s position into account during
its training and with marker condition (see Section 3.2), the collision revision here focuses on
human-human collisions that occur in the results from the human locomotion generation module and
the human-scene interaction generation module. These modules do not consider other characters’
positions during motion generation, leading to frequent human-human collisions in their results.


                                                25
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 19: Visualization of the effect of the collision revision module. The number in the left-upper
corner of each figure denotes the frame order. The frames are captured in top view. The order number
in Red denotes human-human collision, while the number in Green denotes no collision. Please refer
to our Supplementary Videos for a more comprehensive view.


The core solution of the collision revision module is to adjust the speed of one character’s mo-
tion and slow down the other character’s motion to avoid collisions. The strategy is as fol-
lows: suppose there are two sequences, SeqA and SeqB , for two characters, respectively. The
sequence length is identical and denoted as L. To determine the collided frames, we use
LhumanP ene mentioned in Section 3.2 to identify the collided frames (a threshold is set to fil-
ter out frames with trivial human-human collisions). Suppose the collided sequences are COL =
{[cols1 , cole1 ], [cols2 , cole2 ], ..., [colsN , coleN ]}, where [colsn , colen ] denotes the start and end frame
index of the nth collided sequence. We apply collision revision iteratively from the first collided
sequence. For character A, we speed up its motions during [0, colsn +col           2
                                                                                       en
                                                                                          ] by downsampling the frame
              colsn +colen        colsn +colen     colen −colsn
length from          2       to (        2     −         2      ), and slow down its motions during [ colsn +col
                                                                                                               2
                                                                                                                    en
                                                                                                                       , L]
                                                                 colsn +colen                colsn +colen   colen −colsn
by upsampling the frame length from (L −                               2      ) to  (L  −          2      +       2       ).
Then, we apply a similar process to character B,
but slow down its former motions and speed up
its latter motions. By slowing down/speeding
up the former part and speeding up/slowing
down the latter part, the total sequence length
L remains unchanged. We then re-calculate
LhumanP ene to check if the human-human colli-
sion is alleviated. If so, new collision sequences
COL are identified, and the process starts from
the first new sequence; otherwise, we move to
the next collided sequence [cols(n+1) , cole(n+1) ].
In this way, the system effectively alleviates
human-human collisions among human locomo- Figure 20: Failure case of collision revision. In
tion or human-scene interaction results. Fig. 19 a narrow aisle, the collision revision module may
shows the results before and after applying the fail to prevent human-human collisions.
collision revision module. However, it should


                                                            26
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 21: Visualization comparisons between the direct application of a texture map to the
SMPL-X body model and 3D digital human assets from Mixamo (Adobe, 2015).


be noted that the collision revision will fail when there is no space for changing motion lanes, for
example the narrow aisle as shown in Fig. 20.

C.5   M OTION R ETARGETING

Fig. 21 demonstrates the unrealistic rendering results when merely applying a texture map onto the
SMPL/SMPL-X body model, compared to the more natural results of existing 3D digital human
assets. To ensure that the generated motions retarget well to the 3D asset, we carefully adjust the
shifts of the translations of the pelvis joint and the rotations of 21 body joints and 30 hand joints
between the SMPL-X body model (all generated marker points are converted to SMPL-X parameters
using our marker-to-SMPLX regressor) and the 3D digital asset. This process is performed using the
Keemap (Keeline, 2023) package in Blender. The retargeted results are shown in Fig. 22.


D     I MPLEMENTATION D ETAILS

In our human-human interaction module, the size of the SDF points box was set to 3 × 3 × 3 meters,
consisting of 128 × 128 × 128 points. The ground threshold Tf loor was set to the height of the ground
in the raw data, while the ceiling threshold Tceiling was randomized between the maximum height of
the motion body meshes and the top height of the SDF box. The number of implicitly synthesized
objects, K, is uniformly chosen at random from the range [0,10]. The loss weights for each function
in Eq. 3 were determined through hyperparameter tuning to achieve optimal performance, resulting
in values of 1, 3, 0.001, 30, 30, 0.01, 3, 1, 1, respectively. We conducted training over 1,000 epochs in
Phase1 with a batch size of 20 per GPU and a learning rate of 1e−4 . In Phase2, we trained for 500
epochs using the same batch size but reduced the learning rate to 1e−5 . For Phase3, we decreased
the batch size to 6 per GPU due to increased memory costs from LhumanP ene and further lowered
the learning rate to 1e−6 . Training was performed using 4 RTX 4090 GPUs, totaling 384 GPU hours
for training on InterGen, and extended to 1000 GPU hours when incorporating training on Inter-X.


E     A DDITIONAL C OMPARISONS OF H UMAN -H UMAN I NTERACTION

Table 3 presents additional metrics evaluating the motion quality and diversity of different human-
human interaction modules, complementing the physics compliance metrics discussed in the main
paper. To test the feasibility of using marker points as a human-human interaction representa-
tion—distinct from InterGen (Liang et al., 2024)—we removed the conditions from our method and
aligned the training settings, such as the number of epochs, with InterGen for a fair comparison. The
results indicate that switching to the marker points format maintains motion quality and diversity, with
metrics close to those of InterGen, thus validating the feasibility of using marker points as a motion
representation. We also attempted to adapt ComMDM (Shafir et al., 2024) to a larger human-human
interaction dataset, but it did not yield significant improvements in the metrics. We attribute this to
ComMDM’s heavy reliance on the pretrained MDM (Tevet et al., 2023) model, where most layers
were frozen, making it difficult to capture the distribution of a larger dataset.


                                                   27
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 22: Visualization of retargeting results. Our retargeting module can be applied to multiple
existing 3D assets. The displayed motion is generated from the instructional text:“The other person
carries one person forward and twirls around gracefully, followed by a warm embrace and a spinning
dance. They conclude the dance by opening their arms and bowing”.


F    A BLATION S TUDIES

Here, we primarily discuss ablation studies related to our human-human interaction module. For the
effects of other system modules, please refer to their corresponding sections in the Appendix.
Canonicalization Strategies. We compare the performance of different canonicalization strategies
as illustrated in Fig. 4. The experiments were conducted using training for Phase1 and Phase2
(Phase3 was excluded as it does not impact the conclusions and helps reduce memory usage). From
the results in Table 4, it is evident that the initial canonicalization strategy introduced significant
bias, with the human-scene perturbation metric values of Character A and B being 0.508 and


                                                  28
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Table 3: Comparisons between our marker format generator and other human-human interac-
tion generators on the InterHuman dataset. Following InterGen, we run all evaluations 20 times.
± indicates the 95% confidence interval. Bold indicates the best result. “*” denotes our replication
results, while other compared results are cited from InterGen. The compared variant of our method
here only uses the marker format without additional conditions or losses mentioned in Section 3.2.

                                            R Precision↑
    Methods                                                                            FID↓           MM Dist↓           Diversity↑          MultiModality↑
                             Top 1               Top 2             Top 3
 Real motions           0.452±.008           0.610±.009          0.701±.008        0.273±.007         3.755±.008         7.948±.064                -
 Real motions*          0.420±.005           0.601±.005          0.696±.005        0.201±.004         3.788±.001         7.759±.028                -
 TEMOS                  0.224±.010           0.316±.013          0.450±.018       17.375±.043         6.342±.015         6.939±.071            0.535±.014
                                  ±.012            ±.010              ±.014                ±.072           ±.013              ±.022
 T2M                    0.238                0.325               0.464            13.769              5.731              7.046                 1.387±.076
 MDM                    0.153±.012           0.260±.009          0.339±.012        9.167±.056         7.125±.018         7.602±.045            2.355±.080
 ComMDM                 0.067±.013           0.125±.018          0.184±.015       38.673±.098         14.211±.013        3.520±.058            0.217±.018
 ComMDM*                0.069±.009           0.133±.009          0.210±.010       40.267±.069         4.083±.020         7.852±.039            1.765±.044
 InterGen               0.371±.010           0.515±.012          0.624±.010        5.918±.079         5.108±.014         7.387±.029            2.141±.063
                                  ±.005              ±.005               ±.005           ±.093                ±.001           ±.030
 InterGen*              0.423               0.579                0.663             6.281              3.805              7.889                 1.177±.043
                                  ±.004            ±.005              ±.005                ±.086           ±.001                 ±.033
 Ours (Marker Format)   0.411                0.561               0.644            5.878               3.808              7.891                 1.084±.025


Table 4: Comparisons between different canonicalization strategies. “A” represents the character
centered around the origin, while “B” represents the character positioned relative to A. “R-P T1”
denotes R-Precision Top 1. The best results are highlighted in bold.

                                                                 HSP↓
 Canonicalization Strategy         FS↓       FP↓                                 HHP↓       R-P T1↑     FID↓       MM Dist↓       Diversity↑     MModality↑
                                                             A           B
  Initial Canonicalization           0      0.0074        0.508     4.791        0.097        0.323    4.995          3.823          7.796             0.353
Improved Canonicalization            0      0.0052        0.443     1.471        0.099        0.369    4.411          3.816          7.783             0.405


Table 5: Ablation study of the effectiveness of motion and SDF conditions. Conditions are added
cumulatively rather than individually. The best results are highlighted in bold.

 Condition Strategy       FS↓              FP↓           HSP↓        HHP↓         R-P T1↑          FID↓       MM Dist↓        Diversity↑        MModality↑
   w/o condition              0           0.0672      15.897        0.1006            0.407        5.712        3.801             7.964            1.003
w/ motion condition           0           0.0135      7.003         0.1009            0.352        6.628        3.827             7.796            0.816
 w/ SDF condition             0           0.0052       1.852        0.0989            0.369        4.411        3.816             7.783            0.405



4.791, respectively. After transitioning to the improved canonicalization strategy, most metrics
showed enhanced performance, and the bias was largely mitigated, with values of 0.443 and 1.471
for the human-scene perturbation metric. This demonstrates the effectiveness of the improved
canonicalization approach.
Motion and SDF Conditions. In Table 5, we assess the impact of motion and SDF conditions
on the human-human interaction module. Without these conditions, there is a notable increase in
human-scene collisions, with an HSP value of 15.897. When the conditions are applied, there is a
clear improvement in physics-consistency performance, though this comes at the cost of reduced
diversity (Diversity and MModality) in the generated human motions due to the constraints imposed
by the conditions. Additionally, while the SDF condition improves human-scene collision mitigation,
the motion condition also contributes positively. We attribute this benefit to the first-frame motion
condition’s role in defining the range of subsequent motions, which helps prevent the generation of
extreme motions that could lead to significant collisions.
Loss Functions. We assess the effectiveness of several key loss functions in our human-human
interaction module: LsceneP ene , LsceneReg , LhumanP ene , and LhumanReg . The comparisons in
Table 6 demonstrate the benefits of incorporating human-scene and human-human collision-related
losses, as indicated by improved physical compliance metrics. However, we observe that the
human-human collision-related loss negatively impacts R-Precision, MM Dist, and FID scores.
This degradation can be attributed to the inclusion of noise in the training data, where characters
occasionally collide. The additional penalty from the human-human collision loss can cause a
mismatch between the generated motion distribution and the training data distribution, leading to


                                                                                 29
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Table 6: Ablation study of the effectiveness of different conditions. Losses are added cumulatively
rather than individually. “Base Losses” refers to losses excluding collision-related terms as shown in
Eq. 3. The best results are highlighted in bold.

           Method                   FS↓          FP↓      HSP↓     HHP↓       R-P T1↑     FID↓      MM Dist↓     Diversity↑    MModality↑
       Base Losses                   0          0.0079    1.913    0.0959      0.371       3.871      3.816        7.651          0.426
 +LsceneP ene + LsceneReg            0          0.0052    1.852    0.0989      0.369       4.411      3.816        7.783          0.405
+LhumanP ene + LhumanReg          0.0001        0.0047    1.695    0.0742      0.323      10.251      3.978        7.756          0.381


Table 7: Ablation study of different training strategies. “+” denotes phased training, while “&”
denotes merged training phases. The best results are highlighted in bold.

      Training Strategies         FS↓         FP↓        HSP↓     HHP↓       R-P T1↑     FID↓      MM Dist↓    Diversity↑     MModality↑
       Phase1&Phase2               0       0.0087        1.699    0.1060      0.311      7.680      3.847        7.933          0.673
       Phase1+Phase2               0       0.0052        1.852    0.0989      0.369      4.411      3.816        7.783          0.405
    Phase1&Phase2&Phase3            0      0.0271        1.339    0.0951      0.286     22.039      3.893        7.805          0.687
    Phase1+Phase2+Phase3         0.0001    0.0047        1.695    0.0742      0.323     10.251      3.978        7.756          0.381


        Table 8: Explorations of different data scales. The best results are highlighted in bold.

        Dataset             FS↓         FP↓       HSP↓       HHP↓          R-P T1↑     FID↓      MM Dist↓      Diversity↑     MModality↑
     InterHuman              0         0.0052     1.852      0.0989         0.369      4.411       3.816         7.783           0.405
InterHuman+Inter-X           0         0.0049     1.542      0.0884         0.342      4.079       3.827         7.791           0.405



higher FID scores. Additionally, since R-Precision and MM Dist evaluations rely on motion encoders
trained on the initial data, biased generated results may not be well encoded, affecting these metrics.
Training Strategies. We examine the necessity of the three-step training process for the human-
human interaction generator. Table 7 presents the results of different training strategies. The
results indicate a significant deterioration in generation quality when combining all training phases.
Specifically, the combined training phases lead to a marked increase in FID (exceeding 22) and a
decrease in R-Precision. We attribute these quality degradations to the early introduction of physical
constraints, which restrict the generator’s motion learning capability. This constraint compels the
generator to consistently avoid collisions, resulting in overly cautious motions with subtle movements
or even static poses. This underscores the importance of the phased training approach.

G      E XPLORATION OF T RAINING DATA C ONSUMPTION
As discussed in Section 3.2, our marker-based body representation allows the generator to utilize
data from various sources and formats. Here, we explore how this capability affects the quality of
generated motions. Table 8 presents results exploring how this capability influences the quality of
generated motions. We observe that incorporating more data from Inter-X improves physical metrics,
while R-Precision and MM Dist metrics suffer. We attribute this to the differing distributions between
Inter-X and InterHuman data, which may cause the motion encoder trained on InterHuman to perform
suboptimally on Inter-X, thus affecting these evaluation metrics.

H      M ORE V ISUAL R ESULTS
Figures 23 and 24 present additional visual comparisons of different human-human interaction
modules. Fig. 25 and Fig. 26 showcases further visual generation results guided by long plots.

I     L IMITATIONS AND O UTLOOKS
While the system excels in generating diverse human motion types, several constraints warrant future
improvements. Firstly, the manual setup of camera poses for rendering sitcoms from generated
human motion remains a bottleneck. Implementing an automatic camera-following network could


                                                                      30
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 23: More visual comparisons of human-human interaction generative modules. The
human-human interaction command interpretation is shown at the top, with some key motion words
highlighted in green. Due to the randomization inherent in the generation module, the resulting
motions may appear in different positions. Camera rendering aspects are adjusted for optimal
observation of the motions. Each row, from left to right, shows screenshots captured at different
times, progressing from earlier to more recent frames.

streamline this process and enhance sitcom quality. Secondly, inherited limitations from DIMOS
(Zhao et al., 2023) restrict human-scene interactions to sitting and lying scenarios. Expanding
the repertoire to include a wider range of interactions requires access to high-quality, open-access
human-scene interaction training data. Thirdly, due to differing training strategies and datasets for
the three generative modules, there are still noticeable transitions between single human motions
and human-human interactions. Additionally, in narrow spaces, physics constraints can prevent the
generation of more dynamic interactions. Unifying the training setup and further enlarging human-
human interaction training dataset may help address these challenges. Fourthly, while the scene-aware
human-human interaction module ensures physics alignment and prevents collisions, it does not
significantly enrich the diversity or complexity of interaction motions themselves. The random
synthesis of objects improves physical plausibility but does not fully capture the rich, entangled
context of real-world human interactions. Generating more realistic and diverse human interaction
motions will likely require exhaustive data collection efforts, such as motion capture or automated


                                                 31
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 24: More visual comparisons of human-human interaction generative modules. The
human-human interaction command interpretation is shown at the top, with some key motion words
highlighted in green. Due to the randomization inherent in the generation module, the resulting
motions may appear in different positions. Camera rendering aspects are adjusted for optimal
observation of the motions. Each row, from left to right, shows screenshots captured at different
times, progressing from earlier to more recent frames.


extraction from images and videos. Future advancements, possibly driven by scaling laws akin to
those observed in models like Stable Diffusion (Rombach et al., 2022) or ChatGPT (OpenAI, 2022),
could further benefit this area by leveraging massive datasets. Fifthly, the system currently focuses
exclusively on human motions, neglecting movement of scene objects (Xu et al., 2023). Integrating
basic, generalized object movements initially and gradually scaling to complex movements could
address this gap. Lastly, the system is currently confined to motions within the same floor layer.
Addressing interactions between different layers necessitates developing a dedicated generation
module for seamless integration with the existing system.


                                                 32
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 25: More visual illustrations of the generations of the whole system guided by long
plots. The plots are shown at the top, with some key motion words highlighted in green. For better
illustration, we include two cameras from different angles. Each row, from left to right, shows
screenshots captured at different times, progressing from earlier to more recent frames.


                                               33
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 26: More visual illustrations of the generations of the whole system guided by long
plots. The plots are shown at the top, with some key motion words highlighted in green. For better
illustration, we include two cameras from different angles. Each row, from left to right, shows
screenshots captured at different times, progressing from earlier to more recent frames.


                                               34
