Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


E NABLING R EALTIME R EINFORCEMENT L EARNING AT
S CALE WITH S TAGGERED A SYNCHRONOUS I NFERENCE
    Matthew Riemer∗1,2,3 , Gopeshh Subbaraj∗1,2 , Glen Berseth1,2 , Irina Rish1,2
 1
    Mila, 2 Université de Montréal, and 3 IBM Research



                                                A BSTRACT

             Realtime environments change even as agents perform action inference and learn-
             ing, thus requiring high interaction frequencies to effectively minimize regret.
             However, recent advances in machine learning involve larger neural networks
             with longer inference times, raising questions about their applicability in realtime
             systems where reaction time is crucial. We present an analysis of lower bounds on
             regret in realtime reinforcement learning (RL) environments to show that minimiz-
             ing long-term regret is generally impossible within the typical sequential interaction
             and learning paradigm, but often becomes possible when sufficient asynchronous
             compute is available. We propose novel algorithms for staggering asynchronous
             inference processes to ensure that actions are taken at consistent time intervals, and
             demonstrate that use of models with high action inference times is only constrained
             by the environment’s effective stochasticity over the inference horizon, and not
             by action frequency. Our analysis shows that the number of inference processes
             needed scales linearly with increasing inference times while enabling use of models
             that are multiple orders of magnitude larger than existing approaches when learning
             from a realtime simulation of Game Boy games such as Pokémon and Tetris.


1        I NTRODUCTION

An often ignored discrepancy between the discrete-time RL framework and the real-world is the
fact that the world continues to evolve even while agents are computing their actions. As a result,
agents are limited in the types of problems that they can solve because the speed at which they can
compute actions dictates a particular stochastic or deterministic time discretization rate. Agents
that take infrequent actions require some lower-level program to manage behavior between actions,
often through simple policies like remaining still or repeating the last action. Ideally, intelligent
agents would exert more control over their environment, but this conflicts with the trend of using
larger models, which have high action inference and learning times. Consequently, as typically
deployed with sequential interaction, large models, which are often found to be essential for complex
tasks, increasingly rely on low-level automation, reducing their control over realtime environments.
This paper examines this discrepancy and explores alternative asynchronous interaction paradigms,
enabling large models to act quickly and maintain greater control in high-frequency environments.
Figure 1a shows the standard sequential interaction paradigm of RL. In this setup, the agent receives
a state from the environment, learns from the state transition, and then infers an action. Each process
must be completed before the agent can process a new state, limiting the action frequency and
increasing reliance on low-level automation as the model size grows. In contrast, Figure 1b illustrates
the asynchronous multi-process interaction paradigm we propose. Our key insight is that even models
with high inference times can act at every step using sufficiently many staggered inference processes.
Similarly, sufficiently many asynchronous learning processes can maintain rapid updates without
blocking progress, despite high learning times. This work formalizes and empirically tests the benefits
and limitations of this approach, making the following contributions:

          1. We formalize how the choice of a particular time discretization induces a new learning
             problem and how that problem relates to the original problem in Definition 1.
     ∗
         Equal contribution. Direct correspondences to {matthew.riemer,gopeshh.subbaraj}@mila.quebec.


                                                       1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                                               !ℒ
    Agent                                     Environment        Agent                 Learning
             Learning                                                                                       State, Reward           Environment
                              State, Reward
                                                                          !ℒ
                                                                                    Learning         !"
                                                                                                                            State
                                                                         !ℒ
                 Parameters                                                                    Parameters
                                                                               Learning
                                Action                                                          !"
                                                                                                                     Action



                                                                                                                                                  !ℳ

    (a) Sequential Interaction and Learning                 (b) Asynchronous Multi-process Interaction and Learning

Figure 1: Frameworks for Environment Interaction in RL. a) The typical sequential interaction
paradigm where both learning and action inference block the environment from moving forward.
b) The more realistic setting considered in this work where the environment, the agent’s inference
process, and agent’s learning process all proceed at their own rate and interact asynchronously.
Multiple self-loops are depicted to denote multiple asynchronous processes. τM denotes the frequency
of the environment, τθ denotes the frequency of each inference process, and τL denotes the frequency
of each learning process. Sequential interaction and learning has a frequency of τM + τθ + τL .

        2. We derive worst-case lower bounds on regret for solving the new problem rather than the
           original in Theorem 1, leading us to conclude in Remark 1 that typical sequential interaction
           (Figure 1a) scales poorly with model size.
        3. We propose novel methods for staggering asynchronous inference in Algorithms 1 and 2,
           addressing the poor scaling properties of sequential interaction (Remark 2).
        4. We conduct comprehensive experiments to verify our theory, demonstrating the use of
           models that are orders of magnitude larger for realtime games like Pokémon and Tetris.

2       R EGRET D ECOMPOSITION IN R EALTIME R EINFORCEMENT L EARNING

Background - Sequential Interaction: Most RL research focuses on agents interacting sequentially
with a Markov Decision Process (MDP) [71; 94] Mseq = ⟨S, A, p, r⟩, where S is a set of states, A
is a set of actions, r(s, a) is a reward function with outputs bounded by rmax , and p(s′ |s, a) is a state
transition probability function. Agents take actions based on a policy πθ (a|s) that maps states to
action probabilities parameterized by θ. An unrealistic implicit assumption of this setting is that the
time between decisions is fixed and only depends on the MDP. It is also unrealistically assumed that
the environment can be paused while the policy generates an action a from state s.
Asynchronous Interaction Environments: The standard MDP formalism lacks a crucial element
for realtime settings where the environment cannot be "paused," and the agent interacts with it
asynchronously, as described by Travnik et al. [102]. In this case, it is necessary to define the
environment’s behavior when the agent has not selected an action. We believe the most general
solution is to use a preset default behavior if there is no available action at by the agent π at time-
step t. This behavior follows a ∼ β(s), where a ∈ Aβ is possibly from a different action space
than A, requiring p and r to be defined over A ∪ Aβ . Now we can define an asynchronous MDP
Masync = ⟨S, A, p, r, β⟩ as an extension of a sequential MDP Mseq with the addition of the default
behavior policy β. Note that β does not need to be non-Markovian, because the state space should
be defined to include any intermediate computations needed to generate the actions of β. Defining
the default behavior as a policy is no more than a useful interpretation of what happens and is
equivalent to sayingPthe environment   follows a Markov chain pβ (s′ |s) when P no action is available
        β ′                     ′
where p (s |s) := a∈Aβ p(s |s, a)β(a|s) with expected reward rβ (s) = a∈Aβ β(a|s)r(s, a).
Time Discretization Rates: The real environment evolves in continuous time, so we must define
time discretization rates to describe each component of the agent-environment interface in discrete
steps. We treat the environment step time as a random variable TM with sampled values τM ∼ TM
and expected value τ̄M := E[TM ]. Similarly, the inference time of the policy for a single action1 is
another random variable Tθ with sampled values τθ ∼ Tθ and expected value τ̄θ := E[Tθ ].2 We can
    1
    See Appendix B.5 for a comparison with action chunking methods that produce multiple actions at a time.
    2
    While policies in general could have adaptive computation times based on the state, this is relatively
uncommon in the literature and will be left to future work for simplicity of the discourse.


                                                             2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


now introduce yet another random variable TI with sampled values τI ∼ TI and expected value
τ̄I := E[TI ] that is of particular importance to our work, representing the time elapsed between
actions taken by the agent πθ (rather than β) in Masync . This has been called a variety of names in
the literature including the interaction time, the action cycle time, and the inverse of the interaction
frequency. What is very important to note for our purposes is that TI need not be equal to TM nor
Tθ , with the precise relation between these variables depending on the particular method of agent
deployment. Establishing these three random variables now allows us to define the decision problem
induced by these choices related to the agent-environment boundary (see Figure 2 for an illustration).
  Definition 1 (Induced Delayed Semi-MDP) Any choice of random variables TM , TI , and
  Tθ applied to an asynchronous MDP Masync induces a delayed semi-MDP M̃delay :=
  ⟨S, A, p, r, β, TM , TI , Tθ ⟩ where the semi-MDP decision making steps t̃ associated with the
  actual decisions of the agent π happen after ⌈τI /τM ⌉ steps t in the ground asynchronous MDP
  Masync . The semi-MDP is delayed with respect to Masync because semi-MDP actions ãt̃ ∈ A
  generated by π are equivalent to actions that are delayed by ⌈τθ /τM ⌉ in Masync such that
  πθ (ãt̃ |st̃ ) = πθ (at+⌈τθ /τM ⌉ |st ) where st̃ = st . If ⌈τθ /τM ⌉ > 1 the transition dynamics are pβ
  and reward dynamics are rβ for ⌈τθ /τM ⌉ − 1 steps in Masync until at+⌈τθ /τM ⌉ is applied.

In general, the optimal policy and optimal re-
ward rate will not be the same for Masync and                                      Time
M̃delay , with M̃delay incurring additional sub-                           !
                                                                               "
                                                                                                    !
                                                                                                        !
                                                                                                            "
                                                                     ! !            !
optimality because of the coarse nature of the              MDP                                 "
                                                                                                                !       !   "
                                                                                                                                State
                                                                                        !                           !
decision problem. That said, we have direct                                                 !

control over TI and Tθ , so it is of interest to
understand how our design decisions relate to
the sub-optimality experienced. Chiefly, we are
interested in understanding under what scenar-         Delayed
ios the optimal reward rate of Masync can still        Semi-MDP
be achieved even when τ̄θ >> τ̄M . To do this,
we focus on worst case lower bounds on regret          Figure 2: Induced Delayed Semi-MDP. We il-
i.e. the unavoidable regret incurred because of        lustrate the semi-MDP described in Definition 1
the interaction defined by M̃delay in the worst        following the style of Figure 1 from Sutton et al.
case scenario where β is always a suboptimal           [95]. Masync is depicted in purple and M̃delay is
choice. The realtime regret ∆realtime (τ ) is the      depicted in blue. Actions are delayed by the infer-
accumulated suboptimality in τ seconds relative        ence time of the policy π and the default policy β
to following the optimal policy at every discrete      is followed between selections.
steps t occurring after τM seconds in Masync .
  Theorem 1 (Realtime Regret Decomposition) The accumulated realtime regret ∆realtime (τ )
  over time τ of a delayed semi-MDP M̃delay relative to the oracle policy in the underlying
  asynchronous MDP Masync can be decomposed into three independent terms.
                          ∆realtime (τ ) = ∆learn (τ ) + ∆inaction (τ ) + ∆delay (τ )                                           (1)
  ∆learn (τ ) is the regret experienced even in sequential environments as a result of learning and
  exploration. The lower bound in the worst case is:3
                                                        p
                                        ∆learn (τ ) ∈ Ω( τ /τ̄I )                                (2)
  ∆inaction (τ ) expresses the regret as a result of following β rather than optimal actions in Masync .
  The lower bound and upper bound in the worst case is:
                             ∆inaction (τ ) ∈ Θ((τ /τ̄I ) × (τ̄I − τ̄M )/τ̄M )                                                  (3)
  ∆delay (τ ) expresses the regret as a result of the delay of actions by π in the underlying asyn-
  chronous Masync . The lower bound in the worst case is:

                          ∆delay (τ ) ∈ Ω((τ /τ̄I ) × E[1 − (pminimax )⌈τθ /τM ⌉ ])                                             (4)


                                                      3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


    where pminimax := mins∈S,a∈A maxs′ ∈S p(s′ |s, a) is a measure of environment stochastic-
    ity4 and ⌈τθ /τM ⌉ is the number of environment steps elapsed during action inference.

See Appendix B for a formal proof of Theorem 1 and our other findings. We believe this work is the
first to formally state the regret decomposition in Equation 1. Note though that previous studies on
real-world RL have highlighted the challenges of learning from limited samples, realtime inference,
and managing system delays in scaling methods to realtime settings [19]. Equation 2 extends known
lower bounds on learning time [31], using the notation from Definition 1 to explicitly connect with
continuous time. Notably, this bound depends on τ̄I (not τ̄θ ) and assumes learning can keep pace
with the environment to learn from every interaction. Equation 3 provides a novel regret bound,
formalizing the known suboptimality of interacting with realtime environments at a slower pace
[102; 28; 73; 107; 106; 21]. This result highlights limitations of the sequential interaction paradigm.
    Remark 1 (Inaction of Sequential Interaction) When π and Masync interact sequentially,
    τI = τθ such that in the worst case ∆inaction (τ ) ∈ Ω(τ /τ̄θ × (τ̄θ − τ̄M )/τ̄M ). This implies that
    even as τ → ∞, in the worst case ∆realtime (τ )/τ ∈ Ω(∆inaction (τ )/τ ) ∈ Ω((τ̄θ − τ̄M )/τ̄M τ̄θ ).

This means a realtime framework with sequential interaction cannot ensure that regret will eventually
dissipate. Thus, we explore asynchronous alternatives in the next section. Finally, Equation 4
highlights the key limitation in minimizing regret using asynchronous compute. Previous work
established that suboptimality from delay in MDPs relates to the stochasticity in the underlying
undelayed MDP [17; 64], focusing on communication delays inherent to the environment. Our focus,
however, is on delays caused by the agent’s computations, which we can control. Thus, the emphasis
on regret associated with the decision that leads to a particular value of τθ is novel. Since this term
is the only part of regret that depends on τθ , it helps identify which environments are manageable
when τθ >> τM . In deterministic environments, there is no regret due to τθ as pminimax = 1, but
in stochastic environments, the degree and temporal horizon of stochasticity determine what values
of τθ are tolerable. For simplicity, we present a looser bound here; a tighter bound is available in
Appendix B. In summary, stochasticity with respect to actual rewards is what really matters.

3       A SYNCHRONOUS I NTERACTION & L EARNING M ETHODS

Figure 3 highlights key differences between the standard sequential RL framework and the asyn-
chronous multi-process framework we propose. In the sequential framework, interaction and learning
delay each other. In contrast, in the asynchronous framework that we propose, actions and learning
can occur at every step with enough processes. However, actions are delayed and reflect past states,
which may limit performance in some environments. Note that staggering processes to maintain
regular intervals is essential. For example, if all inference processes took a deterministic amount of
time with no offset between them, all additional actions in the environment would be overwritten with
no benefit from increasing compute. Meanwhile, with staggering we can experience linear speedups.

3.1     BACKGROUND : S TAGGERED A SYNCHRONOUS L EARNING

Parallel vs. Asynchronous Updates: Learning from a transition, i.e., computing gradients, usually
takes longer than inference. Thus, performing learning in separate processes is crucial to avoid
blocking inference [106], especially for models with a large number of parameters. For this use
case, one might be tempted to consider parallel learning processes to increase the effective batch
size without increasing wall-clock time per batch as this avoids wasted computation. Indeed, parallel
updates are better for training large language models when final performance and compute efficiency
are most important. In contrast, asynchronous learning can produce updates even faster than learning
from a single transition, making the model more responsive to exploration. However, lock-free
asynchronous approaches risk overwriting updates, potentially wasting computation that does not
contribute to final performance. That said, our focus is on maximizing responsiveness in large models,
not necessarily compute efficiency, and overwritten updates are not wasted with respect to regret.
    3
    Known algorithms achieve regret upper bounds within a logarithmic factor of this lower bound [68].
    4
    When the environment is deterministic, pminimax = 1 and ∆delay (τ ) = 0. When the environment is uniformly
random, pminimax = 1/|S| and as |S| → ∞, ∆delay (τ ) ∈ Ω(τ ).


                                                      4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


 Environment


 Sequential Inference and Learning


 Staggered Asynchronous Inference



 Staggered Asynchronous Learning


Figure 3: Realtime Interaction Frequency. We illustrate the comparative interaction frequency of
methods that sequence learning and inference and those that maintain multiple staggered asynchronous
processes. Even when inference times are greater than the environment step time, it is possible to use
asynchronous compute to eliminate inaction and learn from every step.

Round-Robin Asynchronous Learning: Langford et al. [50] laid the foundation for addressing
asynchronous update staggering for large neural network models using variants of stochastic gradient
descent (SGD). They showed that applying updates in a delayed, orderly fashion avoids wasted
compute on overwritten gradients. Their approach demonstrated convergence for delayed SGD, with
linear scaling limited only by the time taken to update parameters relative to computing gradients.
This method allows significant linear scaling with minimal compute waste for large models and the
delay in the updates will not be a persistent source of regret in Theorem 1. While not our novel
contribution, this strategy is underexplored. We investigate its scaling properties in our experiments.

3.2      O UR N OVELTY: S TAGGERED A SYNCHRONOUS I NFERENCE

In Remark 1 we highlighted that τ̄I is fundamentally limited by τ̄θ for sequential interaction, which
results in persistent regret even as time goes on when τ̄θ > τ̄M . We will now highlight two novel
algorithms for staggering inference processes that can lead to a reduction in τ̄I when the number of
inference processes NI are increased. Algorithm 1 is capable of scaling the expected interaction time
with the number of processes by τ̄I ≤ min(τθmax /NI , τ̄M ) where τθmax is the maximum encountered
value of τθ . Meanwhile, Algorithm 2 is capable of scaling the expected interaction time with the
number of processes by τ̄I = min(τ̄θ /NI , τ̄M ). Both algorithms can eliminate inaction.5
  Remark 2 (Inaction of Asynchronous Interaction) For any τ̄θ when π and Masync interact
  asynchronously with staggering algorithms 1 or 2, there is a value of the number of inference
  processes NI∗ such that for all NI ≥ NI∗ , ∆inaction (τ )/τ → 0 as time goes to τ → ∞.

Algorithm 1 always ensures each processes waits for the current estimate of τθmax amount of seconds
before an action is taken by that process to preserve the spacing between actions. Adjustments are
made to the waiting time in each process considering dist(x,y), the distance process x is behind
process y in the cycle of processes, until the estimate converges to the true τθmax value. The benefit of
this algorithm is that the spacing between actions stays very consistent with no variance once the
maximum value estimate has stabilized. This makes M̃delay easier to learn from. The downside is
that the amount of necessary compute to eliminate inaction may be relatively high.
On the other hand, Algorithm 2 stops all waiting in all processes as time goes on, so that the expected
interaction time of each process is τ̄θ . An estimate of τ̄θ is maintained and when the estimate changes
after an action is taken, processes wait for an amount of time designed to adjust the average spacing
between processes to τ̄θ /NI . The law of large numbers ensures that the estimate converges to τ̄θ in
the limit as τ → ∞ and that the waiting time diminishes to zero. Algorithm 2 has a strictly smaller
compute requirement than Algorithm 1, but experiences variance in TI driven by the variance in
Tθ , which makes M̃delay harder to learn from. The compute advantage becomes more significant for
   5
       Appendix B.6 describes how this can lead to achieving sublinear regret in deterministic environments.


                                                        5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


distributions that have variance in Tθ such that τθmax − τ̄θ is large. In our experiments, we consider
Algorithm 1 because we found the variance in Tθ is small for the models and hardware we consider.

Algorithm 1 Maximum Time Inference Staggering
Initialize: τ̂θmax = 0 and delay[processnum] = 0 ∀ processnum ∈ [1, ..., NI ]
Run: INFERENCE[processnum] ∀ processnum ∈ [1, ..., NI ]
  function I NFERENCE(processnum)
       while alive do
           sleep(delay[processnum])           ▷ Sleep for any delays accumulated by other processes
           delay[processnum] ← 0
           a, τθ ∼ πθ (st )                   ▷ Have the policy sample an action and inference time
           if τθ ≥ τ̂θmax then
                δτ ← τθ − τ̂θmax       ▷ Other processes sleep for the difference with the maximum
                for num ̸= processnum ∈ [1, ..., NI ] do
                     delay[num] ← delay[num] + dist(num,processnum) ×δτ /NI
                τ̂θmax ← τθ                                              ▷ Set new global maximum
           else
                sleep(τ̂θmax − τθ )                                   ▷ Sleep for the remaining time
           at+⌈τ̂θmax /τM ⌉ ← a                                     ▷ Register action in environment


Hardware Optimization: In this paper, our focus is on the possibility of achieving speedups when
adequate hardware is available to facilitate it. As such, we focus on what can be achieved with an
ideal set of hardware rather than the most efficient way to utilize a given constrained set of hardware.
In our experiments, we run each process on its own dedicated CPU such that resource constraints like
memory capacity, and memory bandwidth do not present significant issues. However, if, for example,
we aimed to implement multiple simultaneous processes on a single GPU, we would have to consider
tradeoffs between memory capacity, memory bandwidth, and latency that will jointly serve to limit
the possible speedups. We leave analysis of these practical tradeoffs to future work.


4    R ELATED W ORK

Realtime interaction: Previous work such as Travnik et al. [102] has considered the asynchronous
nature of realtime environments. However, we are not aware of any prior paper that has formalized
the connection between asynchronous and sequential versions of the same environment as we have.
Travnik et al. [102] highlight the reaction time benefit of acting before you learn, and Ramstedt &
Pal [73] highlight the reaction time benefit of interacting based on a one-step lag. Meanwhile, the
interaction frequency of both of these approaches are limited by sequential interaction paradigm and
thus the drawback highlighted in Remark 1 also applies to them.
Designing the interaction rate: Farrahi & Mahmood [21] examined how the choice of τI affects
the learning performance of deep RL algorithms in robotics. They found that low τI complicates
credit assignment, while high τI complicates learning reactive policies. Karimi et al. [36] proposed
a policy that executes multi-step actions with a learned τI within the options framework, which
may aid in slow problems where credit assignment is challenging. However, this approach does not
address the action delay issue we focus on and may worsen it by committing to multiple actions
based on a delayed state. Our policy, defined in the semi-MDP framework (Definition 1), relies on
a low-level policy β, similar to the options framework [95]. The key difference is that β cannot be
modified, preventing intra-option learning and thus making it impossible to improve β even when it
is sub-optimal. Thus we would rather minimize the use of β i.e. minimize inaction.
Reinforcement learning with delays: Reinforcement learning in environments with delayed states,
observations, and actions is well-studied. Typically, delays are treated as communication delays
inherent to the environment [103; 9]. In contrast, we focus on delays resulting from our computations,
which are under our control and part of agent design. Our formulation of delay as part of regret is
novel due to this unique focus. Common methods address delay by augmenting the state space with
all actions taken since the delayed state or observation [8; 37; 63], but this is infeasible for us since
these actions are not available when computation begins. Instead, our approach aligns more with


                                                   6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


methods addressing delay without state augmentation [89; 9; 16; 2; 35]. However, these methods are
limited by the environment’s stochasticity [17; 64], as highlighted by Equation 4 of Theorem 1.
Asynchronous learning: Most work on asynchronous RL involves multiple environment simulators
learned from asynchronously or in parallel [62; 20; 90]. We explore a more challenging real-world
setup with a single environment, limiting exploration opportunities. Unlike typical asynchronous
setups where each process interacts sequentially with the environment and then learn from that
interaction [62], our setting benefits from making interaction and learning asynchronous (Remark
2). Indeed, our paper introduces the concept of staggering asynchronous interaction, which is an
innovation with benefits unique to the non-pausing environment setting we explore. Similarly to ours,
some prior work has considered asynchronous learning to avoid blocking inference [106], focusing
on model-based learning [28; 29; 27; 107] and auxiliary value functions [96; 14]. The novelty of
our approach is in its use of multiple asynchronous staggered inference processes instead of a single
process, a critical contribution for deploying large models (see Remark 1 and Remark 2).

5    E MPIRICAL R ESULTS

To show that our proposed method does indeed provide practical benefits for minimizing regret per
second with large neural networks in realtime environments, we perform a suite of experiments to
validate the theoretical claims made in the previous sections. Our experiments include:
       • Question 1: an evaluation of the speed of progress through a realtime game strategy game
         where constant learning is necessary to move forward when action inference times are large.
       • Question 2: an evaluation of episodic reward in games where reaction time must be fast to
         demonstrate that asynchronous interaction can maintain performance with models that are
         multiple orders of magnitude larger than those using sequential interaction.
       • Question 3: an evaluation of the scaling properties of Algorithms 1 and 2 to demonstrate that
         the needed number of processes to eliminate inaction, NI∗ , scales linearly with increasing
         inference times τ̄θ and parameter counts |θ|.
       • Question 4: an evaluation of the scaling properties of round-robin asynchronous learning
         [50] to demonstrate that the number of processes needed to learn from every transition also
         scales linearly with increasing learning times and parameter counts |θ|.
Implementation Details: For our experiments, we implemented the Deep Q-Network (DQN)
learning algorithm [61] within our asynchronous multi-process framework, using a discount factor of
γ = 0.99, a batch size of 16, and an Adam learning rate of 0.001 for the sparse reward Game Boy
games (with 0.00001 used for the comparatively dense reward Atari games). A shared experience
replay buffer stores the 1 million most recent environment transitions. For preprocessing, we down-
sampled monochromatic Game Boy images to 84x84x1, similar to the preprocessing that is standard
for Atari [61]. Following the scaling procedure previously established by [13] and [91], we used a
15-layer ResNet model [20] while scaling the number of filters by a factor k to grow the network. The
model sizes correspond to: k = 1 (1M parameters), k = 7 (10M), k = 29 (100M), and k = 98 (1B).
Models were deployed on multi-process CPUs using Pytorch multiprocessing library on Intel Gold
6148 Skylake cores at 2.4GHz, with one core per process and multiple machines for models using
> 40 processes. See Appendix A for further detail regarding our experimental setup and a discussion
of limitations. As large models are known to be difficult to optimize in an online RL context, we also
tried training common 1M models with an equivalent amount of added delay as the larger models to
perform a sanity check. Our initial experiments indicated performance was similar.
Realtime Environment Simulation: To run a comprehensive set of scaling experiments that would
not be feasible with real-world deployment, we need a simulation of a realistic realtime scenario.
Towards this end, we considered two games from the Game Boy that are made available for simulation
as RL environments through the Gymnasium Retro project [65]. We implemented a realtime version
of the Game Boy where it is run at 59.7275 frames per second such that τM = 1/59.7275 and with
"noop" actions executed as the default behavior β. This exactly mimics the way that humans would
interact with the Game Boy as a handheld console [104] and matches the setting in which humans
compete over speed runs for these games. We also leveraged three Atari environments [7] run at 60
frames per second with "noop" actions executed as β to mimic the way that humans interact with the
Atari console in the real-world. These are ideal settings for addressing our core empirical questions.


                                                  7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


      (a) 100M: Pokémon Battles Won vs. Time τ            (b) 100M: Wild Pokémon Caught vs. Time τ

Figure 4: Realtime Pokémon Performance. a) Battles won in Pokémon Blue over time for
|θ| = 100M . b) Wild Pokémon caught in Pokémon Blue over time for |θ| = 100M . The parallel
learning baseline considers an effective batch size that is 33× larger, incurring 33× fewer updates.

5.1     FASTER P ROGRESS T HROUGH A R EALTIME G AME WITH C ONSTANT N OVELTY

Pokémon Blue: Pokémon Blue is a valuable environment for our study due to its long play through
time and constant novelty over many hours of play. Acting quickly is not a necessity to complete
this game as it lets the agent dictate the pace of play, but better players are still differentiated based
on their speed of completing the game. Indeed, the game has a large community of "speed runners"
aiming to complete milestones in record times, with even the fastest milestones taking multiple hours
[93]. It is an interesting domain for our study because acting quickly is only beneficial to the extent
that the agent displays competent behavior, so action throughput alone will not lead to better results
when the quality of play correspondingly suffers. Because Pokémon Blue is known as a challenging
exploration problem that perhaps even exceeds the scope of previous deep RL achievements [30], we
divided the game into two settings based on expert human play: 295 battle encounters (Figure 9a)
and 93 catching encounters (Figure 9b). Agents are deployed in these settings and must complete
each encounter (by winning a battle or catching a Pokémon) before progressing.
Question 1: Can asynchronous approaches achieve faster progress in a realtime strategy game where
constant learning is necessary to move forward even when action inference times are large?
Figure 4: For Pokémon Blue we leverage NI = NI∗ and
enough learning threads to learn every 5 environment
steps. We did not find benefit from learning every step
given that the underlying game is not responsive to every
action taken at the frame level. For all models, the explo-
ration rate is annealed from 1.0 to 0.05 over the course
of the first 100,000 steps of learning. We compare to
the standard RL interaction paradigm where inference
and learning are performed sequentially [94] and when
the order is flipped for realtime settings [102]. Our re-
sults in Figures 4a and 4b showcase that asynchronous         Figure 5: Realtime Tetris Performance
inference and learning combine for superior scaling of        vs. |θ|. The average episodic return over
realtime performance as models grow. See Appendix A           2,000 episodes of learning. We compare
for results for the 1M and 10M models. The improve-           models with a single inference process to
ment over sequential interaction corresponds with our         those that perform staggered asynchronous
expectations given Remarks 1 and 2.                           inference following Algorithm 1.

5.2     M AINTAINING P ERFORMANCE IN G AMES THAT P RIORITIZE R EACTION T IME

Tetris: We also explore the game Tetris (Figure 9c) that presents a different kind of challenge for our
agents where even more of a premium is put on reaction time. In Tetris, the player will lose the game
if they wait indefinitely and do not act in time. While a slow policy can eventually win in Pokémon,
despite taking longer than necessary, a policy that does not act timely cannot progress in Tetris as
new pieces must be moved correctly before they fall on existing pieces.
Question 2: Can asynchronous interaction help for games that prioritize reaction time as |θ| grows?


                                                    8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 5: To aid with exploration and jump-start learning, a single episode of human play is provided
to each agent to learn from. The agent continues to learn from a total of 2,000 episodes with an
exploration rate of 0.05. We see that sequential interaction scales quite poorly for games that prioritize
a high frequency of actions and cannot surpass random performance for |θ| ≥1M as we would expect
based on Remark 1. Meanwhile, staggered asynchronous inference following Algorithm 1 can
achieve a much higher reward rate for |θ| >1B as we would anticipate based on Remark 2.
Figure 6: We also provide supplemental results for three Atari games with 2,000 training episodes
in the same setting (see Figure 10), demonstrating superior performance as |θ| scales up. Here we
additionally compare to a deeper ResNet architecture with 30 convolutional layers rather than 15.
The deeper architecture brings up inference times at the same number of total parameters and thus
leads to an even bigger gap between staggered asynchronous and sequential approaches. We find that
the ability for performance to be maintained with asynchronous methods as the model size grows
depends on the game. For example, Boxing includes a very stochastic opponent policy, making it
very hard to maintain human-level performance in the presence of delay, while the Krull environment
is predictable enough for agents to surpass human performance even when delay is significant. In
Figure 14 we see a similar overall trend while using Rainbow learning [26] rather than DQN learning.

5.3   C OMPUTATIONAL S CALING OF A SYNCHRONOUS I NTERACTION AND L EARNING

Question 3: How does NI∗ from Remark 2 scale with τ̄θ and the number of parameters |θ|?
Figure 7: We measure NI∗ for Algorithms 1 and 2 when the Game Boy is run at the standard
frequency using an ϵ-greedy DQN policy at ϵ = 0 and ϵ = 0.5. Figure 7a shows that NI∗ scales
roughly linearly with τ̄θ in all cases, as expected for effective staggering (Remark 2). Figure 7b also
demonstrates that NI∗ scales roughly linearly with |θ|. When ϵ = 0, the variance in Tθ is very small
and Algorithms 1 and 2 thus perform the same. When ϵ = 0.5, the variance in Tθ is high because
sampling random actions is very fast, showcasing predictably superior performance for Algorithm 2.
The performance of Algorithm 1 is unaffected by stochasticity in Tθ , but the values of τ̄θ are.
Notation for Asynchronous Learning: We also would like to consider the compute scaling properties
of round-robin asynchronous learning [50]. We now assume that the time to learn from an environment
transition can be treated as a random variable TL with sampled values τL ∼ TL and expected value
τ̄L := E[TL ]. NL∗ will denote the number of learning processes such that all NL ≥ NL∗ include at
least one transition learned from for each environment transition.
Question 4: How does NL∗ scale with τ̄L and the number of parameters |θ|?
Figure 8: In Figure 8a we demonstrate that NL∗ grows approximately linearly with τ̄L . This
scaling is in line with what we would expect for the round-robin algorithm with large networks [50].
Additionally, our results in Figure 8b appear to also showcase linear scaling of NL∗ ≥ 1 with |θ|. We
plot three different batch sizes per learning process in each figure to highlight the tradeoff between
efficiency in achieving a particular amortized learning throughput and the number of changes made to


            (a) Boxing                          (b) Krull                    (c) Name This Game
Figure 6: Realtime Atari Performance vs. |θ|. The average episodic return over 2,000 simulated
learning episodes. We compare models with a single inference process to those that perform staggered
asynchronous inference following Algorithm 1 in a) Boxing, b) Krull, and c) Name This Game (see
Figure 10). Human performance was reported by [61]. Small confidence intervals may be hard to see.


                                                    9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


     (a) NI∗ vs. τ̄θ for Algorithms 1 and 2                       (b) NI∗ vs. |θ| for Algorithms 1 and 2
Figure 7: a) We plot the scaling behavior of the inference compute requirement NI∗ as the expected
action inference time τ̄θ increases for ResNet polices across CPUs in the Game Boy environment. b)
We plot the scaling behavior of NI∗ instead as a function of the model size |θ|.


    (a) NL∗ vs. τ̄L for Round-Robin Learning                    (b) NL∗ vs. |θ| for Round-Robin Learning
Figure 8: a) We plot the scaling behavior of the learning compute requirement NL∗ ≥ 1 as the
expected transition learning time τ̄L increases for ResNet polices across CPUs in the Game Boy
environment. b) We plot the scaling behavior of NL∗ instead as a function of the model size |θ|.
the parameters in the inference process. Higher batch sizes result in longer and increasingly parallel
updates with better amortized learning throughput using the same number of processes and fewer
changes to the parameters used for inference (as highlighted by τ̄L ). Meanwhile, smaller batch size
result in shorter and increasingly sequential updates that lead to worse amortized learning throughput
using the same number of processes and more changes to the parameters used for inference.

6      D ISCUSSION

Implications for Software: One difficulty in deploying RL environments within realtime settings is
limitations in current APIs such as Open AI gym [10]. In realtime settings, the environment needs to
run in its own separate process so that it is not blocked by the agent (just like the real world). We hope
that the contribution of our code and environments can thus help jump-start the community’s ability
to conduct research on this important setting. A new paradigm of agent-environment interaction is
needed where 1 process is used for the environment with NI processes dedicated for inference and
NL processes dedicated for learning, depending on specific resource constraints.
Implications for Hardware: Our paper demonstrates the benefits of asynchronous computation
within realtime settings and thus advances in hardware that enable this will serve to amplify the impact
of our findings. Memory bandwidth is a primary bottleneck in allowing for asynchronous computation
with current hardware. So any improvements i.e. in GPU memory bandwidth, in bandwidth across
nodes, or the number of GPUs or CPUs per node will make the scalability of asynchronous approaches
increasingly viable. Taking a longer-term perspective, hardware architectures that move beyond the
von Neumann seperation of memory and compute, such as so called "neuromorphic" computing, will
also serve to enable larger scale asynchronous computation like we see in the brain.
Bigger Models: In this paper, we have taken a deeper look at RL in realtime settings and the viability
of increasing the neural network model size in these environments. Our theoretical analysis of regret
bounds has demonstrated the downfall of models that implement a single action inference process as
model sizes grow (Remark 1) and we have proposed staggering algorithms that address this limitation
for environments that are sufficiently deterministic (Remark 2). Our empirical results playing realtime
games corroborate these findings and demonstrate the ability to perform well with models that are
orders of magnitude larger. While conventional wisdom often leads researchers to think that smaller
models are necessary for realtime settings, our work indicates that this is not necessarily the case and
takes a step towards making realtime foundation model deployment realistic.


                                                   10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


R EPRODUCIBILITY S TATEMENT

In this paper, we fully disclose all the necessary information to reproduce the main experimental
results, as detailed in both Section 5 and Appendix A. We have also released all the necessary code
along with detailed instructions to reproduce our results at https://github.com/CERC-AAI/realtime_rl.
Experimental settings, including hyperparameters needed to reproduce our results are clearly outlined
in the paper and further elaborated on in the appendix. Moreover, we provide appropriate statistical
significance measures in our plots when applicable, such as shading in Figures 4 and 5 to communicate
run-to-run variance in terms of 95% confidence intervals. We also include comprehensive information
on the compute resources, such as the type of hardware, memory, and time required for execution, as
outlined in the "Implementation Details" paragraph of Section 5. This ensures that our results are
reproducible, and necessary computational resources are well-specified for accurate replication.


ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

We would like to acknowledge our support from the Canada CIFAR AI Chair Program and from the
Canada Excellence Research Chairs (CERC) Program. We also thank the IBM Cognitive Compute
Cluster, the Mila cluster, and Compute Canada for providing computational resources. We are grateful
to Yoshua Bengio for his support during initial discussions that helped shape the direction of this
paper. Moreover, we would like to thank Johan Obando-Ceron, Khurram Javed, Mark Ring, and Rich
Sutton for valuable feedback that helped shape the framing of our contribution. We also thank Olexa
Bilaniuk for his assistance with questions related to computational resources and multiprocessing.


R EFERENCES
  [1] Marwa Abdulhai, Dong-Ki Kim, Matthew Riemer, Miao Liu, Gerald Tesauro, and Jonathan P
      How. Context-specific representation abstraction for deep option learning. arXiv preprint
      arXiv:2109.09876, 2021.

  [2] Mridul Agarwal and Vaneet Aggarwal. Blind decision making: Reinforcement learning with
      delayed observations. Pattern Recognition Letters, 150:176–182, 2021.

  [3] Cameron Allen, Michael Katz, Tim Klinger, George Konidaris, Matthew Riemer, and Gerald
      Tesauro. Efficient black-box planning using macro-actions with focused effects. arXiv preprint
      arXiv:2004.13242, 2020.

  [4] Pierre-Luc Bacon, Jean Harb, and Doina Precup. The option-critic architecture. In Thirty-First
      AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, 2017.

  [5] Andrew G Barto and Thomas G Dietterich. Reinforcement learning and its relationship to
      supervised learning. Handbook of Learning and Approximate Dynamic Programming, pp.
      45–63, 2004.

  [6] Pouya Bashivan, Martin Schrimpf, Robert Ajemian, Irina Rish, Matthew Riemer, and Yuhai
      Tu. Continual learning with self-organizing maps. arXiv preprint arXiv:1904.09330, 2019.

  [7] Marc G Bellemare, Yavar Naddaf, Joel Veness, and Michael Bowling. The arcade learning
      environment: An evaluation platform for general agents. Journal of Artificial Intelligence
      Research, 47:253–279, 2013.

  [8] Dimitri P Bertsekas. Dynamic programming and optimal control. Journal of the Operational
      Research Society, 47(6):833–833, 1996.

  [9] Yann Bouteiller, Simon Ramstedt, Giovanni Beltrame, Christopher Pal, and Jonathan Bi-
      nas. Reinforcement learning with random delays. In International conference on learning
      representations, 2020.

 [10] G Brockman. Openai gym. arXiv preprint arXiv:1606.01540, 2016.


                                                11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


 [11] Ignacio Cases, Clemens Rosenbaum, Matthew Riemer, Atticus Geiger, Tim Klinger, Alex
      Tamkin, Olivia Li, Sandhini Agarwal, Joshua D Greene, Dan Jurafsky, et al. Recursive routing
      networks: Learning to compose modules for language understanding. In Proceedings of
      the 2019 Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association for Computational
      Linguistics: Human Language Technologies, Volume 1 (Long and Short Papers), pp. 3631–
      3648, 2019.
 [12] Michael B Chang, Abhishek Gupta, Sergey Levine, and Thomas L Griffiths. Automatically
      composing representation transformations as a means for generalization. 2019.
 [13] Karl Cobbe, Chris Hesse, Jacob Hilton, and John Schulman. Leveraging procedural generation
      to benchmark reinforcement learning. In International conference on machine learning, pp.
      2048–2056. PMLR, 2020.
 [14] Gheorghe Comanici, Amelia Glaese, Anita Gergely, Daniel Toyama, Zafarali Ahmed, Tyler
      Jackson, Philippe Hamel, and Doina Precup. Learning how to interact with a complex interface
      using hierarchical reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2204.10374, 2022.
 [15] Payel Das, Kahini Wadhawan, Oscar Chang, Tom Sercu, Cicero Dos Santos, Matthew Riemer,
      Vijil Chenthamarakshan, Inkit Padhi, and Aleksandra Mojsilovic. Pepcvae: Semi-supervised
      targeted design of antimicrobial peptide sequences. arXiv preprint arXiv:1810.07743, 2018.
 [16] Esther Derman, Gal Dalal, and Shie Mannor. Acting in delayed environments with non-
      stationary markov policies. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2021.
 [17] Esther Derman, Gal Dalal, and Shie Mannor. Acting in delayed environments with non-
      stationary markov policies. arXiv preprint arXiv:2101.11992, 2021.
 [18] Pierre Dognin, Jesus Rios, Ronny Luss, Inkit Padhi, Matthew D Riemer, Miao Liu, Prasanna
      Sattigeri, Manish Nagireddy, Kush R Varshney, and Djallel Bouneffouf. Contextual moral
      value alignment through context-based aggregation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.12805, 2024.
 [19] Gabriel Dulac-Arnold, Daniel Mankowitz, and Todd Hester. Challenges of real-world rein-
      forcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1904.12901, 2019.
 [20] Lasse Espeholt, Hubert Soyer, Remi Munos, Karen Simonyan, Vlad Mnih, Tom Ward, Yotam
      Doron, Vlad Firoiu, Tim Harley, Iain Dunning, et al. Impala: Scalable distributed deep-rl
      with importance weighted actor-learner architectures. In International conference on machine
      learning, pp. 1407–1416. PMLR, 2018.
 [21] Homayoon Farrahi and A Rupam Mahmood. Reducing the cost of cycle-time tuning for
      real-world policy optimization. In 2023 International Joint Conference on Neural Networks
      (IJCNN), pp. 1–8. IEEE, 2023.
 [22] Jakob Foerster, Richard Y Chen, Maruan Al-Shedivat, Shimon Whiteson, Pieter Abbeel,
      and Igor Mordatch. Learning with opponent-learning awareness. In Proceedings of the
      17th International Conference on Autonomous Agents and MultiAgent Systems, pp. 122–130.
      International Foundation for Autonomous Agents and Multiagent Systems, 2018.
 [23] Jakob Foerster, Gregory Farquhar, Maruan Al-Shedivat, Tim Rocktäschel, Eric Xing, and
      Shimon Whiteson. Dice: The infinitely differentiable monte carlo estimator. In International
      Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 1529–1538. PMLR, 2018.
 [24] Charles R. Harris, K. Jarrod Millman, Stéfan J. van der Walt, Ralf Gommers, Pauli Virtanen,
      David Cournapeau, Eric Wieser, Julian Taylor, Sebastian Berg, Nathaniel J. Smith, Robert
      Kern, Matti Picus, Stephan Hoyer, Marten H. van Kerkwijk, Matthew Brett, Allan Haldane,
      Jaime Fernández del Río, Mark Wiebe, Pearu Peterson, Pierre Gérard-Marchant, Kevin
      Sheppard, Tyler Reddy, Warren Weckesser, Hameer Abbasi, Christoph Gohlke, and Travis E.
      Oliphant. Array programming with NumPy. Nature, 585(7825):357–362, September 2020.
      doi: 10.1038/s41586-020-2649-2. URL https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-020-2649-2.
 [25] Fenno F Heath, Richard Hull, Elham Khabiri, Matthew Riemer, Noi Sukaviriya, and Roman
      Vaculín. Alexandria: Extensible framework for rapid exploration of social media. In 2015
      IEEE International Congress on Big Data, pp. 483–490. IEEE, 2015.


                                               12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


 [26] Matteo Hessel, Joseph Modayil, Hado Van Hasselt, Tom Schaul, Georg Ostrovski, Will
      Dabney, Dan Horgan, Bilal Piot, Mohammad Azar, and David Silver. Rainbow: Combining
      improvements in deep reinforcement learning. In Proceedings of the AAAI conference on
      artificial intelligence, volume 32, 2018.

 [27] Todd Hester and Peter Stone. Texplore: real-time sample-efficient reinforcement learning for
      robots. Machine learning, 90:385–429, 2013.

 [28] Todd Hester, Michael Quinlan, and Peter Stone. A real-time model-based reinforcement
      learning architecture for robot control. arXiv preprint arXiv:1105.1749, 2011.

 [29] Todd Hester, Michael Quinlan, and Peter Stone. Rtmba: A real-time model-based reinforce-
      ment learning architecture for robot control. In 2012 IEEE International Conference on
      Robotics and Automation, pp. 85–90. IEEE, 2012.

 [30] Shayaan Jagtap. Why can a machine beat mario but not pokemon?, 2018. URL https:
      //towardsdatascience.com/why-can-a-machine-beat-mario-but-not-pokemon-ff61313187e1.

 [31] Thomas Jaksch, Ronald Ortner, and Peter Auer. Near-optimal regret bounds for reinforcement
      learning. Journal of Machine Learning Research, 11(4), 2010.

 [32] Chi Jin, Zeyuan Allen-Zhu, Sebastien Bubeck, and Michael I Jordan. Is q-learning provably
      efficient? Advances in neural information processing systems, 31, 2018.

 [33] Ying Jin, Zhuoran Yang, and Zhaoran Wang. Is pessimism provably efficient for offline rl? In
      International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 5084–5096. PMLR, 2021.

 [34] Jared Kaplan, Sam McCandlish, Tom Henighan, Tom B Brown, Benjamin Chess, Rewon
      Child, Scott Gray, Alec Radford, Jeffrey Wu, and Dario Amodei. Scaling laws for neural
      language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2001.08361, 2020.

 [35] Armin Karamzade, Kyungmin Kim, Montek Kalsi, and Roy Fox. Reinforcement learning
      from delayed observations via world models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.12309, 2024.

 [36] Amirmohammad Karimi, Jun Jin, Jun Luo, A Rupam Mahmood, Martin Jagersand, and
      Samuele Tosatto. Dynamic decision frequency with continuous options. In 2023 IEEE/RSJ
      International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS), pp. 7545–7552. IEEE,
      2023.

 [37] Konstantinos V Katsikopoulos and Sascha E Engelbrecht. Markov decision processes with
      delays and asynchronous cost collection. IEEE transactions on automatic control, 48(4):
      568–574, 2003.

 [38] Elham Khabiri, Matthew Riemer, Fenno F Heath III, and Richard Hull. Domain scoping for
      subject matter experts. In 2015 AAAI Fall Symposium Series, 2015.

 [39] Khimya Khetarpal, Matthew Riemer, Irina Rish, and Doina Precup. Towards continual
      reinforcement learning: A review and perspectives. arXiv preprint arXiv:2012.13490, 2020.

 [40] Dong-Ki Kim, Miao Liu, Shayegan Omidshafiei, Sebastian Lopez-Cot, Matthew Riemer, Gol-
      naz Habibi, Gerald Tesauro, Sami Mourad, Murray Campbell, and Jonathan P How. Learning
      hierarchical teaching policies for cooperative agents. arXiv preprint arXiv:1903.03216, 2019.

 [41] Dong-Ki Kim, Miao Liu, Shayegan Omidshafiei, Sebastian Lopez-Cot, Matthew Riemer,
      Gerald Tesauro, Murray Campbell, Sami Mourad, Golnaz Habibi, and Jonathan P How. Hetero-
      geneous knowledge transfer via hierarchical teaching in cooperative multiagent reinforcement
      learning. 2019.

 [42] Dong Ki Kim, Miao Liu, Matthew D Riemer, Chuangchuang Sun, Marwa Abdulhai, Golnaz
      Habibi, Sebastian Lopez-Cot, Gerald Tesauro, and Jonathan How. A policy gradient algorithm
      for learning to learn in multiagent reinforcement learning. In International Conference on
      Machine Learning, pp. 5541–5550. PMLR, 2021.


                                               13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


 [43] Dong-Ki Kim, Matthew Riemer, Miao Liu, Jakob Foerster, Michael Everett, Chuangchuang
      Sun, Gerald Tesauro, and Jonathan P How. Influencing long-term behavior in multiagent
      reinforcement learning. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 35:18808–18821,
      2022.
 [44] Dong-Ki Kim, Matthew Riemer, Miao Liu, Jakob N Foerster, Gerald Tesauro, and Jonathan P
      How. Game-theoretical perspectives on active equilibria: A preferred solution concept over
      nash equilibria. arXiv preprint arXiv:2210.16175, 2022.
 [45] James Kirkpatrick, Razvan Pascanu, Neil Rabinowitz, Joel Veness, Guillaume Desjardins,
      Andrei A Rusu, Kieran Milan, John Quan, Tiago Ramalho, Agnieszka Grabska-Barwinska,
      et al. Overcoming catastrophic forgetting in neural networks. Proceedings of the national
      academy of sciences, 114(13):3521–3526, 2017.
 [46] Tim Klinger, Dhaval Adjodah, Vincent Marois, Josh Joseph, Matthew Riemer, Alex ’Sandy’
      Pentland, and Murray Campbell. A study of compositional generalization in neural models,
      2020. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2006.09437.
 [47] Sachin Konan, Esmaeil Seraj, and Matthew Gombolay. Iterated reasoning with mutual infor-
      mation in cooperative and byzantine decentralized teaming. arXiv preprint arXiv:2201.08484,
      2022.
 [48] James Kostas, Chris Nota, and Philip Thomas. Asynchronous coagent networks. In Hal Daumé
      III and Aarti Singh (eds.), Proceedings of the 37th International Conference on Machine
      Learning, volume 119 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pp. 5426–5435. PMLR,
      13–18 Jul 2020. URL https://proceedings.mlr.press/v119/kostas20a.html.
 [49] Aviral Kumar, Aurick Zhou, George Tucker, and Sergey Levine. Conservative q-learning
      for offline reinforcement learning. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 33:
      1179–1191, 2020.
 [50] John Langford, Alexander J Smola, and Martin Zinkevich. Slow learners are fast. In Pro-
      ceedings of the 22nd International Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems, pp.
      2331–2339, 2009.
 [51] Angeliki Lazaridou and Marco Baroni. Emergent multi-agent communication in the deep
      learning era. arXiv preprint arXiv:2006.02419, 2020.
 [52] Lihong Li, Thomas J Walsh, and Michael L Littman. Towards a unified theory of state
      abstraction for mdps.
 [53] Zhizhong Li and Derek Hoiem. Learning without forgetting. IEEE transactions on pattern
      analysis and machine intelligence, 40(12):2935–2947, 2017.
 [54] Ryan Lowe, Yi I Wu, Aviv Tamar, Jean Harb, OpenAI Pieter Abbeel, and Igor Mordatch.
      Multi-agent actor-critic for mixed cooperative-competitive environments. Advances in neural
      information processing systems, 30, 2017.
 [55] Tyler Malloy, Tim Klinger, Miao Liu, Matthew Riemer, Gerald Tesauro, and Chris R Sims.
      Consolidation via policy information regularization in deep rl for multi-agent games. arXiv
      preprint arXiv:2011.11517, 2020.
 [56] Tyler Malloy, Chris R Sims, Tim Klinger, Miao Liu, Matthew Riemer, and Gerald Tesauro.
      Deep rl with information constrained policies: Generalization in continuous control. arXiv
      preprint arXiv:2010.04646, 2020.
 [57] Tyler Malloy, Tim Klinger, Miao Liu, Gerald Tesauro, Matthew Riemer, and Chris R Sims.
      Rl generalization in a theory of mind game through a sleep metaphor (student abstract). In
      Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, volume 35, pp. 15841–15842,
      2021.
 [58] Tyler Malloy, Chris R Sims, Tim Klinger, Miao Liu, Matthew Riemer, and Gerald Tesauro.
      Capacity-limited decentralized actor-critic for multi-agent games. In 2021 IEEE Conference
      on Games (CoG), pp. 1–8. IEEE, 2021.


                                               14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


 [59] Tyler Malloy, Miao Liu, Matthew D Riemer, Tim Klinger, Gerald Tesauro, and Chris R Sims.
      Learning in factored domains with information-constrained visual representations. arXiv
      preprint arXiv:2303.17508, 2023.
 [60] Amin Memarian, Maximilian Puelma Touzel, Matthew Riemer, Rupali Bhati, and Irina Rish.
      Summarizing societies: Agent abstraction in multi-agent reinforcement learning. In From
      Cells to Societies: Collective Learning across Scales, 2022.
 [61] Volodymyr Mnih, Koray Kavukcuoglu, David Silver, Andrei A Rusu, Joel Veness, Marc G
      Bellemare, Alex Graves, Martin Riedmiller, Andreas K Fidjeland, Georg Ostrovski, et al.
      Human-level control through deep reinforcement learning. nature, 518(7540):529–533, 2015.
 [62] Volodymyr Mnih, Adria Puigdomenech Badia, Mehdi Mirza, Alex Graves, Timothy Lillicrap,
      Tim Harley, David Silver, and Koray Kavukcuoglu. Asynchronous methods for deep rein-
      forcement learning. In International conference on machine learning, pp. 1928–1937. PMLR,
      2016.
 [63] Somjit Nath, Mayank Baranwal, and Harshad Khadilkar. Revisiting state augmentation
      methods for reinforcement learning with stochastic delays. In Proceedings of the 30th ACM
      International Conference on Information & Knowledge Management, pp. 1346–1355, 2021.
 [64] Somjit Nath, Mayank Baranwal, and Harshad Khadilkar. Revisiting state augmentation
      methods for reinforcement learning with stochastic delays. In Proceedings of the 30th ACM
      International Conference on Information & Knowledge Management, pp. 1346–1355, 2021.
 [65] Alex Nichol, Vicki Pfau, Christopher Hesse, Oleg Klimov, and John Schulman. Gotta learn
      fast: A new benchmark for generalization in rl. arXiv preprint arXiv:1804.03720, 2018.
 [66] Fabrice Normandin, Florian Golemo, Oleksiy Ostapenko, Pau Rodriguez, Matthew D Riemer,
      Julio Hurtado, Khimya Khetarpal, Ryan Lindeborg, Lucas Cecchi, Timothée Lesort, et al.
      Sequoia: A software framework to unify continual learning research. arXiv preprint
      arXiv:2108.01005, 2021.
 [67] Shayegan Omidshafiei, Dong-Ki Kim, Miao Liu, Gerald Tesauro, Matthew Riemer, Christo-
      pher Amato, Murray Campbell, and Jonathan P How. Learning to teach in cooperative
      multiagent reinforcement learning. In Proceedings of the AAAI conference on artificial
      intelligence, volume 33, pp. 6128–6136, 2019.
 [68] Ronald Ortner. Regret bounds for reinforcement learning via markov chain concentration.
      Journal of Artificial Intelligence Research, 67:115–128, 2020.
 [69] Inkit Padhi, Pierre Dognin, Jesus Rios, Ronny Luss, Swapnaja Achintalwar, Matthew Riemer,
      Miao Liu, Prasanna Sattigeri, Manish Nagireddy, Kush R Varshney, et al. Comvas: Contextual
      moral values alignment system. Proceedings of the International Joint Conference on Artificial
      Intelligence, 2024.
 [70] Adam Paszke, Sam Gross, Francisco Massa, Adam Lerer, James Bradbury, Gregory Chanan,
      Trevor Killeen, Zeming Lin, Natalia Gimelshein, Luca Antiga, Alban Desmaison, Andreas
      Kopf, Edward Yang, Zachary DeVito, Martin Raison, Alykhan Tejani, Sasank Chilamkurthy,
      Benoit Steiner, Lu Fang, Junjie Bai, and Soumith Chintala. Pytorch: An imperative style, high-
      performance deep learning library. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems
      32, pp. 8024–8035. Curran Associates, Inc., 2019. URL http://papers.neurips.cc/paper/9015-
      pytorch-an-imperative-style-high-performance-deep-learning-library.pdf.
 [71] ML Puterman. Markov decision processes. 1994. Jhon Wiley & Sons, New Jersey, 1994.
 [72] Neil Rabinowitz, Frank Perbet, Francis Song, Chiyuan Zhang, SM Ali Eslami, and Matthew
      Botvinick. Machine theory of mind. In International conference on machine learning, pp.
      4218–4227. PMLR, 2018.
 [73] Simon Ramstedt and Chris Pal. Real-time reinforcement learning. Advances in neural
      information processing systems, 32, 2019.


                                                15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


 [74] Matthew Riemer. Distributed computing in social media analytics. Distributed Computing in
      Big Data Analytics: Concepts, Technologies and Applications, pp. 121–135, 2017.
 [75] Matthew Riemer, Sophia Krasikov, and Harini Srinivasan. A deep learning and knowledge
      transfer based architecture for social media user characteristic determination. In Proceedings
      of the third International Workshop on Natural Language Processing for Social Media, pp.
      39–47, 2015.
 [76] Matthew Riemer, Aditya Vempaty, Flavio Calmon, Fenno Heath, Richard Hull, and Elham
      Khabiri. Correcting forecasts with multifactor neural attention. In International Conference
      on Machine Learning, pp. 3010–3019. PMLR, 2016.
 [77] Matthew Riemer, Michele Franceschini, Djallel Bouneffouf, and Tim Klinger. Generative
      knowledge distillation for general purpose function compression. NIPS 2017 Workshop on
      Teaching Machines, Robots, and Humans, 5:30, 2017.
 [78] Matthew Riemer, Elham Khabiri, and Richard Goodwin. Representation stability as a regular-
      izer for improved text analytics transfer learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1704.03617, 2017.
 [79] Matthew Riemer, Ignacio Cases, Robert Ajemian, Miao Liu, Irina Rish, Yuhai Tu, and
      Gerald Tesauro. Learning to learn without forgetting by maximizing transfer and minimizing
      interference. arXiv preprint arXiv:1810.11910, 2018.
 [80] Matthew Riemer, Miao Liu, and Gerald Tesauro. Learning abstract options. Advances in
      neural information processing systems, 31, 2018.
 [81] Matthew Riemer, Tim Klinger, Djallel Bouneffouf, and Michele Franceschini. Scalable
      recollections for continual lifelong learning. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on
      Artificial Intelligence, volume 33, pp. 1352–1359, 2019.
 [82] Matthew Riemer, Ignacio Cases, Clemens Rosenbaum, Miao Liu, and Gerald Tesauro. On the
      role of weight sharing during deep option learning. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on
      Artificial Intelligence, volume 34, pp. 5519–5526, 2020.
 [83] Matthew Riemer, Sharath Chandra Raparthy, Ignacio Cases, Gopeshh Subbaraj, Maximil-
      ian Puelma Touzel, and Irina Rish. Continual learning in environments with polynomial mixing
      times. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2022.
 [84] Matthew Riemer, Khimya Khetarpal, Janarthanan Rajendran, and Sarath Chandar. Balancing
      context length and mixing times for reinforcement learning at scale. In The Thirty-eighth
      Annual Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems, 2024.
 [85] Matthew Riemer, Gopeshh Subbaraj, Glen Berseth, and Irina Rish. Realtime reinforcement
      learning: Towards rapid asynchronous deployment of large models. In ICML 2024 Workshop:
      Aligning Reinforcement Learning Experimentalists and Theorists, 2024.
 [86] Clemens Rosenbaum, Tim Klinger, and Matthew Riemer. Routing networks: Adaptive
      selection of non-linear functions for multi-task learning. In International Conference on
      Learning Representations. International Conference on Learning Representations, ICLR,
      2018.
 [87] Clemens Rosenbaum, Ignacio Cases, Matthew Riemer, Atticus Geiger, Lauri Karttunen,
      Joshua D Greene, Dan Jurafsky, and Christopher Potts. Dispatched routing networks. Technical
      report, 2019.
 [88] Clemens Rosenbaum, Ignacio Cases, Matthew Riemer, and Tim Klinger. Routing networks and
      the challenges of modular and compositional computation. arXiv preprint arXiv:1904.12774,
      2019.
 [89] Erik Schuitema, Lucian Buşoniu, Robert Babuška, and Pieter Jonker. Control delay in
      reinforcement learning for real-time dynamic systems: A memoryless approach. In 2010
      IEEE/RSJ international conference on intelligent robots and systems, pp. 3226–3231. IEEE,
      2010.


                                                16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


 [90] John Schulman, Filip Wolski, Prafulla Dhariwal, Alec Radford, and Oleg Klimov. Proximal
      policy optimization algorithms. arXiv preprint arXiv:1707.06347, 2017.
 [91] Max Schwarzer, Johan Samir Obando Ceron, Aaron Courville, Marc G Bellemare, Rishabh
      Agarwal, and Pablo Samuel Castro. Bigger, better, faster: Human-level atari with human-level
      efficiency. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 30365–30380. PMLR, 2023.
 [92] speedrun.com.    Pokémon red/blue/rng manipulation faq, 2020. URL http://http:
      //wiki.pokemonspeedruns.com/index.php?title=Pok%C3%A9mon_Red/Blue/RNG_
      Manipulation_FAQ.
 [93] speedrun.com. Pokemon red/blue leaderboard, 2024. URL https://www.speedrun.com/
      pkmnredblue.
 [94] Richard S Sutton and Andrew G Barto. Reinforcement learning: An introduction. 2018.
 [95] Richard S Sutton, Doina Precup, and Satinder Singh. Between mdps and semi-mdps: A
      framework for temporal abstraction in reinforcement learning. Artificial intelligence, 112(1-2):
      181–211, 1999.
 [96] Richard S Sutton, Joseph Modayil, Michael Delp, Thomas Degris, Patrick M Pilarski, Adam
      White, and Doina Precup. Horde: A scalable real-time architecture for learning knowledge from
      unsupervised sensorimotor interaction. In The 10th International Conference on Autonomous
      Agents and Multiagent Systems-Volume 2, pp. 761–768, 2011.
 [97] Megh Thakkar, Quentin Fournier, Matthew D Riemer, Pin-Yu Chen, Amal Zouaq, Payel Das,
      and Sarath Chandar. A deep dive into the trade-offs of parameter-efficient preference alignment
      techniques, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2406.04879.
 [98] Megh Thakkar, Yash More, Quentin Fournier, Matthew Riemer, Pin-Yu Chen, Amal Zouaq,
      Payel Das, and Sarath Chandar. Combining domain and alignment vectors to achieve better
      knowledge-safety trade-offs in llms. arXiv preprint arXiv:2411.06824, 2024.
 [99] Philip S. Thomas. Policy gradient coagent networks. In J. Shawe-Taylor, R. Zemel, P. Bartlett,
      F. Pereira, and K.Q. Weinberger (eds.), Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
      volume 24. Curran Associates, Inc., 2011. URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper_files/
      paper/2011/file/1e6e0a04d20f50967c64dac2d639a577-Paper.pdf.
[100] Maximilian Puelma Touzel, Amin Memarian, Matthew Riemer, Andrei Mircea, Andrew Robert
      Williams, Elin Ahlstrand, Lucas Lehnert, Rupali Bhati, Guillaume Dumas, and Irina Rish.
      Scalable approaches for a theory of many minds. In Agentic Markets Workshop at ICML 2024,
      2024.
[101] Mark Towers, Ariel Kwiatkowski, Jordan Terry, John U Balis, Gianluca De Cola, Tristan Deleu,
      Manuel Goulão, Andreas Kallinteris, Markus Krimmel, Arjun KG, et al. Gymnasium: A
      standard interface for reinforcement learning environments. arXiv preprint arXiv:2407.17032,
      2024.
[102] Jaden B Travnik, Kory W Mathewson, Richard S Sutton, and Patrick M Pilarski. Reactive
      reinforcement learning in asynchronous environments. Frontiers in Robotics and AI, 5:79,
      2018.
[103] Thomas J Walsh, Ali Nouri, Lihong Li, and Michael L Littman. Learning and planning
      in environments with delayed feedback. Autonomous Agents and Multi-Agent Systems, 18:
      83–105, 2009.
[104] Wikipedia. Game Boy — Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia. http://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.
      php?title=Game%20Boy&oldid=1224667625, 2024. [Online; accessed 20-May-2024].
[105] Annie Xie, Dylan Losey, Ryan Tolsma, Chelsea Finn, and Dorsa Sadigh. Learning latent
      representations to influence multi-agent interaction. In Conference on robot learning, pp.
      575–588. PMLR, 2021.


                                                 17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


      (a) Pokémon Battling               (b) Pokémon Catching                     (c) Tetris

Figure 9: a) A frame from the final battle of Pokémon Blue when the agent is deciding on the next
move. b) A frame from the final catching encounter of Pokémon Blue when the agent has just
successfully caught Mewtwo. C) A frame from Tetris right before the agent completes its first line.

[106] Yufeng Yuan and A Rupam Mahmood. Asynchronous reinforcement learning for real-time
      control of physical robots. In 2022 International Conference on Robotics and Automation
      (ICRA), pp. 5546–5552. IEEE, 2022.
[107] Yunzhi Zhang, Ignasi Clavera, Boren Tsai, and Pieter Abbeel. Asynchronous methods for
      model-based reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1910.12453, 2019.
[108] Modjtaba Shokrian Zini, Mohammad Pedramfar, Matthew Riemer, Ahmadreza Moradipari,
      and Miao Liu. Coagent networks revisited. arXiv preprint arXiv:2001.10474, 2020.


A    F URTHER D ETAILS S UPPORTING THE M AIN T EXT
Software Libraries: Our experiments leverage Numpy [24], which is publicly available following a
BSD license. Neural network models were developed using Pytorch [70], which is publicly available
following a modified BSD license. The Gym Retro project [65] used to simulate the Game Boy in a
RL environment is made available following a MIT license. We are not at liberty to distribute the
proprietary ROMs associated with Pokémon or Tetris and each person that deploys our provided code
must separately obtain their own copy.
Environment Details: We depict the environments considered in our paper in Figure 9. We consider
six discrete actions for both Pokémon Blue and Tetris including the A button, the B button, the left
directional button, the up directional button, the right directional button, and the down directional
button. In the Battling Environment when the opponent Pokémon is knocked out by the agent’s
Pokémon a reward of 1 is received and a reward of −1 is received when a users Pokémon is knocked
out. Battles include 1-6 Pokémon for the agent and 1-6 Pokémon for the opponent AI. In the Catching
Environment a reward of 1 is received by the agent when a wild Pokémon is captured and −1 when
the encounter is terminated unsuccessfully. In Tetris we provide changes in the in-game score as
a reward for the agent to learn from. We leverage Atari environments as provided by Gymnasium
[101], specifically using the "NoFrameSkip-v4" variants with action 0 taken for "noops" to simulate
real-world play on a console.
Training Procedure for Tetris: The one episode of human play provided for Tetris included 16,106
steps where non-noop actions were taken. We used our experiments from Figure 7 to calculate the
amount of action delay per step for each model and populated the replay buffer with 16,106 transitions
corresponding to these actions with observations delayed by the expected amount for each model. We
the trained each model for 16,000 steps before tuning the model in a simulation of the environment
with the corresponding amount of delay and inaction for 2,000 episodes with one update on the replay
buffer for each action taken in the environment. The episodic reward from Figure 5 corresponds to the
average episodic reward achieved during that training period. To ensure differences in learning are
only the results of delay and inaction while ignoring differences based on different learning speeds
resulting from the model size itself, we use the delay and inaction calculated for models of that size,
but then always learn a model of the standard 15 convolutional layer ResNet depth with k = 1 filter


                                                 18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


           (a) Boxing                          (b) Krull                    (c) Name This Game

Figure 10: Realtime Atari Environments. Frames from the Atari environments a) Boxing, b) Krull,
and c) Name This Game. These particular games were selected because DQN learning is known to
achieve comparable performance to humans within 2,000 episodes when trained without delay.


size. We also tried using the same model size, which followed the same general trend, but report it
this way to address a concern mentioned by a reviewer of this paper.
Training Procedure for Atari: We followed a similar training procedure for Atari. We used our
experiments from Figure 7 to calculate the amount of action delay per step for each model. The
number of delay and inaction steps were normalized for the slightly faster 60 frame per second
environment. This only has an impact for the 1B model size, which now has a delay of 599 steps
rather than 596 steps for the standard depth ResNet model. The episodic reward from Figure 6
corresponds to the average episodic reward achieved during that training period. For the 2xDeep
architecture we leveraged a ResNet model with 6 blocks rather than 3 blocks, which corresponds to 30
convolutional layers rather than 15 convolutional layers. In the final three blocks, each layers has 32k
filters where k = 0.0625 corresponds to 70k parameters, k = 0.75 corresponds to 1M parameters,
k = 4.75 corresponds to 10M parameters, k = 18.5 corresponds to 100M parameters, and k = 63
corresponds to 1B parameters. As is standard practice for Atari, we now learn every 4 environment
steps. However, we do not skip frames and allow models to act at every step if it can.
Statistical Significance: We also note that error bar shading throughout our paper reflects 95%
confidence intervals computed with three random seeds: 0, 1, and 2.
Limitations: In both our experiments on Pokémon Blue and Tetris, performance is well below
human-level. This is because both of these games pose significant exploration problems and we
train our models from scratch for a limited amount of time. We believe that these experiments are
more than sufficient to showcase the benefits of staggered asynchronous inference in comparison
to the sequential interaction framework by showcasing when the latter framework breaks down in
realtime settings. However, we speculate that the results showing that game play does not suffer
despite significant action delay will likely not generalize to more intricate human-level policies. We
also corroborate our findings in a setting where agents can perform on a human-level with limited
training episodes for the Atari games Boxing, Krull, and Name This Game.
Algorithm Pseudocode: Here we provide detailed pseudocode for Algorithm 2, which could not be
included in the main text due to space constraints.

A.1   P OKÉMON R ESULTS WITH S MALLER M ODEL S IZES

Due to space restrictions we were also not able to include our experiments for the Pokémon battling
and catching domains with |θ| < 100M in the main text. We provide these results for |θ| = 1M
in Figure 11 and |θ| = 10M in Figure 12. As expected by our theory, the difference between
asynchronous interaction and sequential interaction is expected to be less when the action inference


                                                  19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Algorithm 2 Expected Time Inference Staggering
Initialize: τ̄ˆθ = 0, τtot = 0, atot = 0, and delay[processnum] = 0 ∀ processnum ∈ [1, ..., NI ]
Run: INFERENCE[processnum] ∀ processnum ∈ [1, ..., NI ]
  function I NFERENCE(processnum)
       while alive do
           sleep(delay[processnum])              ▷ Sleep for any delays accumulated by other processes
           delay[processnum] ← 0
           a, τθ ∼ πθ (st )                      ▷ Have the policy sample an action and inference time
           atot ← atot + 1
           τtot
              ′
                ← τtot + τθ
           τ̄ˆθ ← τtot /atot
                    ′
           δτ ← τ̄ˆθ − τ̄ˆθ
           if δτ ≥ 0 then                                  ▷ Wait more further from the current process
                for num ̸= processnum ∈ [1, ..., NI ] do
                    delay[num] ← delay[num] + dist(num, processnum) abs(δτ )/NI
           else                                                ▷ Wait more closer to the current process
                for num ̸= processnum ∈ [1, ..., NI ] do
                    delay[num] ← delay[num] + (NI − 1)dist(num,processnum) abs(δτ )/NI
           at+⌈τθ /τM ⌉ ← a                                            ▷ Register action in environment


   (a) 1M: Pokémon Battles Won vs. Time τ                   (b) 1M: Wild Pokémon Caught vs. Time τ

Figure 11: Realtime Pokémon Performance for Staggered Asynchronous Interaction & Learning.
a) Battles won in Pokémon Blue as a function of time for |θ| = 1M . b) Wild Pokémon caught in
Pokémon Blue as a function of time for |θ| = 1M .


time is low. In this experiment, the sequential interaction baseline acts every 5 steps at 1M parameters,
8 steps at 10M parameters, and 70 steps at 100M parameters. For the Pokemon game it is expected
that there is not much improvement acting at every step as it is well known to speed runners that in
common circumstances the game could take as many as 17 frames to respond to non-noop actions in
which time intermediate actions are "buffered" and not yet registered in the environment [92]. This is
a fact commonly exploited by speed-runners to allow for them to manipulate the RNG of the game
and execute actions in a "frame perfect" manner despite natural human imprecision when it comes
to action timing. As a result, the overall performance in this domain is in line with expectations
as differences are most significant when inference times are greater than this 17 environment step
threshold. The results reported in Figure 11 and in Figure 12 are mean performances along with 95%
confidence intervals, calculated from 10 runs with different random seeds.


A.2    P ERFORMANCE AS A F UNCTION OF N ON -N OOP ACTIONS

In Figures 13a and 13b we observe that the difference between progress through the game for
sequential and asynchronous algorithms per non-noop action is not statistically significant in the
Pokémon battling and catching environments. As such, our asynchronous algorithm takes full
advantage of the increased throughput of non-noop actions taken in the environment.


                                                   20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


    (a) 10M: Pokémon Battles Won vs. Time τ          (b) 10M: Wild Pokémon Caught vs. Time τ

Figure 12: Realtime Pokémon Performance for Staggered Asynchronous Interaction & Learning.
a) Battles won in Pokémon Blue as a function of time for |θ| = 10M . b) Wild Pokémon caught in
Pokémon Blue as a function of time for |θ| = 10M .


(a) 100M: Pokémon Battles Won vs. Number of Non- (b) 100M: Wild Pokémon Caught vs. Number of Non-
Noop Actions                                     Noop Actions

Figure 13: Realtime Pokémon Performance for Staggered Asynchronous Interaction & Learning.
a) Battles won in Pokémon Blue as a function of non-noop actions taken in the environment for
|θ| = 100M . b) Wild Pokémon caught in Pokémon Blue as a function of non-noop actions taken in
the environment for |θ| = 100M .


                                               21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A.3   R AINBOW E XPERIMENTS

We now also include results with Rainbow [26] used for learning rather than the DQN on Atari. We
again use a standard k = 1 filter size at the standard 15 convolutional layer ResNet depth now with
the Rainbow model for learning based on model inference times that correspond to those used for
the DQN. Note that Rainbow performing worse than the DQN in the Boxing environment, even
without delay, was reported in Table 5 of the original paper [26]. Our implementation of Rainbow
draws heavily from the following repository https://github.com/davide97l/Rainbow/tree/master with
hyperparameters taken from that repository other than the 0.0001 learning rate corresponding to our
other Atari experiments. These experiments yet again showcase the superior ability of staggered
asynchronous inference to maintain performance at larger model sizes and inference times.


B     P ROOFS FOR E ACH T HEORETICAL S TATEMENT

Our proofs rely on the following core assumptions, restated from the main text:

      1. The environment step time can be treated as an independent random variable TM with
         sampled values τM ∼ TM and expected value τ̄M := E[TM ].
      2. The environment interaction time can be treated as an independent random variable TI with
         sampled values τI ∼ TI and expected value τ̄I := E[TI ].
      3. The action inference time of the policy can be treated as an independent random variable Tθ
         with sampled values τθ ∼ Tθ and expected value τ̄θ := E[Tθ ].
      4. Asynchronous learning can learn from every interaction with M̃delay .

Issues with the proof in an earlier workshop version of the paper [85] have been corrected here.

B.1   D EFINITION 1

Most of Definition 1 just recaps the dynamics of how the agent interacts with an asynchronous ground
MDP following assumptions 1-3 about the nature of that interaction. All that is left to show is that this
can be viewed as a delayed MDP and that it can be viewed as a semi-MDP. The interaction process
highlighted in Definition 1 matches that of a Random Delay Markov Decision Process (RDMDP)
[9] where the action delay distribution is defined by the random variable ⌈τθ /τM ⌉. To show it is a
semi-MDP as well, we consider the same proof style of Theorem 1 in Sutton et al. [95]:


            (a) Boxing                          (b) Krull                   (c) Name This Game

Figure 14: Realtime Atari Rainbow Performance vs. |θ|. The average episodic return over
2,000 simulated learning episodes. We compare Rainbow models with a single inference process
to staggered asynchronous inference following Algorithm 1 in a) Boxing, b) Krull, and c) Name
This Game (see Figure 10). Human performance was originally reported by [61]. Small confidence
intervals may be hard to see.


                                                   22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A semi-MDP consists of (1) a set of states, (2) a set of actions, (3) for each pair of state and action,
an expected cumulative discounted reward, and (4) a well-defined joint distribution of the next state
and transit time. We now demonstrate each of these properties. The set of states is S and the set of
actions is A. The expected reward and the next-state and transit-time distributions are well defined
for every state and delayed action. These expectations and distributions are well defined because
Masync is Markov, thus the next state, reward, and time are dependent only on the delayed action
chosen and the state in which it was initiated. Transit times with arbitrary real intervals are permitted
in semi-MDPs.

B.2    T HEOREM 1

To prove Theorem 1 we will demonstrate the validity of each equation of the theorem following the
order of presentation in the main text.
Equation 1: By definition ∆learn (τ ) and ∆inaction (τ ) must be independent contribution to the total
regret because learning regret is only incurred when acting in the environment following π and
inaction regret is only incurred when not acting in the environment and thus following the default
behavior policy β. The interaction frequency does not depend on the parameter values of π as they
change following from the independent random variable assumption. Even when regret from learning
is eliminated and regret from inaction is eliminated there is still another independent source of regret
that persists ∆delay (τ ) reflecting the lower reward rate of the best possible policy in acting over M̃delay
in comparison to the best possible policy acting over Masync .
Equation 2: The worst case lower bound for the standard notion√      of regret arising from the need for
learning and exploration has been established as ∆learn (T ) ∈ Ω( T ) where T denotes the number
of discrete learning steps taken in the environment. Given that we learn from every asynchronous
interaction with the environment following assumption 4, then the regret as a function of τ scales
with the expected number of discrete environment steps as a p      function of T i.e. E[T (τ )] = τ /τ̄I
because TM and TI are independent. Therefor, ∆learn (τ ) ∈ Ω( τ /τ̄I ).√As noted in the footnote in
the main text, this analysis equally applies to the known ∆learn (T ) ∈ Õ( T ) minimum upper bound
[68].
Equation 3: The worst case lower bound on ∆inaction (τ ) is derived by considering a worst case
environment with two actions a1 and a2 and two states s1 and s2 where the default behavior β
takes its own action a3 at every state. The reward provided is 1 at s1 and 0 at s2 . The next state
is s1 regardless of the state if either a1 or a2 is taken and s2 if a3 is taken. In this environment
the optimal reward rate is 1 and the reward rate when following β is 0.0. The expected number of
times a3 is taken during τ seconds in Masync is then τ /τ̄I × (τ̄I − τ̄M )/τ̄M because β is used for
(τ̄I − τ̄M )/τ̄I percent of ground MDP actions and the expected number of actions taken over τ is
τ /τ̄M when TM and TI are independent. Therefor, ∆inaction (τ ) ∈ Ω((τ /τ̄I ) × (τ̄I − τ̄M )/τ̄M )
for this particular environment. Meanwhile, the expected inaction regret is also upper bounded by
∆inaction (τ ) ≤ rmax × (τ /τ̄I ) × (τ̄I − τ̄M )/τ̄M where rmax is the maximum possible reward per step
because by definition the agent cannot incur regret from inaction when it is acting in the environment.
Therefor, we have demonstrated that Equation 3 holds.
Equation 4: The worst case lower bound on ∆delay (τ ) is derived by considering a worst case
environment with n states S = {s1 , ..., sn } and n actions A = {a1 , ..., an } where the default
behavior β takes its own action a0 at every state. If the agent takes the action ai corresponding to
the state si for any i ∈ {1, ..., n} the agent receives a reward of 1, otherwise it receives a reward
of 0. The agent stays in the current state si regardless of the action with probability pminimax and
goes to the next state in the cycle si+1 with probability 1 − pminimax where pminimax ≥ 1/n because
the sum over next state probabilities must equal 1. After state sn the agent returns to state s1 . The
probability of staying in the current state for k consecutive environment steps is (pminimax )k and in
the limit as n → ∞ this is also the probability that the agent is in the current state k steps later. If
the agent is not in the current state k steps later, the agent will apply a sub-optimal action based on
the old state because no state will overtake the current state as more likely than the current state
with the state likelihoods converging to uniform in the limit as k → ∞ when the Markov chain fully
mixes. So the regret per ground environment step incurred by the optimal policy that acts with k step
lag is 1 − (pminimax )k . Thus, the best expected regret rate per step that can be ensured with actions
delayed by k = ⌈τθ /τM ⌉ is ≥ E[1 − (pminimax )⌈τθ /τM ⌉ ]. Moreover, the expected number of steps


                                                     23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


taken in the asynchronous MDP over τ seconds is τ /τ̄I , so we can lower bound the expected regret
as ∆delay (τ ) ≥ (τ /τ̄I ) × E[1 − (pminimax )⌈τθ /τM ⌉ ]. This then leads us to the conclusion of Equation
4 from the main text that ∆delay (τ ) ∈ Ω((τ /τ̄I ) × E[1 − (pminimax )⌈τθ /τM ⌉ ]).
Tighter Version of Equation 4: While the definition of pminimax in the main text holds for the counter
example above, this example relies on the fact that transitioning states actually has an impact on the
reward of a policy and its value function. In general, it does not matter if the state changes if the
change does not impact the optimal policy. So a tighter version of pminimax would be defined over a
π ∗ -irrelevance state abstraction ϕπ∗ of the state space rather than the ground state space, following
the terminology of [52]. In a ϕπ∗ abstraction every abstract state in ϕπ∗ (S) has an action a∗ that is
optimal for all the ground states i and j in that abstract state. As a result, ϕπ∗ (si ) = ϕπ∗ (sj ) implies
                   ∗                       ∗
that maxa∈A Qπ (si , a) = maxa∈A Qπ (sj , a). For example,       P a tighter version of Equation 4 could
be written with pminimax := mins∈S,a∈A maxϕπ∗ (si )∈ϕπ∗ (S) ϕπ∗ (sj )=ϕπ∗ (si ) p(sj |s, a).

B.3    R EMARK 1

We restate the derivation of the remark from the main text, filling in a bit more detail for clarity.
When π and Masync interact sequentially, we must have τI ≥ τθ , so ∆inaction (τ ) ∈ Ω(τ /τ̄I × (τ̄I −
τ̄M )/τ̄M ) ∈ Ω(τ /τ̄θ × (τ̄θ − τ̄M )/τ̄M ). This implies that even as τ → ∞, the worst case regret
rate ∆realtime (τ )/τ ∈ Ω(∆inaction (τ )/τ ) ∈ Ω((τ̄θ − τ̄M )/τ̄M τ̄θ ) following from Theorem 1.

B.4    R EMARK 2

Interaction Time of Algorithm 1: At any point in time, by definition τ̂θmax ≤ τθmax as the estimated
maximum must be less than or equal the current maximum. Therefore, with NI equally spaced
processes, the interaction time must be τI = ⌈τ̂θmax /NI /τM ⌉ × τM and Algorithm 1 ensures equal
spacing between processes whenever τ̂θmax does not change. Regardless of the changing value of
τ̂θmax , we can also bound the individual interaction time steps τI ≤ ⌈τθmax /NI /τM ⌉ × τM and
correspondingly the global average τ̄I ≤ τθmax /NI when τ̄I > τ̄M and τ̄I = τ̄M otherwise.
Interaction Time of Algorithm 2: As τ → ∞, τ̂θ → τ̄θ due to the law of large numbers and thus
δτ → 0, which implies that additional waiting times become zero in the limit. Therefore, with NI
equally spaced processes, the interaction time must be τI = ⌈τ̄θ /NI /τM ⌉ × τM and Algorithm 2
ensures equal spacing between processes whenever τ̂θ does not change and δτ = 0. Thus, as τ → ∞
the global average is τ̄I = τ̄θ /NI when τ̄I > τ̄M and τ̄I = τ̄M otherwise.
Bringing it Together: Algorithm 1 is capable of scaling the expected interaction time with the
number of processes by τ̄I ≤ min(τθmax /NI , τ̄M ) where τθmax is the maximum encountered value of
τθ as τ → ∞. This then implies that for NI ≥ NI∗ = ⌈τθmax /τ̄M ⌉, τ̄I = τ̄M . Algorithm 2 is capable
of scaling the expected interaction time with the number of processes by τ̄I = min(τ̄θ /NI , τ̄M ) as
τ → ∞ following the law of large numbers. This then correspondingly implies that for NI ≥ NI∗ =
⌈τ̄θ /τ̄M ⌉, τ̄I = τ̄M .

B.5    C OMPARISON WITH ACTION C HUNKING A PPROACHES

The action chunking approach learns a policy that produces multiple actions at a time with a single
inference step i.e. a policy πθ (at , ..., at+k |st ) that produces k actions at a time. Clearly action
chunking does not address the root cause of regret from delay ∆delay (τ ) that our asynchronous
inference framework also suffers from as k steps of delay is built directly into the policy. However, it
is less clear on the surface how the action chunking approach relates to ∆learn (τ ) and ∆inaction (τ ).
Does action chunking eliminate ∆inaction (τ )? Action chunking could eliminate regret from inaction
if τθmax /k = τM . But this is not possible for any value of τθmax with sufficiently large k because τθmax
must depend on k as the size of the outputs produced scales linearly with k. So action chunking can
eliminate inaction for some policy classes, but not in general as policy inference times become large.
Our asynchronous inference approach provides a more general result in this regard (see Remark 2).
Does action chunking impact ∆learn (τ )? A hidden term excluded from our bound of p         ∆learn (τ ) in
the main text is a dependence on the size of the action space |A| such that ∆learn (τ ) ∈ Ω( τ |A|/τ̄I )
[31]. We suppressed this dependence for clarity in the main text, but it is important to keep in mind


                                                    24
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


when
p considering action chunking approaches as this implies that the regret lower bound scales with
  |A|k and thus can lead to an exponentially worse regret from learning ∆learn (τ ) even in cases
where ∆inaction (τ ) is eliminated with sufficiently large k.

B.6    ACHIEVING S UBLINEAR R EGRET WITH S TAGGERED A SYNCHRONOUS I NFERENCE

As we have demonstrated in Remark 2, when enough asynchronous threads are provided, a model of
any size can eliminate regret from inaction. Regret from delay is not addressed by this approach, but
goes to zero in deterministic environments. As a result, to demonstrate that total regret is sublinear
for deterministic environments following Equation 1, we must only show that ∆learn (τ ) can be upper
bounded by a quantity sublinear in τ . For example, if we use Q-Learning as we do in our experiments,
there are known upper bounds for√ the case of utilizing optimistic exploration with a carefully designed
learning rate of ∆learn (T ) ∈ Õ( T ) where T is the number of steps in the environment [32]. In
                                                                                                     √
expectation E[T ] = τ /τ̄M , so the upper bound on the expected regret will be ∆learn (T ) ∈ Õ( τ )
as τ̄M is a constant. As a result, our approach can achieve sublinear regret whenever ∆delay (τ ) is
sublinear, which includes, but is not limited to, all deterministic environments.

C     T OWARDS E NABLING R EAL -W ORLD D EPLOYMENT OF AGENTS IN E VEN
      M ORE C OMPLEX S CENARIOS
Designing Safe Default Policies β: In our work, we assume β performs poorly such that it is unsafe
and thus our goal with asynchronous interaction is to avoid using it altogether. However, an alternate
research direction motivated by our formulation in Definition 1 would be to work on refining the β
function itself such that relying on it is guaranteed to be safe and not lead to irrevertible consequences.
This is, for example, a major difference between the implementation of β in the games Pokémon
and Tetris. In Pokémon inaction does not prohibit the agent from eventually achieving success
in the game, whereas in Tetris inaction leads to missed opportunities that can never be overcome.
This materializes in our empirical results as we see a slower degradation of performance for the
sequential interaction baseline as the model size grows for Pokémon. That said, the limitation of our
asynchronous inference approach is that policies are based on previous states, which can itself be
unsafe in stochastic environments. In this case, it would be logical to also consider beneficial and safe
ways to modify β itself, which can then just be viewed as another model that happens to have a faster
inference time that should also be provided resources for asynchronous learning. This case closely
mirrors the options framework [95; 4] and variants of it that consider deep hierarchies of policies
[80; 82; 1]. As we do not want β itself to lead the agent to OOD states, it probably would make sense
to train this policy with a pessimism bias [49; 33] or a bias towards actions that make focused effects
in the environment [3]. Moreover, our work is complimentary to efficient methods for performing
alignment of large deep models [97], particularly for enhanced safety [98] and alignment with moral
values [69; 18]. It is also worth noting that while neural scaling laws demonstrate generalization
improvements with increased model size in the regime of having access to as much data as needed
[34], capacity limits have often been found to improve generalization for RL [56; 59] and multi-agent
RL [55; 58; 57]. As such, it may not make sense to scale model size indefinitely, as suggested by the
general discourse of our paper, in data limited settings where safety is critical.
Broader Domains with Diverse Subtasks or Nonstationarity: When it comes to both learning
a policy over the delayed semi-MDP and learning a default behavior policy, a key challenge is to
adapt these policies to changing environment dynamics and new scenarios. Broadly, this is referred
to as Continual RL (see [39] for a comprehensive survey). On the optimization end, these settings
require consideration of the stability-plasticity dilemma. For example, we used recency based replay
buffers in this work that have been standard in the RL literature since [61]. However, this recency
based buffer maintenance strategy only makes sense when we are purely focused on plasticity. A
reasonable alternative for continual learning would be buffers based on reservoir sampling [79] to
emphasize stability or scalable memory efficient approximate buffers [77; 81; 6]. Another way to
promote stability during learning is with regularization based approaches. For example, approaches
that leverage knowledge distillation from old versions of models [53; 78] or approaches that penalize
movement in parameter space [45]. In settings where subtasks are diverse it is also important to
consider that the optimal interaction frequency may depend on the context. In this case, it may be
beneficial to consider algorithms that adaptively select which layers to process at inference time


                                                   25
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


[86; 11; 12; 87], see [88] for a survey of approaches. More generally, this adaptive computation
problem can be formalized within the coagent networks framework [99; 48; 108]. That said, the
compositional generalization needed for utilizing these models in practice makes achieving real-world
success very challenging [46]. Moreover, in the case of POMDPs, especially when they are large
scale [83], it may make sense to adaptively change the interaction history context length sent to our
policy to tradeoff the extent of modeling non-Markovian dependencies with inference and evaluation
times [84].
Interacting in Multi-agent Settings: Another key consideration when generalizing our approach
to more realistic settings is interacting with other agents in the environment. While asynchronous
interaction can definitely help eliminate inaction, the amount of tolerable delay depends not just on
the environment, but also on the behavior of other other agents in the environment. For example,
the Boxing environment considered in our experiments from Figure 6 can also be played as a two
agent game. We find that it is very difficult to perform on human-level in this environment even
with delay as low as 3 environment steps, which ties back to the stochasticity of the policy used
by the AI in single player mode. Another key challenge in multi-agent environments is when the
policies of the other agents change i.e. due to learning, which makes the environment nonstationary
from the perspective of each agent. When the agents are trained in a centralized fashion, they can be
considered in each others updates to mitigate this nonstationarity [54]. However, in the more typical
decentralized setting agents must build theory of mind models to speculate about the (changing)
behavior of other agents [72] which must be carefully constructed for scalability in the presence of
many other agents [60; 100]. Effective approaches have been developed to address this challenge by
meta-learning with respect to the updating policies of other agents [22; 23; 42; 105; 43] or by learning
to perform effective communication between agents [51; 67; 40; 41; 47]. In order to generalize our
theoretical results in Theorem 1 to environments with multiple learning agents, we would have to
consider regret with respect to complex game-theoretic solution concepts [44]. As such, we leave
consideration of these approaches and exploration of a formulation for realtime regret in this setting
to future work.
Applicability Beyond RL: In this paper, we focused on RL environments because of our use of
the formalism of RL to establish our theoretical contributions. However, the general principles of
this paper should apply to many practical domains that are not typically modeled using RL such as
biomedical applications like peptide design [15], monitoring conversation topics across the internet
[75; 25; 74; 38], and time series prediction based on incoming internet data [76]. Indeed, we chose
to study the framework of RL as these problems can generally be considered a special case of the
RL formalism [5]. For example, one broad application area of particular relevance to our paper is
continual supervised learning. There are many potential settings of deployment related to this general
topic that can all be considered special cases of the formulation we consider in this paper [66].


                                                  26
