Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A C OMPUTATIONAL F RAMEWORK FOR M ODELING
E MERGENCE OF C OLOR V ISION IN THE H UMAN B RAIN
 Atsunobu Kotani & Ren Ng
 Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Sciences
 University of California, Berkeley
 {akotani,ren}@berkeley.edu


                                                    A BSTRACT

             It is a mystery how the brain decodes color vision purely from the optic nerve
             signals it receives, with a core inferential challenge being how it disentangles inter-
             nal perception with the correct color dimensionality from the unknown encoding
             properties of the eye. In this paper, we introduce a computational framework for
             modeling this emergence of human color vision by simulating both the eye and the
             cortex. Existing research often overlooks how the cortex develops color vision or
             represents color space internally, assuming that the color dimensionality is known a
             priori; however, we argue that the visual cortex has the capability and the challenge
             of inferring the color dimensionality purely from fluctuations in the optic nerve
             signals. To validate our theory, we introduce a simulation engine for biological
             eyes based on established vision science and generate optic nerve signals resulting
             from looking at natural images. Further, we propose a bio-plausible model of corti-
             cal learning based on self-supervised prediction of optic nerve signal fluctuations
             under natural eye motions. We show that this model naturally learns to generate
             color vision by disentangling retinal invariants from the sensory signals. When
             the retina contains N types of color photoreceptors, our simulation shows that
             N -dimensional color vision naturally emerges, verified through formal colorimetry.
             Using this framework, we also present the first simulation work that successfully
             boosts the color dimensionality, as observed in gene therapy on squirrel monkeys,
             and demonstrates the possibility of enhancing human color vision from 3D to 4D.


1       I NTRODUCTION
                  “Color is the place where our brain and the universe meet.” – Paul Klee
We experience colors in everyday life so effortlessly that it is easy to take the underlying neural
computations for granted. In fact, the sensory signals exiting our eye, called optic nerve signals
(ONS), are nothing like our color vision (see Fig. 1 and Supplementary Video 0:30 1 ). For example,
ONS are spatially warped, akin to an image taken with a fish-eye lens, due to varying densities of
photoreceptor cells in the retina (Curcio et al., 1990). ONS does not come in color either – colors
of the scene are spectrally sampled by different types of color sensitive cells (cone cells) in the
retina, appearing as a layer of spatial noise in the ONS. Furthermore, other processes, such as lateral
inhibition and action potentials, render the image structure barely recognizable, in gradient domain
where spatiotemporal “edges” dominate. Now, the question is: how are we still seeing colors?
Specifically, this paper introduces a novel computational framework for modeling the emergence of
human color vision by simulating the eye and the cortex. For the eye, we present a biophysically
accurate implementation of a textbook scientific model of the retinal neural circuitry. For the brain,
we hypothesize a low-level, self-supervised learning mechanism in the cortex that operates purely on
the optic nerve signal stream. For color representation in the brain, we propose modeling color in the
brain as a high-dimensional vector, rather than assuming any specific color dimensionality and show
that the correct color dimensionality emerges naturally through the proposed learning.
For eye simulation, our goal is to create a computational engine that takes in any spectral image of the
world and outputs the corresponding optic nerve signal stream, based on established vision science.
    1
        Code, video, dataset, and tutorials are available on our project website: https://matisse.eecs.berkeley.edu.


                                                           1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


 Scene Stimulus                           Optic Nerve Signals (ONS)                              Decoded                                       Quantitative
 (hyperspectral)                                                                                Color Vision                                    CMF-SIM
                                                                                                                                                             3D
                           Simulation                                      Simulation                                                         0 1 2 3 4
                                                                                                                       Analysis of
                            Engine of           time t                         of                                                             Qualitative NS
                                                                                                                       Emergent
                           Biological                                       Cortical
                                                                                                                      Neural Color
                              Eyes                                          Learning

                                                                                                          N-dim
           400-700nm        Section 3           t + Δt                      Section 4                                     Section 5


                                                          …
 Input Imagery         Retina Model             Optic Nerve Signal      Cortical Learning     Emergent Vision        Analysis of Vision     CMF-SIM, NS
 • Database of         • Textbook vision        • Biological realism    • Core hypothesis:    • Emergent color       • Emergent color       • CMF-SIM (Color
   hyperspectral         science model of       • Marked difference       learning by self-     vision in cortex       vision analyzed        Matching Function
   photographs           foveal optic nerve       from color vision       supervised          • Cortical color         rigorously as          Sim.) quantifies
 • Brain never           signal generation      • Eye motion, scalar,     prediction of         represented in ℝN      black-box, akin to     color dimension
   receives this       • Retina cells: cones,     spatially warped,       ONS fluctuations      as high-dim vector     analyzing another    • NS (Neural-Scope)
   ground-truth          horizontal cells,        patchy spectral         under natural eye   • Brain must infer       human’s vision         visualizes ℝN color
   data, only optic      bipolar, ganglion        sampling, lateral       motion                the correct color    • Rigor of Maxwell’s     by linear projection
   nerve signals         cells (optic nerve)      inhibition, spiking   • Bio-plausible         dimensionality         color matching         to RGB colorspace



Figure 1: Overview of our proposed framework for modeling the emergence of human color vision.
Our simulation engine of biological eyes converts a scene stimulus (hyperspectral image) to a stream
of optic nerve signals (Section 3 & Video 0:30). We simulate cortical learning purely from these
optic nerve signals (Section 4) and show the emergence of color vision. We show how to analyze the
emergent neural color quantitatively with Color Matching Function test Simulator (CMF -SIM ) and
qualitatively with Neural Scope (NS ) (Section 5).


Our model captures how scene form, color, and motion become spatiotemporally entangled in the
optic nerve signal stream. Our simulation is based on the “textbook” model of vision science (Rodieck,
1998) for midget, private-line visual pathways, detailed in Section 3, and comprising fixational eye
motion, spectral encoding by cone cells, foveation, and lateral inhibition.
For brain simulation, we hypothesize that the cortex could disentangle the optic nerve signal from
the invariant retinal properties to generate color vision – purely through a self-supervised learning
process that aims to predict the constant fluctuations in cellular-level activations of the optic nerve
signal during small eye movements. The neural conditions for such self-supervised learning are
biologically plausible in the sense that the cortex continuously receives optic nerve signals under the
tiny gaze movements of fixational eye drift.The theoretical intuition for why such learning might
succeed is that eye motion repeatedly draws a static scene image across the invariant spectral and
spatial sampling properties of the retina, potentially enabling the retinal properties and scene images
to be mutually filtered out of the optic nerve signal where they are entangled. We show that this
simple learning mechanism succeeds at discovering color vision with the correct dimensionality.
But first, a somewhat esoteric yet technically critical feature of the modeling framework needs
discussion: color representation in the brain. Existing research often overlooks how the cortex
develops color vision or represents color space internally, assuming that the color dimensionality
is known a priori, e.g. RGB. We argue that the cortex has the capability and the task of inferring
color dimensionality, purely from fluctuations in the optic nerve signals. Therefore, we propose
representing color in the cortex as a high-dimensional vector in RN and find that the correct color
space and color dimensionality emerge naturally as geometric properties of the hypothesized learning
mechanism. We show how to formally quantify and visualize the emergent color space (Section 5).
Remarkably, the hypothesized learning mechanism results in clear color vision of the correct color
dimensionality. When the retina contains 1, 2, 3 or 4 types of color photoreceptors (cones), correct
color dimensionality emerges: respectively, 1D mono-, 2D di-, 3D tri- or 4D tetra-chromatic vision.
In fact, it is an esoteric but well-known fact in vision science that the three types of 2D dichromacy
result in highly specific color-spaces (blue-yellow, blue-orange, and teal-pink), which we see emerge
naturally. Even more, the simulation presents a model of how color dimensionality boosting occurred
in the squirrel monkeys (Mancuso et al., 2009). We simulate injection of the third cone pigment virus
into the dichromat retina, which results in boosting from dichromacy to trichromacy. Intriguingly, the
model also shows the possibility that normal human trichromacy could be boosted to tetrachromacy.
In sum, our proposed framework formulates the emergence of human color vision in a computational
manner. The simulation engine of realistic optic nerve signals generates training data to this problem,


                                                                                2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


and an intentional and challenging constraint is that the cortical model must strictly learn only from
the optic nerve signal with no auxiliary information. This paper presents the first, simple and yet
complete existence proof that such cortical inference is possible, and we show that this learning
simulation is consistent with various surprising and unexplained vision science phenomena.


2     R ELATED W ORK

2.1   V ISION S CIENCE ON O PTIC N ERVE S IGNAL E NCODING

In the “textbook” model, the retina transforms light into electrical signals through three primary
functions: color sampling via cone cell spectral response functions, lateral inhibition via horizontal
neural connections, and spatial sampling via cell positioning (Fig. 2). Under daylight, this process
begins when light activates cone cells, which are of three types for most humans (Young, 1801;
1802; Von Helmholtz, 1867), each sensitive to different wavelengths (Stockman & Sharpe, 2000).
These signals are then modulated by horizontal cells that enhance visual contrast through lateral
inhibition (Rodieck, 1965; Dacey et al., 1996; Verweij et al., 2003). The signals continue to bipolar
and retinal ganglion cells (RGCs), with a direct connection in the fovea via the midget private-line
pathway (Dowling & Boycott, 1966; McMahon et al., 2000; Wool et al., 2018), vital for high-
resolution color vision. Notably, the cone cell density varies, reaching its peak in the fovea (Osterberg,
1935; Curcio et al., 1990). The axons of the ganglion cells bundle to form optic nerve signals,
maintaining their spatial arrangement, which results in a retinotopy in the visual cortex (Holmes,
1918; Tootell et al., 1982; Dougherty et al., 2003). Fixational eye movements cause dynamic
photoreceptor activation at all times by constantly shifting the gaze, even when focusing on static
objects (Rucci & Victor, 2015; Young & Smithson, 2021; Martinez-Conde et al., 2013).
Recordings of real optic nerve signals exist, but cannot be used for our cortical simulations because
they are orders of magnitude too low resolution (from only a few thousand cells) and only in response
to grayscale rather than color imagery (Litke et al., 2004; Brackbill et al., 2020; Marre et al., 2017;
Liu et al., 2022). To overcome these data limitations, we present a simulation engine for the midget
private-line pathway in the fovea in Section 3.

2.2   C OLOR R EPRESENTATION IN C OMPUTATIONAL N EUROSCIENCE

It is an open question how to meaningfully model neural representations of color in simulations of
visual perception. Most computational neuroscience sidesteps this issue, “hard-coding” a dimensional-
ity of 3, representing and constraining cortical color to tristimulus values, such as RGB (Parthasarathy
et al., 2017; Botella-Soler et al., 2018; Brackbill et al., 2020; Kim et al., 2021; Zhang et al., 2022;
Wu et al., 2022), LMS (Young, 1802; Von Helmholtz, 1867) or cone-opponent space (Derrington
et al., 1984; MacLeod & Boynton, 1979). Constraining cortical models to such a ceiling of three for
dimensionality clearly conflicts with the study of a functional tetrachromat observer with 4D color
vision (Jordan et al., 2010; Rezeanu et al., 2021). Instead, we model the brain with the capability and
the challenge of deducing the inherent color dimensionality encoded in the optic nerve signals.

2.3   T HEORY ON H OW V ISION E MERGES IN THE B RAIN

In computational vision science modeling, it is often overlooked that the cortex relies solely on a
stream of optic nerve signals to discover color vision, with no access to a teacher signal or perceptual
ground truth. Rather, various efforts have been made to reconstruct visual stimuli from neural
responses by giving the cortical model access to ground truth stimulus image (Naselaris et al., 2009;
Nishimoto et al., 2011; Parthasarathy et al., 2017; Botella-Soler et al., 2018; Brackbill et al., 2020;
Kim et al., 2021), but the neural reality is that the brain never has direct access to the visual scene. This
characteristic makes the human visual system a quintessential example of self-supervised learning,
which is a growing field in computer vision (De Sa, 1993; Chen et al., 2020; He et al., 2022). In
this work, we propose a learning principle in the cortex which aims to predict the cellular-level
fluctuations in activation that occur during small eye movements, which is associated with the idea of
temporal prediction (Palmer et al., 2015; Lotter et al., 2016; Singer et al., 2018; 2023b), as well as the
broader concept of predictive coding (Rao & Ballard, 1999; Srinivasan et al., 1982). It is also closely
linked to the sensorimotor contingency theory from cognitive science (O’Regan & Noë, 2001) and


                                                     3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


slow feature analysis (Hinton, 1990; Földiák, 1991) which suggests that the brain learns to anticipate
the sensory outcomes of motor actions (e.g. eye movements) and filters out invariant (slow) features.

2.4   T HEORY ON H OW B RAINS I NFER C OLOR D IMENSIONALITY

Previous studies has investigated inference of invariant retinal properties from sensory signals. For
instance, research has demonstrated the ability to deduce cone cell types (Wachtler et al., 2007;
Brainard et al., 2008; Benson et al., 2014) and the positions of photoreceptors (Maloney & Ahumada,
1989; Brainard et al., 2008) via statistical methods from sensory signals. Brainard et al. (2008) hinted
at analyzing sensory inputs from different time points during fixational drift as a way to reveal retinal
features, and in this paper we provide a computational realization of this idea with a specific learning
mechanism that achieves complete disentanglement of retinal invariants from optic nerve signals.

2.5   M EASUREMENT OF C OLOR D IMENSIONALITY IN H UMAN C OLOR P ERCEPTION

In this paper, we need to rigorously measure the color dimensionality of the emergent color from
cortical simulation. To do so, we adapt Maxwell’s famous color-matching experiments (Maxwell,
1856), which laid the foundation of colorimetry that remains at the heart of all color reproduction
technology today. Color matching experiments confirmed the trichromatic theory (Young, 1802;
Von Helmholtz, 1867; Grassmann, 1853) in which the 3-dimensional nature of human color vision has
its basis in the three different cone types in the human retina. Jacobs’s recent review (Jacobs, 2018)
of color dimensionality in animal vision, however, reminds the community that the dimensionality of
color vision does not automatically equal the number of cone types, and that the most rigorous way
to measure it remains Maxwellian color matching – as we follow in this work.

2.6   C OMPLEXITY OF H UMAN C OLOR V ISION

This paper focuses on color dimensionality because it is the foundational characteristic of an ob-
server’s color experience, but many layers of further perceptual complexity exist atop that foundation.
Examples include chromatic adaptation (color constancy) (Von Kries, 1902; Land, 1977; Foster,
2011), perceptual nonuniformity across colorspace (CIE, 1976; MacAdam, 1942), complex contextual
interactions (Fairchild, 2013), and even surprising flood-fill features (Pinna, 1987; Pinna et al., 2001).
Parts of these perceptual phenomena are scientifically mapped to neural correlates, such as nonlinear
photoreceptor responses (Krauskopf & Karl, 1992; Angueyra et al., 2022), or parvocellular pathway
and neural processes spanning V1, V2, and V4 (Livingstone & Hubel, 1987; Zeki, 1978; Li et al.,
2014; Liu et al., 2020; Angueyra et al., 2022). This paper leaves these additional layers of perceptual
complexity as future modeling work.

3     S IMULATION E NGINE FOR B IOLOGICAL E YES AND O PTIC N ERVE S IGNALS

We model the primary functions of the human retina based on the known science. The inputs to our
retina model are hyperspectral images (Fig.2.A; details in Appendix A.1). A model of fixational eye
drift (Rucci & Victor, 2015; Young & Smithson, 2021; Martinez-Conde et al., 2013) generates a
sequence of frames that sample different parts of the image. Each frame is projected on the retina,
stimulating a randomized array of cone cells, according to known cell density variation as a function
of eccentricity (distance from the fovea) (Curcio et al., 1990) and known statistics of different cone
cell types (Carroll et al., 2000) (Fig. 2.B). Each cone cell converts the scene light into photoreceptor
activations based on cone type spectral response functions (Stockman et al., 1999; Stockman &
Sharpe, 2000) (Fig. 2.C), followed by lateral inhibition from horizontal cells (Wool et al., 2018;
Rodieck, 1965) (Fig. 2.D). These signals are transformed into spike trains (Fig. 2.E), then bundled
into optic nerve signals (ONS), resulting in spatial distortion (Fig. 2.F), turning a color scene stimulus
into a noisy, spatially distorted ONS. Additional details are in Appendix A and Video 1:35.
One observation to make is that there are three invariant properties of the simulated retina (i.e.
retinal invariants): cell positions, cell types, and horizontal cell connections. These properties are
held constant during generation of ONS for a particular eye, but we use the engine with different
values for these properties to generate ONS datasets for a diverse set of eyes. For example, we
create datasets with different cone types, including monochromatic (L, M, S), dichromatic (LM, LS,


                                                    4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 2: Overview of our simulation engine of biological eyes. 1. This engine takes a scene stimulus
as an input, processes it through a “textbook” model of eye motion and retinal neural circuitry, to
generate a stream of optic nerve signals. 2. This engine accepts custom eye and retina parameters. 3.
It allows visualization of neural signals in steps (A-F), illustrating the progressive entanglement of
scene imagery with retinal properties. 4. Visualization of changing one of the input parameters, the
number of cone cell types – showing that the signals become noisier as the number increases.


MS), trichromatic (LMS) and tetrachromatic (LMSQ) configurations (Fig. 2.4). The generated ONS
becomes spatially noisier as the number of cone types increases, and we study how the cortex infers
the inherent color dimensionality of these eyes purely from the differences in their respective ONS.

4    S IMULATING C ORTICAL L EARNING AND E MERGENCE OF C OLOR V ISION
Our cortical model is structured to learn three functions in a pipeline (Fig. 3.1): 1. Φ that decodes the
optic nerve signal at time t into its internal percept; 2. Ω that translates this percept according to eye
motions inferred from the signal over a short time interval, dt; and 3. Ψ that re-encodes the translated
percept back into a predicted optic nerve signal at time t + dt, which is compared against the real
signal received at that time. Mathematically, given the optic nerve signal Ot at time t;
                                        Ôt+dt = Ψ(Ω(Φ(Ot )))                                          (1)
where Ôt+dt is the predicted ONS at time t + dt. Here the task of decoder Φ is analogous to inverting
the retinal processes to transform Ot into the visual percept image Vt (i.e. Vt ← Φ(Ot )). Likewise,
the re-encoder function Ψ resembles the retinal processes, as it aims to reproduce an optic nerve
signal from the visual percept (i.e. Ot ← Ψ(Vt )). Therefore, Φ and Ψ are pseudo-inverses.
The learning objective is to minimize the prediction error Eprediction , the difference between predicted
and real optic nerve images at time t + dt, such that:
                   Eprediction = ∥Ot+dt − Ôt+dt ∥22 = ∥Ot+dt − Ψ(Ω(Φ(Ot )))∥22                        (2)
where Ot+dt is the real observed ONS at time t + dt.
Three main ideas drove the evolution of our selected model features. First, we reasoned that it would
be a big step towards successful decoding and re-encoding if the cortex could infer the key encoding
properties of each cone cell. We gave the cortical model sets of learnable parameters, which we


                                                    5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                 1. Hypothesized Cortical Learning Mechanism                            3. Example Measurement of Color Dimensionality
 True ONS                                                                                          Initial state 700 steps 1,200 steps 100K steps
  at time t       Φ, Ω, Ψ are                    Internal Percept
                   learnable                                                            CMF-             1D          1D         2D          3D
                                   Decode
                                     Φ
                   functions                                                            SIM
                                                                                                   0 1 2 3 4   0 1 2 3 4   0 1 2 3 4   0 1 2 3 4


                                                                 N-dim
                                   Neural                            Translate
                                                                         Ω
 True ONS        Predicted ONS
  at t + Δt         at t + Δt
                                   Buckets
                                                                                        NS

                                 Re-Encode
                                     Ψ                           N-dim
              Prediction Error                                                      * NS linearly projects N-dim vectors to RGB color space

      2. Example of Learning Evolution on Trichromat ONS Stream                          4. Inferred Retinal Invariants with Neural Buckets
                                                                                                   Initial state 700 steps 1,200 steps 100K steps
   Log ONS                                                                            Cone
  prediction                                                                         Positions
  error (a.u.)                                                                           P
                 0                           700 1,200                       100K   Cone types

 Ground-Truth High Initial state     700 steps     1,200 steps      100K steps
                                                                                         C
                     Error                                                          L    M     S
                                                                                    LI weights
                                                                                         W
                     Low
                     Error                                                          -    0     +


Figure 3: Overview of our hypothesized cortical learning mechanism and exclusive study of the
learning behavior of the cortical model with trichromatic retina. 1. Given the stream of optic nerve
signals as the only input data, the cortical model aims to predict the next ONS from the current
one with 3 learnable functions, decoder Φ, translation operator Ω and re-encoder Ψ. 2. Prediction
error decreases as learning progresses, converging after 100K learning steps. 3. During learning,
the color dimensionality of the internal percepts transition from 1D, 2D to 3D, formally measured
by CMF -SIM and visualized by NS (Fig. 4 & Section 5). 4. The cortical model infers the retinal
invariant properties during learning: cell positions P (higher density in fovea), cone cell types C, and
lateral inhibition weights W (center-surround receptive field).


call “neural buckets”, in which to store and update guesses of these properties during learning. The
buckets contain the following information for each cone cell: 2D position in visual space (P), cone
spectral identity (C), and lateral inhibition weights (W) to neighboring cones.
The second main idea was the observation that decoder Φ and encoder Ψ are mathematically
factorizable into a pipeline of subfunctions, such that:
                                                       Φ = ΦP ◦ ΦC ◦ ΦW
                                                       Ψ = ΨW ◦ ΨC ◦ ΨP .
Each sub-function is an operator conditioned on its corresponding neural bucket, cell positions P,
cone spectral types C, and lateral inhibition weights to neighboring cells W. In case of decoder
Φ, it first executes inversion of lateral inhibition using ΦW in order to estimate the activations of
each photoreceptor associated with an optic nerve axon; second, projects scalar cone activations into
RN by ΦC using inferred spectral identities in C (and interpolating color across space – the third
main idea below); and finally inverting the spatial distortion of foveation via ΦP . The re-encoding
function is a pipeline of analogous subfunctions in reverse order: re-applying spatial warping with ΨP ;
re-projecting color into scalar photoreceptor activations with ΨC ; and re-applying lateral inhibition
with ΨW . Further implementation details are provided in Appendix B.
The third main idea was that, in order to accurately re-encode after translation, the model needs to
learn to interpolate color information spatially, because there is only one cone type at each point on
the retina. This need to interpolate is analogous to the situation in cameras with image sensors (Bayer,
1976; Fossum, 1997; Kimmel, 1999) that physically sample only one of the R,G,B channels at each
pixel, and fundamentally require demosaicking algorithms to interpolate full R,G,B values at all
pixels. The required interpolation function in the cortical model is more complex because the spectral


                                                                         6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


     1. CMF-SIM: Quantitative Color Matching Function Test Simulator                                   2. NS: Qualitative Neural Scope
 Coefficients                       Eye model     Cortical model                                            Cortical model
 on primaries                                            Color percept                                                                        RGB-projected
 (Knobs)                                                                                  ONS                    Visual Percept                Visual Percept
                                  Match
                                                Decode
                                                 ℝ
                                                                                                        Decode
                                                                                                            ℝ
                     Primary      color
                                                                                                                                       NS
                      lights                                                Error
                                                                         difference                                                   Neural
                                                                                                                         N-dim        Scope
                                                         Color percept
                     Target                     Decode                                                                 Linear transform from RN to R3
                      light   Target
                              color              ℝ                                             •   NS is a learnable N Δ 3 matrix.
                                                                         Perceptual            •   Optimized as a visualization parameter,
    Update the coefficients to                                             Error
    minimize the error until convergence                                                           independent of the main cortical loop.

                      3. Example Output: Full CMF-SIM Result for the Cortical Model Trained with Trichromat Retina
    # of primaries            0            1                2              3                   4                       Summary of the Results
 Coefficients at         N/A
  convergence
                                                                                                                 Area under
                                                                                                                  the curve
                                                                                      400 nm       700 nm       # of primaries    0   1   2     3   4
     Perceptual
                                                                     0 area under      0 area under
      error at
                                                                       the curve                            Error first goes zero with 3 primaries.
    convergence                                                                          the curve
                                                                                                            → Formal measurement: 3D color vision.


Figure 4: Overview of our measurement methods of emergent color dimensionality, Color Matching
Function Test Simulator (CMF -SIM ) & Neural Scope (NS ). 1. CMF -SIM determines the mini-
mum number of primary colors needed to match any target color by iteratively updating coefficients
to minimize perceptual error. 2. NS visualizes visual percepts independently of the cortical learning
loop, optimized as a learnable N × 3 matrix to minimize projection error to the target RGB image. 3.
Example CMF -SIM output for a trichromat retina-trained cortical model shows matching errors for
400–700nm spectral light converging to zero with three primaries, confirming 3D color vision.


sampling pattern is random, so learning this function is entangled with correctly resolving C. We
enable and force the cortical model to learn the color interpolation function by representing it as a
convolutional neural network with neural bucket parameters D (Appendix B.2.2).
An important detail is the handling of eye motion in the simulation. In one experiment we show
that the model can learn a subfunction that estimates the eye motion translation between times t and
t + dt purely from the optic nerve signals at those times. The main computational challenge here is
the spatial warp in optic nerve signals. The uniform translation in stimulus space corresponds to a
non-uniform translation in the optic nerve signal space, which makes the prediction of the eye motion
dependent on the inference of cell positions P. We find that the cortical model iteratively updates the
neural bucket P from imperfect initial eye motion estimate, which helps to improve the prediction of
eye motion, and vice versa. This inference converges to the correct eye motion estimate, as the model
learns to minimize prediction error (Appendix B.3).
With this pipeline of subfunctions and associated neural buckets, the hypothesized learning is
equivalent to parallel numerical optimization of all neural buckets in striving to minimize prediction
error. We simulate learning using stochastic gradient descent (Kingma & Ba, 2014).

5       N EURAL R EPRESENTATION OF C OLOR S PACE AND A NALYSIS OF
        E MERGENT C OLOR D IMENSIONALITY
We model color in the cortex as a vector in high-dimensional space, RN . This decision represents our
view that the brain has both the freedom and the challenge of somehow inferring the intrinsic color
dimensionality of the visual signals it is receiving along the optic nerve. Specifically, we define a
cortical decoding function Φ that takes the optic nerve signal Ot at time t and transforms it into its
internal visual percept Vt (Fig. 3), such that:
                                                                   Vt = Φ(Ot )                                                                           (3)
where each pixel in Vt is a N -dimensional vector. Inside RN , we assume that cortical color space
emerges as a K-dimensional manifold. To measure this intrinsic dimensionality K, we introduce two
methods: formal, numerical CMF -SIM ; and intuitive, visual NS .


                                                                          7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


CMF -SIM (Color Matching Function Test Simulator) is our tool to formally quantify the color
dimensionality that has emerged in the RN color space of the cortical model (Fig. 4.1). CMF -SIM
treats the retina model and cortical model as a black-box color observer. Specifically, we limit
ourselves to showing the model two patches of scene color at random, distinct locations on the
retina to reflect the effect of real-world viewing conditions, obtaining only a scalar score as feedback
to indicate the difference in color appearance betweem the two patches (with zero representing a
color match). This interface is intentionally limited and identical to color matching experiments
with human subjects. Then, resting on the formal, technical bedrock for colorimetry established by
Maxwell (1856) and Grassmann (1853), we exhaustively probe to determine the minimum number of
color primaries needed to match any test color through linear combination (Fig. 4.1 & Appendix C).
For example, Maxwell found that most humans require 3 primaries and are formally trichromatic, but
red-green colorblind persons require only 2 primaries and are dichromatic. We model diverse color
observers and measure the color dimensionality of their emergent vision.
NS (Neural-Scope) is our tool to display emergent colors in RN by projecting them into RGB color
space (Fig. 4.2). NS is a learnable N × 3 matrix mapping the emergent cortical color manifold in
RN linearly to conventional RGB color, enabling visual inspection of emergent color vision. To
compute NS , we first project our hyperspectral image dataset in two ways: (1) using the retina and
learned cortical model to map hyperspectral images into the RN cortical colorspace, and (2) using
conventional color processing to convert hyperspectral data to RGB via CIEXYZ (CIE, 1931). NS
is then determined as the least squares transform from the former data in RN to the latter in RGB.
Importantly, NS is independently optimized as a visualization parameter, separate from the main
cortical loop, ensuring that the cortex processes ONS without any exposure to input images in either
hyperspectral or RGB form. NS provides striking color visualizations and complementary intuition
visually, which are fully consistent with formal CMF -SIM results. For example, NS allows us to
compute and contrast the color palettes of the three different types of human dichromacy (Fig. 5).
In sum, we model cortical color as vectors in RN , allow color space to emerge naturally through
the hypothesized learning mechanism, and measure the emergent color space’s dimensionality
quantitatively with CMF -SIM and analyze it visually with NS .


6    S IMULATION R ESULTS - E MERGENCE OF C OLOR V ISION

Figure 3.2 begins with a model of typical human retina containing L, M and S cones, and illustrates
the time-varying behavior of the cortical model as it learns color vision. The visualized prediction
error decreases as the training progresses, and the internal percept converges to 3-D color vision
both formally (CMF -SIM ) and visually (NS imagery), shown in Figure 3.3. Notably, the visual
timeline highlights that the cortical model learns color vision one dimension at a time: achieving
monochromacy at 700 learning steps, dichromacy at 1,200 steps, and converging to trichromacy after
106 steps. At convergence, the cortical model has accurately inferred all retinal properties: spectral
identity of each cell, cell positions and lateral inhibition neighbor weights (Fig. 3.4). For a cortical
model trained with a trichromat retina, CMF -SIM results closely align with human psychophysical
data (Stiles & Burch, 1955) (Appendix G.1) and the model consistently demonstrates 3D color vision
across different noise initializations (Appendix G.2), highlighting our model’s validity and robustness.
The remainder of this section shows CMF -SIM and NS results at convergence for a diversity of
simulation scenarios. Fig. 4.2 dissects the CMF -SIM analysis for the case where the retina contains
3 cone types. The graphs show color matching function results using optimal sets of color primaries
from 0 to 4 primaries, along with the residual perceptual error as a function of wavelength. The area
under the curve (AUC) for each error graph suggests that the error falls to near-zero only with at least
3 primaries – this formally proves that the color dimensionality is 3.
Figure 5 presents results of the hypothesized cortical learning in a diversity of color observers
where the retina contains different numbers of cone cell types. This shows that the model learns
K-dimensional color vision when the retina contains K cone types. That is, when the retina contains
1, 2, 3 or 4 cell types, the cortical model converges on mono, di, tri, or tetrachromat color vision,
formally quantified with CMF -SIM (further analysis of tetrachromat models in Appendix F). And
qualitatively, we observe that the NS images are grayscale for K = 1, colorblind with only shades
of blue and yellow for K = 2, and full color with all trichromatic hues only with K = 3 (Fig. 5.1).
Use of NS is limited to color dimensionality up to 3, and is to not applicable to K = 4 case, but


                                                   8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


  1. Emerged Color Dimensionality Equals Number of Cone Types    2. Qualitative Colors of Dichromat Variants   3. Control
# of cone        1            2            3            4         2 - protan     2 - deutan      2 - tritan        3
cell types           M            MS        LMS         LMQS             MS             LS              LM          LMS



Learned
Percept                                              Neural
   ＼                                                 Scope
 Input                                                Not
 ONS                                                Applicable


 CMF-                1D           2D         3D            4D             2D             2D             2D            1D
 SIM
             0 1 2 3 4    0 1 2 3 4    0 1 2 3 4   0 1 2 3 4     0 1 2 3 4      0 1 2 3 4      0 1 2 3 4       0 1 2 3 4


Figure 5: Results of simulating emergence of color vision from various retinas, with analysis of
learned color dimensionality using qualitative visualization (NS ) and formal methods (CMF -SIM ).
1. Cortical models trained with dataset generated with retinas containing 1, 2, 3, 4 cone types result
in mono-, di-, tri, tetrachromatic color vision, respectively. 2. Qualitative color of dichromat variants
is consistent with known vision science on color vision deficiency. 3. Control experiment with a
trichromat retina, but with cortical learning deliberately removed: CMF -SIM measures color as 1-D,
highlighting that cortical learning is necessary for emergence of correct color dimensionality.



CMF -SIM formally confirms that 4-dimensional color emerges there. All variants of retinas with
two cone types (protanopia, deuteranopia and tritanopia), converge to 2D color vision. But more
striking, NS reveals hue shifts among these models that are consistent with color vision deficiencies
studies (Brettel et al., 1997) (yellow-blue hues for deuteranopia / protanopia (Judd, 1948; Graham &
Hsia, 1959) and teal-pink hues for tritanopia (Alpern et al., 1983)) (Fig. 5.2).
In a control experiment, we verify that cortical learning is essential for color vision by comparing two
scenarios: (1) a baseline where optic nerve signals directly form percepts, with all cortical learning
deliberately removed (Fig. 5.3), and (2) the proposed model including cortical learning (Fig. 5.1,
LMS case). The control baseline experiment fails standard color-matching tests, reducing color
dimensionality to 1-D despite 3 cone types, demonstrating that cortical learning is indeed necessary
for emergence of correct color dimensionality (details in Appendix D). In contrast, the proposed
learning-based model results in correct 3-D color, as expected.
Figure 6 simulates boosting of color dimensionality in adulthood by gene therapy. Previous genetic
studies (Jacobs et al., 2007; Mancuso et al., 2009; Zhang et al., 2017) demonstrated that the intro-
duction of an additional class of photopigments in the mammalian cone mosaic, even in adulthood
via gene therapy, resulted in a new dimension of chromatic sensory experience. Here, we simulate
the experiment performed in squirrel monkeys (Mancuso et al., 2009), finding simulation results
consistent with the noted boost in color dimensionality (Fig. 6.1). First, we model the vision of an
adult male squirrel monkey with a protanopic retina (M and S cones only) and a cortical model that
has converged. Next, we simulate the effects of gene therapy, by modifying the retina model so that a
random subset of cones begin to express L opsin. Immediately after this retinal change, NS continues
to show blue-yellow dichromatic vision. However, if we allow the cortical model to continue the
hypothesized self-supervised learning, vision re-converges to boosted, 3-dimensional color (Fig. 6.1).
As an aside, the real gene therapy experiment (Mancuso et al., 2009) resulted in expression of both
M and L photopigment in affected cones, but the relative amounts are difficult to ascertain. We
additionally model scenarios in which equal M and L expression occurs or a variable amount of L
relative to M at each cell, and both scenarios converge to trichromacy as well (Appendix E). These
result indicate that the hypothesized self-supervised learning can explain experimental boosting of
color dimensionality in adulthood consistent with Mancuso et al. (2009), if the hypothesized learning
is assumed to occur continuously even in adulthood.
Figure 6.2 further demonstrates that simulations of boosting color dimensionality succeed even in
3D→4D cases by the addition of a fourth cone between S and M cones. This simulation results
present the first theoretical work that highlights the possibility of boosting humans with trichromatic


                                                           9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                      1. Gene Therapy in Squirrel Monkeys to                                 2. Gene Therapy in Humans to Boost
                               Cure Color Blindness                                          Trichromatic to Tetrachromatic Vision
                                 MS                          LMS                                    LMS                         LMQS


                Sensitivity


                                              Sensitivity


                                                                                    Sensitivity


                                                                                                                  Sensitivity
                                 nm                          nm                                      nm                          nm
                      Pre-Therapy                 Post-Therapy                           Pre-Therapy                 Post-Therapy
                         Colorblind          Initial               Converged                Trichromat           Initial              Converged

                                                                                                                         Neural Scope
                                                                                                                         Not Applicable


                                      2D                    2D           3D                               3D                    3D           4D

                              0 1 2 3 4    0 1 2 3 4               0 1 2 3 4                      0 1 2 3 4    0 1 2 3 4               0 1 2 3 4


Figure 6: Simulated experiments for boosting color dimensionality via gene therapy. 1. 2D dichromat
model is boosted to 3D trichromacy by mutating some M cones to express L opsins, with cortical
learning re-converging to 3D color. 2. 3D trichromat model is boosted to 4D tetrachromacy by adding
a fourth cone type between M and L cones, with cortical learning re-converging to 4D color.


vision to tetrachromat one by addition of a fourth photopigment. Further details, including the study
of human tetrachromat observer model, are described in Appendix F.


7    C ONCLUSION

In this work, we presented a framework for modeling the emergence of color vision in the human
brain. We introduced a simulation engine for optic nerve signals, simulated cortical learning purely
from such input signals, and measured the emergent color dimensionality qualitatively with NS and
quantitatively with CMF -SIM .
We believe that the critical contribution of this work actually lies in the computational formulation
of the problem in human perception itself – given access to only a stream of optic nerve signals,
we probe how to meaningfully model the emergence of color vision in the cortex via simulated
learning. Once the problem is formulated this way, it may not be entirely surprising to machine
learning researchers that color with the correct dimensionality can be inferred; however, from the
vision science perspective, this new approach is in many ways a foreign way to formulate the problem,
because it is more common to think color comes from hardwired neural circuits (Appendix D).
The connection to camera imaging systems is noteworthy as well. The proposed computational
framework is akin to a camera processing pipeline attached to an unknown, random color filter array
pattern, where even the number of different color filters is a mystery. This is related to a branch of
computational imaging called “auto calibration” that jointly solves for the scene and unknown system
calibration parameters from measurements. One could imagine a new class of engineered sensing
systems that have general processing units along the lines of the learning mechanism in this paper,
that enables perceptual inference from a broader range of sensory streams that do not require the
precision manufacturing common to many current sensors and cameras.
The learning notion of perception emerging from a process of disentangling it from encoded sensory
streams is an interesting intellectual view of how perception may generally emerge in the brain.
Any sensory stream going to the brain encodes information from the world entangled with sensing
organ characteristics. The self-supervised learning mechanism proposed in this paper might be
abstracted into a general neural process of learning to predict fluctuations in sensory stream due to ego
perturbation, with perception for that sense emerging neurally as the optimal internal representation
and associated decoder/encoder pair that enables accurate prediction.
To conclude, we invite the research community to build on the computational framework proposed in
this paper, by improving the visual system components (e.g. even more accurately modeling details in
the eye model, or replacing back-propagation in the cortical model with more bio-plausible learning
rules (Lillicrap et al., 2020; Hinton, 2022)), or applying the framework to other sensory modalities.


                                                                               10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
This project was supported by Air Force Office of Scientific Research’s MURI grant (FA9550-20-1-
0195 and FA9550-21-1-0230). We are grateful to everyone involved in the MURI project for their
support and feedback. Special thanks to Bruno Olshausen, Jessica Lee, and Alexander Belsten for
their valuable discussions and insights. We also appreciate Fred Rieke, Lawrence Sincich, and David
Brainard for their thoughtful input and engaging conversations.

R EFERENCES
Colorimetry. Number 15.2 in CIE Publication. Commission Internationale de l’Éclairage, Vienna,
  Austria, 2nd edition, 1976.
Larry F Abbott. Lapicque’s introduction of the integrate-and-fire model neuron (1907). Brain
  research bulletin, 50(5-6):303–304, 1999.
Russell J Adams, Daphne Maurer, and Margaret Davis. Newborns’ discrimination of chromatic from
  achromatic stimuli. Journal of Experimental Child Psychology, 41(2):267–281, 1986.
Eirikur Agustsson and Radu Timofte. Ntire 2017 challenge on single image super-resolution:
  Dataset and study. In The IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR)
  Workshops, July 2017.
Albert J Ahumada. Learning receptor positions. Computational models of visual processing, pp.
  23–34, 1991.
M Alpern, K Kitahara, and D H Krantz. Perception of colour in unilateral tritanopia. The Journal of
 Physiology, 335(1):683–697, 1983.
Alexander G Anderson, Kavitha Ratnam, Austin Roorda, and Bruno A Olshausen. High-acuity vision
  from retinal image motion. Journal of vision, 20(7):34–34, 2020.
Juan M Angueyra, Jacob Baudin, Gregory W Schwartz, and Fred Rieke. Predicting and manipulating
  cone responses to naturalistic inputs. Journal of Neuroscience, 42(7):1254–1274, 2022.
Boaz Arad, Radu Timofte, Rony Yahel, Nimrod Morag, Amir Bernat, Yuanhao Cai, Jing Lin, Zudi
  Lin, Haoqian Wang, Yulun Zhang, et al. Ntire 2022 spectral recovery challenge and data set.
  In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp.
  863–881, 2022.
Claudia Diaz Araya and Jan M Provis. Evidence of photoreceptor migration during early foveal
  development: a quantitative analysis of human fetal retinae. Visual neuroscience, 8(6):505–514,
  1992.
Michael A Arbib. The handbook of brain theory and neural networks. MIT press, 2003.
Manel Baradad, Jonas Wulff, Tongzhou Wang, Phillip Isola, and Antonio Torralba. Learning to see
 by looking at noise. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2021.
Horace B Barlow et al. Possible principles underlying the transformation of sensory messages.
 Sensory communication, 1(01):217–233, 1961.
Bryce Bayer. Color imaging array. United States Patent, no. 3971065, 1976.
Noah C Benson, Jeremy R Manning, and David H Brainard. Unsupervised learning of cone spectral
  classes from natural images. PLoS Computational Biology, 10(6):e1003652, 2014.
Michael J Berry, David K Warland, and Markus Meister. The structure and precision of retinal spike
 trains. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 94(10):5411–5416, 1997.
Vicente Botella-Soler, Stéphane Deny, Georg Martius, Olivier Marre, and Gašper Tkačik. Nonlinear
  decoding of a complex movie from the mammalian retina. PLoS computational biology, 14(5):
  e1006057, 2018.


                                                11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Nora Brackbill, Colleen Rhoades, Alexandra Kling, Nishal P Shah, Alexander Sher, Alan M Litke,
  and EJ Chichilnisky. Reconstruction of natural images from responses of primate retinal ganglion
  cells. Elife, 9:e58516, 2020.

David Brainard, Haomiao Jiang, Nicolas P Cottaris, Fred Rieke, EJ Chichilnisky, Joyce E Farrell,
  and Brian A Wandell. Isetbio: Computational tools for modeling early human vision. In Imaging
  Systems and Applications, pp. IT4A–4. Optica Publishing Group, 2015.

David H Brainard. Color and the cone mosaic. Annual Review of Vision Science, 1:519–546, 2015.

David H Brainard, David R Williams, and Heidi Hofer. Trichromatic reconstruction from the
  interleaved cone mosaic: Bayesian model and the color appearance of small spots. Journal of
  vision, 8(5):15–15, 2008.

Hans Brettel, Françoise Viénot, and John D Mollon. Computerized simulation of color appearance
  for dichromats. Josa a, 14(10):2647–2655, 1997.

Gijs Joost Brouwer and David J Heeger. Decoding and reconstructing color from responses in human
  visual cortex. Journal of Neuroscience, 29(44):13992–14003, 2009.

Angela M Brown. Development of visual sensitivity to light and color vision in human infants: A
  critical review. Vision Research, 30(8):1159–1188, 1990.

Yoram Burak, Uri Rokni, Markus Meister, and Haim Sompolinsky. Bayesian model of dynamic
  image stabilization in the visual system. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 107
  (45):19525–19530, 2010.

Joseph Carroll, Carrie McMahon, Maureen Neitz, and Jay Neitz. Flicker-photometric electroretino-
  gram estimates of l: M cone photoreceptor ratio in men with photopigment spectra derived from
  genetics. JOSA A, 17(3):499–509, 2000.

Joseph Carroll, Jay Neitz, and Maureen Neitz. Estimates of l: M cone ratio from erg flicker photometry
  and genetics. Journal of vision, 2(8):1–1, 2002.

Ting Chen, Simon Kornblith, Mohammad Norouzi, and Geoffrey Hinton. A simple framework for
  contrastive learning of visual representations. In International conference on machine learning, pp.
  1597–1607. PMLR, 2020.

CIE. Commission internationale de l’eclairage proceedings, 1931.

Bevil R Conway. The organization and operation of inferior temporal cortex. Annual review of vision
  science, 4:381–402, 2018.

Bevil R Conway, Saima Malik-Moraleda, and Edward Gibson. Color appearance and the end of
  hering’s opponent-colors theory. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 2023.

Frans W Cornelissen and Eli Brenner. Is adding a new class of cones to the retina sufficient to cure
  color-blindness? Journal of vision, 15(13):22–22, 2015.

Nicolas P Cottaris, Haomiao Jiang, Xiaomao Ding, Brian A Wandell, and David H Brainard. A
  computational-observer model of spatial contrast sensitivity: Effects of wave-front-based optics,
  cone-mosaic structure, and inference engine. Journal of vision, 19(4):8–8, 2019.

Lisa J Croner and Ehud Kaplan. Receptive fields of p and m ganglion cells across the primate retina.
  Vision research, 35(1):7–24, 1995.

Joanna D Crook, Orin S Packer, John B Troy, and Dennis M Dacey. Synaptic mechanisms of color
  and luminance coding: rediscovering the xy-cell dichotomy in primate retinal ganglion cells. In
  The new visual neurosciences, pp. 123–144. The MIT Press, Cambridge, MA, 2013.

Christine A Curcio, Kenneth R Sloan, Robert E Kalina, and Anita E Hendrickson. Human photore-
  ceptor topography. Journal of comparative neurology, 292(4):497–523, 1990.


                                                 12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Dennis Dacey, Orin S Packer, Lisa Diller, David Brainard, Beth Peterson, and Barry Lee. Center
  surround receptive field structure of cone bipolar cells in primate retina. Vision research, 40(14):
 1801–1811, 2000.
Dennis M Dacey. The mosaic of midget ganglion cells in the human retina. Journal of Neuroscience,
 13(12):5334–5355, 1993.
Dennis M Dacey and Barry B Lee. The’blue-on’opponent pathway in primate retina originates from
  a distinct bistratified ganglion cell type. Nature, 367(6465):731–735, 1994.
Dennis M Dacey, Barry B Lee, Donna K Stafford, Joel Pokorny, and Vivianne C Smith. Horizontal
  cells of the primate retina: cone specificity without spectral opponency. Science, 271(5249):
  656–659, 1996.
Virginia De Sa. Learning classification with unlabeled data. Advances in neural information
  processing systems, 6, 1993.
Russell L De Valois and Karen K De Valois. A multi-stage color model. Vision research, 33(8):
 1053–1065, 1993.
Andrew M Derrington, John Krauskopf, and Peter Lennie. Chromatic mechanisms in lateral geniculate
  nucleus of macaque. The Journal of physiology, 357(1):241–265, 1984.
René Descartes. Descartes: Selected philosophical writings. Cambridge University Press, 1988.
Laurent Dinh, Jascha Sohl-Dickstein, and Samy Bengio. Density estimation using real nvp. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:1605.08803, 2016.
Robert F Dougherty, Volker M Koch, Alyssa A Brewer, Bernd Fischer, Jan Modersitzki, and Brian A
  Wandell. Visual field representations and locations of visual areas v1/2/3 in human visual cortex.
  Journal of vision, 3(10):1–1, 2003.
John E Dowling and Brian Blundell Boycott. Organization of the primate retina: electron microscopy.
  Proceedings of the Royal Society of London. Series B. Biological Sciences, 166(1002):80–111,
  1966.
Ch Enroth-Cugell, JG Robson, DE Schweitzer-Tong, and AB Watson. Spatio-temporal interactions
  in cat retinal ganglion cells showing linear spatial summation. The Journal of Physiology, 341(1):
  279–307, 1983.
Mark D Fairchild. Color appearance models. John Wiley & Sons, 2013.
Greg D Field, Jeffrey L Gauthier, Alexander Sher, Martin Greschner, Timothy A Machado, Lauren H
  Jepson, Jonathon Shlens, Deborah E Gunning, Keith Mathieson, Wladyslaw Dabrowski, et al.
  Functional connectivity in the retina at the resolution of photoreceptors. Nature, 467(7316):
  673–677, 2010.
Peter Földiák. Learning invariance from transformation sequences. Neural computation, 3(2):
  194–200, 1991.
Eric R Fossum. Cmos image sensors: Electronic camera-on-a-chip. IEEE transactions on electron
  devices, 44(10):1689–1698, 1997.
David H. Foster. Color constancy. Vision Research, 51(7):674–700, 2011. ISSN 0042-6989. doi:
  https://doi.org/10.1016/j.visres.2010.09.006. Vision Research 50th Anniversary Issue: Part 1.
Julian Freedland and Fred Rieke. Systematic reduction of the dimensionality of natural scenes allows
  accurate predictions of retinal ganglion cell spike outputs. Proceedings of the National Academy
  of Sciences, 119(46):e2121744119, 2022.
Tyler Godat, Nicolas P Cottaris, Sara Patterson, Kendall Kohout, Keith Parkins, Qiang Yang, Jen-
  nifer M Strazzeri, Juliette E McGregor, David H Brainard, William H Merigan, et al. In vivo
  chromatic and spatial tuning of foveolar retinal ganglion cells in macaca fascicularis. Plos one, 17
  (11):e0278261, 2022.


                                                 13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


CH Graham and Yun Hsia. Studies of color blindness: a unilaterally dichromatic subject, 1959.

Hermann Grassmann. Zur theorie der farbenmischung. Annalen der Physik, 165(5):69–84, 1853.

John Guild. The colorimetric properties of the spectrum. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal
  Society of London. Series A, Containing Papers of a Mathematical or Physical Character, 230
  (681-693):149–187, 1931.

S Lee Guth. Model for color vision and light adaptation. JOSA A, 8(6):976–993, 1991.

Theodros M Haile, Kaitlin S Bohon, Maria C Romero, and Bevil R Conway. Visual stimulus-driven
  functional organization of macaque prefrontal cortex. Neuroimage, 188:427–444, 2019.

H KEFFER Hartline and Floyd Ratliff. Spatial summation of inhibitory influences in the eye of
  limulus, and the mutual interaction of receptor units. The Journal of general physiology, 41(5):
  1049–1066, 1958.

Kaiming He, Xinlei Chen, Saining Xie, Yanghao Li, Piotr Dollár, and Ross Girshick. Masked
  autoencoders are scalable vision learners. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer
  vision and pattern recognition, pp. 16000–16009, 2022.

Ewald Hering. Zur Lehre vom Lichtsinne: sechs Mittheilungen an die Kaiserl. Akademie der
 Wissenschaften in Wien. C. Gerold’s Sohn, 1878.

Geoffrey Hinton. The forward-forward algorithm: Some preliminary investigations. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2212.13345, 2022.

Geoffrey E Hinton. Connectionist learning procedures. In Machine learning, pp. 555–610. Elsevier,
 1990.

Hajime Hirasawa and Akimichi Kaneko. pH Changes in the Invaginating Synaptic Cleft Mediate
  Feedback from Horizontal Cells to Cone Photoreceptors by Modulating Ca2+ Channels . Journal
  of General Physiology, 122(6):657–671, 11 2003. ISSN 0022-1295.

Heidi Hofer, Joseph Carroll, Jay Neitz, Maureen Neitz, and David R Williams. Organization of the
  human trichromatic cone mosaic. Journal of Neuroscience, 25(42):9669–9679, 2005.

Gordon Holmes. Disturbances of vision by cerebral lesions. The British journal of ophthalmology, 2
  (7):353, 1918.

David H Hubel and Torsten N Wiesel. Receptive fields, binocular interaction and functional architec-
  ture in the cat’s visual cortex. The Journal of physiology, 160(1):106, 1962.

Gerald H Jacobs. Photopigments and the dimensionality of animal color vision. Neuroscience &
  Biobehavioral Reviews, 86:108–130, 2018.

Gerald H Jacobs, Gary A Williams, Hugh Cahill, and Jeremy Nathans. Emergence of novel color
  vision in mice engineered to express a human cone photopigment. science, 315(5819):1723–1725,
  2007.

Sandra Jiménez and Jesús Malo. The role of spatial information in disentangling the irradiance–
  reflectance–transmittance ambiguity. IEEE transactions on geoscience and remote sensing, 52(8):
  4881–4894, 2013.

Gabriele Jordan, Samir S Deeb, Jenny M Bosten, and John D Mollon. The dimensionality of color
  vision in carriers of anomalous trichromacy. Journal of vision, 10(8):12–12, 2010.

Deane B Judd. Color perceptions of deuteranopic and protanopic observers. Journal of Research of
  the National Bureau of Standards, 41:247–271, 1948.

Deane B Judd. Response functions for types of vision according to the Müller theory. US Government
  Printing Office, 1949.


                                                14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Young Joon Kim, Nora Brackbill, Eleanor Batty, JinHyung Lee, Catalin Mitelut, William Tong,
  EJ Chichilnisky, and Liam Paninski. Nonlinear decoding of natural images from large-scale
  primate retinal ganglion recordings. Neural Computation, 33(7):1719–1750, 2021.
Ron Kimmel. Demosaicing: Image reconstruction from color ccd samples. IEEE Transactions on
  image processing, 8(9):1221–1228, 1999.
Diederik P Kingma and Jimmy Ba. Adam: A method for stochastic optimization. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1412.6980, 2014.
John Krauskopf and Gegenfurtner Karl. Color discrimination and adaptation. Vision research, 32
  (11):2165–2175, 1992.
Stephen W Kuffler. Discharge patterns and functional organization of mammalian retina. Journal of
  neurophysiology, 16(1):37–68, 1953.
Rosa Lafer-Sousa and Bevil R Conway. Parallel, multi-stage processing of colors, faces and shapes
  in macaque inferior temporal cortex. Nature neuroscience, 16(12):1870–1878, 2013.
Edwin H Land. The retinex theory of color vision. Scientific american, 237(6):108–129, 1977.
Michael F Land and Dan-Eric Nilsson. Animal eyes. OUP Oxford, 2012.
L Lapicque. Recherches quantitatives sur l’excitation electrique des nerfs. J. Physiol. Paris, 9:
  620–635, 1907.
Jessica Lee, Nicholas Jennings, Varun Srivastava, and Ren Ng. Theory of human tetrachromatic color
  experience and printing. ACM Trans. Graph, 43(4), July 2024.
Peter Lennie, P William Haake, and David R Williams. The design of chromatically opponent
  receptive fields. Computational models of visual processing, pp. 71–82, 1991.
Ming Li, Fang Liu, Mikko Juusola, and Shiming Tang. Perceptual color map in macaque visual area
 v4. Journal of Neuroscience, 34(1):202–217, 2014.
Trisha Lian, Kevin J MacKenzie, David H Brainard, Nicolas P Cottaris, and Brian A Wandell. Ray
  tracing 3d spectral scenes through human optics models. Journal of vision, 19(12):23–23, 2019.
Timothy P Lillicrap, Adam Santoro, Luke Marris, Colin J Akerman, and Geoffrey Hinton. Backprop-
  agation and the brain. Nature Reviews Neuroscience, 21(6):335–346, 2020.
AM Litke, N Bezayiff, EJ Chichilnisky, W Cunningham, W Dabrowski, AA Grillo, M Grivich,
 P Grybos, P Hottowy, S Kachiguine, et al. What does the eye tell the brain?: Development of
 a system for the large-scale recording of retinal output activity. IEEE Transactions on Nuclear
 Science, 51(4):1434–1440, 2004.
Jian K Liu, Dimokratis Karamanlis, and Tim Gollisch. Simple model for encoding natural images
   by retinal ganglion cells with nonlinear spatial integration. PLoS computational biology, 18(3):
   e1009925, 2022.
Jianfei Liu, HaeWon Jung, Alfredo Dubra, and Johnny Tam. Cone photoreceptor cell segmentation
   and diameter measurement on adaptive optics images using circularly constrained active contour
   model. Investigative ophthalmology & visual science, 59(11):4639–4652, 2018.
Ye Liu, Ming Li, Xian Zhang, Yiliang Lu, Hongliang Gong, Jiapeng Yin, Zheyuan Chen, Liling
  Qian, Yupeng Yang, Ian Max Andolina, et al. Hierarchical representation for chromatic processing
  across macaque v1, v2, and v4. Neuron, 108(3):538–550, 2020.
Margaret S Livingstone and David H Hubel. Psychophysical evidence for separate channels for the
 perception of form, color, movement, and depth. Journal of Neuroscience, 7(11):3416–3468, 1987.
William Lotter, Gabriel Kreiman, and David Cox. Deep predictive coding networks for video
 prediction and unsupervised learning. In International Conference on Learning Representations,
 2016.


                                               15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


David L MacAdam. Visual sensitivities to color differences in daylight. Josa, 32(5):247–274, 1942.
Donald IA MacLeod and Robert M Boynton. Chromaticity diagram showing cone excitation by
  stimuli of equal luminance. JOSA, 69(8):1183–1186, 1979.
Walter Makous. Comment on" emergence of novel color vision in mice engineered to express a
 human cone photopigment". Science, 318(5848):196–196, 2007.
Laurence T Maloney and Albert J Ahumada. Learning by assertion: Two methods for calibrating a
  linear visual system. Neural Computation, 1(3):392–401, 1989.
Katherine Mancuso, William W Hauswirth, Qiuhong Li, Thomas B Connor, James A Kuchenbecker,
  Matthew C Mauck, Jay Neitz, and Maureen Neitz. Gene therapy for red–green colour blindness in
  adult primates. Nature, 461(7265):784–787, 2009.
Olivier Marre, Gasper Tkacik, Dario Amodei, Elad Schneidman, William Bialek, and Michael Berry.
  Multi-electrode array recording from salamander retinal ganglion cells. 2017.
Susana Martinez-Conde, Jorge Otero-Millan, and Stephen L Macknik. The impact of microsaccades
  on vision: towards a unified theory of saccadic function. Nature Reviews Neuroscience, 14(2):
  83–96, 2013.
James Clerk Maxwell. Theory of the perception of colors. Trans. R. Scottish Soc. Arts, 4:394–400,
  1856.
J. W. McClurkin and L. M. Optican. Primate striate and prestriate cortical neurons during discrim-
   ination. i. simultaneous temporal encoding of information about color and pattern. Journal of
   Neurophysiology, 75(1):481–495, 1996.
J. W. McClurkin, J. A. Zarbock, and L. M Optican. Primate striate and prestriate cortical neurons dur-
   ing discrimination. ii. separable temporal codes for color and pattern. Journal of Neurophysiology,
   75(1):496–507, 1996.
K McLaren. Xiii—the development of the cie 1976 (l* a* b*) uniform colour space and colour-
  difference formula. Journal of the Society of Dyers and Colourists, 92(9):338–341, 1976.
Matthew J McMahon, Martin JM Lankheet, Peter Lennie, and David R Williams. Fine structure of
 parvocellular receptive fields in the primate fovea revealed by laser interferometry. Journal of
 Neuroscience, 20(5):2043–2053, 2000.
JD Mollon and JK Bowmaker. The spatial arrangement of cones in the primate fovea. Nature, 360
  (6405):677–679, 1992.
Thomas Naselaris, Ryan J Prenger, Kendrick N Kay, Michael Oliver, and Jack L Gallant. Bayesian
  reconstruction of natural images from human brain activity. Neuron, 63(6):902–915, 2009.
J Neitz and M Neitz. Evolution of the circuitry for conscious color vision in primates. Eye, 31(2):
  286–300, 2017.
Jay Neitz and Maureen Neitz. The genetics of normal and defective color vision. Vision Research, 51
  (7):633–651, 2011.
Isaac Newton. Opticks: or, A Treatise of the Reflexions, Refractions, Inflexions and Colours of Light.
   Courier Corporation, 1704.
Shinji Nishimoto, An T Vu, Thomas Naselaris, Yuval Benjamini, Bin Yu, and Jack L Gallant.
  Reconstructing visual experiences from brain activity evoked by natural movies. Current biology,
  21(19):1641–1646, 2011.
J Kevin O’Regan and Alva Noë. A sensorimotor account of vision and visual consciousness.
  Behavioral and brain sciences, 24(5):939–973, 2001.
Gustav A Osterberg. Topography of the layer of rods and cones in the human retina. Acta ophthalmo-
  logica, 1935.


                                                 16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Orin S Packer and Dennis M Dacey. Receptive field structure of h1 horizontal cells in macaque
  monkey retina. Journal of Vision, 2(4):1–1, 2002.
Stephanie E Palmer, Olivier Marre, Michael J Berry, and William Bialek. Predictive information in a
  sensory population. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 112(22):6908–6913, 2015.
Nikhil Parthasarathy, Eleanor Batty, William Falcon, Thomas Rutten, Mohit Rajpal, EJ Chichilnisky,
  and Liam Paninski. Neural networks for efficient bayesian decoding of natural images from retinal
  neurons. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 30, 2017.
Ken Perlin. An image synthesizer. ACM Siggraph Computer Graphics, 19(3):287–296, 1985.
Baingio Pinna. Un effetto di colorazione. In Il laboratorio e la città. XXI Congresso degli Psicologi
  Italiani, volume 158. Edizioni SIPs, Societá Italiana di Psiocologia, Milano, 1987.
Baingio Pinna, Gavin Brelstaff, and Lothar Spillmann. Surface color from boundaries: a new
 ‘watercolor’illusion. Vision research, 41(20):2669–2676, 2001.
Jonathan R Polimeni, Bruce Fischl, Douglas N Greve, and Lawrence L Wald. Laminar analysis of 7
  t bold using an imposed spatial activation pattern in human v1. Neuroimage, 52(4):1334–1346,
  2010.
Rajeev Ramanath, Wesley E Snyder, Griff L Bilbro, and William A Sander III. Demosaicking
  methods for bayer color arrays. Journal of Electronic imaging, 11(3):306–315, 2002.
Rajesh PN Rao and Dana H Ballard. Predictive coding in the visual cortex: a functional interpretation
  of some extra-classical receptive-field effects. Nature neuroscience, 2(1):79–87, 1999.
Katja Reinhard and Thomas A Münch. Visual properties of human retinal ganglion cells. PLoS One,
 16(2):e0246952, 2021.
Ilias Rentzeperis, Andrey R Nikolaev, Daniel C Kiper, and Cees van Leeuwen. Distributed processing
   of color and form in the visual cortex. Frontiers in psychology, 5:932, 2014.
Dragos L Rezeanu, James Kuchenbecker, Rachel Barborek, Marcus Mazzaferri, Maureen Neitz, and
  Jay Neitz. Explaining the absence of functional tetrachromacy in females with four cone types.
  Investigative Ophthalmology & Visual Science, 62(8):527–527, 2021.
Danilo Rezende and Shakir Mohamed. Variational inference with normalizing flows. In International
  conference on machine learning, pp. 1530–1538. PMLR, 2015.
Austin H Riesen, Robert L Ramsey, and Paul D Wilson. Development of visual acuity in rhesus
  monkeys deprived of patterned light during early infancy. Psychonomic Science, 1(1-12):33–34,
 1964.
Mattia Rigotti, Omri Barak, Melissa R Warden, Xiao-Jing Wang, Nathaniel D Daw, Earl K Miller,
 and Stefano Fusi. The importance of mixed selectivity in complex cognitive tasks. Nature, 497
 (7451):585–590, 2013.
Robert W Rodieck. Quantitative analysis of cat retinal ganglion cell response to visual stimuli. Vision
  research, 5(12):583–601, 1965.
Robert W Rodieck. The first steps in seeing. 1998.
Martin Rolfs. Microsaccades: small steps on a long way. Vision research, 49(20):2415–2441, 2009.
Olaf Ronneberger, Philipp Fischer, and Thomas Brox. U-net: Convolutional networks for biomedical
  image segmentation. In Medical Image Computing and Computer-Assisted Intervention–MICCAI
  2015: 18th International Conference, Munich, Germany, October 5-9, 2015, Proceedings, Part III
  18, pp. 234–241. Springer, 2015.
Austin Roorda, Fernando Romero-Borja, William J Donnelly III, Hope Queener, Thomas J Hebert,
  and Melanie CW Campbell. Adaptive optics scanning laser ophthalmoscopy. Optics express, 10
 (9):405–412, 2002.


                                                  17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Michele Rucci and Jonathan D Victor. The unsteady eye: an information-processing stage, not a bug.
 Trends in neurosciences, 38(4):195–206, 2015.

Michele Rucci, Ehud Ahissar, and David Burr. Temporal coding of visual space. Trends in cognitive
 sciences, 22(10):883–895, 2018.

Ramkumar Sabesan, Heidi Hofer, and Austin Roorda. Characterizing the human cone photoreceptor
  mosaic via dynamic photopigment densitometry. PloS one, 10(12):e0144891, 2015.

Ramkumar Sabesan, Brian P Schmidt, William S Tuten, and Austin Roorda. The elementary
  representation of spatial and color vision in the human retina. Science advances, 2(9):e1600797,
  2016.

Jared M Salisbury and Stephanie E Palmer. Optimal prediction in the retina and natural motion
  statistics. Journal of Statistical Physics, 162(5):1309–1323, 2016.

Elad Schneidman, Michael J Berry, Ronen Segev, and William Bialek. Weak pairwise correlations
  imply strongly correlated network states in a neural population. Nature, 440(7087):1007–1012,
  2006.

Manuel Schottdorf and Barry B Lee. A quantitative description of macaque ganglion cell responses
 to natural scenes: the interplay of time and space. The Journal of physiology, 599(12):3169–3193,
 2021.

Jérémie Sibille, Carolin Gehr, Jonathan I Benichov, Hymavathy Balasubramanian, Kai Lun Teh,
  Tatiana Lupashina, Daniela Vallentin, and Jens Kremkow. High-density electrode recordings reveal
  strong and specific connections between retinal ganglion cells and midbrain neurons. Nature
  communications, 13(1):5218, 2022.

Yosef Singer, Yayoi Teramoto, Ben DB Willmore, Jan WH Schnupp, Andrew J King, and Nicol S
  Harper. Sensory cortex is optimized for prediction of future input. elife, 7:e31557, 2018.

Yosef Singer, Luke Taylor, Ben DB Willmore, Andrew J King, and Nicol S Harper. Hierarchical
  temporal prediction captures motion processing along the visual pathway. eLife, 12:e52599, 2023a.

Yosef Singer, Luke Taylor, Ben DB Willmore, Andrew J King, and Nicol S Harper. Hierarchical
  temporal prediction captures motion processing along the visual pathway. Elife, 12:e52599, 2023b.

Barun Singh, William T Freeman, and D Brainard. Exploiting spatial and spectral image regularities
  for color constancy. In Workshop on Statistical and Computational Theories of Vision. Nice, France.
  Citeseer, 2003.

Florentina Soto, Jen-Chun Hsiang, Rithwick Rajagopal, Kisha Piggott, George J Harocopos, Steven M
  Couch, Philip Custer, Josh L Morgan, and Daniel Kerschensteiner. Efficient coding by midget and
  parasol ganglion cells in the human retina. Neuron, 107(4):656–666, 2020.

Mandyam Veerambudi Srinivasan, Simon Barry Laughlin, and Andreas Dubs. Predictive coding:
 a fresh view of inhibition in the retina. Proceedings of the Royal Society of London. Series B.
 Biological Sciences, 216(1205):427–459, 1982.

WS Stiles and JM Burch. Interim report to the commission internationale de l’eclairage, zurich,
 1955, on the national physical laboratory’s investigation of colour-matching (1955). Optica Acta:
 International Journal of Optics, 2(4):168–181, 1955.

Vincent Stimper, David Liu, Andrew Campbell, Vincent Berenz, Lukas Ryll, Bernhard Schölkopf,
  and José Miguel Hernández-Lobato. normflows: A pytorch package for normalizing flows.
  Journal of Open Source Software, 8(86):5361, 2023. doi: 10.21105/joss.05361. URL https:
  //doi.org/10.21105/joss.05361.

Andrew Stockman and Lindsay T Sharpe. The spectral sensitivities of the middle-and long-
 wavelength-sensitive cones derived from measurements in observers of known genotype. Vision
  research, 40(13):1711–1737, 2000.


                                                18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Andrew Stockman, Lindsay T. Sharpe, and Clemens Fach. The spectral sensitivity of the human
  short-wavelength sensitive cones derived from thresholds and color matches. Vision Research, 39
 (17):2901–2927, 1999. ISSN 0042-6989.
Andrew Stockman, David H Brainard, et al. Color vision mechanisms. OSA handbook of optics, 3:
 11–1, 2010.
Roger BH Tootell, Martin S Silverman, Eugene Switkes, and Russell L De Valois. Deoxyglucose
  analysis of retinotopic organization in primate striate cortex. Science, 218(4575):902–904, 1982.
Antonio Torralba and Aude Oliva. Statistics of natural image categories. Network: computation in
  neural systems, 14(3):391, 2003.
Ashish Vaswani, Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Jakob Uszkoreit, Llion Jones, Aidan N Gomez, Łukasz
  Kaiser, and Illia Polosukhin. Attention is all you need. Advances in neural information processing
  systems, 30, 2017.
Jan Verweij, Eric P Hornstein, and Julie L Schnapf. Surround antagonism in macaque cone photore-
  ceptors. Journal of Neuroscience, 23(32):10249–10257, 2003.
Hermann Von Helmholtz. Handbuch der physiologischen Optik, volume 9. Voss, 1867.
J Von Kries. Theoretische studien über die umstimmung des sehorgans. Festschrift der Albrecht-
  Ludwigs-Universität, 32:145–158, 1902.
Thomas Wachtler, Eizaburo Doi, Te-Won Lee, and Terrence J Sejnowski. Cone selectivity derived
  from the responses of the retinal cone mosaic to natural scenes. Journal of vision, 7(8):6–6, 2007.
GEORGE WALD. The molecular basis of visual excitation. Nature, 219(5156):800–807, 1968.
Yiyi Wang, Nicolas Bensaid, Pavan Tiruveedhula, Jianqiang Ma, Sowmya Ravikumar, and Austin
  Roorda. Human foveal cone photoreceptor topography and its dependence on eye length. Elife, 8:
  e47148, 2019.
John S Werner, Brennan Marsh-Armstrong, and Kenneth Knoblauch. Adaptive changes in color
  vision from long-term filter usage in anomalous but not normal trichromacy. Current Biology, 30
  (15):3011–3015, 2020.
David R Williams, Donald IA MacLeod, and Mary M Hayhoe. Foveal tritanopia. Vision Research,
  21(9):1341–1356, 1981.
Lance Williams. Pyramidal parametrics. In Proceedings of the 10th annual conference on Computer
  graphics and interactive techniques, pp. 1–11, 1983.
Lauren E Wool, Joanna D Crook, John B Troy, Orin S Packer, Qasim Zaidi, and Dennis M Dacey.
  Nonselective wiring accounts for red-green opponency in midget ganglion cells of the primate
  retina. Journal of Neuroscience, 38(6):1520–1540, 2018.
William David Wright. A re-determination of the trichromatic coefficients of the spectral colours.
 Transactions of the Optical Society, 30(4):141, 1929.
Eric Wu, Nora Brackbill, Alexander Sher, Alan Litke, Eero Simoncelli, and EJ Chichilnisky. Maxi-
  mum a posteriori natural scene reconstruction from retinal ganglion cells with deep denoiser priors.
  Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 35:27212–27224, 2022.
Günther Wyszecki and Walter Stanley Stiles. Color science: concepts and methods, quantitative data
  and formulae. John wiley & sons, 1982.
Ed Yong. An immense world: How animal senses reveal the hidden realms around us. Knopf Canada,
  2022.
Laura K Young and Hannah E Smithson. Emulated retinal image capture (erica) to test, train and
  validate processing of retinal images. Scientific Reports, 11(1):11225, 2021.


                                                 19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Thomas Young. Ii. the bakerian lecture. on the mechanism of the eye. Philosophical Transactions of
  the Royal Society of London, (91):23–88, 1801.
Thomas Young. Ii. the bakerian lecture. on the theory of light and colours. Philosophical transactions
  of the Royal Society of London, (92):12–48, 1802.
Semir M Zeki. Functional specialisation in the visual cortex of the rhesus monkey. Nature, 274
  (5670):423–428, 1978.
Ling-Qi Zhang, Nicolas P Cottaris, and David H Brainard. An image reconstruction framework for
  characterizing initial visual encoding. Elife, 11:e71132, 2022.
Yuxin Zhang, Wen-Tao Deng, Wei Du, Ping Zhu, Jie Li, Fan Xu, Jingfen Sun, Cecilia D Gerstner,
  Wolfgang Baehr, Sanford L Boye, et al. Gene-based therapy in a mouse model of blue cone
  monochromacy. Scientific reports, 7(1):6690, 2017.
Zhetuo Zhao, Ehud Ahissar, Jonathan D Victor, and Michele Rucci. Inferring visual space from
  ultra-fine extra-retinal knowledge of gaze position. Nature communications, 14(1):269, 2023.


                                                 20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Supplementary Materials
In this supplementary section, we provide additional details on our computational framework for
modeling the emergence of human color vision. Section A covers the simulation of optic nerve signals
from hyperspectral scene images and our modeling of retina circuitry. Section B details the design
of our simulated cortical model. Section C provides a step-by-step description of how we simulate
formal color matching function tests of color dimensionality, CMF -SIM . In Section D, we probe
whether the emergence of color vision depends on cortical learning, by introducing comparative,
baseline cortical models. Section E simulates variant cell expression phenotypes after gene therapy in
squirrel monkeys (Mancuso et al., 2009), showing robustness of the simulation result that addition of
a new cell opsin gene enhances color dimensionality. Finally, Section F discusses our tetrachromacy
simulation, highlighting the differences between the human Q cone (between M and L cones) and the
pigeon Q cone (between S and M cones). A supplementary video is available on our project website:
https://matisse.eecs.berkeley.edu.

                        Table 1: Glossary of terms used in our framework
                                             Scalars
      t, x, y    Time, world view coordinates
       u, v      Optic nerve image coordinates
        N        N -dimensional vector represents cortical color
                                      Eye Simulation Engine
    St (x, y)    Scene image, spectrum at each pixel
        Υ        Retina encoding of scene into time-averaged optic nerve image: Υ(St ) = Ot
                                     Cortical Image Functions
   Ot (u, v)     Time-averaged optic nerve image
   At (u, v)     Cone activations image
   Ṽt (u, v)    Visual percept image
   Vt (x, y)     Unwarped visual percept image
 Ôt+dt (u, v)   Predicted optic nerve image, time t + dt
                              Neural Buckets (Learnable Parameters)
       C         Color type of each cone
       P         Position of each cone in visual field
       W         Lateral inhibition weights to neighboring cones
       D         Demosaicing operator parameters
       M         Motion estimation operator parameters
                                Learned Cortical Function Operators
      Φ, Ψ       Φ decodes Ot into Vt , and Ψ re-encodes Vt into Ot .
                 Φ = ΦP ◦ ΦC ◦ ΦW , and Ψ = ΨW ◦ ΨC ◦ ΨP .
  ΦW , Ψ W       Transforms Ot into At , and vice-versa.
  ΦC , Ψ C       Transforms At into Ṽt , and vice versa.
  ΦP , Ψ P       Transforms Ṽt into Vt , and vice versa.
 µM (O1 , O2 )   Estimates world translation (x, y) between two optic nerve images
   Ω(x,y)        Translates an image laterally by (x, y). ΩµM (Ot ,Ot+dt ) (Vt ) = Vt+dt


A     S IMULATION E NGINE OF B IOLOGICAL E YES
We simulate the optic nerve signals from hyperspectral scene images, simulate eye gaze movements,
and model the retina circuitry. We describe the details of these simulations in the following.

A.1     DATABASE OF H YPERSPECTRAL S CENE I MAGES

We model the scene viewed by the eye using a dataset comprising 900 hyperspectral images from
everyday scenes, captured with a hyperspectral camera (Arad et al., 2022). Each image in the dataset


                                                  21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


is of dimension 512 pixels × 482 pixels × 31 spectral channels, where each pixel is represented by
its spectral power distribution (“spectra ” below). To generate our training data set, we cropped
thousands of 482x482 patches from these hyperspectral images, ensuring sufficient resolution to
avoid aliasing effects, induced by varying cone cell densities (Section A.3.2).
While only hyperspectral images are used during learning simulation, RGB images can be presented
during test-time by simulating a projector with specific spectral power distributions (SPDs) for the
R, G, and B channels (Cottaris et al., 2019), effectively converting each RGB image into a spectral
representation before passing into the retina model. This test-time use of RGB images does not affect
learning and is purely for illustrative purposes in the figures (e.g., Figure 3).

A.2     E YE G AZE M OVEMENTS – F IXATIONAL D RIFT

We simulate small eye movement as fixational eye drift with a random walk (Young & Smithson,
2021). This produces a stream of the current scene image translating across the retina. Over a time
interval of duration dt, we sample the change in eye motion from a uniform probability distribution
(dX, dY ) ∼ U{(−15, 15) × (−15, 15)} where 15 corresponds to 15 pixels in the scene image S.
The Mona Lisa video in Supplementary Video 2:08 also incorporates manually-authored saccades
(e.g. from hand to mouth) for illustrative purposes, but the learning simulation uses only fixational
drift.

A.3     R ETINA C IRCUITRY M ODEL

Our model of light detection and signal encoding in the retina is the textbook model (Rodieck, 1998)
of the photopic, midget, “private-line” pathway (see Figure 2). Details of our implementation follow.

A.3.1    C ONE M OSAIC AND S PECTRAL S AMPLING
In our simulation, we model 256 × 256 cone cells, with the random distribution of L, M and S
cone cells on the retina with a relative probability of 0.63, 0.32 and 0.05 from Sabesan et al. (2015).
We model L, M and S spectral response using the template response function from Carroll et al.
(2000), with spectral peaks of 560, 530, 419 nm, respectively. We model photon-shot noise in
the photoreceptor activation values, simulating a signal-to-noise ratio of approximately 100. The
simulation omits foveal tritanopia (Williams et al., 1981).

A.3.2    F OVEATION AND C ONE P OSITIONS
We model cone cell spatial density on the retina in accordance with Curcio et al. (1990), while
enforcing retinotopy. Starting from a regular grid of cells, we computationally perturb positions
until the target spatial distribution is stochastically achieved, while constraining each cell to be
always confined by its neighbors. We model biological variation in cell locations, which represents a
challenge for cortical learning, by adding multi-resolution positional randomness (Perlin, 1985).

A.3.3    C ENTER -S URROUND L ATERAL I NHIBITION
We mathematically model textbook lateral inhibition in retinal signals as a Difference-of-Gaussians
(DoG) convolution kernel (Enroth-Cugell et al., 1983), with parameters fitted from electrophysiol-
ogy (Wool et al., 2018). Specifically our DoG kernel has standard deviations of 0.15 and 0.9 cone
diameters, respectively, for the positive center and negative surround Gaussians. Significantly, the
relative amplitudes are such that the kernel has a non-zero mean of 0.09 (Lennie et al., 1991; Wool
et al., 2018). We convolve the array of cone activation values by this DoG kernel to compute outputs
to bipolar cells.

A.3.4    O N /O FF PATHWAYS AND O PTIC N ERVE S PIKING
We model textbook on- and off- connections from cone activations to bipolar cells, forwarding to
on- and off- retinal ganglion cells (RGC)s. The on- activation is modeled by a rectified linear unit
activation function, ReLU(x) = max(0, x), where x is the laterally-inhibited cone output. The off-
activation is modeled as ReLU(−x). Optic nerve spikes are the outputs at RGC axons, with action


                                                  22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                    Details of Learnable Cortical Functions
 True ONS                            Lateral                                Cone                                  Cell Unwarped Visual Percept
  at time t                                        Cone Activations                        Visual Percept
                                   Inhibition                              Identity                             Position


    Ot                            ΦL(Ot)                 At              ΦC(At)                                ΦP(Ṽt)
                                                                                              Ṽt                                  Vt
                                                                                                                                     Translation
                                      W                               C               D                            P
Compute prediction error            Kernel in
                                 Fourier domain
                                                             H×W×N                Demosaicking
                                                                                     CNN
                                                                                                               Coordinate-
                                                                                                              based network
                                                                                                                                        Ω(Vt)
& update cortical functions                                learnable tensor
 Φ, Ψ and Ω, accordingly.


 Ot+Δt            Ô t+Δt         ΨL(At+Δt)            At+Δt             ΨC(Ṽt+Δt)         Ṽt+Δt             ΨP(V*
                                                                                                                   t+Δt
                                                                                                                        )        Vt+Δt
 True ONS      Predicted ONS                       Predicted Cone                          Predicted Visual                   Predicted Unwarped
  at t + Δt     at time t + Δt                    Activation at t + Δt                    Percept at t + Δt                       VP at t + Δt


Figure 7: Pipeline of decoding, translation and re-encoding cortical functions. The optic nerve signal
image Ot is decoded into visual percept image Vt . The percept is translated in accordance with eye
motion over time dt, then re-encoded back into a prediction of the optic nerve signal Ôt+dt at a short
time in the future.


potentials are generated with Leaky Integrate and Fire model (Lapicque, 1907; Abbott, 1999; Arbib,
2003).

B     C ORTICAL M ODEL

B.1     T IME -AVERAGED O PTIC N ERVE S IGNALS

We model the first step of cortical processing as re-combination of the on- and off- RGC action
potentials followed by time-averaging. This results in an image stream Ot with real-valued pixel
values that are proportional to the laterally-inhibited output from cone cells. Ot is the sole input to
the remainder of the cortical model.

B.2     P REDICTION P IPELINE AND L EARNING O BJECTIVE

Figure 7 shows an elaboration of the cortical prediction pipeline introduced in Figure 3.1 and
summarized in Section 4. This pipeline represents an existence-proof simulation that the hypothesized
self-supervised learning on Ot can successfully produce: (1) emergence of vision with the correct
color dimensionality, and (2) inference of invariant retinal properties, including learned neural buckets
for cone spectral identities C, cell positions P and lateral inhibition weights W. Our results show that
both can be simultaneously achieved by learning to minimize the error in predicting the fluctuations
in optic nerve signal values.
To re-summarize Section 4, the prediction is made by applying the learned functions for decoding
Φ, translation Ω and re-encoding Ψ to the optic nerve signal Ot , to obtain a predicted optic nerve
signal Ôt+dt = Ψ(Ω(Φ(Ot ))). The learning objective function is to minimize prediction error, the
difference between predicted and real optic nerve images at time t + dt: Eprediction = ∥Ot+dt −
Ôt+dt ∥22 = ∥Ot+dt −Ψ(Ω(Φ(Ot )))∥22 . The decoder Φ and re-encoder Ψ functions are each factorized
into a pipeline, such that: Φ = ΦP ◦ ΦC ◦ ΦW and Ψ = ΨW ◦ ΨC ◦ ΨP , where each sub-function
is an operator conditioned on its corresponding neural bucket, C, P and W. The following sections
describe the implementation of each learnable neural bucket and its associated cortical sub-function.

B.2.1         L EARNING L ATERAL I NHIBITION N EIGHBOR W EIGHTS W
In the factorized function pipeline, sub-decoder ΦW conceptually inverts lateral inhibition to transform
optic nerve image Ot into cone activation image At . Conversely, sub-encoder ΨW reproduces lateral


                                                                          23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


inhibition to transform At into Ot . These operators are modeled, respectively, as inverse and forward
convolution operators, implemented by pixel-wise division and multiplication in the Fourier domain.
The learnable parameters for this operator are neural bucket W, representing the Fourier transform
image pixels of the lateral inhibition DoG kernel’s Fourier transform. The resolution of W is set
equal to the image resolution of Ot .

B.2.2    L EARNING C OLOR T YPES C AND I NTERPOLATION D
In the factorized function pipeline, sub-decoder ΦC conceptually transforms cone activation image
At (scalar-valued pixels) into a full-color visual percept image Ṽt (N -dimensional vector pixels).
Conversely, ΨC re-encodes Ṽt into At . These functions depend on two neural buckets of learnable
parameters, C and D. C is an image of N -dimensional vectors, in which the cortical model learns
to represent the spectral type of the source cone associated with each pixel in At . D are the
parameter weights of a learnable function ϕD that spatially interpolates color across the image, which
we implement as a convolutional neural network based on the U-Net (Ronneberger et al., 2015)
architecture.
Mathematically, ΦC and ΨC are defined as ΦC (At ) = ϕD (At ⊗ C), where ⊗ denotes element-wise
multiplication; ΨC (Ṽt ) = Ṽt ⊗ C, where ⊙ denotes element-wise dot product. To maintain ΦC and
ΨC as pseudo-inverses, we constrain C ⊙ C to be an image with all pixels equal to 1.

B.2.3    L EARNING C ELL P OSITIONS P
As shown in Fig. 2.3.F, optic nerve images are spatially distorted due to foveation, whereas visual
perception is apparently undistorted. In the factorized function pipeline, sub-decoder ΦP conceptually
transforms Ṽt (u, v), which is foveated and spatially distorted, into the final visual percept image
Vt (x, y), which is Euclidean and undistorted. Conversely, ΨP re-warps Vt (x, y) into Ṽt (u, v).
We define a learnable spatial warping function ϕP (u, v) = (x, y), implemented using normalizing
flow (Rezende & Mohamed, 2015; Dinh et al., 2016) that is an invertible function. Neural bucket
P comprises the learnable parameters of this normalizing flow network. Then ΦP (Ṽt )(x, y) =
Ṽt (ϕ−1
      P (x, y)), and ΨP (Vt )(u, v) = Ṽt (ϕP (u, v)).


B.3     L EARNING E YE M OTION E STIMATION M

In the learning loop, cortical sub-function Ω translates the visual percept image according to the
spatial motion (dx, dy) that occurs during the brief period between t and t + dt. Where does (dx, dy)
come from? Here, we describe how the cortex can learn a helper cortical function µM (Ot , Ot+dt )
that estimates (dx, dy) directly from the optic nerve stream values at times t and t + dt, maintaining
the strict operation of the cortical learning model purely from optic nerve signals.
We model learning of µM (Ot , Ot+dt ) with neural bucket M by optimizing:
                  M = argmin∥B(Ot+dt ) − ΨP (ΩµM (Ot ,Ot+dt ) (ΦP (B(Ot ))))∥22 ,
                          M,P

where B is a convolution operator that low-pass filters the optic nerve images, effectively halving the
highest frequencies; ΦP aims to dewarp the optic nerve image into Euclidean coordinates, and ΨP is
the inverse operator that rewarps the image. Details are discussed also in Supplementary Video 16:25.

B.4     E FFICIENT L EARNING I MPLEMENTATION & A LTERNATIVE R EPRESENTATION OF
        I NTERNAL P ERCEPTS

We simulate the self-supervised learning by parallel numerical optimization of all neural buckets
by applying the stochastic gradient descent algorithm to minimize the prediction error metric. In
practice, this is implemented by repeating the following step thousands of times until convergence:
pick a batch of different scene images from the database; generate the optic nerve signals at time t
with the retina encoding model; send this into the cortical model and execute the decode / translate /
re-encode functions with current neural bucket parameters to estimate the signal at t + dt; compute
the actual optic nerve signal at t + dt with the retina encoding model; compute the prediction error


                                                  24
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


by taking the difference between prediction and actual signal; backpropagate the prediction error to
update neural bucket parameters.
For efficient processing of cortical functions, we avoid computing full-resolution undistorted visual
percept images Vt (x, y) during the learning simulation. Instead, we directly compute Ṽt+dt (u, v) by
optical flow of the pixels in Ṽt (u, v), where the optical flow map is defined by (ΨP ◦ ΩµM (Ot ,Ot+dt ) ◦
ΦP ). This is mathematically equivalent to the learning implementation described in Section B.2, and
the cortical model continues to learn cell positions P, and therefore decoder Φ can still be applied to
compute undistorted visual percepts when desired.


C    C OLOR M ATCHING F UNCTION T ESTS & CMF -SIM

In the classical color matching theory of Maxwell (1856) and Grassmann (1853), an observer
compares a test color spectrum, t, and a set of K primary color spectra, pi for i = 1, ..., K and tunes
real weights αi for each primary until a color match is achieved. If a particular weight has a negative
value, primary light of that magnitude is added to the test color t rather than to the other primary
                                                                                   PK
colors. Mathematically, a color match is achieved when the matching spectrum i=1 αi+ pi and test
              PK
spectrum t + i=1 (−αi )+ pi appear identical. Here, αi+ is defined as max(αi , 0).
We simulate such classical color matching by formulating the retina model plus learned cortical
model as a black-box color observer in the colorimetric sense. That is, we take the test and matching
spectra, simulate the stimulation on different parts of the retina for test and match color patches, apply
the retina encoding model Υ and the learned cortical decoder Φ to each separately, and iteratively
update the weights αi until there is no further improvement in the computed perceptual difference
              PK                        PK
E = ∥Φ(Υ( i=1 αi+ pi )) − Φ(Υ(t + i=1 (−αi )+ pi ))∥22 . Note that the optimal E will not be close
to zero if the primaries cannot match test color t.
The color dimensionality of an observer is formally equal to the minimum number of primary colors
required to match any test color. CMF -SIM simulates thousands of color matches to rigorously
compute this dimensionality for any given retina model plus cortical model. In CMF -SIM , we
simulate classical color matching function (CMF) tests of exhaustively attempting to match test
colors equal to each monochromatic wavelength (100 samples from 400 to 700 nm), with a linear
combination of K primary colors. For the primary colors, we use distinct, monochromatic spectra.
We start CMF tests with a single primary, and add primaries one-by-one until all test wavelengths in
the CMF can be matched successfully. The pseudocode for CMF -SIM is described in Algorithm 1.
For example, for our cortical model to be formally measured as trichromat, we must show that there
do not exist any 1 or 2 primaries that can pass the CMF tests, and show 3 primaries that succeed. A
brute-force approach would be to exhaustively test all possible sets of K primaries; for efficiency,
we instead perform stratified sampling to randomly generate a large number (e.g. 500) distinct sets
of primaries for each choice of K. We require that all of these possible primary sets fail, with the
aggregate perceptual error across all wavelengths being greater than a threshold ϵ, before incrementing
the CMF tests to N +1 primaries.


D    BASELINE R ESULTS – T ESTING IF C ORTICAL I NFERENCE IS R EQUIRED
     FOR C OLOR V ISION

A fundamental question about color perception is whether cortical inference is necessary, or if human
color perception arises directly from hardwired neural circuits. The main paper presents analysis an
existence proof that cortical inference can indeed result in color vision of the correct dimensionality.
Here, we add evidence that cortical inference of some kind is necessary, by modeling and testing
three baseline cortical models with limited or no cortical processing.
For our first baseline, we assume an extreme case where no cortical learning occurs, treating raw
optic nerve signals directly as internal percepts (i.e., the cortical decoder function Φ is an identity
function). We apply CMF -SIM directly to the optic nerve signals generated by a trichromat retina.
Figure 8.1 presents analysis that this model fails to generate vision that can be recognized as color
consistent. The analysis is to perform baseline color matching experiments where the test and match


                                                    25
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Algorithm 1: Pseudocode for CMF -SIM
Data: WAVELENGTHS, MAX_TRIALS, Retinal process Υ, Cortical decoder Φ

Function CMF-SIM():
   base_errors ← ComputeBaseErrors()
   color_dimensionality ← FindMinimumPrimaries(base_errors)
   return color_dimensionality

Function ComputeBaseErrors():
   Initialize an array errors
   foreach wavelength λ in WAVELENGTHS do
       (x, y)A = RandomLocation()
       (x, y)B = RandomLocation()
        colorPatchA ← MonochromaticColorPatch(λ, (x, y)A )
        colorPatchB ← MonochromaticColorPatch(λ, (x, y)B )
        perceptA ← Φ(Υ(colorPatchA))
        perceptB ← Φ(Υ(colorPatchB))
        errors[λ] ← PerceptualError(perceptA, (x, y)A , perceptB, (x, y)B )
   return errors

Function FindMinimumPrimaries(base_errors):
   num_primaries ← 0
   repeat
       num_primaries ← num_primaries + 1
       all_tests_passed ← true
       trial ← 0
       repeat
            trial ← trial + 1
            Randomly initialize primaries p = {p1 , ..., pnum_primaries }
            foreach wavelength λ in WAVELENGTHS do
                 Zero initialize coefficients α = {α1 , ..., αnum_primaries } for primary p
                 repeat
                     (x, y)A , (x, y)B = RandomLocations()
                      positive_alpha, negative_alpha ← αi+ for all i, (−αi )+ for all i
                      testColorPatch ← MonochromaticColorPatch(λ, (x, y)A +
                       WeightedColorPatch(negative_alpha, p, (x, y)A )
                      matchColorPatch ← WeightedColorPatch(positive_alpha, p, (x, y)B )
                      testPercept ← Φ(Υ(testColorPatch))
                      matchPercept ← Φ(Υ(matchColorPatch))
                      errors[λ] ← PerceptualError(testPercept, (x, y)A , matchPercept, (x, y)B )
                      coefficients α ← GradientDescent(p, α, target, match, errors)
                 until convergence
                 if error ≥ base_errors[λ] then
                      all_tests_passed ← false
                      break
        until trial = MAX_TRIALS
    until all_tests_passed
    return num_primaries



spectral functions are identical. This “base perceptual error” is larger than the energy of each color
percept itself, meaning that the emergent vision fails to recognize a patch as the same color across
different parts of the retina.
The second baseline model is a variant of the first, where we change the optic nerve stream to directly
transfer cone activation values, omitting the encoding complications of foveated warping and lateral


                                                  26
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                                          2. Cone          3. Ablating
                      1. ONS as Internal Percept                       Activations as     Demosaicing
                                                                      Internal Percept     Network

                                Base Error                                         1D               1D
                                                 150%   CMF-SIM
                                                 100%    output
                                                                       0 1 2 3 4          0 1 2 3 4
                Perceptual
                  Error                                                           150%             150%
                                                                                  100%             100%
                                                        Base Error
                                Frequency (nm)

                             Energy (0 Primary)
                                                          Energy
                                                        (0 Primary)

                Perceptual                                                        543nm            554nm
                  Error
                                                        1 Primary

                                Frequency (nm)                               nm               nm



Figure 8: Comparison CMF -SIM results of our baseline cortical models with limited or no inferential
processing. In all of these models, the input optic nerve stream comes from a retina with 3 cone
cells as in regular human trichromacy. 1. The first baseline model represents no cortical learning
involvement in human visual perception, by setting the internal percept directly equal to the input
optic nerve signal. The resulting base error, the perceptual error between the same color patch at two
different retinal locations, results in higher errors, compared to the energy of the internal percept.
This means that this cortical model fails to recognize the same color consistently across different
patches of the retina, so it is procedurally impossible to even try color matching function tests against
reference match colors. Formally then, this model fails resolve color vision. 2. In the second baseline
model, we treat cone cell activations as internal percepts, omitting lateral inhibition from the eye
simulation; CMF -SIM measures the resulting internal percept as 1D color vision, failing to resolve
trichromacy. 3. The third baseline model is an ablation model in which we omit the demosaicking
network D from our proposed model of Section B; CMF -SIM also measures the resulting internal
percept as 1D color. Red base errors are superimposed on energy / 1 primary error plots for visual
comparison, and 150% of these base errors are applied as threshold determination.


inhibition. This is intended as a far simpler encoding, to pressure test whether color vision can be
detected in the spectrally encoded cone values without further processing. However, CMF -SIM
formally measures that this model results in 1D color (Figure 8.2), instead of the expected 3D color
from such a retina. This result shows that cortical processing is required even on cone activations to
produce color vision of the correct color dimensionality.
The third baseline model adds another perspective by taking the full-featured model detailed in
Section B but omitting the demosaicking network ϕD (as defined in Section B.2.2). As shown in
Figure 8.3, CMF -SIM measures the resulting percepts of this model also as 1D, providing evidence
of the importance of demosaicking process in the emergence of color vision.


E    VARIATIONS IN C ELL E XPRESSION AFTER G ENE T HERAPY

As described in Section 6, we simulate experiments aimed at boosting color dimensionality Mancuso
et al. (2009). In our simulation, approximately 60% of M cones are affected by gene therapy, with
three possible scenarios for their modification. First, affected M cones are completely transformed
into pure L cones (Figure 9.1). Second, affected M cones equally express M and L opsins (Figure 9.2).
Third, affected M cones express M and L opsins in random ratios, that is αL + βM, where α and β
spatially vary across the retina (Figure 9.3). In all cases, we confirm that our cortical model acquires
3D color vision after adaptation (i.e. re-learning), formally measured by CMF -SIM . This makes
intuitive sense if we consider the emergent vision from linear systems theory. Each different opsin
can be interpreted as a basis vector for the resulting linear color space. In this view, cells containing a


                                                            27
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


               1. Complete Replacement                                    2. Co-Expression                             3.Varying Ratios
               MS                        LMS                         MS                 L*MS                      MS       Mixed expression of L&M
 Sensitivity


                           Sensitivity


                                                       Sensitivity


                                                                                                    Sensitivity
               nm                        nm                          nm                  nm                       nm             nm       α L+β M

       Pre-Therapy             Post-Therapy                  Pre-Therapy             Post-Therapy         Pre-Therapy           Post-Therapy

                                          All converges to 3D color vision after post-therapy re-learning.


Figure 9: Three scenarios of cell expression after gene therapy adding a third cone type: 1. affected
M cones transform into L cones, 2. affected M cones express 50:50 M and L opsins, and 3. affected
M cones express M and L opsins at spatially-varying, random ratios (i.e. α, β ∈ [0, 1], α + β = 1).
CMF -SIM shows that all cases converge to 3D color vision after post-therapy re-learning.


mixture of two cones (M and L in this case) can be interpreted as linear combinations of two basis
vectors, which cannot increase the dimensionality of the linear space.


F              P ROBING E FFECT OF S PECTRAL R ESPONSE AND E NVIRONMENTAL C OLORS
               IN ACQUIRING T ETRACHROMATIC V ISION

In Section 6, tests of tetrachromatic eyes assumed the fourth cone type was a pigeon Q cone, with peak
sensitivity at 506 nm, between the S and M cone peak sensitivities (419 nm and 530 nm, respectively).
In this section, we report additional experiments using instead a human Q cone, modeled with peak
sensitivity at 545 nm between M and L peak sensitivities (530 nm and 560 nm, respectively). As
shown in the spectral graphs of Figure 10, the pigeon Q cone is more decorrelated from L, M, S,
which in principle may more easily support emergence of 4D color vision.
Further, we probe the effect of visual environment on the emergence of tetrachromacy, simulating
the learning of color vision with three different input scene image datasets. The first environment
is the set of real hyperspectral photographs of everyday scenes (Arad et al., 2022) as described in
Section A.1. However, natural hyperspectral images are thought to be lacking in human tetrachromatic
colors (Lee et al., 2024), so in the second and third datasets we augment the 900 hyperspectral images
with 100 tetrachromatic color patches. In the second dataset, the colors are sampled from the
tetrachromatic hue sphere as computed using recently developed N -dimensional color theory for
tetrachromacy (Lee et al., 2024), customized to each of the observers here (i.e. with human Q or
pigeon Q, respectively). In the third dataset, the colors are sampled from an idealized tetrachromatic
color space in which each of the four cone channels is allowed to take any value, allowing theoretically
maximum levels of chromatic contrast. Since natural hyperspectral images have been found lacking
in human tetrachromatic colors (Lee et al., 2024), in principle we may expect the likelihood that 4D
color vision emerges to increase across these three simulated environments.
Indeed, in line with theoretical intuition, Figure 10 shows that 4D color vision emerges, as measured
formally by CMF -SIM , only for the third visual environment in the case of the human Q cone, but
4D color vision emerges with any of the visual environments for the pigeon Q cone. Our simulations
suggest strong genetic and environmental effects on emergence of tetrachromatic color vision.


G              F URTHER E VALUATION OF C OLOR E MERGENCE IN C ORTICAL M ODEL

G.1             VALIDATION OF S IMULATED C OLOR M ATCHING F UNCTIONS AGAINST H UMAN
                P SYCHOPHYSICAL DATA

Our simulation produces results that are highly consistent with the psychophysical measurements of
actual human subjects. Specifically, we compared the output of CMF -SIM with the empirical color
matching function data reported in Stiles & Burch (1955). To match the experimental setup in Stiles
& Burch (1955), we employed the same monochromatic color primaries at 444nm, 526nm, and
645nm. As shown in Figure 11, the CMFs resulting from color matching simulation in CMF -SIM


                                                                                28
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                  1. Human Q cone                                                  2. Pigeon Q cone
                                                         L                                                               L
                     Cone                                M                            Cone                               M
                    Spectral                             S                           Spectral                            S
                   Sensitivity                           Human Q                    Sensitivity                          Pigeon Q
                                       nm                                                               nm
              Hyperspectral         + Hue sphere        + LQMS full colors     Hyperspectral         + Hue sphere        + LMQS full colors

                          3D                    3D                     4D                  4D                    4D                   4D
CMF-SIM
 output
               0 1 2 3 4             0 1 2 3 4             0 1 2 3 4           0 1 2 3 4            0 1 2 3 4              0 1 2 3 4


Base Error



  Energy
(0 Primary)

                         597nm                 522nm                  573nm               581nm                 607nm                588nm

1 Primary


                     502,603nm              532,620nm             498,614nm           487,576nm              491,557nm           480,581nm

2 Primaries


                  432,518,584nm        449,509,598nm          440,521,604nm       433,500,589nm        439,529,574nm          410,488,573nm

3 Primaries


              442,463,541,597nm     420,492,564,622nm      454,499,552,601nm   444,528,553,576nm    441,497,528,629nm     437,488,533,579nm

4 Primaries

                    nm                    nm                     nm                  nm                   nm                    nm



Figure 10: Results of expanded experiments of boosting color dimensionality from 3D to 4D, by
addition of a Q cone to trichromatic L, M, S cones. Panel 1 models addition of a Q cone from
natural human tetrachromacy, and panel 2 is for a Q cone from pigeon vision; spectral responses are
shown. Each panel compares emergence of color vision with three different visual environments: real
hyperspectal images (Arad et al., 2022); synthetic images containing tetrachromatic colors sampled
from the hue sphere customized to that color observer (Lee et al., 2024); synthetic images containing
idealized tetrachromatic colors with chromatic contrast between cone channels at the theoretical
maximum. The simulation results show that 4D color vision only emerges for the human Q cone
with the third environment, while it emerges for the pigeon Q cone under all three environments.


closely align with the empirical color matching function curves, providing further validation of our
simulated cortical model as an accurate representation of human trichromatic color vision.


G.2     ROBUST E MERGENCE OF C ORRECT C OLOR D IMENSIONALITY IN C ORTICAL M ODEL

The emergence of correct color dimensionality in our simulations remained consistent across varia-
tions in initialization, designed to mimic the natural biological variability between humans (Carroll
et al., 2002; Hofer et al., 2005). We tested this rigorously by varying both cone type ratios and initial
noise parameters. First, we altered the L:M cone ratios in the retinal patch, testing 2:1 (original), 1:1,
and 1:2, as well as an equal L:M:S ratio of 1:1:1. In all cases, the framework consistently converged
to 3D color vision, demonstrating adaptability to different cone distributions. Second, we sampled
the random seed for noise parameters, including: photon-shot noise during photoreceptor activation,
lateral inhibition noise, Perlin noise for cell position randomization, and cortical model parameter
initialization. Despite these changes, the model always converged to 3D color vision when trained


                                                                      29
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                             Generated Color Matching Functions
                                                                      CMFs from Stiles & Burch (1955)
                              from our Simulated Cortical Model


              Coefficients


                                      Wavelength (nm)                        Wavelength (nm)
                                          * Same primaries are used: 444nm, 526nm, 645nm

Figure 11: Side-by-side comparisons of two color-matching functions (CMFs) are presented. Left:
The CMFs generated from our simulated cortical model, trained using a trichromatic retina. Right:
The CMFs obtained from Stiles & Burch (1955), based on real human subjects. To ensure a direct
comparison, our simulation used the same set of spectral primaries (i.e., 444nm, 526nm, and 645nm).
This comparison highlights the validity of our trained cortical model as an accurate representation of
a color observer.


with a trichromat retina, underscoring the robustness of the simulated cortical learning to biological
and physical variability.
To further illustrate the robustness of our cortical model, we present its performance across a diverse
range of input stimuli during testing, as shown in Figure 12. The figure demonstrates the Neural-
Scoped internal percept of our cortical model trained with a trichromatic retina. Specifically:

      1. For hyperspectral images derived from RGB inputs, converted using the method described
         in Section A.1, the model successfully reconstructs accurate color percepts (3rd column)
         from optic nerve signals (2nd column), which have been time-averaged for improved
         visualization. Additionally, the model demonstrates complete robustness to various hue
         variations, accurately reconstructing color percepts even under significant changes in the
         chromatic properties of the input stimuli.
      2. For hyperspectral images from a standard dataset (Arad et al., 2022), the model accurately
         reconstructs color percepts (6th column) from optic nerve signals (5th column). To aid
         clarity, we include RGB-projected versions of the hyperspectral images in the 4th column.

This highlights the model’s ability to generalize across varying input types and maintain robust
performance under diverse conditions.

H    TABLE OF I MAGES WITH VARYING N UMBER OF C ONES FOR
     P HOTORECEPTOR ACTIVATIONS AND RGC S PIKES
To enhance intuition and visual clarity, we present a table in Figure 13, where the number of cone
types in the simulation varies across columns. The rows display images of photoreceptor activations,
bipolar signals, and optic nerve signals.
The second row in Figure 13 reveals that photoreceptor activations become increasingly noisy as
additional cone types are added to the retinal mosaic. The third row shows bipolar signals, computed
by applying a center-surround lateral inhibition kernel to the photoreceptor activations, introducing
greater complexity compared to the photoreceptor layer. By the time optic nerve signals (spikes)
are generated, differences between cone mosaics become almost indistinguishable, underscoring the
cortical challenge of extracting color vision with the correct dimensionality.
We also present a variant of Figure 13 that features the balloon image in Figure 14.


                                                              30
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 12: Our learned cortical model demonstrates robust performance across a wide variety of
inputs during testing. Here, we present the neural-scoped internal percept of our cortical model trained
with a trichromatic retina: 1. For hyperspectral images derived from RGB inputs (Section A.1), the
model accurately reconstructs the color percept (3rd column) from optic nerve signals (2nd column,
time-averaged for clearer visualization). 2. For hyperspectral images (Arad et al., 2022), the model
similarly produces accurate color percepts (6th column) from optic nerve signals (5th column). For
visual clarity, we show RGB-projected hyperspectral images in the 4th column.


                                                  31
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 13: Expanded version of Figure 2.4, showing the full field of view with simulated retinal
ganglion cell outputs (i.e., spiking optic nerve signals in the last row). Red boxes highlight close-up
details of the full-sized data near the left eye of the Mona Lisa. L, M, S, and Q cones are visualized
as red, green, blue, and black, respectively, in the first row.


                                                  32
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


  Figure 14: Expanded version of Figure 2.4, a variant of Figure 13, featuring the balloon image.


                                                33
