Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


SWE-S EARCH : E NHANCING S OFTWARE AGENTS
WITH M ONTE C ARLO T REE S EARCH AND I TERATIVE
R EFINEMENT
  Antonis Antoniades1∗ , Albert Örwall2∗
 Kexun Zhang3 , Yuxi Xie4 , Anirudh Goyal5 , William Wang1
 1
   University of California, Santa Barbara, 2 Moatless AI, 3 Carnegie Mellon University,
 4
   National University of Singapore, 5 Mila



                                              A BSTRACT

            Software engineers operating in complex and dynamic environments must con-
            tinuously adapt to evolving requirements, learn iteratively from experience, and
            reconsider their approaches based on new insights. However, current large lan-
            guage model (LLM)-based software agents often follow linear, sequential pro-
            cesses that prevent backtracking and exploration of alternative solutions, limiting
            their ability to rethink their strategies when initial approaches prove ineffective.
            To address these challenges, we propose SWE-Search, a multi-agent framework
            that integrates Monte Carlo Tree Search (MCTS) with a self-improvement mecha-
            nism to enhance software agents’ performance on repository-level software tasks.
            SWE-Search extends traditional MCTS by incorporating a hybrid value function
            that leverages LLMs for both numerical value estimation and qualitative evalua-
            tion. This enables self-feedback loops where agents iteratively refine their strate-
            gies based on both quantitative numerical evaluations and qualitative natural lan-
            guage assessments of pursued trajectories. The framework includes a SWE-Agent
            for adaptive exploration, a Value Agent for iterative feedback, and a Discrimi-
            nator Agent that facilitates multi-agent debate for collaborative decision-making.
            Applied to the SWE-bench benchmark, our approach demonstrates a 23% rela-
            tive improvement in performance across five models compared to standard open-
            source agents without MCTS. Our analysis reveals how performance scales with
            increased inference-time compute through deeper search, providing a pathway to
            improve software agents without requiring larger models or additional training
            data. This highlights the potential of self-evaluation driven search techniques in
            complex software engineering environments.


1       I NTRODUCTION

Software engineering is a complex and iterative process involving exploration, problem-solving,
and decision-making under uncertainty. Tasks such as debugging, feature development, and code
refactoring require continuous assessment of different approaches, frequent backtracking, and the
incorporation of new information. While machine learning has made progress in automating parts
of this workflow (Li et al., 2022; OpenAI et al., 2024; Ouyang et al., 2022; Yang et al., 2024b),
replicating the adaptive and strategic behavior of human engineers remains a significant challenge.
This is due to the inherently non-linear and iterative nature of software engineering, where engi-
neers dynamically explore various solutions, refine strategies based on feedback, and collaborate
to identify the most effective path forward. Current large language model (LLM)-based software
agents (Xia et al., 2024; Zhang et al., 2024d), while powerful, often struggle with complex, long-
horizon tasks that require adaptive strategies and flexible reassessment over time. These agents can
become trapped in repetitive patterns, limiting their effectiveness in tackling more intricate software
engineering problems.
    ∗
        Denotes equal contribution. Correspondence to: antonis@ucsb.edu, albert@moatless.ai.
        Code: github.com/aorwall/moatless-tree-search, Demo: https://streamlit.moatless.ai


                                                     1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


To address these challenges, we introduce SWE-Search, a multi-agent system that replicates the
adaptability, iterative learning, and collaborative decision-making of human engineers. SWE-Search
is designed to address three critical needs in software engineering:
Flexible Exploration and Adaptation: Engineering problems often require exploring multiple ap-
proaches and adapting strategies based on evolving information (Li et al., 2022). SWE-Search’s
SWE-Agent operates in a flexible state space, allowing it to fluidly transition between actions such
as planning, searching, and editing. This design mirrors the way engineers backtrack and adjust their
approach dynamically, ensuring the agent can revise its course when faced with new challenges or
information, and points towards the direction of more general, open-ended systems (Wang et al.,
2023; Ma et al., 2024a; Lu et al., 2024b; Faldor et al., 2024; Hu et al., 2024; Lu et al., 2024a).
Iterative Learning through Feedback: Effective engineering relies heavily on continuous testing and
refinement. To replicate this, SWE-Search integrates a Monte Carlo Tree Search (MCTS) (Silver
et al., 2016b) planning module paired with a Value Agent. The MCTS module balances exploration
and exploitation to guide the agent through complex solution spaces. The Value Agent augments this
process by providing both utility estimates and qualitative feedback, allowing the agent to iteratively
improve its decision-making based on past experiences, similar to how engineers refine their work
through feedback and debugging.
Collaborative Decision-Making: Complex problems often benefit from diverse perspectives (Khan
et al., 2024; Amayuelas et al., 2024; Du et al., 2023; Zhang et al., 2024c). In SWE-Search, once a
set of potential solutions is generated, the Discriminator Agent facilitates a multi-agent debate. Each
agent advocates for different solutions by presenting arguments, which are critically evaluated by a
judge agent. This process mirrors real-world engineering collaboration, where teams deliberate to
refine and select the most robust solutions.
We evaluate SWE-Search on the SWE-bench-lite, a benchmark which tests agents’ ability to resolve
real-world repository-level issues by generating code patches that fix failing tests. SWE-Search
demonstrates a 23% relative performance improvement across five models compared to standard
open-source agents. We explore how performance scales with increased search depth and identify
key factors that enhance self-assessment in software agents. Our work demonstrates the potential of
MCTS and iterative learning to improve agent reasoning and planning in dynamic, complex domains
like software engineering, introducing a new paradigm for autonomous software development.

2   R ELATED W ORK
Search methods Various search approaches have been applied to Large Language Models (LLMs)
to facilitate System 2 (Kahneman, 2011; Saha et al., 2024; Pan et al., 2023; Bounsi et al., 2024)
thinking in non-linear reasoning structures. A critical feature of these approaches is their ability to
backtrack. Unlike greedy processes (Black, 2005), search algorithms explore multiple branches at
each step, potentially escaping paths that lead to dead ends. These methods differ in their strategies
for exploring and memorizing possible choices, and in their heuristics for switching between them.
Breadth-first search (Moore, 1959) maintains all possible search paths, incurring significant memory
and computational costs. Depth-first search (Cormen et al., 2009), in contrast, prioritizes the most
promising path in a more greedy manner. When applied to LLMs, these methods demonstrate a
trade-off between diversity and quality in text generation (Yao et al., 2023). The A∗ algorithm (Hart
et al., 1968) combines aspects of breadth-first and greedy search to find optimal solutions using
a predetermined evaluation function. In this work, we adopt Monte Carlo Tree Search (MCTS)
(Coulom, 2007), an advanced search algorithm that conducts statistical tree search without requiring
dedicated evaluation heuristics for each state. MCTS has achieved impressive results in complex
strategy games (Silver et al., 2016b), protein folding (Jumper et al., 2021), and algorithm discovery
(Fawzi et al., 2022).

Software Agents Software agents are designed to perform autonomous actions within large code-
bases. Given a repository-level task, these agents typically locate relevant files and code segments
before implementing necessary changes. We focus on the SWE-bench task (Jimenez et al., 2024),
which involves resolving real-world GitHub issues. Among the agents with disclosed technical de-
tails on SWE-bench, Yang et al. (2024b) introduced the concept of agent-computer interfaces with
SWE-agent. OpenDevin (Wang et al., 2024b) presents a collection of community-driven agents,


                                                  2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


including CodeAct (Wang et al., 2024a). The Agentless approach demonstrated competitive perfor-
mance using a simple two-step process of localization and repair. AutoCodeRover (Zhang et al.,
2024d) incorporated advanced code tools such as abstract syntax trees and spectrum-based fault
localization. The Alibaba Lingma Agent (Ma et al., 2024b) introduced a search-based approach
for repository exploration, followed by a structured editing phase. While effective, it constitutes a
more hand-designed solution specifically designed to interface with the search functionality of their
agent. Finally, Brown et al. (2024) show that repeated trajectory sampling using the exact same
agent/model setup can yield results with high variance.


3     M ETHODOLOGY

SWE-Search is a multi-agent system designed to tackle complex software engineering tasks by inte-
grating dynamic planning, value estimation, and deliberative decision-making. The core motivation
behind this method is to emulate the sophisticated, iterative workflows of human software engi-
neers, where exploration, planning, and collaboration are crucial to solving intricate problems. By
leveraging the strengths of Monte Carlo Tree Search (MCTS) for planning, a Value Agent for utility
estimation and feedback, and a Discriminator Agent for final decision-making through debate, SWE-
Search provides a comprehensive, adaptive framework capable of navigating and solving real-world
software engineering challenges.
SWE-Search consists of four primary components that work in synergy:
SWE-Search Framework and Action Agent: Building on the moatless-tools framework (Örwall,
2024), SWE-Search operates in a dynamic code environment with a flexible state-space and a git-
like commit tree structure. This design facilitates efficient backtracking to previous states, enabling
the Action Agent to explore diverse solution trajectories. The adaptable state-space enhances the
system’s ability to exploit the MCTS module effectively.
Value (Function) Agent: To approximate the utility of each observation, we employ an LLM-based
value function, which in addition to outputting a value, also generates an explanation in natural
language. This explanation can be leveraged to improve subsequent actions from parent nodes,
enabling iterative self-improvement of the search process.
Search Algorithm: The core of SWE-Search’s exploration strategy is based on a Monte Carlo Tree
Search (MCTS) which uses a heuristic-based selection process similar to AlphaZero (Silver et al.,
2016a), specifically tailored for software engineering tasks. This modified MCTS algorithm effec-
tively balances exploration and exploitation, helping the agent explore a diverse set of solutions and
converge quickly on the most promising strategies.
Discriminator Agent: In the final stage of SWE-Search, the Discriminator Agent evaluates the solu-
tions generated by the search process. Inspired by multi-agent debate frameworks (Du et al., 2023;
Khan et al., 2024; Amayuelas et al., 2024), this agent engages in a structured debate, where multiple
agents argue for or against the proposed solutions. The debate process not only surfaces diverse
perspectives but also leads to a more rigorously justified final decision.

3.1   P ROBLEM F ORMULATION

The task of the SWE agent can be formalized as a tuple M = (S, C, A, V, P, p0 , ρ). Here, S
represents the state space, encompassing all possible states such as the current context of the files
the agent is working on and the overall status of the codebase. The context space, denoted as C,
includes metadata about the repository and the initial problem description. The value function V
assigns a utility score to each state-action pair O(a, t), guiding the agent’s decisions.
The environment’s dynamics are defined by a context-dependent transition function P : S × A ×
C → ∆(S), which models the evolution of the repository’s state after each action. The initial state
distribution, p0 : C → ∆(S), specifies how the initial state depends on the given context, while
ρ ∈ ∆(C) defines the distribution over contexts.
Given an initial context c ∼ ρ and an initial state s0 ∼ p0 (· | c), the SWE agent executes its policy
π : S × C → ∆(A), which selects actions based on the current state and context. At each time
step t, the agent takes an action of type τ , at,τ ∼ π(st,τ , c) and receives a corresponding reward


                                                  3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                       Tree Search                               Evaluation
                                                                                        State
                  Expansion

         Parent     Sibling       Hindsight
         Node       Action        Feedback                                                       Execute Action
                                     (ε)

                                  Feedback
                              +    <str>                                                  New File   Trajectory Selected Test
                                                                                          Context       Info     Execution

                                                                                                                    PASS
       LLM               Action Agent                                                                               FAIL
                                                                                                                    FAIL



                                                                                        LLM                    Value Agent
                              Alternative     Backup                   Start
                                Action
                                              Hindsight Feedback (ε)   Search
                                              Current Expansion                                        Value     Feedback
                                                                       Identify                  +     <int>      <str>
                                                                       GetMoreContext
                                              High Value Node
                                                                       Plan
                                              Medium Value Node

                                              Low Value Node           Edit


Figure 1: SWE-Search Overview. Tree search. Each state is represented as a node from which the
agent can expand from, and each corresponding action is presented as an edge. Evaluation. Uses
all relevant context including trajectory information, file context, and executed tests, to provide a
quantitative value estimation and qualitative explanation in natural language. Expansion. Nodes can
be expanded using value function feedback from future actions.


R(st,τ , at,τ , c). The environment then transitions to a new state st+1 ∼ P(· | st,τ , at,τ , c), and
the agent continues to observe this updated state. Over time, this process generates a trajectory
τ := {st,τ , at,τ , rt }Tt=0 as the agent interacts with the environment.
The agent’s objective is to maximize the cumulative reward over the trajectory, which is captured
by the value function v(st,τ , at,τ , {si }t−1        t−1
                                           i=0 , {ai }i=0 ). This value function depends not only on the
current state and action but also on the history of previous states and actions, which deviates from the
assumptions of a Markovian process. Formally,     hP the agent seeks to maximize theiexpected cumulative
                                                       T
reward, defined as: maxπ VT (ρ) = maxπ Eτ              t=0 R(st,τ , at,τ , c) | c ∼ ρ; π .

This optimization captures the agent’s (in-context) process, as it adjusts its policy π to achieve the
highest expected return across multiple trajectories, considering both current and historical informa-
tion.

3.2   SWE-S EARCH F RAMEWORK AND ACTION AGENT

The SWE-Search Action Agent builds on the moatless-tools framework (Örwall, 2024). Its action
space, A, is organized as a two-tier hierarchy, comprising both action types and their corresponding
specific actions. Formally, this can be expressed as A = (t, τ, a) | t ∈ T , a ∈ At , where T rep-
resents the set of action types (e.g., Search, Plan, Edit), and At is the set of possible actions
corresponding to each type τ . These actions range from tool invocations and code modifications to
the generation of structured text. When an action is executed, the Agent transitions to a state of the
corresponding action type st+1,τ . To enhance the base agent’s effectiveness in search-driven tasks,
we introduced the following modifications:
One key modification we implemented is the expansion of the Plan state, allowing it to transition
flexibly to any other state, rather than being limited to transitioning only to Edit. This change
is motivated by the need to enable more dynamic and adaptive problem-solving behaviors within
the agent. In the context of software engineering, rigid state transitions can be overly restrictive.
For instance, during code modification tasks, an agent might recognize mid-process that further
planning, additional searches, or different types of analysis are necessary before proceeding with
edits. Restricting transitions only to editing would artificially constrain the agent, potentially leading
it to suboptimal actions or causing it to become stuck in unproductive loops. By allowing transitions
to any state, we empower the agent to adapt to new information as it arises (Fig. 2), exploring

                                                                  4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


a wider variety of trajectories. This enhanced flexibility reflects the iterative and often non-linear
nature of real software engineering workflows, where engineers frequently revisit planning, testing,
and research phases before committing to edits.
Second, the agent is empowered to execute any tests within the codebase at its discretion, as well
as to create and implement new tests. The results of these tests are incorporated into both the value
function and the agent’s subsequent decision-making process. It is crucial to highlight that the tests
required to resolve a given instance (i.e., fail-to-pass tests) are not explicitly revealed to the agent.
However, the agent can leverage any pre-existing tests within the repository, simulating the behavior
of a real-world software engineer. 1 We refer to this enhanced base agent as Moatless-Adapted.

3.3   VALUE (F UNCTION ) AGENT

The role of the Value Agent extends beyond simply estimating the expected utility of a given state-
action pair V (st , at ). In addition to calculating the value vn , the Value Agent generates a written
explanation, denoted as ε. This explanation serves a dual purpose: it provides transparency into
the decision-making process and functions as feedback for the Action Agent, which can leverage
this explanation when re-expanding from the parent node of On (see Figure 1, hindsight feedback).
This approach enables the system to iteratively refine its decision-making process, mirroring how
a human software engineer continuously re-evaluates their approach based on new information to
improve their problem-solving strategy.
The input to the value function consists of all state-action pairs up to and including the current state
being evaluated, alongside specific instructions on how to assess the state. This allows the Value
Agent to contextualize the decision within the trajectory, accounting for the sequence of actions and
states leading up to the present. The final output of the value function can be formalized as:

                         (vt , εt ) = V (st,τ , at,τ , {si }i=0...t−1 , {ai }i=0...t−1 )              (1)

Here, vt represents the expected utility of the current state-action pair, while εt is the accompanying
explanation.
In practice, the Value Agent is tasked with analyzing the entire trajectory leading up to the current
state-action pair, providing not only the required utility estimate vt , but also a detailed explanation
εt . This explanation is critical for the agent’s overall performance, as it offers insight into the rea-
soning behind utility estimates, which in turn informs the Action Agent’s future decisions. We have
observed that one of the key factors driving the effectiveness of the Value Agent lies in the clarity
and specificity of these explanations. A well-articulated explanation can illuminate the strengths and
limitations of different state types (e.g., Search, Edit, Plan), helping the Action Agent better
understand which types of states are more promising or risky to pursue.
By providing detailed feedback on the potential utility of different actions and contextualizing them
within the broader trajectory, the Value Agent enables more informed and strategic decision-making
by the Action Agent. This integration of both quantitative and qualitative feedback leads to improved
performance and more adaptive behavior throughout the task (Fig. 4a).

3.4   S EARCH A LGORITHM

Our search tree is structured with nodes representing states St,τ and edges representing actions
At,τ . The search algorithm employed is a modified Monte Carlo Tree Search (MCTS), specifi-
cally adapted for the tasks of the SWE-Agent. Unlike prior approaches for web agents that utilize
language models in the selection process (Koh et al., 2024; Zhang et al., 2024b), we deliberately
choose not to rely on language models for node selection. Instead, we adopt a more straightforward
heuristic-based selection function, similar to the approach used in AlphaZero (Silver et al., 2016a;
2018). This decision is driven by the need for interpretability, efficiency, and the focus on tasks
where heuristic-based exploration suffices to guide the agent effectively through complex software
engineering environments.
  1
    This approach aligns with the practices of other SWE agents, and has been validated by the authors of
SWE-bench, who confirmed its legitimacy as long as the fail-to-pass tests remain concealed from the model.


                                                       5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


At the core of our algorithm is a modified Upper Confidence Bound for Trees (UCT) selection crite-
rion (Kocsis & Szepesvári, 2006), which determines the next node to expand. This criterion balances
exploitation of known high-reward actions with exploration of less-visited states. We introduce ad-
ditional terms to encourage strategic exploration early in the search process, and to penalize over-
exploration at later stages when convergence on the optimal solution is desired. The modified UCT
function is expressed as:


   U CT (s, a) = exploitation + exploration + early depth bonus − late depth penalty                   (2)

This can be expressed more formally as:
                                                  s
                                                       ln N (s)                √
                     U CT (s, a) = V (s, a) + C                 + αe−β(d−1) − γ d                      (3)
                                                       N (s, a)

V (s, a) is the value estimate of the state-action pair , N (s, a) is the number of times the state-action
pair (s, a) has been visited, N (s) is the visit count of state s, d is the depth of the node in the search
tree, and C, α, β, and γ are constants that control the balance between exploration, exploitation, and
depth-dependent rewards and penalties.
This formulation is inspired by the way software engineers explore potential solutions to a task. In
practice, an engineer’s search process can be broken down into the following key phases, which our
algorithm mirrors:
Early Exploration: Initially, an engineer explores a wide variety of potential approaches to fully
understand the problem and identify promising strategies. This is encouraged in our algorithm by
the early depth bonus, represented by the term αe−β(d−1) , which rewards exploration at shallow
depths, simulating the early phases of wide exploration.
Convergence and Exploitation: As the engineer gains more information and narrows down the op-
tions, the focus shifts to exploiting the most effective solution paths. This transition is handled by
the standard
    √         UCT exploitation term V (s, a) and is further reinforced by the late depth penalty
(−γ d), which discourages over-exploration as the agent delves deeper into the search tree.
Quick Abandonment of Poor Strategies: Software engineers are also adept at abandoning poor strate-
gies when new information indicates that a particular approach is not viable. We capture this be-
havior by implementing a simple heuristic rule that abandons nodes associated with consecutive low
rewards, ensuring that the agent does not waste resources on unproductive trajectories.
At each step, the node with the highest UCT value is selected for expansion, formalized as:

                                       s∗ = arg max U CT (s, a)                                        (4)
                                               (s,a)

This approach effectively mimics the decision-making process of a software engineer, who balances
exploration of potential strategies with a focus on converging towards the optimal solution, while
remaining flexible enough to backtrack when necessary. By incorporating heuristic feedback and
depth-based adjustments, the algorithm avoids getting stuck in unproductive paths and enhances the
agent’s ability to identify high-reward strategies with minimal computational overhead Appendix 6.

3.5   D ISCRIMINATOR AGENT

The final stage of SWE-Search involves the Discriminator Agent, whose role is to evaluate the
candidate solutions generated by the search process and select the one most likely to resolve the
issue at hand. This module accepts up to five final solutions produced by the search and engages in
a multi-agent debate to determine the most promising option. Drawing inspiration from recent work
on persuasive multi-agent debates (Khan et al., 2024; Amayuelas et al., 2024), the Discriminator
leverages the collective reasoning of multiple agents to ensure a more robust final selection. The
complete prompts used in both the debate rounds and conclusion phase are provided in Appendix
L. Configuration and hyperparameter details can be found in Table 2.


                                                       6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                   Finish                      STATUS: FAILED                  Feedback
Edit
                                   "finish_reason":"The `idiff` function now                    <Reward>: 0
                                   correctly handles `Eq` objects and functions,                <Explanation>: The action correctly adds the import for exp,
                                                                                                resolving the NameError.
    "instructions":"Add the        and all tests are passing. The issue is fully                However, an AttributeError in idiff remains, requiring
    import statement for `Eq`      resolved."                                                   further modification to handle Function objects properly.
    to resolve the
    `NameError`."
    "file_path":"sympy/
    geometry/util.py"
    "pseudo_code":"from                                STATUS: TESTS FAILED             Edit              STATUS: TESTS PASSED
    sympy import                   Edit                                                                                                    Finish STATUS: RESOLVED
    Function, Symbol,               "instructions":"Add new tests for idiff             "instructions":"Modify idiff to handle
                                    with Eq objects and functions.",                                                                       "finish_reason":"The
    solve, Eq"                                                                          Function objects correctly.",                      `idiff` function has
    "planned_steps":"Rerun          "file_path":"/geometry/tests/test_util.py",         "file_path":"sympy/geometry/util.py",
    the tests to ensure that the    "pseudo_code":"def test_idiff_                                                                         been successfully
                                                                                        "pseudo_code":"dydx =                              modified to handle `Eq`
    `NameError` is resolved         with_eq_and_functions(): # Test
                                                                                        Function(getattr(y, 'name',
    and all tests pass."            cases for Eq objects and
                                                                                        y.func.name))(x).diff(x)",                         objects and functions,
                                    functions",
                                                                                        "planned_steps": "Rerun tests to verify            and all tests are passing."
                                    "planned_steps": "Rerun tests to verify idiff
                                    works with new cases."                              AttributeError is resolved."


Figure 2: Hindsight feedback error correction. Instance sympy sympy-15678, SWE-Search with
Qwen2.5-72B-Instruct. Initially, the Action Agent performs edits and runs tests, which pass. It
prematurely concludes the search. Without actually knowing the proposed solution does not resolve
the issue, the Value Agent identifies potentially missed tests and assigns a low reward. Upon re-
expansion using the Value Agent’s feedback, new tests fail, prompting the Action Agent to make
additional edits, which result in a preferred solution which ultimately resolves the issue.


The discriminator stage extends the MCTS framework by enabling direct comparison between can-
didate solutions through structured debate. While our value function achieves 73% accuracy in
solution evaluation, empirical results show that the discriminator improves final selection accuracy
to 84% (Fig. 8a). This improvement is particularly notable for cases where multiple solutions
have similar value estimates but differ in implementation details. The structured comparison helps
identify subtle trade-offs that may not be captured by the value function alone.



4        E XPERIMENTS

Benchmark For our experiments, we utilize SWE-bench Lite, a curated subset of the official
SWE-bench, containing 300 instances. This dataset is specifically designed to be self-contained and
focuses primarily on evaluating functional bug fixes, providing a controlled environment to assess
the performance of our system.


Evaluation Metrics We use two metrics: resolve rate (Pass@1) and Pass@5. Resolve rate is the
percentage of issues successfully resolved, measuring overall effectiveness. Pass@5 is the percent-
age of issues where a correct solution is found within five attempts. This allows us to assess the
efficiency of the search in identifying successful bug fixes within a limited number of iterations.


Baselines Software agents leverage diverse tools, architectures, and models, leading to variability
in their performance on subsets of the SWE-bench Lite dataset (Zhang et al., 2024a). For compar-
ison, we build upon the moatless-tools framework (Örwall, 2024), a high-performing open-source
agent commonly used in research settings (Chowdhury et al., 2024). To isolate the impact of our
search approach, we adapt moatless-tools v0.0.2 as our baseline, referred to as Moatless-Adapted.
This allows us to fairly compare the performance of SWE-Search against Moatless-Adapted across
various models, including two closed-source models (GPT-4o, GPT-4o-mini) and three open-source
models (Qwen2.5-72B-Instruct (Yang et al., 2024a), Llama-3.1-70B-Instruct (Dubey et al., 2024),
and DeepSeek-V2.5 (DeepSeek-AI et al., 2024)). We also reference official moatless-tools GPT-4o
results on SWE-bench Lite to ensure a fair and consistent comparison.


Implementation Details For consistency, we use identical prompts across all models. In SWE-
Search, we limit each node to a maximum of three expansions and cap the total search iterations at
100. Further details on model hyperparameters can be found in Appendix, 2.


                                                                                    7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                        Table 1: Resolve Rate Comparison, SWE-bench Lite
      Model                     Moatless-v0.0.2 Moatless-Adapted SWE-Search                %∆
      GPT-4o                          24.3                 25.7                31.0         +17
      GPT-4o-mini                      –                   13.0                17.0         +24
      Qwen-2.5-72b-Instruct            –                   18.0                24.7         +27
      Deepseek-V2.5                    –                   16.3                21.0         +22
      Llama-3.1-70b-Instruct           –                   13.6                17.7         +23
      Mean % ∆                                                                              +23


4.1     E XPERIMENTAL R ESULTS

4.1.1    SWE-S EARCH S URPASSES ALL C ORRESPONDING BASE AGENTS AND E NABLES
         S MALLER , O PEN S OURCE M ODELS TO A PPROACH GPT-4 O

On average, SWE-Search outperforms the baseline agent across all five models, achieving a 23%
relative improvement (Table 1). Notably, SWE-Search with Qwen-2.5-72B-Instruct exceeds the per-
formance of GPT-4o using the original Moatless-v0.0.2 framework, and closely matches its perfor-
mance when compared with the Moatless-Adapted agent, with only a slight difference (∆ = −1%).
Interestingly, all five models demonstrate significant improvement when utilizing the proposed ap-
proach, with consistent gains across different models.

4.1.2    S EARCH E NABLES AGENTS TO M AKE B ETTER U SE OF M ORE F LEXIBILITY

To prevent goal divergence, most agents, including moatless-tools, rely on strict transition rules,
where state transitions follow predetermined sequences (e.g., Search → Identify, Plan → Edit). In
Moatless-Adapted, we introduce a more flexible transition logic that allows a Plan state to transition
into any other state type. This added flexibility has both advantages and drawbacks. On the positive
side, it enables the agent to autonomously correct its trajectory without external feedback, particu-
larly when the necessary adjustments span only a limited portion of the task. However, this increased
flexibility also introduces the risk of the agent becoming trapped in infinite loops. Without a high-
level control mechanism to detect and mitigate these situations, the agent may fail to recover from
such loops. This trade-off is evident in the modest performance difference between Moatless-v0.0.2
and Moatless-Adapted, with a slight performance improvement of only 1.4% (Table 1).

4.1.3    I MPACT OF H INDSIGHT F EEDBACK ON AGENT P ERFORMANCE

One key advantage of utilizing LLMs for value estimation is their dual ability to provide both quan-
titative value estimates and qualitative assessments in natural language. These qualitative insights
can significantly enhance the agent’s action generation and search process by offering detailed feed-
back on potential errors or overlooked aspects of the task. In practice, feedback was also crucial in
eliciting diversity in the actions taken by the agent, as without it, the agent would often take very
similar actions when re-expanding from a parent node.
As shown in Figure 2, this mechanism plays a critical role in improving the agent’s performance.
During the initial expansion, the agent prematurely concludes that the task is complete. However,
the value function correctly identifies gaps in the test coverage, specifically in addressing potential
corner cases, and assigns a low reward. This feedback prompts the agent to re-expand the parent
state, leading to the introduction of new tests, which subsequently fail. The agent then performs a
series of edits (summarized in the figure for brevity), ultimately resolving the task correctly. Em-
pirically, we observe that the instances unresolved by Moatless-Adapted but successfully solved by
SWE-Search are often attributed to this search-and-feedback loop, where iterative feedback drives
the agent toward a correct solution.

4.2     I MPORTANCE OF C OMPREHENSIVE S TATE I NFORMATION FOR VALUE F UNCTION
        P ERFORMANCE


                                                  8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


a    Identify                                Identify                               b                                            Issues Resolved vs. Transitions
                                    X                                        X                                100

     RequestMoreContext                      RequestMoreContext
                                                                                                              80


                                                                                        Resolved Issues (n)
     Feedback                                Feedback
     <Reward>: 0                              <Reward>: 75                                                    60
     <Explanation>: The request for           <Explanation>: The request for
     QuerySet._batched_insert                 QuerySet._batched_insert
     context vis relevant but not directly
                                              context is crucial and well-                                    40
     impactful. It's key for implementing     targeted.
     RETURNING clauses, but doesn't
                                                                                                                                                                Model
                                              This method is key for
     propose changes. Exploring the           implementing                                                                                                GPT-4o
                                              RETURNING clauses in bulk_                                                                                  GPT-4o-mini
     current code and suggesting                                                                              20
                                                                                                                                                          Qwen2.5-72B-Instruct
     specific modifications would be          create with conflict updates. This
                                                                                                                                                          DeepSeek-V2.5
     more valuable. The progress lacks        information will likely advance the
                                                                                                                                                          Llama-3.1-70B-Instruct
     tangible output towards a solution.      solution process significantly.
                                                                                                               0
                                                                                                                     0      20         40        60        80           100
                                                                                                                                        Transitions (n)



Figure 4: (a) Importance of state-specific value prompts. On the left and right are the respective
Value Agents’ outputs with and without state-specific prompts. While the action in both cases is
effective in finding the right file, the non-state-specific scenario does not recognize this and assigns
a low reward. On the contrary, the state-specific prompt correctly assigns a high reward to this state.
(b) Performance scaling with search depth across different language models. The graph shows
the number of issues resolved as a function of the number of transitions (search iterations) for all
models used.
                                                                                                                    Model                            Pass@1             Pass@5
The effectiveness of SWE-Search hinges on the value
function’s ability to accurately differentiate between GPT-4o                      31.0        34.0
desirable and undesirable states, and to provide ac- GPT-4o-mini                   17.0        22.3
tionable feedback that drives improvement. However,       Qwen-2.5-72b-Instruct    24.7        25.7
our experiments revealed that the value function some- Deepseek-V2.5               21.0        23.3
                                                          Llama-3.1-70b-Instruct   21.0        22.3
times failed to recognize critical decision points in the
search tree. It frequently misinterpreted the purpose of
certain actions, leading to the undervaluation of effec- Figure 3: SWE-bench SWE-Search results
tive strategies by assigning low rewards. As shown in
Figure 4a , before the introduction of state-specific value prompts, the agent consistently assigned
low rewards even when the Action Agent correctly identified the need for additional context, such
as locating relevant files. This issue persisted despite the agent successfully identifying the files
later. By implementing state-specific prompts across core state clusters (Searching, Planning, Edit-
ing), the value function became significantly more adept at interpreting the intent behind actions
and evaluating their outcomes within each state. For further details on experiments distinguishing
between effective and ineffective states, refer to Appendix 8.

Scaling SWE agents with Inference-time Compute The success of large language models
(LLMs) has traditionally been attributed to the expansion of training data and model size, i.e.,
training-time compute (Wei et al., 2022; Chung et al., 2022). Recently, researchers have started ex-
ploring how different methods scale with inference-time (OpenAI, 2024; Snell et al., 2024; Dubey
et al., 2024). Here, we study the performance of software engineering agents through increased
inference-time compute. As shown in Figure 4b, increasing search iterations leads to a consistent
rise in the number of resolved issues. To ensure experimental feasibility across the 300 instances
in the SWE-bench Lite dataset, we applied conservative parameters (maximum iterations = 100,
maximum expansions per node = 3). Approaches like SWE-Search enable the allocation of greater
resources to specific challenges, such as addressing critical software vulnerabilities (Rigaki et al.,
2024; Fang et al., 2024), offering a scalable solution to complex tasks.

Convergence of Value Function and Discriminator to Right Solution The search process can
yield multiple proposed solutions. Ideally, the mean trajectory value of the the proposed solution
that resolves the issue will always be the highest, which would yields the ideal performance of the
agent (Figure 3). In practice, the value function successfully converged on the correct solution
73% of the time on average across the five models. The discriminator module performed even
better, increasing the proportion of correct solutions selected to 84%. While in typical large action
spaces, Monte Carlo Tree Search (MCTS) is run for thousands of iterations (Silver et al., 2016b),


                                                                                    9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


    a                                             Proportion of Correct Solutions                                  b                         Overlap of Resolved Issues

                                                                                                                       GPT-4o
                         1.0                                                                                           GPT-4o-mini
                                                                 0.95            0.94
                                0.89                                                 0.91                              Qwen2.5-72B-Instruct
                                                                                                                                                           0.8%
                                                                                                                       DeepSeek-V2.5                        (1)
                                                      0.84
                                                                                                                       Llama-3.1-70B-Instruct
                         0.8        0.77                              0.79
    pass@1 / pass@ (p)                          0.76                                                                                                    0.8%
                                                                                                                                                 2.3% (1) 0.8%         0.8%
                                                                                                  0.67                                       3.1% (3)        (1)        (1)
                                                                                                                                              (4) 4.7%              0.8%
                         0.6                                                                                                                        (6)              (1)      1.6%
                                                                                                                                10.9%                                          (2)
                                                                                                                                 (14)      3.9%                                       4.7%
                                                                                                                                            (5)                              1.6%      (6)
                                                                                                                                                                              (2)
                                                                                                                                      2.3%
                         0.4                                                                                                           (3)                 21.1%
                                                                                                        0.33                                                (27)
                                                                                                                                              4.7%                          1.6% 3.1%
                                                                                                                                         1.6% (6)                                   (4)
                                                                                                                                                                             (2) 3.1%
                                                                                                                                          (2)                                     (4)
                         0.2                                                                                                            3.1%
                                                                                                                                         (4)
                                                                                                                                                  3.9%                       3.1%
                                                                                             Discriminator                                         (5)     4.7%     2.3%      (4)
                                                                                             Mean Value                                                     (6)      (3)
                                                                                                                                                    0.0%
                         0.0                                                                                                                         (0)     0.8%
                                                                                                                                             6.2%                          1.6%
                                  -4o              in i                uct        k-V2
                                                                                          .5                uct                                               (1)
                               GPT           -4o-m           - In s tr      pSee                  - In s tr                                   (8)                           (2)
                                        G P T n 2 .5 - 7 2 B            Dee           - 3 .1
                                                                                             -70B
                                             w e                                  m a
                                          Q                                  L la



Figure 5: (a) Value Function vs. Discriminator Comparison. Comparison of value function
vs. discriminator ability to discern the final solution that resolved the issue when there is one.
The discriminator performs better across all models except GPT-4o-mini. DeepSeek-V2.5 had the
smallest disparity between the two methods, suggesting an ability to act as a well-calibrated value
function. (b) Model-Specific Issue Resolution. Venn diagram of resolved issues by model. Each
model can solve a handful of unique instances.

the value function’s success rate remains impressive given the computational constraints. However,
SWE-Search could further benefit from enhanced methods for identifying the correct solutions more
consistently, allowing it to fully reach its potential.

Different Models can Resolve Vastly Different Issue Subsets When comparing the resolved
instances across the five models, we observed significant diversity in the subsets of issues each
model successfully solved. As shown in Figure 5, each model managed to resolve at least one
unique instance. Notably, a surprising number of issues (33) were solved by other models but not by
GPT-4o. This suggests that model diversity could play an important role, at least in the short term,
in enhancing the performance of SWE-agents.

5            D ISCUSSION AND C ONCLUSION
In this paper, we introduced SWE-Search, a general framework that integrates Monte Carlo Tree
Search (MCTS) and qualitative feedback to enhance the performance of software engineering agents.
The proposed approach demonstrated improvements over different baseline models, highlighting the
potential of search-based methods in software engineering tasks.
One of the key advantages of search-based approaches, as demonstrated in our work, is their ability
to scale performance with increased inference-time compute. This flexibility allows the system to
adapt to problems that require higher computational resources, such as discovering software vul-
nerabilities or even generating large codebases from scratch. Future research should focus on two
main directions: (a) investigating how search agents scale with computational resources, and (b)
expanding the application of software agent search to a broader range of complex use cases.
Given that search techniques like MCTS closely resemble the problem-solving processes of human
software engineers, we expect these methods to become increasingly prevalent in agent-driven sys-
tems. As the nature of software engineering tasks evolves, system architectures will need to become
more fluid and adaptable, fully leveraging the potential of search-based techniques. This evolution
will likely lead to the development of larger, more general agentic systems capable of tackling a
wide array of software engineering challenges.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
Research was sponsored by the U.S. Army Research Office and accomplished under cooperative
agreement W911NF-19-2-0026 for the Institute for Collaborative Biotechnologies.


                                                                                                                  10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


R EFERENCES
Alfonso Amayuelas, Xianjun Yang, Antonis Antoniades, Wenyue Hua, Liangming Pan, and William
  Wang. Multiagent collaboration attack: Investigating adversarial attacks in large language model
  collaborations via debate, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2406.14711.
Paul E. Black. greedy algorithm, feb 2005. URL https://www.nist.gov/dads/HTML/
  greedyalgo.html. Accessed: TODAY.
Wilfried Bounsi, Borja Ibarz, Andrew Dudzik, Jessica B. Hamrick, Larisa Markeeva, Alex Vitvit-
 skyi, Razvan Pascanu, and Petar Veličković. Transformers meet neural algorithmic reasoners,
 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2406.09308.
Bradley Brown, Jordan Juravsky, Ryan Ehrlich, Ronald Clark, Quoc V. Le, Christopher Ré, and
  Azalia Mirhoseini. Large language monkeys: Scaling inference compute with repeated sampling,
  2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2407.21787.
Neil Chowdhury, James Aung, Chan Jun Shern, Oliver Jaffe, Dane Sherburn, Giulio Starace, Evan
  Mays, Rachel Dias, Marwan Aljubeh, Mia Glaese, Carlos E. Jimenez, John Yang, Kevin Liu, and
  Aleksander Madry. Introducing SWE-bench verified, August 2024. URL https://openai.
  com/research/introducing-swe-bench-verified. OpenAI Blog.
Hyung Won Chung, Le Hou, Shayne Longpre, Barret Zoph, Yi Tay, William Fedus, Yunxuan
  Li, Xuezhi Wang, Mostafa Dehghani, Siddhartha Brahma, Albert Webson, Shixiang Shane Gu,
  Zhuyun Dai, Mirac Suzgun, Xinyun Chen, Aakanksha Chowdhery, Alex Castro-Ros, Marie Pel-
  lat, Kevin Robinson, Dasha Valter, Sharan Narang, Gaurav Mishra, Adams Yu, Vincent Zhao,
  Yanping Huang, Andrew Dai, Hongkun Yu, Slav Petrov, Ed H. Chi, Jeff Dean, Jacob Devlin,
  Adam Roberts, Denny Zhou, Quoc V. Le, and Jason Wei. Scaling instruction-finetuned language
  models, 2022. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2210.11416.
Thomas H. Cormen, Charles E. Leiserson, Ronald L. Rivest, and Clifford Stein. Introduction to
  Algorithms, Third Edition. The MIT Press, 3rd edition, 2009. ISBN 0262033844.
Rémi Coulom. Efficient selectivity and backup operators in monte-carlo tree search. In H. Jaap
   van den Herik, Paolo Ciancarini, and H. H. L. M. (Jeroen) Donkers (eds.), Computers and Games,
   pp. 72–83, Berlin, Heidelberg, 2007. Springer Berlin Heidelberg. ISBN 978-3-540-75538-8.
DeepSeek-AI, Qihao Zhu, Daya Guo, Zhihong Shao, Dejian Yang, Peiyi Wang, Runxin Xu, Y. Wu,
  Yukun Li, Huazuo Gao, Shirong Ma, Wangding Zeng, Xiao Bi, Zihui Gu, Hanwei Xu, Damai
  Dai, Kai Dong, Liyue Zhang, Yishi Piao, Zhibin Gou, Zhenda Xie, Zhewen Hao, Bingxuan Wang,
  Junxiao Song, Deli Chen, Xin Xie, Kang Guan, Yuxiang You, Aixin Liu, Qiushi Du, Wenjun Gao,
  Xuan Lu, Qinyu Chen, Yaohui Wang, Chengqi Deng, Jiashi Li, Chenggang Zhao, Chong Ruan,
  Fuli Luo, and Wenfeng Liang. Deepseek-coder-v2: Breaking the barrier of closed-source models
  in code intelligence, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2406.11931.
Yilun Du, Shuang Li, Antonio Torralba, Joshua B. Tenenbaum, and Igor Mordatch. Improving
  factuality and reasoning in language models through multiagent debate, 2023. URL https:
  //arxiv.org/abs/2305.14325.
Abhimanyu Dubey, Abhinav Jauhri, Abhinav Pandey, Abhishek Kadian, Ahmad Al-Dahle, Aiesha
  Letman, Akhil Mathur, Alan Schelten, Amy Yang, Angela Fan, Anirudh Goyal, Anthony
  Hartshorn, Aobo Yang, Archi Mitra, Archie Sravankumar, Artem Korenev, Arthur Hinsvark,
  Arun Rao, Aston Zhang, Aurelien Rodriguez, Austen Gregerson, Ava Spataru, Baptiste Roziere,
  Bethany Biron, Binh Tang, Bobbie Chern, Charlotte Caucheteux, Chaya Nayak, Chloe Bi, Chris
  Marra, Chris McConnell, Christian Keller, Christophe Touret, Chunyang Wu, Corinne Wong,
  Cristian Canton Ferrer, Cyrus Nikolaidis, Damien Allonsius, Daniel Song, Danielle Pintz, Danny
  Livshits, David Esiobu, Dhruv Choudhary, Dhruv Mahajan, Diego Garcia-Olano, Diego Perino,
  Dieuwke Hupkes, Egor Lakomkin, Ehab AlBadawy, Elina Lobanova, Emily Dinan, Eric Michael
  Smith, Filip Radenovic, Frank Zhang, Gabriel Synnaeve, Gabrielle Lee, Georgia Lewis Ander-
  son, Graeme Nail, Gregoire Mialon, Guan Pang, Guillem Cucurell, Hailey Nguyen, Hannah
  Korevaar, Hu Xu, Hugo Touvron, Iliyan Zarov, Imanol Arrieta Ibarra, Isabel Kloumann, Ishan
  Misra, Ivan Evtimov, Jade Copet, Jaewon Lee, Jan Geffert, Jana Vranes, Jason Park, Jay Ma-
  hadeokar, Jeet Shah, Jelmer van der Linde, Jennifer Billock, Jenny Hong, Jenya Lee, Jeremy


                                               11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


  Fu, Jianfeng Chi, Jianyu Huang, Jiawen Liu, Jie Wang, Jiecao Yu, Joanna Bitton, Joe Spisak,
  Jongsoo Park, Joseph Rocca, Joshua Johnstun, Joshua Saxe, Junteng Jia, Kalyan Vasuden Al-
  wala, Kartikeya Upasani, Kate Plawiak, Ke Li, Kenneth Heafield, Kevin Stone, Khalid El-Arini,
  Krithika Iyer, Kshitiz Malik, Kuenley Chiu, Kunal Bhalla, Lauren Rantala-Yeary, Laurens van der
  Maaten, Lawrence Chen, Liang Tan, Liz Jenkins, Louis Martin, Lovish Madaan, Lubo Malo,
  Lukas Blecher, Lukas Landzaat, Luke de Oliveira, Madeline Muzzi, Mahesh Pasupuleti, Man-
  nat Singh, Manohar Paluri, Marcin Kardas, Mathew Oldham, Mathieu Rita, Maya Pavlova,
  Melanie Kambadur, Mike Lewis, Min Si, Mitesh Kumar Singh, Mona Hassan, Naman Goyal,
  Narjes Torabi, Nikolay Bashlykov, Nikolay Bogoychev, Niladri Chatterji, Olivier Duchenne, Onur
  Çelebi, Patrick Alrassy, Pengchuan Zhang, Pengwei Li, Petar Vasic, Peter Weng, Prajjwal Bhar-
  gava, Pratik Dubal, Praveen Krishnan, Punit Singh Koura, Puxin Xu, Qing He, Qingxiao Dong,
  Ragavan Srinivasan, Raj Ganapathy, Ramon Calderer, Ricardo Silveira Cabral, Robert Stojnic,
  Roberta Raileanu, Rohit Girdhar, Rohit Patel, Romain Sauvestre, Ronnie Polidoro, Roshan Sum-
  baly, Ross Taylor, Ruan Silva, Rui Hou, Rui Wang, Saghar Hosseini, Sahana Chennabasappa,
  Sanjay Singh, Sean Bell, Seohyun Sonia Kim, Sergey Edunov, Shaoliang Nie, Sharan Narang,
  Sharath Raparthy, Sheng Shen, Shengye Wan, Shruti Bhosale, Shun Zhang, Simon Vandenhende,
  Soumya Batra, Spencer Whitman, Sten Sootla, Stephane Collot, Suchin Gururangan, Sydney
  Borodinsky, Tamar Herman, Tara Fowler, Tarek Sheasha, Thomas Georgiou, Thomas Scialom,
  Tobias Speckbacher, Todor Mihaylov, Tong Xiao, Ujjwal Karn, Vedanuj Goswami, Vibhor Gupta,
  Vignesh Ramanathan, Viktor Kerkez, Vincent Gonguet, Virginie Do, Vish Vogeti, Vladan Petro-
  vic, Weiwei Chu, Wenhan Xiong, Wenyin Fu, Whitney Meers, Xavier Martinet, Xiaodong Wang,
  Xiaoqing Ellen Tan, Xinfeng Xie, Xuchao Jia, Xuewei Wang, Yaelle Goldschlag, Yashesh Gaur,
  Yasmine Babaei, Yi Wen, Yiwen Song, Yuchen Zhang, Yue Li, Yuning Mao, Zacharie Delpierre
  Coudert, Zheng Yan, Zhengxing Chen, Zoe Papakipos, Aaditya Singh, Aaron Grattafiori, Abha
  Jain, Adam Kelsey, Adam Shajnfeld, Adithya Gangidi, Adolfo Victoria, Ahuva Goldstand, Ajay
  Menon, Ajay Sharma, Alex Boesenberg, Alex Vaughan, Alexei Baevski, Allie Feinstein, Amanda
  Kallet, Amit Sangani, Anam Yunus, Andrei Lupu, Andres Alvarado, Andrew Caples, Andrew
  Gu, Andrew Ho, Andrew Poulton, Andrew Ryan, Ankit Ramchandani, Annie Franco, Aparajita
  Saraf, Arkabandhu Chowdhury, Ashley Gabriel, Ashwin Bharambe, Assaf Eisenman, Azadeh
  Yazdan, Beau James, Ben Maurer, Benjamin Leonhardi, Bernie Huang, Beth Loyd, Beto De
  Paola, Bhargavi Paranjape, Bing Liu, Bo Wu, Boyu Ni, Braden Hancock, Bram Wasti, Bran-
  don Spence, Brani Stojkovic, Brian Gamido, Britt Montalvo, Carl Parker, Carly Burton, Catalina
  Mejia, Changhan Wang, Changkyu Kim, Chao Zhou, Chester Hu, Ching-Hsiang Chu, Chris Cai,
  Chris Tindal, Christoph Feichtenhofer, Damon Civin, Dana Beaty, Daniel Kreymer, Daniel Li,
  Danny Wyatt, David Adkins, David Xu, Davide Testuggine, Delia David, Devi Parikh, Diana
  Liskovich, Didem Foss, Dingkang Wang, Duc Le, Dustin Holland, Edward Dowling, Eissa Jamil,
  Elaine Montgomery, Eleonora Presani, Emily Hahn, Emily Wood, Erik Brinkman, Esteban Ar-
  caute, Evan Dunbar, Evan Smothers, Fei Sun, Felix Kreuk, Feng Tian, Firat Ozgenel, Francesco
  Caggioni, Francisco Guzmán, Frank Kanayet, Frank Seide, Gabriela Medina Florez, Gabriella
  Schwarz, Gada Badeer, Georgia Swee, Gil Halpern, Govind Thattai, Grant Herman, Grigory
  Sizov, Guangyi, Zhang, Guna Lakshminarayanan, Hamid Shojanazeri, Han Zou, Hannah Wang,
  Hanwen Zha, Haroun Habeeb, Harrison Rudolph, Helen Suk, Henry Aspegren, Hunter Gold-
  man, Ibrahim Damlaj, Igor Molybog, Igor Tufanov, Irina-Elena Veliche, Itai Gat, Jake Weissman,
  James Geboski, James Kohli, Japhet Asher, Jean-Baptiste Gaya, Jeff Marcus, Jeff Tang, Jennifer
  Chan, Jenny Zhen, Jeremy Reizenstein, Jeremy Teboul, Jessica Zhong, Jian Jin, Jingyi Yang, Joe
  Cummings, Jon Carvill, Jon Shepard, Jonathan McPhie, Jonathan Torres, Josh Ginsburg, Junjie
  Wang, Kai Wu, Kam Hou U, Karan Saxena, Karthik Prasad, Kartikay Khandelwal, Katayoun
  Zand, Kathy Matosich, Kaushik Veeraraghavan, Kelly Michelena, Keqian Li, Kun Huang, Kunal
  Chawla, Kushal Lakhotia, Kyle Huang, Lailin Chen, Lakshya Garg, Lavender A, Leandro Silva,
  Lee Bell, Lei Zhang, Liangpeng Guo, Licheng Yu, Liron Moshkovich, Luca Wehrstedt, Madian
  Khabsa, Manav Avalani, Manish Bhatt, Maria Tsimpoukelli, Martynas Mankus, Matan Hasson,
  Matthew Lennie, Matthias Reso, Maxim Groshev, Maxim Naumov, Maya Lathi, Meghan Ke-
  neally, Michael L. Seltzer, Michal Valko, Michelle Restrepo, Mihir Patel, Mik Vyatskov, Mikayel
  Samvelyan, Mike Clark, Mike Macey, Mike Wang, Miquel Jubert Hermoso, Mo Metanat, Mo-
  hammad Rastegari, Munish Bansal, Nandhini Santhanam, Natascha Parks, Natasha White, Navy-
  ata Bawa, Nayan Singhal, Nick Egebo, Nicolas Usunier, Nikolay Pavlovich Laptev, Ning Dong,
  Ning Zhang, Norman Cheng, Oleg Chernoguz, Olivia Hart, Omkar Salpekar, Ozlem Kalinli,
  Parkin Kent, Parth Parekh, Paul Saab, Pavan Balaji, Pedro Rittner, Philip Bontrager, Pierre Roux,
  Piotr Dollar, Polina Zvyagina, Prashant Ratanchandani, Pritish Yuvraj, Qian Liang, Rachad Alao,


                                               12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


  Rachel Rodriguez, Rafi Ayub, Raghotham Murthy, Raghu Nayani, Rahul Mitra, Raymond Li,
  Rebekkah Hogan, Robin Battey, Rocky Wang, Rohan Maheswari, Russ Howes, Ruty Rinott,
  Sai Jayesh Bondu, Samyak Datta, Sara Chugh, Sara Hunt, Sargun Dhillon, Sasha Sidorov, Sa-
  tadru Pan, Saurabh Verma, Seiji Yamamoto, Sharadh Ramaswamy, Shaun Lindsay, Shaun Lind-
  say, Sheng Feng, Shenghao Lin, Shengxin Cindy Zha, Shiva Shankar, Shuqiang Zhang, Shuqiang
  Zhang, Sinong Wang, Sneha Agarwal, Soji Sajuyigbe, Soumith Chintala, Stephanie Max, Stephen
  Chen, Steve Kehoe, Steve Satterfield, Sudarshan Govindaprasad, Sumit Gupta, Sungmin Cho,
  Sunny Virk, Suraj Subramanian, Sy Choudhury, Sydney Goldman, Tal Remez, Tamar Glaser,
  Tamara Best, Thilo Kohler, Thomas Robinson, Tianhe Li, Tianjun Zhang, Tim Matthews, Tim-
  othy Chou, Tzook Shaked, Varun Vontimitta, Victoria Ajayi, Victoria Montanez, Vijai Mohan,
  Vinay Satish Kumar, Vishal Mangla, Vı́tor Albiero, Vlad Ionescu, Vlad Poenaru, Vlad Tiberiu
  Mihailescu, Vladimir Ivanov, Wei Li, Wenchen Wang, Wenwen Jiang, Wes Bouaziz, Will Con-
  stable, Xiaocheng Tang, Xiaofang Wang, Xiaojian Wu, Xiaolan Wang, Xide Xia, Xilun Wu,
  Xinbo Gao, Yanjun Chen, Ye Hu, Ye Jia, Ye Qi, Yenda Li, Yilin Zhang, Ying Zhang, Yossi Adi,
  Youngjin Nam, Yu, Wang, Yuchen Hao, Yundi Qian, Yuzi He, Zach Rait, Zachary DeVito, Zef
  Rosnbrick, Zhaoduo Wen, Zhenyu Yang, and Zhiwei Zhao. The llama 3 herd of models, 2024.
  URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2407.21783.
Maxence Faldor, Jenny Zhang, Antoine Cully, and Jeff Clune. Omni-epic: Open-endedness via
 models of human notions of interestingness with environments programmed in code, 2024. URL
 https://arxiv.org/abs/2405.15568.
Richard Fang, Rohan Bindu, Akul Gupta, Qiusi Zhan, and Daniel Kang. Teams of llm agents can
  exploit zero-day vulnerabilities, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2406.01637.
A. Fawzi, M. Balog, A. Huang, T. Hubert, B. Romera-Paredes, M. Barekatain, A. Novikov, F. J. R.
  Ruiz, J. Schrittwieser, G. Swirszcz, D. Silver, D. Hassabis, and P. Kohli. Discovering faster
  matrix multiplication algorithms with reinforcement learning. Nature, 610(7930):47–53, 2022.
  doi: 10.1038/s41586-022-05172-4.
Peter E. Hart, Nils J. Nilsson, and Bertram Raphael. A formal basis for the heuristic determination
  of minimum cost paths. IEEE Trans. Syst. Sci. Cybern., 4(2):100–107, 1968. doi: 10.1109/TSSC.
  1968.300136. URL https://doi.org/10.1109/TSSC.1968.300136.
Shengran Hu, Cong Lu, and Jeff Clune. Automated design of agentic systems, 2024. URL https:
  //arxiv.org/abs/2408.08435.
Carlos E. Jimenez, John Yang, Alexander Wettig, Shunyu Yao, Kexin Pei, Ofir Press, and Karthik
  Narasimhan. Swe-bench: Can language models resolve real-world github issues?, 2024. URL
  https://arxiv.org/abs/2310.06770.
J. Jumper, R. Evans, A. Pritzel, T. Green, M. Figurnov, O. Ronneberger, K. Tunyasuvunakool,
   R. Bates, A. Žı́dek, A. Potapenko, A. Bridgland, C. Meyer, S. A. A. Kohl, A. J. Ballard, A. Cowie,
   B. Romera-Paredes, S. Nikolov, R. Jain, J. Adler, T. Back, S. Petersen, D. Reiman, E. Clancy,
   M. Zielinski, M. Steinegger, M. Pacholska, T. Berghammer, S. Bodenstein, D. Silver, O. Vinyals,
   A. W. Senior, K. Kavukcuoglu, P. Kohli, and D. Hassabis. Highly accurate protein structure pre-
   diction with AlphaFold. Nature, 596(7873):583–589, 2021. doi: 10.1038/s41586-021-03819-2.
Daniel Kahneman. Thinking, fast and slow. Farrar, Straus and Giroux, New York, NY, US, 2011.
  ISBN 978-0-374-27563-1.
Akbir Khan, John Hughes, Dan Valentine, Laura Ruis, Kshitij Sachan, Ansh Radhakrishnan, Edward
  Grefenstette, Samuel R. Bowman, Tim Rocktäschel, and Ethan Perez. Debating with more per-
  suasive llms leads to more truthful answers, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2402.
  06782.
Levente Kocsis and Csaba Szepesvári. Bandit based monte-carlo planning. In Johannes Fürnkranz,
  Tobias Scheffer, and Myra Spiliopoulou (eds.), Machine Learning: ECML 2006, pp. 282–293,
  Berlin, Heidelberg, 2006. Springer Berlin Heidelberg. ISBN 978-3-540-46056-5.
Jing Yu Koh, Stephen McAleer, Daniel Fried, and Ruslan Salakhutdinov. Tree search for language
   model agents, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2407.01476.


                                                 13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Yujia Li, David Choi, Junyoung Chung, Nate Kushman, Julian Schrittwieser, Rémi Leblond, Tom
  Eccles, James Keeling, Felix Gimeno, Agustin Dal Lago, Thomas Hubert, Peter Choy, Cyprien
  de Masson d’Autume, Igor Babuschkin, Xinyun Chen, Po-Sen Huang, Johannes Welbl, Sven
  Gowal, Alexey Cherepanov, James Molloy, Daniel J. Mankowitz, Esme Sutherland Robson, Push-
  meet Kohli, Nando de Freitas, Koray Kavukcuoglu, and Oriol Vinyals. Competition-level code
  generation with alphacode. Science, 378(6624):1092–1097, 2022. doi: 10.1126/science.abq1158.
  URL https://www.science.org/doi/abs/10.1126/science.abq1158.
Chris Lu, Cong Lu, Robert Tjarko Lange, Jakob Foerster, Jeff Clune, and David Ha. The ai
  scientist: Towards fully automated open-ended scientific discovery, 2024a. URL https:
  //arxiv.org/abs/2408.06292.
Cong Lu, Shengran Hu, and Jeff Clune. Intelligent go-explore: Standing on the shoulders of giant
  foundation models, 2024b. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2405.15143.
Yecheng Jason Ma, William Liang, Guanzhi Wang, De-An Huang, Osbert Bastani, Dinesh Jayara-
  man, Yuke Zhu, Linxi Fan, and Anima Anandkumar. Eureka: Human-level reward design via
  coding large language models, 2024a. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2310.12931.
Yingwei Ma, Qingping Yang, Rongyu Cao, Binhua Li, Fei Huang, and Yongbin Li. How to under-
  stand whole software repository?, 2024b. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2406.01422.
E.F. Moore. The Shortest Path Through a Maze. Bell Telephone System. Technical publications.
  monograph. Bell Telephone System., 1959. URL https://books.google.com/books?
  id=IVZBHAAACAAJ.
OpenAI.  OpenAI o1 System Card, September 2024.               URL https://openai.com/
  research/o1-system-card. Online report.
OpenAI, Josh Achiam, Steven Adler, Sandhini Agarwal, Lama Ahmad, Ilge Akkaya, Floren-
  cia Leoni Aleman, Diogo Almeida, Janko Altenschmidt, Sam Altman, Shyamal Anadkat, Red
  Avila, Igor Babuschkin, Suchir Balaji, Valerie Balcom, Paul Baltescu, Haiming Bao, Moham-
  mad Bavarian, Jeff Belgum, Irwan Bello, Jake Berdine, Gabriel Bernadett-Shapiro, Christopher
  Berner, Lenny Bogdonoff, Oleg Boiko, Madelaine Boyd, Anna-Luisa Brakman, Greg Brock-
  man, Tim Brooks, Miles Brundage, Kevin Button, Trevor Cai, Rosie Campbell, Andrew Cann,
  Brittany Carey, Chelsea Carlson, Rory Carmichael, Brooke Chan, Che Chang, Fotis Chantzis,
  Derek Chen, Sully Chen, Ruby Chen, Jason Chen, Mark Chen, Ben Chess, Chester Cho, Casey
  Chu, Hyung Won Chung, Dave Cummings, Jeremiah Currier, Yunxing Dai, Cory Decareaux,
  Thomas Degry, Noah Deutsch, Damien Deville, Arka Dhar, David Dohan, Steve Dowling, Sheila
  Dunning, Adrien Ecoffet, Atty Eleti, Tyna Eloundou, David Farhi, Liam Fedus, Niko Felix,
  Simón Posada Fishman, Juston Forte, Isabella Fulford, Leo Gao, Elie Georges, Christian Gib-
  son, Vik Goel, Tarun Gogineni, Gabriel Goh, Rapha Gontijo-Lopes, Jonathan Gordon, Morgan
  Grafstein, Scott Gray, Ryan Greene, Joshua Gross, Shixiang Shane Gu, Yufei Guo, Chris Hal-
  lacy, Jesse Han, Jeff Harris, Yuchen He, Mike Heaton, Johannes Heidecke, Chris Hesse, Alan
  Hickey, Wade Hickey, Peter Hoeschele, Brandon Houghton, Kenny Hsu, Shengli Hu, Xin Hu,
  Joost Huizinga, Shantanu Jain, Shawn Jain, Joanne Jang, Angela Jiang, Roger Jiang, Haozhun
  Jin, Denny Jin, Shino Jomoto, Billie Jonn, Heewoo Jun, Tomer Kaftan, Łukasz Kaiser, Ali Ka-
  mali, Ingmar Kanitscheider, Nitish Shirish Keskar, Tabarak Khan, Logan Kilpatrick, Jong Wook
  Kim, Christina Kim, Yongjik Kim, Jan Hendrik Kirchner, Jamie Kiros, Matt Knight, Daniel
  Kokotajlo, Łukasz Kondraciuk, Andrew Kondrich, Aris Konstantinidis, Kyle Kosic, Gretchen
  Krueger, Vishal Kuo, Michael Lampe, Ikai Lan, Teddy Lee, Jan Leike, Jade Leung, Daniel
  Levy, Chak Ming Li, Rachel Lim, Molly Lin, Stephanie Lin, Mateusz Litwin, Theresa Lopez,
  Ryan Lowe, Patricia Lue, Anna Makanju, Kim Malfacini, Sam Manning, Todor Markov, Yaniv
  Markovski, Bianca Martin, Katie Mayer, Andrew Mayne, Bob McGrew, Scott Mayer McKinney,
  Christine McLeavey, Paul McMillan, Jake McNeil, David Medina, Aalok Mehta, Jacob Menick,
  Luke Metz, Andrey Mishchenko, Pamela Mishkin, Vinnie Monaco, Evan Morikawa, Daniel
  Mossing, Tong Mu, Mira Murati, Oleg Murk, David Mély, Ashvin Nair, Reiichiro Nakano, Ra-
  jeev Nayak, Arvind Neelakantan, Richard Ngo, Hyeonwoo Noh, Long Ouyang, Cullen O’Keefe,
  Jakub Pachocki, Alex Paino, Joe Palermo, Ashley Pantuliano, Giambattista Parascandolo, Joel
  Parish, Emy Parparita, Alex Passos, Mikhail Pavlov, Andrew Peng, Adam Perelman, Filipe
  de Avila Belbute Peres, Michael Petrov, Henrique Ponde de Oliveira Pinto, Michael, Pokorny,


                                               14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


  Michelle Pokrass, Vitchyr H. Pong, Tolly Powell, Alethea Power, Boris Power, Elizabeth Proehl,
  Raul Puri, Alec Radford, Jack Rae, Aditya Ramesh, Cameron Raymond, Francis Real, Kendra
  Rimbach, Carl Ross, Bob Rotsted, Henri Roussez, Nick Ryder, Mario Saltarelli, Ted Sanders,
  Shibani Santurkar, Girish Sastry, Heather Schmidt, David Schnurr, John Schulman, Daniel Sel-
  sam, Kyla Sheppard, Toki Sherbakov, Jessica Shieh, Sarah Shoker, Pranav Shyam, Szymon Sidor,
  Eric Sigler, Maddie Simens, Jordan Sitkin, Katarina Slama, Ian Sohl, Benjamin Sokolowsky,
  Yang Song, Natalie Staudacher, Felipe Petroski Such, Natalie Summers, Ilya Sutskever, Jie Tang,
  Nikolas Tezak, Madeleine B. Thompson, Phil Tillet, Amin Tootoonchian, Elizabeth Tseng, Pre-
  ston Tuggle, Nick Turley, Jerry Tworek, Juan Felipe Cerón Uribe, Andrea Vallone, Arun Vi-
  jayvergiya, Chelsea Voss, Carroll Wainwright, Justin Jay Wang, Alvin Wang, Ben Wang, Jonathan
  Ward, Jason Wei, CJ Weinmann, Akila Welihinda, Peter Welinder, Jiayi Weng, Lilian Weng,
  Matt Wiethoff, Dave Willner, Clemens Winter, Samuel Wolrich, Hannah Wong, Lauren Work-
  man, Sherwin Wu, Jeff Wu, Michael Wu, Kai Xiao, Tao Xu, Sarah Yoo, Kevin Yu, Qiming
  Yuan, Wojciech Zaremba, Rowan Zellers, Chong Zhang, Marvin Zhang, Shengjia Zhao, Tianhao
  Zheng, Juntang Zhuang, William Zhuk, and Barret Zoph. Gpt-4 technical report, 2024. URL
  https://arxiv.org/abs/2303.08774.
Albert Örwall. Moatless tools, jun 2024.           URL https://github.com/aorwall/
  moatless-tools. Accessed: 2024-07-16.
Long Ouyang, Jeff Wu, Xu Jiang, Diogo Almeida, Carroll L. Wainwright, Pamela Mishkin, Chong
  Zhang, Sandhini Agarwal, Katarina Slama, Alex Ray, John Schulman, Jacob Hilton, Fraser Kel-
  ton, Luke Miller, Maddie Simens, Amanda Askell, Peter Welinder, Paul Christiano, Jan Leike,
  and Ryan Lowe. Training language models to follow instructions with human feedback, 2022.
  URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2203.02155.
Liangming Pan, Alon Albalak, Xinyi Wang, and William Yang Wang. Logic-lm: Empowering
  large language models with symbolic solvers for faithful logical reasoning, 2023. URL https:
  //arxiv.org/abs/2305.12295.
Maria Rigaki, Carlos Catania, and Sebastian Garcia. Hackphyr: A local fine-tuned llm agent for
 network security environments, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2409.11276.
Swarnadeep Saha, Archiki Prasad, Justin Chih-Yao Chen, Peter Hase, Elias Stengel-Eskin, and
  Mohit Bansal. System-1.x: Learning to balance fast and slow planning with language models,
  2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2407.14414.
David Silver, Aja Huang, Chris J. Maddison, Arthur Guez, Laurent Sifre, George van den Driessche,
  Julian Schrittwieser, Ioannis Antonoglou, Veda Panneershelvam, Marc Lanctot, Sander Dieleman,
  Dominik Grewe, John Nham, Nal Kalchbrenner, Ilya Sutskever, Timothy Lillicrap, Madeleine
  Leach, Koray Kavukcuoglu, Thore Graepel, and Demis Hassabis. Mastering the game of go with
  deep neural networks and tree search. Nature, 529(7587):484–489, 1 2016a. ISSN 1476-4687.
  doi: 10.1038/nature16961. URL https://doi.org/10.1038/nature16961.
David Silver, Aja Huang, Chris J. Maddison, Arthur Guez, Laurent Sifre, George van den Driess-
  che, Julian Schrittwieser, Ioannis Antonoglou, Vedavyas Panneershelvam, Marc Lanctot, Sander
  Dieleman, Dominik Grewe, John Nham, Nal Kalchbrenner, Ilya Sutskever, Timothy P. Lilli-
  crap, Madeleine Leach, Koray Kavukcuoglu, Thore Graepel, and Demis Hassabis. Mastering
  the game of go with deep neural networks and tree search. Nat., 529(7587):484–489, 2016b. doi:
  10.1038/NATURE16961. URL https://doi.org/10.1038/nature16961.
David Silver, Thomas Hubert, Julian Schrittwieser, Ioannis Antonoglou, Matthew Lai, Arthur
  Guez, Marc Lanctot, Laurent Sifre, Dharshan Kumaran, Thore Graepel, Timothy Lillicrap,
  Karen Simonyan, and Demis Hassabis. A general reinforcement learning algorithm that masters
  chess, shogi, and go through self-play. Science, 362(6419):1140–1144, 2018. doi: 10.1126/
  science.aar6404. URL https://www.science.org/doi/abs/10.1126/science.
  aar6404.
Charlie Snell, Jaehoon Lee, Kelvin Xu, and Aviral Kumar. Scaling llm test-time compute optimally
  can be more effective than scaling model parameters, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/
  abs/2408.03314.


                                               15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Guanzhi Wang, Yuqi Xie, Yunfan Jiang, Ajay Mandlekar, Chaowei Xiao, Yuke Zhu, Linxi Fan,
  and Anima Anandkumar. Voyager: An open-ended embodied agent with large language models,
  2023. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2305.16291.

Xingyao Wang, Yangyi Chen, Lifan Yuan, Yizhe Zhang, Yunzhu Li, Hao Peng, and Heng Ji. Exe-
  cutable code actions elicit better llm agents, 2024a. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2402.
  01030.

Xingyao Wang, Boxuan Li, Yufan Song, Frank F. Xu, Xiangru Tang, Mingchen Zhuge, Jiayi Pan,
  Yueqi Song, Bowen Li, Jaskirat Singh, Hoang H. Tran, Fuqiang Li, Ren Ma, Mingzhang Zheng,
  Bill Qian, Yanjun Shao, Niklas Muennighoff, Yizhe Zhang, Binyuan Hui, Junyang Lin, Robert
  Brennan, Hao Peng, Heng Ji, and Graham Neubig. Opendevin: An open platform for ai software
  developers as generalist agents, 2024b. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2407.16741.

Jason Wei, Yi Tay, Rishi Bommasani, Colin Raffel, Barret Zoph, Sebastian Borgeaud, Dani Yo-
  gatama, Maarten Bosma, Denny Zhou, Donald Metzler, et al. Emergent abilities of large language
  models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2206.07682, 2022.

Chunqiu Steven Xia, Yinlin Deng, Soren Dunn, and Lingming Zhang. Agentless: Demystifying llm-
  based software engineering agents, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2407.01489.

An Yang, Baosong Yang, Binyuan Hui, Bo Zheng, Bowen Yu, Chang Zhou, Chengpeng Li,
  Chengyuan Li, Dayiheng Liu, Fei Huang, Guanting Dong, Haoran Wei, Huan Lin, Jialong Tang,
  Jialin Wang, Jian Yang, Jianhong Tu, Jianwei Zhang, Jianxin Ma, Jianxin Yang, Jin Xu, Jin-
  gren Zhou, Jinze Bai, Jinzheng He, Junyang Lin, Kai Dang, Keming Lu, Keqin Chen, Kexin
  Yang, Mei Li, Mingfeng Xue, Na Ni, Pei Zhang, Peng Wang, Ru Peng, Rui Men, Ruize Gao,
  Runji Lin, Shijie Wang, Shuai Bai, Sinan Tan, Tianhang Zhu, Tianhao Li, Tianyu Liu, Wen-
  bin Ge, Xiaodong Deng, Xiaohuan Zhou, Xingzhang Ren, Xinyu Zhang, Xipin Wei, Xuancheng
  Ren, Xuejing Liu, Yang Fan, Yang Yao, Yichang Zhang, Yu Wan, Yunfei Chu, Yuqiong Liu,
  Zeyu Cui, Zhenru Zhang, Zhifang Guo, and Zhihao Fan. Qwen2 technical report, 2024a. URL
  https://arxiv.org/abs/2407.10671.

John Yang, Carlos E. Jimenez, Alexander Wettig, Kilian Lieret, Shunyu Yao, Karthik Narasimhan,
  and Ofir Press. Swe-agent: Agent-computer interfaces enable automated software engineering,
  2024b. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2405.15793.

Shunyu Yao, Dian Yu, Jeffrey Zhao, Izhak Shafran, Tom Griffiths, Yuan Cao, and Karthik
  Narasimhan. Tree of thoughts: Deliberate problem solving with large language models. In
  Alice Oh, Tristan Naumann, Amir Globerson, Kate Saenko, Moritz Hardt, and Sergey Levine
  (eds.), Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 36: Annual Conference on Neural
  Information Processing Systems 2023, NeurIPS 2023, New Orleans, LA, USA, December 10 -
  16, 2023, 2023. URL http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/
  271db9922b8d1f4dd7aaef84ed5ac703-Abstract-Conference.html.

Kexun Zhang, Weiran Yao, Zuxin Liu, Yihao Feng, Zhiwei Liu, Rithesh Murthy, Tian Lan, Lei
  Li, Renze Lou, Jiacheng Xu, Bo Pang, Yingbo Zhou, Shelby Heinecke, Silvio Savarese, Huan
  Wang, and Caiming Xiong. Diversity empowers intelligence: Integrating expertise of software
  engineering agents, 2024a. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2408.07060.

Yao Zhang, Zijian Ma, Yunpu Ma, Zhen Han, Yu Wu, and Volker Tresp. Webpilot: A versatile and
  autonomous multi-agent system for web task execution with strategic exploration, 2024b. URL
  https://arxiv.org/abs/2408.15978.

Yiqun Zhang, Xiaocui Yang, Shi Feng, Daling Wang, Yifei Zhang, and Kaisong Song. Can llms
  beat humans in debating? a dynamic multi-agent framework for competitive debate, 2024c. URL
  https://arxiv.org/abs/2408.04472.

Yuntong Zhang, Haifeng Ruan, Zhiyu Fan, and Abhik Roychoudhury. Autocoderover: Autonomous
  program improvement, 2024d. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2404.05427.


                                               16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A    R EPRODUCIBILITY
All models and data used in our work are publicly available. We additionally provide hyperparameter
details in Appendix 2. The code will be released as a public repository upon publication.

B    A DDITIONAL I MPLEMENTATION D ETAILS
Moatless-Adapted is an extended version of the moatless-tools library with support for a tree struc-
ture, the ability to revert to earlier versions of the codebase, and the capability to run tests.
The standard implementation of moatless-tools is based on a finite state machine structure where a
state holds information about file context and properties set in the configuration or from previous
states. It can then transition to a new state when an action is executed. The request that initiates the
action is created by an LLM. This follows a linear structure where one state can transition to another
state. In Moatless-Adapted, this model is extended so that a state can expand by using actions to
create more states. The connections between states are then represented in a tree structure with
nodes.
Each state has a file context associated with it. This file context will be included in the prompt
sent to an LLM. To limit the size of the prompt, files are divided into ”spans,” where a span could
be, for example, a section of code (e.g., imports), a class, or a function. These are identified by
span IDs. Thus, the LLM sees a limited part of the code at a time but can request more context by
searching for or adding files and spans. The file context therefore changes over time, and a specific
state of file context is linked to a specific state. In the standard implementation of moatless-tools,
changes to the codebase are made linearly, and each change is saved directly to the file system. In
Moatless-Adapted, however, there is a need to be able to revert to earlier states and thus return to a
previous version of the codebase. To handle this, the code is stored in a git repository where each
change is committed, and each state has a reference to a commit as well as the current patch of the
diff from the initial commit that existed before starting. This way, one can go back to an earlier state
by specifying the state ID, and the commit that was current at that time will be checked out.
The test files present in the file context are run each time the Plan state is initiated, and the test
results are provided to the state. The tests are then run in Docker images built via the SWE-bench
library. To use this approach in a benchmark where a larger number of instances should be able to
run simultaneously, a solution is used where these images are run as pods in a Kubernetes cluster.
Moatless-tools communicates with the testbed by applying patches and running commands via an
API. When a new instance starts, a pod is created which is then reset at each run, applying the
current patch and running tests according to the test command specified in the SWE-bench library.
It’s important to add here that the agent is not aware of the PASS TO PASS or FAIL TO PASS
tests in the SWE-bench harness, but only knows how to run the tests. This corresponds to a real
engineering environment where each project can have its own test commands.


                                                  17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


C    MCTS H YPERPARAMETERS
The Monte Carlo Tree Search (MCTS) algorithm used in this study employs several hyperparame-
ters.

                                 Table 2: MCTS Hyperparameters
          Hyperparameter                           Description                      Default
          c param                                  UCT exploration parameter        1.41
          max expansions                           Max children per node            5
          max iterations                           Max MCTS iterations              100
          provide feedback                         Enable feedback                  True
          best first                               Use best-first strategy          True
          value function temperature               Value function temperature       0.2
          max depth                                Max tree depth                   20
          UCT Score Calculation Parameters
          exploration weight                       UCT exploration weight           1.0
          depth weight                             Depth penalty weight             0.8
          depth bonus factor                       Depth bonus factor               200.0
          high value threshold                     High-value node threshold        55.0
          low value threshold                      Low-value node threshold         50.0
          very high value threshold                Very high-value threshold        75.0
          high value leaf bonus constant           High-value leaf bonus            20.0
          high value bad children bonus constant   High-value bad children bonus    20.0
          high value child penalty constant        High-value child penalty         5.0
          Action Model Parameters
          action model temperature                 Action model temperature         0.2
          Discriminator Parameters
          number of agents                         Number of Discriminator Agents   5
          number of round                          Number of debate rounds          3
          discriminator temperature                Discriminator temperature        1.0

These hyperparameters can be adjusted to fine-tune the MCTS algorithm’s performance for specific
problem domains or computational constraints. The values listed here are the defaults as defined in
the TreeSearchSettings class and the MCTS implementation.


                                                   18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


D    A BILITY OF MCTS TO E SCAPE U NPRODUCTIVE L OOPS VS . BASELINE

                Moatless-adapted                          SWE-search
                          Start
                                                                Node11
                         Node1

                      SearchCode
                        Action2

                      IdentifyCode
                         Node3
                                            RequestCodeChange            RequestCodeChange
                  RequestCodeChange
                        Action4

                        EditCode
                         Node5                                                               100


                          None                 EditCode                     EditCode
                        Action5

                  RequestCodeChange                                                          75

                        Action6

                        EditCode
                         Node7                  Node42                       Node50          50

                  RequestCodeChange
                        Action8

                        EditCode
                                                                                             25
                         Node9

                  RequestCodeChange         RequestCodeChange            RequestCodeChange

                        Action10


                                                                                                       Reward
                                                                                             0
                        EditCode
                        Node11

                  RequestCodeChange
                                               EditCode                      EditCode
                        Action12                                                                 25

                        EditCode
                        Node13

                  RequestCodeChange
                                                                                                 50
                        Action14
                                                Node71                       Node54
                        EditCode
                        Node15
                                                                                                 75
                  RequestCodeChange
                        Action16

                        EditCode                                              Finish
                                            RequestCodeChange
                        Node17                                                                   100

                  RequestCodeChange
                        Action18

                        EditCode
                        Node19                                               Finished
                                               EditCode
                  RequestCodeChange
                        Action20

                        EditCode
                        Node21

                  RequestCodeChange             Node73
                        Action22

                        EditCode
                        Node23

                  RequestCodeChange
                        Action24

                        EditCode
                        Node25



                   [TERMINATED]


Figure 6: Avoiding Repetitive Actions, django django 10914. We found that the base agent can
often get stuck performing repetitive actions that do not bring it closer to solving the issue, and which
commonly lead to unresolvable dead-ends. In this example, the base agent was stuck implementing
wrong tests which continuously returned errors. In contrast, when this happens in SWE-Search, the
Value Agent recognizes this, terminating these trajectories quickly, as happens in Node 73 (orange).


                                                     19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


E    M ODEL I NSTANCE R ESOLUTION U NIQUENESS
To understand the complementary strengths of different models in resolving software issues, we
analyzed how unique their resolved issue subsets where. Figure 7 illustrates the resolution patterns
for each model across five of the codebases in SWE-bench-lite.

       django             matplotlib                pytest           sympy             scikit-learn


      GPT-4o       GPT-4o-mini         Qwen2.5-72B-Instruct   DeepSeek-V2.5      Llama-3.1-70B-Instruct

Figure 7: Unique Issue Resolution Patterns Across Models and Libraries. Each column repre-
sents a different Python repository, and each row within a column represents a specific issue. Colored
blocks indicate successful resolution by the corresponding model (see legend). White spaces denote
unresolved issues. This visualization highlights the diverse problem-solving capabilities of different
models across various software domains, demonstrating that no single model dominates across all
issues and libraries.


                                                     20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


F       A BILITY OF VALUE F UNCTION TO D ISCERN S UCCESSFUL T RAJECTORIES
Before implementing SWE-Search, we conducted a general study across many models to evaluate
the models’ ability to differentiate states which led to resolved vs. unresolved issues. Figure 8 shows
the results of this study. We found that in general, models assigned higher rewards to states which
eventually led to resolved issues. Of particular interest was the Deepseek model, which seemed
to identify critical errors in trajectories effectively. This was also observed in the final agent (see
Fig. 5a).



                                                                                               Average State Reward Comparison
        Average State Reward


                               80

                               60

                               40

                               20

                                0

                                                       Resolved                          Unresolved
                               20
                                                                                                            t
                                                                                t


                                                                                                                          4o


                                                                                                                                                     ct


                                                                                                                                                                e
                                                                                                       uc
                                                                           uc
                                                   t


                                                                                                                                                               ag
                                              uc


                                                                                                                                                    ru
                                                                                                       tr


                                                                                                                      t-
                                                                           tr


                                                                                                                                                           er
                                              tr


                                                                                                                                               st
                                                                                                   ns


                                                                                                                     gp
                                                                      ns
                                          ns


                                                                                                                                              -in


                                                                                                                                                          Av
                                                                                                  -I
                                                                      -I
                                         -I


                                                                                               B
                                                                  B


                                                                                                                                          3b
                                     8B


                                                                                             14
                                                                 72


                                                                                                                                         -3
                                                                                          -A
                                    3-


                                                             2-


                                                                                                                                     er
                                a-


                                                            en


                                                                                         B


                                                                                                                                    od
                                                                                     57
                               am


                                                        w


                                                                                                                                -c
                                                                                    2-
                                                       /Q
               Ll


                                                                                                                               ek
                                                                                en
                                                   en
        a-


                                                                                                                          se
                                                                                w
    et


                                                   w


                                                                           /Q


                                                                                                                      ep
                                               Q
    M


                                                                       en


                                                                                                                     de
                                                                      w
                                                                  Q


Figure 8: Average State Reward Comparison Across Models. This graph compares the average
state rewards assigned by different language models for resolved (green) and unresolved (red) issues.
Error bars indicate standard deviation. Most models consistently assign higher rewards to states
leading to resolved issues, with the exception of the. The ’Average’ column represents the mean
across all models, demonstrating a clear distinction between resolved and unresolved states.


                                                                                                                21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


G    VALUE F UNCTION P ROMPTS

    Value Function Search Prompt

    Your task is to evaluate a search action executed by an AI agent, considering the search
    parameters, the resulting file context, and the identified code from the search results. Your
    evaluation will focus on whether the search action was well-constructed, whether the re-
    sulting file context is relevant and useful for solving the problem at hand, and whether the
    identified code is appropriate and helpful.

    You will be provided with four inputs:

    • Problem Statement: This will be provided within the <problem statement> XML
      tag and contains the initial message or problem description the coding agent is trying to
      solve.
    • The Search Request: This will be provided within the <search request> XML tag
      and contains the search parameters used by the agent to define the search.
    • The Search Result: The content retrieved based on the search parameters provided within
      a <search results> XML tag.
    • Identified Code: The specific code identified from the search results, provided within the
      <identified code> XML tag.


    Search request parameters:

    • File Pattern (file pattern): Glob patterns (e.g., **/*.py) to filter search results to specific
      files or directories.
    • Query (query): A natural language query for semantic search.
    • Code Snippet (code snippet): Specific code snippets for exact matching.
    • Class Names (class names): Specific class names to include in the search.
    • Function Names (function names): Specific function names to include in the search.


    Evaluation Criteria:


    Search Parameters:

    • Are they appropriately defined to focus the search on relevant files or code?
    • Do they align well with the problem statement?


    Resulting File Context:

    • Does it contain relevant and useful information for solving the problem?
    • Are there missing or irrelevant results indicating a need to refine the search?


    Identified Code Review (most crucial):

    • Is the identified code directly related to the problem?
    • Does it provide the necessary functionality to address the issue?



                                                   22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


   Overall Relevance:

   • Does the combination of search parameters, file context, and identified code effectively
     address the problem?
   • Could there be a better approach or improvements?


   Reward Scale and Guidelines:

   Assign a single integer value between -100 and 100 based on how well the search action,
   resulting file context, and identified code addressed the task at hand. Use the following scale:

   100:

   • Search Parameters: Precisely match the problem needs; no irrelevant or missing elements.
   • Identified Code: Completely and accurately solves the problem with no issues.


   75 to 99:

   • Search Parameters: Well-defined and mostly relevant; minor improvements possible.
   • Identified Code: Effectively addresses the problem with minor issues that are easily fix-
     able.


   0 to 74:

   • Search Parameters: Partially relevant; noticeable inaccuracies or omissions.
   • Identified Code: Partially solves the problem but has significant gaps or errors.


   -1 to -49:

   • Search Parameters: Misaligned with the problem; poorly defined.
   • Identified Code: Fails to address the problem effectively; may cause confusion.


   -50 to -100:

   • Search Parameters: Irrelevant or incorrect; hinders problem-solving.
   • Identified Code: Unrelated to the problem; provides no useful information.


   Output Format:

   Please ensure your output strictly adheres to the following structure:
   <Explanation> [A brief explanation of the evaluation in max one paragraph.]
   <Reward> [A single integer reward value between -100 and 100]


                                                 23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


   Value Function Plan Prompt

   Your role is to evaluate the executed action of the search tree that our AI agents are travers-
   ing, to help us determine the best trajectory to solve a programming issue. The agent is
   responsible for identifying and modifying the correct file(s) in response to the problem state-
   ment.

   Input Data Format:

   • Problem Statement: This will be provided within the <problem statement> XML
     tag and contains the initial message or problem description the coding agent is trying to
     solve.
   • File Context: The relevant code context will be provided within the <file context>
     XML tag and pertains to the state the agent is operating on.
   • History: The sequence of state transitions and actions taken prior to the current state will
     be contained within the <history> XML tag. This will include information on the
     parts of the codebase that were changed, the resulting diff, test results, and any reasoning
     or planned steps.
   • Executed Action: The last executed action of the coding agent will be provided within the
     <executed action> XML tag, this includes the proposed changes and the resulting
     diff of the change.
   • Full Git Diff: The full Git diff up to the current state will be provided within the
     <full git diff> XML tag. This shows all changes made from the initial state to
     the current one and should be considered in your evaluation to ensure the modifications
     align with the overall solution.
   • Test Results: The results of any test cases run on the modified code will be provided
     within the <test results> XML tag. This will include information about passed,
     failed, or skipped tests, which should be carefully evaluated to confirm the correctness of
     the changes.


   Evaluation Criteria:


   Code Correctness: Evaluate whether the implemented code correctly addresses the prob-

   lem. This includes verifying that the correct lines or sections of code have been identified
   and modified appropriately. Ensure that the changes are both syntactically and logically cor-
   rect, and that the diffs accurately represent the intended modifications without introducing
   unrelated changes. Assess whether the modifications effectively solve the problem without
   introducing new issues or inefficiencies.

   Mistakes in Editing Code: Identify any errors made during the code editing process. This

   involves checking for unintended deletions, incorrect modifications, or syntax errors intro-
   duced through the changes. Ensure that the Git diffs maintain integrity by only including the
   intended modifications and no accidental alterations to unrelated parts of the codebase.

   Testing: Assess the proposed changes against existing test cases. Determine if the changes

   pass all relevant tests and evaluate whether any test failures could have been reasonably
   foreseen and avoided by the agent. Consider whether the agent anticipated potential test
   outcomes and addressed them proactively in the solution.



                                                 24
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


   History and Action Evaluation: Review the agent’s previous state transitions and actions

   to determine if the current action contributes positively to solving the problem. Pay special
   attention to detect if the agent is engaging in repetitive actions without making meaningful
   progress. Evaluate whether the last executed action is appropriate and logical given the
   current progress and history of actions.

   Reward Scale and Guidelines:

   The reward value must be based on how confident you are that the agent’s solution is the
   most optimal one possible with no unresolved issues or pending tasks. The scale ranges
   from -100 to 100, where:

   100: You are fully confident that the proposed solution is the most optimal possible, has

   been thoroughly tested, and requires no further changes.

   75-99: The approach is likely the best one possible, but there are minor issues or opportu-

   nities for optimization. All major functionality is correct, but some small improvements or
   additional testing may be needed. There might be some edge cases that are not covered.

   0-74: The solution has been partially implemented or is incomplete or there are likely alter-

   native approaches that might be better, i.e., this is likely not the most optimal approach. The
   core problem might be addressed, but there are significant issues with tests, logical flow, or
   side effects that need attention. There are likely alternative approaches that are much better.

   0: The solution is not yet functional or is missing key elements. The agent’s assertion that

   the task is finished is incorrect, and substantial work is still required to fully resolve the issue.
   Modifying the wrong code, unintentionally removing or altering existing code, introducing
   syntax errors, or producing incorrect diffs fall into this range.

   -1 to -49: The proposed solution introduces new issues or regresses existing functionality,

   but some elements of the solution show potential or may be salvageable. Repetitive actions
   without progress fall into this range.

   -50 to -100: The solution is entirely incorrect, causing significant new problems, or fails

   to address the original issue entirely. Immediate and comprehensive changes are necessary.
   Persistent repetitive actions without progress should be heavily penalized.

   Output Format:

   Please ensure your output strictly adheres to the following structure:
   <Explanation> [Your brief explanation of the evaluation in max one paragraph.]
   <Reward> [A single integer reward value between -100 and 100]


                                                    25
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


   Value Function Request More Context Prompt

   Your role is to evaluate the executed action of the search tree that our AI agents are travers-
   ing, specifically for the RequestMoreContext action. This action is used when the agent
   requests to see code that is not in the current context, potentially revealing an understand-
   ing that relevant code is wholly or partially not visible, and enabling the agent to uncover
   important missing information.

   Evaluation Criteria:

   • Relevance: Are the requested files and code spans likely to be relevant to the problem at
     hand?
   • Necessity: Is the additional context truly needed, or is the agent unnecessarily expanding
     the scope?
   • Specificity: Has the agent been specific in its request, or is it asking for overly broad
     sections of code?
   • Contextual Understanding: Does the request demonstrate a good understanding of the
     codebase structure and the problem domain?
   • Efficiency: Is the agent making targeted requests, or is it asking for too much unnecessary
     information?
   • Progress: Does this request seem likely to move the problem-solving process forward?


   Input Data Format:

   • Problem Statement: Provided within the <problem statement> XML tag, contain-
     ing the initial problem description.
   • File Context: The current code context within the <file context> XML tag.
   • History: Previous state transitions and actions within the <history> XML tag.
   • Executed Action:           The RequestMoreContext action details within the
     <executed action> XML tag, including the files and code spans requested.


   Reward Scale and Guidelines: Assign a single integer value between -100 and 100 based

   on how well the RequestMoreContext action addresses the task at hand:

   100: Perfect request that is highly likely to provide crucial missing information.


   75-99: Good request with minor improvements possible in specificity or relevance.


   0-74: Partially relevant request, but with noticeable inaccuracies or potential for better tar-

   geting.

   -1 to -49: Poor request that is likely to provide mostly irrelevant information or expand the

   scope unnecessarily.

   -50 to -100: Very poor request that is entirely irrelevant or demonstrates a fundamental



                                                 26
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


   misunderstanding of the problem or codebase structure.

   Output Format: Please ensure your output strictly adheres to the following structure:

   <Explanation> [Your explanation of the evaluation in max two paragraphs.]
   <Reward> [A single integer reward value between -100 and 100]



   Value Function Edit Prompt

   Your role is to evaluate the executed action of the search tree that our AI agents are travers-
   ing, with the goal of ensuring that a complete and verified solution is in place. The agent
   believes that it has finished solving the programming issue.

   Evaluation Criteria


   Solution Correctness and Quality: Verify that the proposed changes logically address the

   problem statement. Ensure the changes fit contextually within the existing codebase without
   introducing new issues. Confirm syntactic correctness and that there are no syntax errors
   or typos. Assess whether the solution represents an overall improvement and is the most
   optimal approach possible.

   Accuracy of Code Modifications: Check that the agent correctly identified the appropriate

   code spans to modify. Ensure the changes made are accurate and do not include unintended
   modifications. Look for any alterations to unrelated parts of the code that could introduce
   new problems.

   Testing and Test Results Analysis:

   • Importance of Test Updates: It is crucial that the agent updated existing tests or added
     new tests to verify the solution. Failure to do so should be heavily penalized. The agent
     should ensure that code changes are validated by appropriate tests to confirm correctness
     and prevent regressions.
   • Assess Test Coverage: Evaluate whether the agent has adequately tested the solution,
     including adding new tests for new functionality or changes. Verify that the tests cover
     relevant cases and edge conditions.
   • Penalization for Lack of Testing: When calculating the reward, heavily penalize the
     agent if they failed to update or add necessary tests to verify the solution.


   Consideration of Alternative Approaches: Always assess whether there could be a better

   alternative approach to the problem. Mention any potential alternative solutions in your
   explanation if they are applicable.

   Identification and Explanation of Mistakes: If the agent made incorrect actions, identify

   exactly where and why the mistakes occurred. Explain the impact of any syntax errors,
   incorrect code modifications, or unintended changes.



                                                 27
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


   Assessment of Agent’s Completion Assertion: Verify if the agent’s assertion that the task

   is finished is accurate. Determine if substantial work is still required to fully resolve the
   issue and address this in your evaluation.

   Input Data Format:

   • Problem Statement: This will be provided within the <problem statement> XML
     tag and contains the initial message or problem description the coding agent is trying to
     solve.
   • File Context: The relevant code context will be provided within the <file context>
     XML tag and pertains to the state the agent is operating on.
   • History: The sequence of state transitions and actions taken prior to the current state will
     be contained within the <history> XML tag. This will include information on the
     parts of the codebase that were changed, the resulting diff, test results, and any reasoning
     or planned steps.
   • Reasoning for Completion: The reasoning provided by the agent for why the task is
     finished will be provided within the <reasoning for completion> XML tag. This
     includes the agent’s explanation of why no further changes or actions are necessary.
   • Full Git Diff: The full Git diff up to the current state will be provided within the
     <full git diff> XML tag. This shows all changes made from the initial state to
     the current one and should be considered in your evaluation to ensure the modifications
     align with the overall solution.
   • Test Results: The results of any test cases run on the modified code will be provided
     within the <test results> XML tag. This will include information about passed,
     failed, or skipped tests, which should be carefully evaluated to confirm the correctness of
     the changes.


   Reward Scale and Guidelines:

   The reward value must be based on how confident you are that the agent’s solution is the
   most optimal one possible with no unresolved issues or pending tasks. It is important that
   the agent updated or added new tests to verify the solution; failure to do so should be heavily
   penalized. The scale ranges from -100 to 100, where:

   100: You are fully confident that the proposed solution is the most optimal possible, has

   been thoroughly tested (including updated or new tests), and requires no further changes.

   75-99: The approach is likely the best one possible, but there are minor issues or opportu-

   nities for optimization. All major functionality is correct, but some small improvements or
   additional testing may be needed. There might be some edge cases that are not covered.

   0-74: The solution has been partially implemented or is incomplete, or there are likely

   alternative approaches that might be better. The core problem might be addressed, but there
   are significant issues with tests (especially if the agent did not update or add new tests),
   logical flow, or side effects that need attention.

   0: The solution is not yet functional or is missing key elements. The agent’s assertion that



                                                 28
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


    the task is finished is incorrect, and substantial work is still required to fully resolve the
    issue.

    -1 to -49: The proposed solution introduces new issues or regresses existing functionality,

    but some elements show potential or may be salvageable. Modifying the wrong code, unin-
    tentionally removing or altering existing code, introducing syntax errors, producing incorrect
    diffs, or failing to update or add necessary tests fall into this range.

    -50 to -100: The solution is entirely incorrect, causing significant new problems or failing

    to address the original issue entirely. Immediate and comprehensive changes are necessary.
    Persistent repetitive actions without progress, or failure to update or add tests when neces-
    sary, should be heavily penalized.

    Output Format: Please ensure your output strictly adheres to the following structure:

    <Explanation> [Your explanation of the evaluation in max two paragraphs.]
    <Reward> [A single integer reward value between -100 and 100]


H     M OATLESS T OOLS S TATE R IGIDITY
The Moatless-tools version (v0.0.2) enforces a rigid transition structure where agents must follow
a specific sequence (search → identify → plan → edit). The implementation of this state transition
system can be found here: 2 .

H.1   S TATE T RANSITION S YSTEM

The transition system is configured through a function that accepts three optional parameters:

       • max tokens in edit prompt: Controls the token limit for edit operations
       • global params: Defines parameters applicable across all states
       • state params: Specifies state-specific parameters

H.2   S TATE F LOW

The system defines a directed graph of states with specific transition rules:

      1. Search Phase (SearchCode):
           • Initial state for code operations
           • Can transition to IdentifyCode upon successful search
           • Can move directly to PlanToCode when complete
      2. Identification Phase (IdentifyCode):
           • Processes search results
           • Can return to SearchCode if needed
           • Progresses to DecideRelevance when finished
      3. Decision Phase (DecideRelevance):
           • Evaluates identified information
           • Can trigger new searches
  2
    https://github.com/aorwall/moatless-tools/blob/8ec5d5193b6dce88ec6273c7ec31f9ea3a0bba6f/
moatless/transitions.py#L184


                                                  29
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


            • Transitions to planning when ready, excluding message field
This rigid structure ensures that tools are accessed in a predictable sequence, preventing conflicts
while maintaining system integrity. Additional transitions defined in CODE TRANSITIONS com-
plete the state machine’s behavior set.

I    C OST A NALYSIS
Table 3 presents the API costs for Moatless-Adapted and SWE-Search across different models.
Search-based exploration of multiple solutions results in higher computational costs.

                  Model                          Moatless-Adapted         SWE-Search
                  GPT-4o                                       $40.86          $576.00
                  GPT-4o-mini                                   $9.90           $52.34
                  Qwen-2.5-72b-Instruct*                        $8.50           $42.50
                  DeepseekCoderV2.5                             $3.66           $18.37
                  Llama-3.1-70b-Instruct*                       $9.00           $45.00
                  *
                      Estimated costs based on comparable API pricing

          Table 3: Cost comparison (USD) between Moatless-Adapted and SWE-Search


J    C OMPUTE -M ATCHING A NALYSIS
Table 4 compares SWE-Search against compute-matched baselines. SWE-Search Pass@5 uses the
5 generated answers in 1 run, while for Moatless-Adapted uses the 5 generated solutions across 5
runs. We avoid doing the comparison on GPT-4o to avoid exorbitant API costs.

                                                 SWE-Search             Moatless-Adapted
               Model
                                              Pass@1      Pass@5                 Pass@5
               GPT-4o                             31.0        34.0                     -
               GPT-4o-mini                        17.0        22.3                  17.0
               Qwen-2.5-72b-Instruct              24.7        25.7                  22.3
               DeepseekCoderV2.5                  21.0        23.3                  22.0
               Llama-3.1-70b-Instruct             17.7        22.3                  21.7

    Table 4: Performance comparison (%) between SWE-Search and compute-matched baselines


K     I NTERACTIVE D EMO
To help visualize the search process and provide transparency into our method, we provide an inter-
active demo at https://streamlit.moatless.ai. The demo presents a tree visualization
where each node represents a state/action pair in the search process. Clicking on a node reveals
detailed information including:
       • Complete LLM interactions and tool calls
       • State-specific value function outputs and reasoning
       • Context information used for decision-making
       • File changes and test results where applicable
       • Test creation/execution and their outputs
This interface allows readers to explore how the search algorithm navigates through different states,
makes decisions, and evaluates potential solutions. The visualization particularly highlights how
state-specific value functions guide the exploration process and how the discriminator compares
candidate solutions.


                                                     30
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


L    D ISCRIMINATOR D EBATE P ROMPTS

    Solution Comparison Debate Round Prompt

    Below are a series of suggested changes to address the ¡Problem Statement¿. Your task is to
    carefully evaluate each change and decide which one is the most appropriate to address the
    issue. Input Format:



    • Problem Statement: Original issue to be solved
    • Solutions: Multiple candidate solutions, each with:
        – Unique solution ID
        – Git patch showing code changes


    Task: Evaluate each proposed solution and identify which one most effectively addresses the

    problem statement. Consider the completeness, correctness, and efficiency of each approach.
    Output Format:



    • <Explanation>: Comprehensive explanation and reasoning behind your decision
    • <ID>: The ID of the change you believe is the most appropriate

    Solution Comparison Conclusion Prompt

    Based on the Problem Statement and previous responses from the debate, determine the
    optimal solution. Input Format:



    • Initial Context: Original problem statement
    • Agent Answers: Evaluations and solution ID choices from the debate phase


    Task: Synthesize the evaluations to identify the most appropriate solution. Report your

    conclusion without referencing individual debate participants. Output Format:



    • <Explanation>: Reasoning for the selected solution
    • <ID>: Final chosen solution ID


                                                31
