Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


N EUR F LOW: I NTERPRETING N EURAL N ETWORKS
THROUGH N EURON G ROUPS AND F UNCTIONAL I N -
TERACTIONS

         Tue M. Cao1      Nhat X. Hoang2        Hieu H. Pham3     Phi Le Nguyen1*      My T. Thai2∗
    1
        Institute for AI Innovation and Societal Impact (AI4LIFE), Hanoi University of Science and
                 Technology, Hanoi, Vietnam (tue.cm210908@sis.hust.edu.vn,
                                     lenp@soict.hust.edu.vn)
          2
            University of Florida, Gainesville, Florida, USA {hoangx, mythai}@ufl.edu
               3
                 College of Engineering & Computer Science, VinUniversity, Hanoi, Vietnam
                    VinUni-Illinois Smart Health Center, VinUniversity, Hanoi, Vietnam
                                     (hieu.ph@vinuni.edu.vn)



                                                 A BSTRACT

             Understanding the inner workings of neural networks is essential for enhancing
             model performance and interpretability. Current research predominantly focuses
             on examining the connection between individual neurons and the model’s final
             predictions, which suffers from challenges in interpreting the internal workings of
             the model, particularly when neurons encode multiple unrelated features. In this
             paper, we propose a novel framework that transitions the focus from analyzing
             individual neurons to investigating groups of neurons, shifting the emphasis from
             neuron-output relationships to the functional interactions between neurons. Our
             automated framework, NeurFlow, first identifies core neurons and clusters them
             into groups based on shared functional relationships, enabling a more coherent and
             interpretable view of the network’s internal processes. This approach facilitates
             the construction of a hierarchical circuit representing neuron interactions across
             layers, thus improving interpretability while reducing computational costs. Our
             extensive empirical studies validate the fidelity of our proposed NeurFlow. Addi-
             tionally, we showcase its utility in practical applications such as image debugging
             and automatic concept labeling, thereby highlighting its potential to advance the
             field of neural network explainability. 1


1       I NTRODUCTION

The explainable AI (XAI) field has seen significant advancement in understanding the mechanisms
of deep neural networks (DNNs). This field emerges from the growing need in decoding the internal
representations, in hope of reverse engineering deep models into human interpretable program. Prior
works have initiated on breaking down convolutional neural networks (CNNs) into interpretable
neurons, understanding the models in the most fundamental units (Nguyen et al., 2016; Zeiler &
Fergus, 2014; O’Mahony et al., 2023; Bykov et al., 2024). Extending further, one can examine the
relation between neurons to gain insights on how the model works, within one layer (Vu et al., 2022),
and between multiple layers (Cammarata et al., 2020). Ultimately, recent works try to generate
circuits (Cammarata et al., 2020; Bykov et al., 2024; Wang et al., 2022c; Conmy et al., 2023) that
create exhaustive explanations of how features are processed and evolve throughout the model.
The majority of existing methods focuses on individual neurons Oikarinen & Weng (2024b);
La Rosa et al. (2023a) and their relationship to the model’s final predictions Ghorbani & Zou
(2020b); Wang et al. (2022b); Ghorbani & Zou (2020a), while giving less attention to exploring
    ∗
        Corresponding Authors
    1
        Source code: https://github.com/tue147/neurflow


                                                          1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


and quantifying the relationships and interactions between neurons across different layers. These
approaches are not only constrained by scalability challenges arising from the extensive number
of neurons, but they also hinder a comprehensive understanding of the underlying mechanisms of
DNNs. A notable example is the polysemantic phenomenon Mu & Andreas (2020); O’Mahony et al.
(2023); Olah et al. (2020), where a single neuron is activated by several unrelated concepts. This
phenomenon complicates the task of associating each neuron with a distinct feature and hampers the
interpretation of how a model processes concepts based on the relationships among neurons. Draw-
ing inspiration from human inference, which synthesizes information from a variety of sources, we
contend that, in addition to individual neuron encoding multiple concepts (as demonstrated in prior
studies O’Mahony et al. (2023); Olah et al. (2020)), groups of neurons within each layer also col-
lectively encode the same concept. Furthermore, the decision-making process in neural networks is
shaped not solely by the interactions between individual neurons, but rather by interactions among
neuron groups.
This study seeks to explore the roles and interactions of neuron groups in shaping and develop-
ing concepts, enabling the execution of specific tasks. Due to the complex connections between
large number of neurons, identifying those functions and there interactions is a daunting task. To
overcome this, we demonstrate that for a particular task, only a subset of neurons—referred to as
core concept neurons—play a crucial role as influential and concept-defining elements in neural
networks. These neurons, when deactivated, significantly alter the associated concepts.
Focusing on core concept neurons allows us to view the intricate network in a simplified way, reveal-
ing the most important interactions between the groups of neurons. Therefore, we propose Neur-
Flow framework that (1) identifies core concept neurons, (2) clusters these neurons into groups,
and (3) investigates the functions and interactions of these groups. To enhance interpretability, we
represent each neuron group by the set of visual features it encodes (i.e., named as neuron group’s
concept). Focusing on classification models, we construct, for each class of interest, a hierarchi-
cal tree in which nodes represent neuron groups (defined by the concepts they encode), and edge
weights quantify the interactions between these groups.
Our key contributions are summarized as follows:
i) We introduce an innovative framework that systematically builds a circuit to elucidate the mech-
anisms by which core concept neuron groups operate and interact to achieve specific tasks. This
entire process is automated, necessitating no human intervention or predefined concept labels. To
our knowledge, we are the first to employ neuron groups as the fundamental units for explaining the
internal workings of deep neural networks.
ii) We perform empirical studies to validate the proposed framework, demonstrating the optimality
and fidelity of core concept neurons, and the reliability of interaction weights between core concept
neuron groups.
iii) We provide experimental evidence showing that our framework can be applied to various tasks,
including image debugging and automatic neuron concept labeling. Specifically, we confirm the
biases found by Kim et al. (2024) on ImageNet (Russakovsky et al., 2015), which have not been
proven, by masking the core concept neurons related to the biased features.

2   R ELATED WORK
In an effort to understand the inner mechanism of DNNs, several branches of research have emerged:
Concept based. Kim et al. (2018) show that a model can be rigorously understood by assigning
meaning to the activations, referred to as concept activation vectors. Subsequent works (Ghorbani
et al., 2019; Zhang et al., 2021) have explored more complex methods for extracting these mean-
ings, however, the relationships between concepts remain understudied. Fel et al. (2023); Kowal
et al. (2024) address this limitation by constructing a graph of concepts with edges that quantify the
relations. Their main intention is to see the evolution of concepts throughout the network layers.
Nevertheless, they are unable to explain which parts of the model are responsible for these concepts.
Neuron based. Nguyen et al. (2016); Mu & Andreas (2020); O’Mahony et al. (2023); Bykov et al.
(2024) invest effort in studying the meaning of neurons, in parallel, Vu et al. (2022); Ghorbani &
Zou (2020c); Khakzar et al. (2021b) propose different approaches in identifying important neurons
to the model output. These researches shed light on the function of individual neurons and their


                                                  2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 1: Workflow of NeurFlow, consisting of three main components: identifying core concept neurons in
each layer, building the neuron circuit, and constructing the circuit of neuron groups.


impact on the prediction of the model. Recently, (Cammarata et al., 2020; Bykov et al., 2024;
Achtibat et al., 2023) connect the neurons to form circuits that explain the behavior of a model
throughout the layers, nevertheless, the circuits are constructed manually. Furthermore, a major
limitation of all previous works is that they only analyze one neuron at a time. This approach is
prone to the complex nature of neuron, namely polysemantic neurons, where neurons may encode
multiple distinct features, making model interpretation via neurons challenging (Cammarata et al.,
2020; O’Mahony et al., 2023). Lastly, Wang et al. (2022a); Kalibhat et al. (2023) find the group of
neurons that encode the same concept, however, the relations among the groups and the influence of
a group on the model’s outputs are left unexplored.
Graph based. Ren et al. (2023); Zhou et al. (2024) try to approximate the mechanism of a model
by considering the causal relations between the inputs and outputs. Another notable method (Zhang
et al., 2018) generates a graph that highlights what visual features activate a feature map, for multiple
layers. While this approach can be modified to form a circuit, the graph lacks meaningful edge
weights. Consequently, it cannot quantify the contribution of each CNNs component to others and
to the final prediction, unable to explain the inner mechanism (They use and-or-graph (Zhang et al.,
2017) to form relations between components. However, unlike circuit, this new graph disregards
the original structure of the model, where “concepts” of the first convolution could interact directly
with “concepts” of the last convolution.). Subsequent work (Zhang et al., 2019) fixes this issue by
building a decision tree to quantify the contribution of each feature map to the final predictions.
Our work aligns the most with explaining neurons and forming circuits. We address the common
limitations of manual neuron labeling and circuit construction. We also propose a way to look at
neurons not individually but in groups to overcome the common problem of polysemantic neurons.
Additionally, we prioritize exploring the interactions between neuron groups across layers rather
than focusing solely on the relationship between individual neurons and the model’s output. Table 2
in Appendix B provides a comparison of our method with the most relevant existing studies.


3     N EUR F LOW F RAMEWORK

3.1   P ROBLEM F ORMULATION

Our goal is to explain the internal mechanisms of deep neural networks (DNNs) by investigating
how groups of neurons function and interact to encapsulate concepts, thereby performing a specific
task. In particular, we focus on the classification problem, exploring how groups of neurons process
visual features to identify a class. Given the exponential number of possible neuron groups, we
focus only on core concept neurons. In addition, to facilitate human interpretation, we group these
neurons through the common visual features they encode. In essence, we propose a comprehen-
sive framework to address the following questions: (i) Which neurons play a crucial role in each
layer? (ii) How can these neurons be clustered, and what visual features does each neuron group
encapsulate? (iii) How do groups of neurons in adjacent layers interact?
Our problem can be formulated as follows: Given a pretrained classification network F and a dataset
Dc composed of exemplars from a specific class c, the goal is to construct a hierarchical tree whose
vertices represent groups of core concept neurons in each network layer, and the edges capture
the relationships between these groups. Figure 1 illutrates the workflow of our framework which
comprises the following key components: (1) identifying core concept neurons (Section 3.3), (2)
determining inter-layer relationships among neurons (Section 3.4), (3) clustering the core concept
neurons into groups, and analyzing the interactions between these neuron groups (Section 3.5).


                                                   3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


3.2      D EFINITIONS AND N OTATIONS

In this paper, the term neuron refers to either a unit in a linear layer or a feature map in a convolu-
tional layer. As suggested by Cammarata et al. (2020); Bykov et al. (2024); O’Mahony et al. (2023),
each neuron is selectively activated by a distinct set of visual features, and by interpreting the neuron
as a representation of these features, we can gain insights into the internal representations of a DNN.
We refer to these visual features as the concept of the neuron. In the following definitions, let a
represent an arbitrary neuron located in layer l of the pretrained network F . In this study, we do
not rely on any predefined concepts. Instead, we enhance the original dataset Dc by cutting it into
smaller patches with varying sizes. These patches serve as visual features for probing the model.
We refer to this augmented dataset as D, and denote v as an arbitrary element of D.
Definition 1 (Neuron Concept). The neuron concept Va of neuron a is defined as the set of the top-k
image patches1 that most
                      P strongly activate neuron a. Formally, the neuron concept of a is expressed
as Va := arg max         v∈V ϕa (v), where ϕa (v) : D → − R represents the activation of neuron a for a
            V⊂D;|V|=k
given input v ∈ D, and k is a hyperparameter.

An empirical analysis of the impact of k (Appendix D.7) reveals that NeurFlow’s performance is
relatively insensitive to the selection of k.
Definition 2 (Neuron Concept with Knockout). Let M be the computational graph of the network
F , S be an arbitrary subset neurons of M , and M \ S be the sub-graph of M after removing S; let
ϕSa be the activation of neuron a computed from M \S. The neuron concept of a when knocking-out
S (denoted as VaS ) is defined as VaS := arg max          S
                                                 P
                                                    v∈V ϕa (v).
                                             V⊂D;|V|=k

We hypothesize that for each neuron a, only a small subset of neurons from the preceding layer
exert the most significant influence on a. In particular, knocking out these neurons would lead to
a substantial change in the concept associated with a. We refer to these neurons as core concept
neurons and provide a formal definition in the following.
Definition 3 (Core Concept Neurons). Given a neuron a at layer l, core concept neurons of a (de-
noted as Sa ) is the sub-set of neurons at the previous layer l − 1 satisfying the following conditions:

                                         Sa := arg min VaS ∩ Va ,                                    (1)
                                                S⊆S;|S|≤τ

where S is set of all neurons at layer l − 1 and τ is a predefined threshold. Intuitively, the core
concept neurons for a target neuron a are those that play an important role in defining the concepts
represented by a. In practice, the value of τ may vary across the network layers, its impact will be
elaborated upon in Sections 4.

In the following, we denote by ϕ1,l−1 (v) : D →     − Rm×w×h the function that maps the input v to
the feature maps at the (l − 1)-th layer of the model, where m represents the number of channels,
and w × h indicates the dimensions of each feature map. Furthermore, we adopt the notation |.| to
indicate the cardinality of a set, while ∥.∥ is employed to represent the absolute value. We summarize
all the notations in Table 1 (Appendix A).

3.3      I DENTIFYING CORE CONCEPT N EURONS

Given a neuron a, we describe our algorithm for identifying its core concept neuron set Sa . This
process consists of two main steps: determining a’s concept Va according to Definition 1, and
identifying core concept neurons following Definition 3.
Firstly, we generate a set of image patches D by augmenting the original dataset Dc , which consists
of images that the model classifies as class c. Since neurons can detect visual features at different
levels of granularity, we divide each image in Dc into smaller patches using various crop sizes,
where smaller patches capture simpler visual features and larger patches represent more complex
ones. We subsequently evaluate all items in D to identify the top-k image patches that induce the
highest activation in neuron a, thereby constructing Va .
   1
       each image patch is a piece cropped from image set.


                                                       4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


With Va identified, one could determine the core concept neurons through a brute-force search over
all possible candidates. However, this naive approach is computationally infeasible. To this end,
we define a metric named importance score that quantifies the attribution of a neuron si to a. The
importance score can be intuitively seen as integrated gradients (Sundararajan et al. (2017)) of a to
si calculated across all elements of Va , calculated as follows:
                                                                   N
                                                                               !
                                                                          n
                                    X          X                1 X ∂y( N   x)
                  T (a, si , Va ) =                        x×                     ,               (2)
                                                               N n=1 ∂x
                                      v∈Va     1,l−1
                                                x∈ϕs       (v);
                                                       i
                                             y∈ϕl−1,l
                                                a     (ϕ1,l−1 (v))

where ϕ1,l−1
         si      is the element of ϕ1,l−1 corresponding to neuron si , ϕl−1,l
                                                                        a     depicts the function map-
ping from the activation vector of layer l − 1 to the activation of neuron a, and N is the step size.
Utilizing the importance scores of all neurons in the preceding layer, the set of core concept neurons
is identified by selecting the top τ neurons that exhibit the highest absolute scores. To justify the
use of integrated gradients, we empirically show a strong correlation between the absolute values
of T (a, si , Va ) and the change in a’s concept after knocking out si , as demonstrated in Section 4.
Additionally, we compare our method with other attribution techniques in Appendix D.1.

3.4      C ONSTRUCTING CORE CONCEPT N EURON C IRCUIT
For each class of interest c, the neuron circuit Hc is represented as a hierarchical hypertree2 , with
the root ac being the neuron in the logit layer (ouput) associated with class c. The nodes in each layer
of the tree Hc are the core concept neurons of those in the layer above, and branches connecting a
parent node a and its child si ∈ Sa represents the contributions of si to a’s concept.
As mentioned in (Cammarata et al., 2020; O’Mahony et al., 2023), neurons often exhibit polyse-
mantic behavior, meaning that a single neuron may encode multiple distinct visual features. In other
words, the visual features within a concept Va of neuron a may not share the same meaning and can
be categorized into distinct groups, which we term semantic groups. We hypothesize that each core
concept neuron si makes a distinct contribution to each semantic group of neuron a. To model this
relationship, we represent the interaction between si and a through multiple connections, where the
j-th connection reflects si ’s influence on Va,j , the j-th semantic group of a.
At a conceptual level, the algorithm for constructing the hypertree Hc proceeds through the follow-
ing steps: (1) employing our core concept neuron identification algorithm to determine the children
of each node in the tree (Section 3.3), (2) clustering the neuron concept of each parent node into
semantic groups, and (3) assigning weights to each branch connecting a child node to the semantic
groups of its parent. Figure 2 illustrates our algorithm. The complete algorithm for constructing the
core concept neuron circuit is presented in Appendix E. We provide a detailed explanation of these
steps below.
Determining semantic groups. Let the concept Va corresponding to a be composed of k elements
{va1 , . . . , vak }. For each visual feature vai (i = 1, . . . , k), we define its representative vector r(vai ) ∈
Rm as:                                   h                                                 i
                              r(vai ) = mean ϕ11,l−1 (vai ) , . . . , mean ϕm  1,l−1 i
                                                                                     (va ) ,                    (3)

where ϕ1,l−1 j      (vai ) (j = 1, . . . , m) represents the j-th feature map and mean ϕj1,l−1 (vai ) denotes
the average value across its all elements. Next, we use agglomerative clustering (Murtagh & Leg-
endre, 2014) to divide the set {va1 , . . . , vak } into clusters, where the distance between two visual
features vap , vaq is defined by the distance between their corresponding representative vectors r(vap ),
r(vaq ). The Silhouette score (Rousseeuw, 1987) is employed to ascertain the optimal number of
clusters. The complete procedure is detailed in Algorithm 2.
Calculating edge weight. The weight w(a, si , Va,j ) of the branch connecting a child si and its
parent a’s j-th semantic group Va,j is defined as:
                                                             T (a, si , Va,j )
                                  w(a, si , Va,j ) = P                            ,                            (4)
                                                           s∈Sa ∥T (a, s, Va,j )∥
where T (a, si , Va,j ) is the importance score of si to a calculated over Va,j .
   2
       A hypertree is a tree in which each child-parent pair may be connected by multiple edges.


                                                           5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 2: The interaction between a              Figure 3: Illustration of our algorithm to determine groups of
neuron si and its parent a.                      neurons.


3.5   D ETERMINING G ROUPS OF N EURONS AND C ONSTRUCTING C ONCEPT C IRCUIT


This section describes our algorithms to (1) cluster the set of core concept neurons Sa = {s1 , ..., sk }
into distinct groups, (2) identifying the concept associated with each group, and (3) quantifying the
interaction between the groups.
Clustering neurons into groups. As mentioned in the previous section, a single neuron can encode
multiple distinct visual features, while several neurons may also capture the same visual feature
Cammarata et al. (2020). We hypothesize that, due to the polysemantic nature of neurons (Cam-
marata et al., 2020; O’Mahony et al., 2023), a model may struggle to accurately determine whether
a concept is present in an input image by relying on a single neuron. As a result, the model pro-
cesses visual features not by considering individual neurons in isolation but rather by operating at
the level of neuron groups. Intuitively, a group of neurons consists of those that capture similar
visual features. This can be interpreted as two neurons belonging to the same group if they share
similar semantic concept groups.
Building on this intuition, we develop a neuron clustering algorithm based on the semantic groups
of each neuron’s concept (Figure 3). Specifically, let Vsi represent the concept of neuron si (i.e.,
the primary visual features it encodes), which can be decomposed into several semantic groups
{Vsi ,1 , ..., Vsi ,ni } (see Section 3.4), where ni is the number of semantic groups encoded by si . For
each semantic group Vsi ,j , we calculate its representative activation          vector −
                                                                                        r−→
                                                                                         si ,j by averaging the
                                                   −−→           1
                                                                     P
feature maps of all its visual features, i.e., rsi ,j := |Vs,j | vs ∈Vs,j mean(ϕ         1,l−1
                                                                                                (vs )). We then
apply the agglomerative clustering algorithm to group the semantic groups Vsi ,j (i = 1, ..., k; j =
1, ..., ni ), where the distance between any two groups Vsi ,u and Vsj ,w is determined by the distance
of their respective representative activation vectors, −     rs−i→       −−→
                                                                  ,u and rsj ,w . Finally, we assign neurons
s1 , ..., sk to the same groups based on their semantic concept groups. Specifically, neurons si and
sj are clustered together if there exists a semantic group Vsi ,u (of si ) and a semantic group Vsj ,w
(of sj ) belonging to the same group.
Finding neuron group concept automatically. We define the concept associated with a group of
neurons as the union of all visual features from the corresponding semantic groups. Specifically, let
{VG,1 , . . . , VG,k } represent the semantic groups categorized into a cluster, with their corresponding
neurons {sG,1 , . . . , sG,k } grouped together in the same set, denoted as G. The concept of this group,
                                                                                               Sk
denoted as VG , is then defined as the union of the sets {VG,1 , . . . , VG,k }, i.e., VG := i=1 VG,i .
We leverage a Multimodal LLM to automatically assign labels to the concept, thereby eliminating
the need for a predefined labeled concept dictionary. Further details on the design of the prompts
are provided in the Appendix G.
Constructing concept circuit. For a given class c, the concept circuit Cc is a hierarchical tree where
each node represents a neuron group concept (NGC), and each edge illustrates the contribution of
the child neuron group to its parent. For a node G, we denote by VG = {VG,1 , ..., VG,|VG | } the set
of semantic groups associated with G, and SG = {sG,1 , ..., sG,|SG | } represent the neurons corre-
sponding to the semantic groups in VG , i.e., sG,j is the core concept neuron possesses the semantic
group VG,j (j = 1, ..., |VG |). Let Gi and Gj be a child-parent pair in the tree, then, the relationship
between Gi and Gj (quantified by W (Gi , Gj )) is represented by two aspects: the number of edges
connecting elements of Gi and Gj , and the weights of those connecting edges. The more the edges
and the higher the edge weights, the stronger the relationship between Gi and Gj . Accordingly, we
define the weight of branch connecting a child Gi to its P parent Gj as sum of the attribution of each
neuron in SGi with each neuron in SGj : W (Gi , Gj ) := sGi ,q ∈SGi ; w(sGj ,p , sGi ,q , VGj ,p ).
                                                                 sGj ,p ∈SGj


                                                      6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


4    E XPERIMENTAL E VALUATION
We perform an extensive empirical study to investigating three aspects, including: optimality of core
concept neurons, fidelity of core concept neurons, and fidelity of neuron interaction weights. Our ex-
periments are performed on ResNet50 (He et al., 2016) and GoogLeNet Szegedy et al. (2015) using
the ILSVRC2012 validation set (Russakovsky et al., 2015). The models are pretrained in Pytorch
(Paszke et al., 2019), and layer names follow Pytorch’s conventions (e.g., layer4.2 for ResNet50).
Unless otherwise specified, the input parameters are τ = 16, N = 50, and k = 50, where the top
50 images with the highest activation on the target neuron are considered as its concept. We will
release the source code once the paper is published.
Optimality of core concept neurons. Ac-
cording to Definition 3, the core con-
cept neuron set Sa for neuron a is the
set that minimizes the objective function
 VaSa ∩ Va without exceeding the cardi-
nality τ . To evaluate our heuristic solu-
tion, we define a loss function L(S, a) :=
 VaS ∩ Va /|Va |, balancing these two ob-
                                                Figure 4: The difference in losses between core concept
jectives. In this experiment, our objec- neurons and random neuron combinations. The blue-
tive is to demonstrate that the core concept toned bars represent the average losses, while the pink-toned
neurons, Sa , identified by our algorithm bars indicate instances where random neuron combinations
are near-optimal. Ideally, a brute-force result in smaller losses compared to core concept neurons.
search over all possible combinations of τ
neurons would be conducted to demonstrate that these combinations yield a higher loss function
value compared to Sa . However, such an approach is computationally infeasible due to its pro-
hibitive cost. Consequently, we perform experiments using a large set of randomly selected com-
binations. Specifically, we use three different values of τ , specifically 10, 30, 50. For each setting,
we randomly select 50 target neurons (denoted by ai ) from 10 distinct classes (five neurons for each
class). For each target neuron ai , we determine its core concept neuron set Sai using our algorithm
and generate 100 random neuron combinations, with the same cardinality as Sai , from the preced-
ing layer of ai . In total, the experiments are performed over 15, 000 cases per layer for each model.
We compare the loss differences between Sai and the random neuron combinations. These average
differences along with 99% the confidence intervals are shown in Figure 4. Additionally, we report
cases where the random combinations resulted in a smaller loss than our core concept neurons. As
observed, the average differences are positive in all cases, indicating that replacing the core concept
neurons identified by our algorithm with random ones generally leads to a significant increase in
the loss for both models. Furthermore, only a few cases show a random combination achieving a
smaller loss than our core concept neurons, and in those instances, the gap is negligible.
Fidelity of core concept neurons. We evaluate the impact of the identified core concept neurons
on the model’s performance by comparing two variants: (1) Retaining version–all neurons masked
except for the core concept neurons, and (2) Masking version version–only the core concept neurons
are masked. Intuitively, a higher performance in the Retaining version and a lower performance
in the Masking version would indicate that the core concept neurons play a significant role in the
model’s performance. We compare the performance of these two versions against models obtained
by performing retraining and masking on equal numbers of random neurons. We select 50 random
classes and apply the retaining and masking operations at two levels: on a single layer or across
multiple layers. In the multi-layer scenario, masking or retaining is applied from the linear classifier
down to a specified layer. Figure 5 presents the results for τ = 4, 8, and 16. The y-axis indicates
changes in model accuracy, where a value of 1 implies that masking neurons does not affect pre-
dictions. It is evident that masking core concept neurons consistently results in a more pronounced
decline in performance compared to masking random neuron combinations. Moreover, the rate of
decline in accuracy, moving from higher to lower layers, is considerably steeper for the core con-
cept neurons than for random neurons. The most significant discrepancy occurs at layer 5a of the
GoogLeNet model, where masking core concept neurons at this layer reduces model accuracy to
nearly 0, while masking random neurons has a minimal effect on performance. Retaining version,
preserving only the core concept neurons allows the model to maintain its performance substantially
better than when random neurons are retained. This experiment also demonstrates that the value of


                                                    7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 5: Effects of neuron groups on model’s performance. Retaining only the core concept (denoted as
CC) neurons preserves high accuracy, whereas masking them leads to a significant drop in performance. In
contrast, random neuron combinations show the opposite trend.


τ represents a trade-off between the simplicity of the circuit and the comprehensiveness of capturing
the core concept neurons. A smaller τ results in greater instability in the model’s performance dur-
ing the retaining experiment, leading to a more pronounced performance drop. For more discussion
on the impacts of τ , please refer to Appendix D.6.
We conduct an experiment to show that adding non-core neurons to the concept core neurons set
identified by NeurFlow has minimal impact the model’s performance. Specifically, we perform the
Fidelity experiment with τ = 16, incorporating 50% more non-core neurons (i.e., those that are not
concept core neurons), and evaluated their impact on model accuracy. These neurons were selected
greedily, prioritizing those with the highest scores as ranked by NeuronMCT Khakzar et al. (2021a).
The results in Figure 17 (Appendix D.6) indicate that for ResNet-50, adding non-core neurons had
little to no effect on improving model performance, confirming that when τ is sufficiently large, our
algorithm ensures completeness.
Fidelity of neuron interaction weights. The edge weight representing the interaction between
core concept neurons (or groups of core concept neurons) is defined using Integrated Gradients (IG)
(Definition 3). Without the ground truth, we evaluate the fidelity of edge weights based on the
following rationale: if the weights assigned by our definition are meaningful, they should accurately
rank the importance of neurons in the preceding layer in detecting the concept represented by a target
neuron in the subsequent layer. We demonstrate that our IG-based scores exhibit a strong correlation
with the loss, not only for single neuron setup but also for groups of neurons. Specifically, we
randomly select 10 target neurons from 10 distinct classes (denoted as ai , where i = 1, . . . , 10).
For each target neuron ai , we generate random combinations of neurons from the preceding layer.
We then measure the correlation between the losses caused by these random neuron combinations
and the sum of the absolute values of their IG-based importance scores with respect to ai . The
experiments are conducted using 500 neuron combinations, with cardinality (τ ) varying from 1 to
50. Figure 6 presents the average correlation across all combinations. The results indicate that
for τ < 50, IG-based scores maintain a high correlation across all layers. Notably, for τ = 1,
the correlation consistently exceeds 0.6 in both models, and up to almost perfect correlations for
several layers in ResNet50. While the correlation diminishes as τ increases, our focus is on a
small subset of core concept; thus, for a sparse sub-graph of core concept neurons, these results
are considered satisfactory. We further compare our defined IG-based score with other attribution
methods, including the one used in Vu et al. (2022), in the Appendix D.1.
Quantitative comparison of NeurFlow with
existing approaches. While our approach fo-
cuses on identifying core concept neurons rela-
tive to a specific target neuron, we demonstrate
that the neurons identified by our method also
significantly influence the model’s final output.
To validate this, we analyzed the overlap be-
tween our core concept neurons and the critical
neurons identified by Vu et al. (2022), and Neu- Figure 6: Correlation between loss and our defined IG-
ronMCT (Khakzar et al., 2021a). The F1 scores based importance scores.
for these overlaps are presented in Table 3 (Appendix D.4). The results indicate that NeurFlow iden-


                                                   8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                  Figure 8: Demonstration for automatically labelling
                                                  and explaining the relation of NGCs on class “great
Figure 7: Using NeurFlow to reveal the reason     white shark” using GPT4-o (OpenAI, 2024). The cap-
behind model’s prediction. The top concepts can   tions and the names of the NGCs are highlighted in
be traced throughout the circuit.                 blue, while the relations are in black.

tifies core concept neurons largely similar to those found by NeuronMCT, even though it does not
explicitly find critical neurons to the model’s output. Additionally, we compare our approach for
identifying core concept neurons for a specific target neuron with the method proposed in Cam-
marata et al. (2020). Details of this experiment can be found in Section D.5 (Appendix D.5). The
results, summarized in Table 4 (Appendix), show that our method is more effective in identifying
core concept neurons.


5     A PPLICATIONS
We outlines some applications of NeurFlow. We hypothesize that, as one neuron can have
multiple meanings, a DNN looks at a group of neurons rather than individually to determine
the exact features of the input. Hence, we propose a metric that assesses a model’s con-
fidence in determining whether the input contains a specific visual feature. For a group G
with core concept neurons SG = {sG,1 , . . . , sG,|SG | }, the metric denoted as M (v, SG , D) =
exp( |S1G | s∈SG log(∥ϕs (v)/ max(ϕs , D))∥), where v ∈ D and max(ϕs , D) is the highest value
           P

of activation of neuron s ∈ SG on dataset D. This returns high score when all neurons in G have
high activation (indicating high confidence), while resulting in almost zero if any neuron in the group
has low activation (indicating low confidence). We can use this metric to determine how similar the
features in the input image are to the predetermined neuron groups concept. The specific setup can
be found in the Appendix F. Figures 7 and 9 demonstrate the usage of the metric and the concept
circuit. We use the term NGC to denote the concept of a neuron group.

5.1   I MAGE DEBUGGING

We aim to use the concept circuit to identify concepts contributing to false prediction, which we call
image debugging. If a concept contributes to a class when it should not, we say that the prediction
(or equivalently, the model) is biased by that concept. Kim et al. (2024) propose a framework for
detecting biases in a vision model by generating captions for the predicted images and tracking
the common keywords found in the captions. With this method, they concluded that the pretrained
ResNet50 is biased by “flower pedals” in the class “bee”. However, correlational features do not
imply causation and can lead to misjudgments. We verify and enhance the causality of their claim by
examining the concept circuit of class “bee”, and conducting experiments on the probabilities of the
final predictions with and without neurons that related to “flowers”. Additionally, we discover that
the model also suffers from “green background” bias (resemble “leaves”), which is not mentioned
in Kim et al. (2024).
Figure 9 shows the process of debugging false positive images. Three different concepts are pre-
sented in layer4.2 of ResNet50, representing “pink pedals”, “green background”, and “bee” respec-
tively (we choose this layer as it has a small set of NGCs, however, our following experiment is
consistent for multiple layers and with different classes). We discover that most of the false positive
images have high metric score for “pedal” and “green background”. To further verify the impact
of these biased features, we mask all neurons in the groups of the respective concepts and find that
the probability of the predictions are distorted drastically (and predictions is no longer “bee”), as
opposed to masking random neurons, which yield negligible changes.
This implies the dependence on the biased concept. But how do we know that the groups reflect the
respective visual features? If these groups indeed represent the visual features, then masking them
should hinder the classification probability for images that include those features. We highlight the


                                                  9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 9: (left) The metric scores of false positive images for each concept in layer4.2 of ResNet50. (right)
Showing the images that have the greatest drop in the activation of the logit neuron when masking each group
concept. Verifying that the neuron groups indeed reflect the concepts.

top images that have the largest decrease in the value of the logit neuron (corresponding to class
“bee”) on both validation set of the target class and augmented dataset (see Section 3.3). As shown
in Figure 9, this process indeed yields the images that contain the respective features.
To demonstrate how NeurFlow’s findings differ from those of existing methods, we conduct a qual-
itative experiment comparing the core concept neurons identified by NeurFlow with those identified
by NeuCEPT Vu et al. (2022). Detailed information about this experiment is provided in Appendix
D.3. Our observations indicate that the top logit drop images identified by NeurFlow align bet-
ter with the representative examples of the corresponding concepts. Moreover, masking the core
concept neuron groups identified by NeurFlow resulted in more significant changes to prediction
probabilities while utilizing fewer neurons compared to the groups identified by NeuCEPT.

5.2   AUTOMATIC IDENTIFICATION OF LAYER - BY- LAYER RELATIONS
While automatically discovering concepts from inner representation has been a prominent field of
research (Fel et al., 2023), automatically explaining the resulting concepts is often ignored, relying
on manual annotations. Bykov et al. (2024) utilize label description in ImageNet dataset to generate
caption for neurons, however, these annotations is limited and can not be used to label low level
concepts. Drawing inspiration from Hoang-Xuan et al. (2024); Kalibhat et al. (2023), we go one
step further and not only use MLLM to label the (group of) neurons but also explain the relations
between them in consecutive layers. Thus, we show the prospect of completing the whole picture of
abstracting and explaining the inner representation in a systematic manner.
Specifically, for two consecutive layers, we ask MLLM to describe the common visual features in
a NGC, then matching with those of the top NGC (with the highest weights) at the preceding layer.
This can be done iteratively throughout the concept circuit, generating a comprehensive explanation
without human effort. We use a popular technique (Wei et al., 2022) to guide GPT4-o (OpenAI,
2024) step by step in captioning and in visual feature matching. Figure 8 shows an example of
applying this technique to concept circuit of class “great white shark”. We observe that MLLM
can correctly identify the common visual features within exemplary images of NGCs. Furthermore,
MLLM is able to match the features from lower level NGCs to those at higher level, detailing
formation of new features, showing the potential of explaining in automation, capturing the gradual
process of constructing the output of the model. The prompt used in this experiment is available in
Appendix G.

6     C ONCLUSION
We introduced NeurFlow, a framework that systematically elucidates the function and interactions
of neuron groups within neural networks. By focusing on the most important neurons, we revealed
relationships between neuron groups, which are often obscured by the inherent complexity of neural
network structures. Furthermore, we fully automated the processes of identifying, interpreting,
and annotating neuron group circuits using large language models. Our method aims to provide a
more efficient and comprehensive approach to the automated interpretation of neural activity and
applicability of NeurFlow across a variety of domains, including image debugging and automatic
concept labeling.


                                                     10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This work was funded by Vingroup Joint Stock Company (Vingroup JSC),Vingroup, and supported
by Vingroup Innovation Foundation (VINIF) under project code VINIF.2021.DA00128.
This work is partially supported by the US National Science Foundation under SCH-2123809
project.

R EFERENCES
Reduan Achtibat, Maximilian Dreyer, Ilona Eisenbraun, Sebastian Bosse, Thomas Wiegand, Woj-
  ciech Samek, and Sebastian Lapuschkin. From attribution maps to human-understandable expla-
  nations through concept relevance propagation. Nature Machine Intelligence, 5(9):1006–1019,
  2023.
Sebastian Bach, Alexander Binder, Grégoire Montavon, Frederick Klauschen, Klaus-Robert Müller,
  and Wojciech Samek. On pixel-wise explanations for non-linear classifier decisions by layer-wise
  relevance propagation. PloS one, 10(7):e0130140, 2015.
Kirill Bykov, Laura Kopf, Shinichi Nakajima, Marius Kloft, and Marina Höhne. Labeling neural
  representations with inverse recognition. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
  36, 2024.
Nick Cammarata, Shan Carter, Gabriel Goh, Chris Olah, Michael Petrov, Ludwig Schu-
  bert, Chelsea Voss, Ben Egan, and Swee Kiat Lim. Thread: Circuits. Distill, 2020.
  https://distill.pub/2020/circuits.
Emmanuel Candes, Yingying Fan, Lucas Janson, and Jinchi Lv. Panning for gold:‘model-
  x’knockoffs for high dimensional controlled variable selection. Journal of the Royal Statistical
  Society Series B: Statistical Methodology, 80(3):551–577, 2018.
Arthur Conmy, Augustine Mavor-Parker, Aengus Lynch, Stefan Heimersheim, and Adrià Garriga-
  Alonso. Towards automated circuit discovery for mechanistic interpretability. Advances in Neural
  Information Processing Systems, 36:16318–16352, 2023.
Thomas Fel, Agustin Picard, Louis Bethune, Thibaut Boissin, David Vigouroux, Julien Colin, Rémi
  Cadène, and Thomas Serre. Craft: Concept recursive activation factorization for explainability.
  In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp.
  2711–2721, 2023.
Amirata Ghorbani and James Y Zou. Neuron shapley: Discovering the responsible neurons. In Ad-
 vances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 33, pp. 5922–5932. Curran Associates,
 Inc., 2020a.
Amirata Ghorbani and James Y Zou. Neuron shapley: Discovering the responsible neurons. Ad-
 vances in neural information processing systems, 33:5922–5932, 2020b.
Amirata Ghorbani and James Y Zou. Neuron shapley: Discovering the responsible neurons. Ad-
 vances in neural information processing systems, 33:5922–5932, 2020c.
Amirata Ghorbani, James Wexler, James Y Zou, and Been Kim. Towards automatic concept-based
 explanations. Advances in neural information processing systems, 32, 2019.
Kaiming He, Xiangyu Zhang, Shaoqing Ren, and Jian Sun. Deep residual learning for image recog-
  nition. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, pp.
  770–778, 2016.
Nhat Hoang-Xuan, Minh Vu, and My T Thai. Llm-assisted concept discovery: Automatically iden-
  tifying and explaining neuron functions. arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.08572, 2024.
Neha Kalibhat, Shweta Bhardwaj, C Bayan Bruss, Hamed Firooz, Maziar Sanjabi, and Soheil Feizi.
  Identifying interpretable subspaces in image representations. In International Conference on
  Machine Learning, pp. 15623–15638. PMLR, 2023.


                                               11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A Khakzar, S Baselizadeh, S Khanduja, C Rupprecht, ST Kim, and N Navab. Neural response
  interpretation through the lens of critical pathways. in 2021 ieee. In CVF Conference on Computer
  Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), pp. 13523–13533, 2021a.
Ashkan Khakzar, Soroosh Baselizadeh, Saurabh Khanduja, Christian Rupprecht, Seong Tae Kim,
  and Nassir Navab. Neural response interpretation through the lens of critical pathways. In Pro-
  ceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, pp. 13528–
  13538, 2021b.
Been Kim, Martin Wattenberg, Justin Gilmer, Carrie Cai, James Wexler, Fernanda Viegas, et al.
  Interpretability beyond feature attribution: Quantitative testing with concept activation vectors
  (tcav). In International conference on machine learning, pp. 2668–2677. PMLR, 2018.
Younghyun Kim, Sangwoo Mo, Minkyu Kim, Kyungmin Lee, Jaeho Lee, and Jinwoo Shin. Discov-
  ering and mitigating visual biases through keyword explanation. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF
  Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 11082–11092, 2024.
Matthew Kowal, Richard P Wildes, and Konstantinos G Derpanis. Visual concept connectome (vcc):
 Open world concept discovery and their interlayer connections in deep models. In Proceedings of
 the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 10895–10905, 2024.
Biagio La Rosa, Leilani Gilpin, and Roberto Capobianco. Towards a fuller understanding of neu-
  rons with clustered compositional explanations. In Advances in Neural Information Processing
  Systems, volume 36, pp. 70333–70354. Curran Associates, Inc., 2023a.
Biagio La Rosa, Leilani Gilpin, and Roberto Capobianco. Towards a fuller understanding of neurons
  with clustered compositional explanations. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
  36:70333–70354, 2023b.
Scott Lundberg.   A unified approach to interpreting model predictions.            arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1705.07874, 2017.
Jesse Mu and Jacob Andreas. Compositional explanations of neurons. Advances in Neural Informa-
  tion Processing Systems, 33:17153–17163, 2020.
Fionn Murtagh and Pierre Legendre. Ward’s hierarchical agglomerative clustering method: which
  algorithms implement ward’s criterion? Journal of classification, 31:274–295, 2014.
Anh Nguyen, Jason Yosinski, and Jeff Clune. Multifaceted feature visualization: Uncovering
  the different types of features learned by each neuron in deep neural networks. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1602.03616, 2016.
Tuomas Oikarinen and Tsui-Wei Weng. Linear explanations for individual neurons. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2405.06855, 2024a.
Tuomas Oikarinen and Tsui-Wei Weng. Linear explanations for individual neurons. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2405.06855, 2024b.
Chris Olah, Nick Cammarata, Ludwig Schubert, Gabriel Goh, Michael Petrov, and Shan Carter.
  Zoom in: An introduction to circuits. Distill, 5(3):e00024–001, 2020.
Laura O’Mahony, Vincent Andrearczyk, Henning Müller, and Mara Graziani. Disentangling neuron
  representations with concept vectors. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer
  Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 3770–3775, 2023.
OpenAI. Gpt4-o. https://openai.com/index/hello-gpt-4o, 2024.
Adam Paszke, Sam Gross, Francisco Massa, Adam Lerer, James Bradbury, Gregory Chanan, Trevor
  Killeen, Zeming Lin, Natalia Gimelshein, Luca Antiga, et al. Pytorch: An imperative style, high-
  performance deep learning library. Advances in neural information processing systems, 32, 2019.
Jie Ren, Mingjie Li, Qirui Chen, Huiqi Deng, and Quanshi Zhang. Defining and quantifying the
   emergence of sparse concepts in dnns. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer
   vision and pattern recognition, pp. 20280–20289, 2023.

                                                12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Peter J. Rousseeuw. Silhouettes: A graphical aid to the interpretation and validation of clus-
  ter analysis. Journal of Computational and Applied Mathematics, 20:53–65, 1987. ISSN
  0377-0427. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/0377-0427(87)90125-7. URL https://www.
  sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/0377042787901257.

Olga Russakovsky, Jia Deng, Hao Su, Jonathan Krause, Sanjeev Satheesh, Sean Ma, Zhiheng
  Huang, Andrej Karpathy, Aditya Khosla, Michael Bernstein, Alexander C. Berg, and Li Fei-Fei.
  ImageNet Large Scale Visual Recognition Challenge. International Journal of Computer Vision
  (IJCV), 115(3):211–252, 2015. doi: 10.1007/s11263-015-0816-y.

Karen Simonyan, Andrea Vedaldi, and Andrew Zisserman. Deep inside convolutional networks:
  Visualising image classification models and saliency maps, 2014. URL https://arxiv.
  org/abs/1312.6034.

Daniel Smilkov, Nikhil Thorat, Been Kim, Fernanda Viégas, and Martin Wattenberg. Smoothgrad:
  removing noise by adding noise. arXiv preprint arXiv:1706.03825, 2017.

Asher Spector and Lucas Janson. Powerful knockoffs via minimizing reconstructability. Annals of
  Statistics, 2021+. To Appear.

Jost Tobias Springenberg, Alexey Dosovitskiy, Thomas Brox, and Martin Riedmiller. Striving for
  simplicity: The all convolutional net. arXiv preprint arXiv:1412.6806, 2014.

Mukund Sundararajan, Ankur Taly, and Qiqi Yan. Axiomatic attribution for deep networks. In
 International conference on machine learning, pp. 3319–3328. PMLR, 2017.

Christian Szegedy, Wei Liu, Yangqing Jia, Pierre Sermanet, Scott Reed, Dragomir Anguelov, Du-
  mitru Erhan, Vincent Vanhoucke, and Andrew Rabinovich. Going deeper with convolutions. In
  Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, pp. 1–9, 2015.

Minh N Vu, Truc D Nguyen, and My T Thai. Neucept: Locally discover neural net-
 works’ mechanism via critical neurons identification with precision guarantee. arXiv preprint
 arXiv:2209.08448, 2022.

Andong Wang, Wei-Ning Lee, and Xiaojuan Qi. Hint: Hierarchical neuron concept explainer.
  In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp.
  10254–10264, 2022a.

Andong Wang, Wei-Ning Lee, and Xiaojuan Qi. Hint: Hierarchical neuron concept explainer.
  In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp.
  10254–10264, 2022b.

Kevin Wang, Alexandre Variengien, Arthur Conmy, Buck Shlegeris, and Jacob Steinhardt. Inter-
  pretability in the wild: a circuit for indirect object identification in gpt-2 small. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2211.00593, 2022c.

Jason Wei, Xuezhi Wang, Dale Schuurmans, Maarten Bosma, Fei Xia, Ed Chi, Quoc V Le, Denny
  Zhou, et al. Chain-of-thought prompting elicits reasoning in large language models. Advances in
  neural information processing systems, 35:24824–24837, 2022.

Matthew D Zeiler and Rob Fergus. Visualizing and understanding convolutional networks. In
 Computer Vision–ECCV 2014: 13th European Conference, Zurich, Switzerland, September 6-12,
 2014, Proceedings, Part I 13, pp. 818–833. Springer, 2014.

Quanshi Zhang, Ruiming Cao, Ying Nian Wu, and Song-Chun Zhu. Growing interpretable part
  graphs on convnets via multi-shot learning. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial
  Intelligence, volume 31, 2017.

Quanshi Zhang, Ruiming Cao, Feng Shi, Ying Nian Wu, and Song-Chun Zhu. Interpreting cnn
  knowledge via an explanatory graph. In Proceedings of the AAAI conference on artificial intelli-
  gence, volume 32, 2018.


                                                 13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Quanshi Zhang, Yu Yang, Haotian Ma, and Ying Nian Wu. Interpreting cnns via decision trees. In
  Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, pp. 6261–
  6270, 2019.
Ruihan Zhang, Prashan Madumal, Tim Miller, Krista A Ehinger, and Benjamin IP Rubinstein. In-
  vertible concept-based explanations for cnn models with non-negative concept activation vectors.
  In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, volume 35, pp. 11682–11690,
  2021.
Huilin Zhou, Hao Zhang, Huiqi Deng, Dongrui Liu, Wen Shen, Shih-Han Chan, and Quanshi Zhang.
  Explaining generalization power of a dnn using interactive concepts. In Proceedings of the AAAI
  Conference on Artificial Intelligence, volume 38, pp. 17105–17113, 2024.


                                               14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A    N OTATIONS
We summarize the notations used in this work in Table 1.
                                        Table 1: Notations summarization.

 Notation              Meaning
 a                     A neuron in a model at layer l + 1
 S                     A set of neurons at layer l
 Va                    Concept of a: the top-k highest image patches that activate a
 VaS                   Concept of a when knocking out S
 Va,j                  The j-th semantic group of a
 τ                     The number of core concept neurons of a
 Sa                    The set of core concept neurons of a
 ϕ1,l                  The function that maps from the dataset to the activation at layer l of the model
 T (a, si , Va )       The importance score of si ∈ Sa w.r.t a on Va
 w(a, si , Va,j )      The normalized importance score of si w.r.t a on Va,j
 r(v)                  The activation vector of an input v
 Vsi ,j                The representative activation vector of the j-th semantic group
 G                     A neuron group
 SG                    The set of neurons of G
 VG                    The concept of G
 W (Gi , Gj )          The edge weight between Gi and Gj



B    R ELATED WORKS SUMMARIZATION
Table 2 compares our proposed method and existing approaches.

                           Table 2: Comparison of NeurFlow and existing approaches.

 Method                       Objectives                         Level of granularity   Interaction quantification
 Vu et al. (2022)
                              Finding critical neurons to the
 Ghorbani & Zou (2020c)
                              model’s output
 Khakzar et al. (2021b)
 O’Mahony et al. (2023)
 Mu & Andreas (2020)                                             Neuron                 N/A
 La Rosa et al. (2023b)
 Oikarinen & Weng (2024a)     Individual neuron explanation
 Mu & Andreas (2020)
 Bykov et al. (2024)
 Kalibhat et al. (2023)
                                                                 Group of neurons
 Wang et al. (2022a)
 Kowal et al. (2024)          Determining concept connectivity   Concept                Concept interaction
                              Determining groups of neurons’
 NeurFlow (Ours)                                                 Group of neurons       Neuron group interaction
                              function and interaction



C    L IMITATIONS AND DISCUSSION
While we view NeurFlow as a significant step toward understanding the function and interaction
of neuron groups, it is not without limitations. Our approach defines the concept of neurons as the
top-k most activated visual features, a common practice in the field (O’Mahony et al., 2023; Mu &
Andreas, 2020; Nguyen et al., 2016). However, other researchers have broadened this definition to
include concepts spanning a wider range of activation patterns (La Rosa et al., 2023b; Oikarinen &
Weng, 2024a). This limitation highlights a promising direction for future research: developing more


                                                          15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


flexible frameworks that incorporate both top-k activation and more distributed neural activation
patterns.
Furthermore, our research primarily focus on CNNs, which follows the main focus of a range of
previous works in the field (Cammarata et al., 2020; O’Mahony et al., 2023; Nguyen et al., 2016;
Mu & Andreas, 2020). However, we can apply our framework onto different DNN architectures by
following several steps: 1) define the granularity level of neurons (i.e. individual units, feature maps,
attention heads etc.); 2) iteratively identify the target neuron concept and the core concept neurons;
3) cluster the core concept neurons into groups and construct the concept graph. While exploring
the differences in the inner workings of various architectures is valuable, we leave this promising
direction for future works.

D     A BLATION STUDIES

D.1    C OMPARISON OF ATTRIBUTION METHODS

In this section, we run an ablation study on different choices of attribution method apart form our
integrated gradient (IG) approach, verifying that IG-based score is the most suitable for the quantifi-
cation of edge weights. We assess four additional common pixel attribution methods, including LRP
(Bach et al., 2015), Guided Backpropagation (Springenberg et al., 2014), SmoothGrad (Smilkov
et al., 2017), Saliency (Simonyan et al., 2014), Gradient Shap (Lundberg, 2017). Notably, Smooth-
Grad and Gradient Shap are a follow-up versions of IG. Furthermore, we also evaluate attribution
method used in Vu et al. (2022), which also find important neurons and attributing scores to them,
referred to as Knockoff (Candes et al., 2018). We run on the same setup as in Section 4 for τ ranging
from 0 to 50. For easier comparison, we report the mean correlations of all values of τ . Figure 11
show the mean correlations across the last 10 layers of ResNet50 (He et al., 2016) and GoogLeNet
(Szegedy et al., 2015). The Integrated Gradient consistently yields higher correlations compared
to other attribution method, surpassing its follow-up version SmoothGrad, while being comparable
with Gradient Shap. Furthermore, Knockoff shows a poor performance in ranking the importance
of neurons compared to other attribution methods.
Additionally, we also assess the running time of each method. Specifically, we recorded the run
time of each method on 50 images on CPU (we implement Knockoff on KnockPy library (Spector
& Janson, 2021+) which does not run on GPU, hence, we evaluate all others on CPU for a fair
comparison) across all layers of GoogLeNet. The results in Figure 10 show that IG maintain a
small running time compared to the follow-up method (i.e. SmoothGrad and Gradient Shap), while
yielding the best correlations among the attribution methods. Hence, we choose IG-based score to
assign the edge weights in NeurFlow.


Figure 10: The comparison of average infer-   Figure 11: The comparison of different attribution methods for
ence time across all layers in GoogLeNet on   edge weight quantification.
CPU.


D.2    N EURON GROUP RELATION WEIGHTS AGGREGATION

In this experiment, we compare our choice of summing the edge weights with averaging the edge
weights in forming W (Gi , Gj ) in Section 3.5. Our aim is to verify that: groups of neurons with
higher sum of scores will have higher impact on a target neuron, regardless of the number of neurons
in the group.


                                                    16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


We randomly sample 500 groups of neurons of varying sizes, ranging from {1, 5, 10, 20, 50}. For
a target neuron in the upper layer, we analyzed the correlation between the loss function (defined
in 4 and two metrics: the average edge weights within each group and our original scoring method,
which sums the edge weights of neurons in the group. Higher absolute correlation values indicate
a more effective scoring method. The results in figure 12 are the average of 10 neurons of different
labels in both GoogLeNet and ResNet50.


Figure 12: The correlations across 10 layers of our proposed aggregation (denoted as Original) and average
aggregation (denoted as Average) on GoogLeNet and ResNet50.


D.3    Q UALITATIVE COMPARISON OF IMAGE DEBUGGING WITH N EU CEPT

We conduct a qualitative experiment to compare the set of critical neurons identified by Vu et al.
(2022) (the core concept neuron w.r.t the output logit of the model) and our set in the image de-
bugging experiment. Specifically, following the setups in the experiment in section 5.1, we identify
the top τ = 16 core concept neurons at layer 4.2 of ResNet50 for both methods, which are used
to determine the top-2 groups of core concept neurons for a given misclassified image. Groups of
neurons were identified following the methodology described in section 3.5, where the groups with
the highest metric scores (defined in equation 5) are selected. Furthermore, to quantify the contribu-
tions of the selected groups to the model output, we mask all of neurons in each groups and measure
the changes of probability of the final predictions. The higher the changes, the more “critical” the
groups of neurons. We select three classes, without cherry-picking, namely: Bald Eagle, Great
White Shark, and Bee (corresponding to the classes in figure 7, 8, and 9). The results are presented
in figure 13, 14, and 15.


Figure 13: The comparison of the top-2 groups of neurons with the highest metric score of our method and Vu
et al. (2022) on class Bald eagle. The top logit drop images of NeurFlow are more resemble the original concept
(i.e. NeurFlow concept 1 vs NeuCEPT concept 1). And the prediction probability changes when masking our
core concept neurons are more significant while masking fewer neurons.


                                                      17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 14: The comparison of the top-2 groups of neurons with the highest metric score of our method and
Vu et al. (2022) on class Great white shark. The top logit drop images of NeurFlow are more resemble the
original concept (i.e. NeurFlow concept 2 vs NeuCEPT concept 2). And the prediction probability changes
when masking our core concept neurons are more significant while masking fewer neurons.


Figure 15: The comparison of the top-2 groups of neurons with the highest metric score of our method and Vu
et al. (2022) on class Bee. The top logit drop images of both methods are similar to the exemplary image of the
concept. And, both methods are able to alter the prediction of the model.


Qualitatively, we observed that our method identified the top-2 concepts more closely resembling
the original images. Additionally, our top logit drop images (i.e., ”images showing the largest de-
crease in the target logit value” as described in 5.1) better matched the representative examples of the
identified concepts. Furthermore, masking the core concept neuron groups identified by our method
resulted in more significant changes to the prediction probabilities, using fewer neurons, compared
to the groups identified by NeuCEPT (Vu et al., 2022). For instance, with the labels Bald Eagle and
Great White Shark, masking NeuCEPT’s core concept neurons had no effect on prediction proba-
bilities, whereas masking the neurons identified by our method substantially altered the predictions.
These findings suggest that our approach identifies more impactful neurons and concepts directly
related to the model’s predictions compared to NeuCEPT.

D.4    Q UANTITATIVE COMPARISON OF CORE CONCEPT NEURONS OF THE MODEL OUTPUT

We run an experiment to further verify: although our method focuses on the set of core concept
neurons w.r.t a specific target neuron, our identified neurons also have strong influence to the perfor-
mance of the model.
Specifically, we evaluate the overlaps between our core concept neurons and the critical neurons
(which are specifically designed to find important neurons for the model output) determined by
Khakzar et al. (2021a) and Vu et al. (2022), then average the results across all layers of ResNet50
and GoogLeNet of 10 random classes. The numbers of core concept neurons are set to be the same
for all three methods. We measure the F1 scores of the overlaps, which are shown in table 3. The


                                                      18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Table 3: Overlapping ratio of critical neurons between NeuronMCT (Khakzar et al., 2021a), NeuCEPT (Vu
et al., 2022), and core concept neurons of NeurFlow

       Overlap        NeuronMCT-NeurFlow          NeuronMCT-NeuCEPT             NeurFlow-NeuCEPT
       ResNet50              0.72                        0.48                          0.49
       GoogLeNet             0.79                        0.55                          0.56


         Table 4: Average subtraction of the losses. Negative means our loss is better and vice versa

                             Model          Average Subtraction of the Losses
                             ResNet50                    -0.082
                             GoogLeNet                   -0.013



results imply that NeurFlow contains mostly similar core concept neurons to NeuronMCT while not
directly identifying core concept neurons of the output.

D.5   Q UANTITATIVE COMPARISON OF CORE CONCEPT NEURONS OF A TARGET NEURON

We assess our method of identifying core concept neurons given a specific target neuron with the
method used in Cammarata et al. (2020). In Cammarata et al. (2020), neurons are ranked based on
the top neurons with the highest L2 weights connected to the target neuron. Note that this method
is not applicable in other experiments since calculating weight magnitude is limited to consecutive
layers.
For this comparison, we identify the top τ = 16 core concept neurons in two consecutive layers
(separated by one convolution layer, as per the setup in Cammarata et al. (2020)) using both methods.
We then knock out these core concept neurons to observe how the target neuron’s concept is affected.
The extent of this change is quantified by the loss function defined in 4, where a lower loss indicates
better performance. We randomly selected 100 neurons across 10 different convolution layers from
both models and calculated the average difference in losses between the two methods. A negative
result indicates our method produces a better loss, while a positive result indicates otherwise.
The results are summarized in table 4. These findings demonstrate that our method is more effective
at identifying core concept neurons. Additionally, gradient-based approaches are more versatile, as
they can be applied to non-consecutive layers (e.g., ResNet Block 4.2 → ResNet Block 4.1 in our
experiments), whereas the L2 -weight-based approach is limited to consecutive layers.

D.6   D EPENDENCE ON THE CHOICES OF τ

The trade-off of the parameter τ : In this experiment, we aim to study the choices of parameter
τ on the set of core concept neurons of a model. Specifically, in the experiment “Fidelity of core
concept neurons”, the choice of τ can be seen as a trade-off between simplicity (the number of
core concept neurons) and performance (the accuracy of the prediction when retaining only the core
concept neurons). However, for τ = 4, 8 the results are vary across our tested models. We conduct
additional experiment to highlight that for sufficiently large τ , the results are less dependent on the
parameter.
We evaluate on 10 different labels with the same setups as in the experiment “Fidelity of core con-
cept neurons” for τ = 20, 24. The results in figure 16 show that with these higher τ values, the
performance drops of the model become negligible. Furthermore, the differences between retaining
for τ = 20 and τ = 24 at all layers are minimal, suggesting that the dependence on τ decreases as
we increase the value.
Completeness of core concept neurons on the output: Additionally, we run an experiment to
assess the completeness of NeurFlow in identifying the important neurons for the model’s output. By
greedily adding 50% more neurons in each layer, of which the neurons are ranked by the importance
scores defined in Khakzar et al. (2021a). The higher the scores, the stronger the influence on the


                                                     19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 16: Effects of neuron groups on model’s performance for τ = 16, 20, 24. The effect of increasing τ are
negligible for most of the layers in both models.


Figure 17: The comparison of the influences on models’ performances of core concept neurons and the extended
set of core concept neurons


prediction of the model. We then re-run the “Fidelity of core concept neurons” for τ = 16 (denoted
as “CC”) and its extended version (50% more neurons - denoted as “Extended”). The results in figure
17 show that, for ResNet 50, adding non-core-concept neurons had almost no effect on improving
model performance. For GoogleNet, only in the most critical case (where the retaining operation is
applied up to layer 5b), adding 50% more non-core-concept nodes led to an improvement in model
performance by 25% only at layer 5b in the retaining setup. These results show that when τ is
sufficiently large, our algorithm ensures completeness.


D.7    D EPENDENCE ON THE CHOICES OF k

To evaluate the dependence of the results on the choice of k, we conducted additional experiments
with various values of k and measured the number of core concept neurons overlapping with the
baseline setup of k = 50. Greater overlap indicates less dependence on the choice of k.
Table 5 summarizes the results with τ = 16 (i.e., the maximum number of core concept neurons
per target neuron is 16) and k ∈ {30, 40, 50, 60, 70, 90, 110, 130, 150, 170, 190}, evaluated across
50 random neurons. The results show that for all tested values of k, the overlap ratio is always at
least 14/16 (> 86%), demonstrating that the results of our proposed algorithm are independent of
the choice of k.


                                                     20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


      Table 5: The overlap of sets of core concept neurons of different k compared to the baseline k = 50

                 K         30     40     50     60     70     90    110    130    150    170    190
             GoogLeNet    15.0   15.4   16.0   15.5   15.3   15.3   15.0   15.0   14.9   14.9   14.9
              ResNet50    14.9   15.6   16.0   15.6   15.3   14.7   14.5   14.3   14.1   14.0   14.0


Figure 18: Illustration of the percentages of crop sizes in the concepts of core concept neurons. 50 ran-
dom classes are assessed for three models and three different crop sizes. The layer names are abbreviated
(e.g.“feature.12” to “f12”).



D.8     M ULTIPLE CROP SIZES AUGMENTATION

For a target class c, our input dataset is created by randomly cropping the images that the DNN
classified as class c, similar to Fel et al. (2023). However, since each neuron can detect feature
at different granularity, we crop the images into multiple crop sizes in order to capture features at
different levels. Intuitively, small crop sizes indicate low level while large crop sizes indicate high
level features. In our experiments, we crop the original images into patches of three different sizes—
100%, 50%, and 25% of the original dimensions. The cropping is performed using a sliding window
with a 50% overlap, resulting in roughly 2500 patches in total.
Figure 18 shows the percentages of each crop size in the concepts of core concept neurons through-
out the networks. As demonstrated, lower layer’s neurons often activated on small crop size images
and vice versa. This aligns with the common believe that high level features are detected at the
later stages of DNNs. This approach can be improved further by including more complex augmen-
tation methods. However, in this work, our main focus is functional of groups of neurons and their
interactions.



E     D ETAILED ALGORITHMS

E.1    I DENTIFYING CORE CONCEPT NEURONS AND CONSTRUCTING NEURON CIRCUIT

Algorithms 1, 2, and 3 provide detailed pseudocode for identifying core concept neurons, determin-
ing the semantic groups, and constructing the neuron circuit respectively.


Algorithm 1 Identifying core concept neurons
Input: Target neuron a, dataset D, constraint τ
Output: Set of core concept neurons Sa
                   P
  Va ← arg max        v∈V ϕa (v)
          V⊂D;|V|=k
    T ← calculate T (a, si , Va ), ∀si ∈ S
    Sa ← select the top-τ neurons with the highest ∥T ∥
    return Sa


                                                      21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Algorithm 2 Determining semantic groups
Input: Neuron concept Va
Parameter: Max number of clusters Ncluster
Output: Semantic groups Va,j , ∀j
  r(vai ) ← Calculate the representative vectors ∀vai ∈ Va
  best sil score ← −1
  best n ← Initialize
  for Number of clusters n in {2, . . . , Ncluster } do
       ′
    Va,j   ← Agglomerative clustering with n clusters on {r(vai ), ∀vai ∈ Va }
    sil score ← calculate the Silhouettes score given the results of clustering
    if best sil score < sil score then
         best sil score ← sil score
         best n ← n
    end if
  end for
  Va,j ← Agglomerative clustering with best n clusters on {r(vai ), ∀vai ∈ Va }
  return Va,j , ∀j ∈ {1, . . . , best n}


Algorithm 3 Forming neuron circuit
Input: Logit neuron ac , dataset D, constraint τ
Output: Neuron circuit Hc
  Hc ← { }; SL ← {ac }; Hc ← Hc ∪ SL
  for Layer l in {L − 1, . . . , 2, 1} do
    Sl ← { }
    for Target neuron a in Sl+1 do
       Sl ← Sl ∪ Identify core concept neurons (Alg.1) of a
       Va,j ← Determine semantic groups   P (Alg.2), ∀j
       w(si , Va,j ) ← T (a, si , Va,j )/ s∈Sa ∥T (a, s, Va,j )∥
    end for
    Hc ← Hc ∪ Sl
  end for
  return Hc


F    I MAGE DEBUGGING SETUP
For an arbitrary input v ∈ D, we want to see which parts of v are detected by the group of neurons
G. Thus, we crop the image into multiple crops, similar to what we do in Section 3.3. The crops,
denoted as vi are passed into the model to get the activations, which we can then measure the metric
M (vi , SG , D), ∀vi . Then we can set a threshold for each group, so that, the crops with the scores
above the threshold can be visualized.
However, since the metric can be greatly affected by only one neuron in the group (i.e one neuron
with low activation leads to a low metric score), the metric is prone to outliers. Thus, we only assess
the metric on the subset S′G ⊆ SG . In practice, S′G contains the top-5 neurons that are closest to the
group’s center, where each neuron is represented as −   r−→
                                                         si ,j for a neuron si ∈ SG with the semantic
group’s index j. The center of the cluster is the average of all representative vectors, and the distance
between a pair of neurons is evaluated using l2 distance.

G    MLLM PROMPT FOR AUTOMATIC CONCEPT LABELLING
In this section, we provide our prompts for reproducibility. We employ two types of prompt, which
are responsible either captioning the common concepts in the exemplary images of a neuron concept,
or describing how a NGC formed from NGCs at the preceding layers. Our prompts include three
parts. Firstly, we provide a role for MLLM model, marked as role description. Secondly, the main
prompt is presented where it shows the general instruction for the task that MLLM should do. The


                                                   22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


role description and main prompt is the same for all setups. The last part is the answer form where
we give specific instruction on how to generate appropriate captions and the template of the answer.
The structure of the whole prompts are: Role description + Main prompt + Answer form.

G.1    ROLE DESCRIPTION AND M AIN PROMPT

Role descriptions: “Act as an Image Captioning Language Model.”
Main prompt:
“# Core Responsibilities:
- Analyze a set of similar images to identify common features.
- Generate descriptive captions that highlight these common features.
- You must adapt to detect both simple and complex features.
# Important notes:
- You don’t have to generate captions for every image, focus on the common features.
- Outliers exist in the images, you could ignore them if they are not relevant to the common theme.
- You should describe the images with objective visual features, not subjective (like powerful or
beautiful or scary etc., because these are only your opinion).
- You should only describe visual features, not the context or the story behind the images.
- You should keep a succinct caption, keep it one or two sentences long, that only describe a few
most common features.
# Role Summary:
Your role is to provide accurate and coherent captions for a set of similar images by identifying and
describing common features. These features can range from simple elements like edges and colors
to complex patterns such as a specific object in a particular setting.”

G.2    A NSWER FORM

Answer form for single concept captioning:
“# Answer form:
- Common features: a list of features
- Caption: your caption in one or two sentences”
Answer form for describing NGC’s formation:
# Key note of the input:
- There are many different groups of images, make sure you get the number of groups right.
- Each group of images has a common feature.
- The higher level feature is the first group.
- Other groups are lower level features that combine to form the higher level feature of the first
group.
# Key note of the output:
- You should not only focus on the common features of the images but also describe how the features
from the lower level groups combine to form the higher-level feature of the first group.
- You should focus on the common features that shared among both the high and low level.
“# Step by step:
- Find the lists of common features in Group 2, . . . , N.


                                                   23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


- For each feature from those lists: match it with the features in Group 1.
- Some of the features in the lists might have no matches: they might be combined with others to
form new features, match the features in Group 1 with some simple combination of the features in
Group 2, . . . , N (e.g. blue and green →
                                        − blue-green, multiple curve orientations →
                                                                                  − a circle, two
edges with different orientations →
                                  − an angle, etc.).
- If you don’t find any visual features that match, please don’t describe features that is not presented,
instead, you can say ”There is no matches”.
- From the matched features, derive the common features in Group 1.
- Generate caption for Group 1.
# Answer form:
- Group 1 Common Features: list of common features
- Group 2 Common Features: list of common features
- ...
- Group N Common Features: list of common features
Feature Evolution:
- Group 2: has feature A - match feature A in Group 1 (for Group 2 to N, if there is no matches,
please say ”There is no matches”)
- ...
- Group N: has feature B - match feature B in Group 1
Caption: one or two sentences capturing the common features and their evolution”


                                                   24
