Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


OVTR: E ND - TO -E ND O PEN -VOCABULARY M ULTIPLE
O BJECT T RACKING WITH T RANSFORMER
 Jinyang Li† En Yu† Sijia Chen Wenbing Tao∗
 Huazhong University of Science and Technology
 {jinyangli, yuen, sijiachen, wenbingtao}@hust.edu.cn



                                                A BSTRACT
             Open-vocabulary multiple object tracking aims to generalize trackers to unseen
             categories during training, enabling their application across a variety of real-world
             scenarios. However, the existing open-vocabulary tracker is constrained by its
             framework structure, isolated frame-level perception, and insufficient modal inter-
             actions, which hinder its performance in open-vocabulary classification and track-
             ing. In this paper, we propose OVTR (End-to-End Open-Vocabulary Multiple
             Object Tracking with TRansformer), the first end-to-end open-vocabulary tracker
             that models motion, appearance, and category simultaneously. To achieve stable
             classification and continuous tracking, we design the CIP (Category Information
             Propagation) strategy, which establishes multiple high-level category information
             priors for subsequent frames. Additionally, we introduce a dual-branch struc-
             ture for generalization capability and deep multimodal interaction, and incorpo-
             rate protective strategies in the decoder to enhance performance. Experimental
             results show that our method surpasses previous trackers on the open-vocabulary
             MOT benchmark while also achieving faster inference speeds and significantly
             reducing preprocessing requirements. Moreover, the experiment transferring the
             model to another dataset demonstrates its strong adaptability. Models and code
             are released at https://github.com/jinyanglii/OVTR.


1       I NTRODUCTION
Critical to video perception, multiple object tracking (MOT) can currently be applied to various
downstream tasks such as autonomous driving and video analysis (Bashar et al., 2022). Dominant
MOT methods are primarily trained to track closed-vocabulary categories, limiting their ability to
generalize to unseen categories and a broader range of scenarios. Clearly, such approaches do not
offer the ultimate solution for human-like video perception intelligence, as humans can perceive
and track unseen dynamic objects in an open-world context. To address this, the open-vocabulary
multiple object tracking (OVMOT) task (Li et al., 2023) was proposed, where models are expected to
identify and track novel categories in a zero-shot manner, aligning better with real-world demands,
such as more comprehensive video understanding, smart cities, and autonomous driving.
Recently, as numerous open-vocabulary detection (OVD) (Gu et al., 2021; Du et al., 2022; Lin et al.,
2022; Wu et al., 2023b; Zang et al., 2022) methods have emerged, researchers (Li et al., 2023) have
extended OVD into the tracking domain by integrating open-vocabulary detectors with appearance-
based associations, as illustrated in Fig. 1. This approach utilizes OVD and data augmentation to
improve appearance-based association learning. However, it encounters three problems: (1) Clas-
sification and tracking are merely cobbled together, rather than collaborating effectively. Treat-
ing classification independently in each frame causes instability in category perception and hin-
ders the reuse of previous predictions in subsequent frames. (2) From the framework perspective,
appearance-based association struggles to adapt to the diverse environments typical of OVMOT
task. Moreover, the tracking-by-OVD framework inevitably relies on complex post-processing and
anchor generation, which reduce inference speed and necessitate hand-designed operations based on
scene-specific prior knowledge, making it difficult to adapt in an open-world context. (3) Achieving
    †
        Equal Contribution.
    ∗
        Corresponding author.


                                                      1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


            text embeddings           queries        object representations        category information propagation

                        T1                                     T2                              T3


                              ...                                   ...                             ...
              “Parus”               “bowl”           “Parus”              “bowl”   (“Parus”)              “bowl”

                                                   (a) Tracking-by-OVD

                        T1                                     T2                              T3            “Parus”


      ...


                                                                                                             “bowl”

                                                (b) Tracking-by-Query (Ours)

Figure 1: Comparison of tracking-by-OVD and our method. Tracking-by-OVD predicts each
frame independently, making classification and association susceptible to changes in appearance. In
contrast, our method, OVTR, propagates location, appearance, and category information from the
current frame to subsequent frames, creating a stable, continuously updated information flow. This
flow serves as a prior, aiding in capturing the corresponding target in future frames.
open-vocabulary capabilities requires significant time to use a pre-trained image encoder to extract
numerous object embeddings that implicitly contain unseen categories from datasets, which pro-
longs the model development cycle. Despite this, the performance of open-vocabulary classification
remains insufficient.
Regarding problem (1), an iterative tracking mechanism (Zeng et al., 2022) can be leveraged to
propagate category information to subsequent frames. For problem (2), existing closed-set, end-to-
end transformer-based tracking methods (Zeng et al., 2022; Zhang et al., 2023; Gao & Wang, 2023;
Yu et al., 2023b) focus on achieving sustained tracking in complex scenarios. With their elegant
framework, these methods eliminate the need for complex post-processing and explicit tracking as-
sociations, showing potential for cross-temporal modeling of targets in specific scenarios. Adopting
such a structure effectively mitigates these challenges. Taken together, an iterative, transformer-
based, end-to-end tracker such as MOTR (Zeng et al., 2022) can serve as a suitable foundation.
Based on the iterative tracking mechanism, we propagate category information across multiple
frames, which we refer to as the category information propagation (CIP) strategy. By convert-
ing predicted category information into priors for subsequent tracking, it establishes a higher-level
flow that enables the continuous tracking of corresponding targets. Additionally, due to the intro-
duction of attention mechanism, potential interference among differing information must also be
considered. To address this, we designed two attention protection strategies. These strategies con-
struct masks based on category prediction distributions and the arrangement of queries, effectively
intervening to ensure harmonious cooperation between classification and tracking.
To address problem (3), we design our method from the perspective of knowledge distillation and
deep modality interaction. Considering that knowledge distillation between two models processing
the same modality may be more effective, we use the CLIP (Radford et al., 2021) image encoder, a
source of open-vocabulary, to guide our model in acquiring open-vocabulary generalization capabil-
ities in image perception, aligning intermediate outputs (termed aligned queries) with CLIP image
embeddings. Meanwhile, given the shortcomings in prior work regarding multimodal fusion, we de-
sign attention-based fusion in both the encoder and decoder. Particularly, in the decoder, we propose
a dual-branch structure. One branch serves as the medium through which the CLIP image encoder
guides our model, while the other branch allows the aligned queries to interact with text embeddings
from the CLIP text encoder to focus on category information, yielding features rich in category in-
formation for open-vocabulary classification. Thus, through the dual-branch decoder design, we
avoid cumbersome preprocessing while achieving improved open-vocabulary performance.


                                                                2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Incorporating all the aforementioned designs, we propose OVTR (End-to-End Open-Vocabulary
Multiple Object Tracking with TRansformer), the first end-to-end open-vocabulary tracker that in-
tegrates motion, appearance, and category modeling. Experimental results on the TAO (Dave et al.,
2020) dataset demonstrate that OVTR outperforms state-of-the-art methods on the TETA (Li et al.,
2022b) metric. Notably, on the validation set, OVTR exceeds OVTrack by 12.9% on the novel
TETA, while on the test set, it surpasses OVTrack by 12.4%. Additionally, in the KITTI (Geiger
et al., 2012) transfer experiment, OVTR outperforms OVTrack by 2.9% on the MOTA metric.
To summarize, our main contributions are listed as below:

       • We propose the first end-to-end open-vocabulary multi-object tracking algorithm, intro-
         ducing a novel perspective to the OVMOT field, achieving faster inference speeds, and
         possessing strong scalability with potential for further improvement.
       • We propose the category information propagation (CIP) strategy to enhance the stability of
         tracking and classification, along with the attention isolation strategies that ensure open-
         vocabulary perception and tracking operate in harmony.
       • We propose a dual-branch decoder guided by an alignment mechanism, empowering the
         model with strong open-vocabulary perception and multimodal interaction capabilities
         while eliminating the need for time-consuming preprocessing.

2     R ELATED W ORK
Open-Vocabulary MOT. Multi-object tracking (MOT) is the task of identifying and following mul-
tiple objects across consecutive frames in a video. Many trackers exhibit powerful capabilities and
performance (Wojke et al., 2017; Zhang et al., 2022b; Yu et al., 2022; Chen et al., 2024a;b), and MOT
has been scaled up to handle a broader range of categories, enabling it to operate in more diverse
environments. Dave et al. (2020) introduced the TAO benchmark, which includes more than 800
categories and emphasizes MOT performance on the long-tail distribution of a large number of cate-
gories. TETA (Li et al., 2022b) decomposes tracking evaluation into three sub-factors: localization,
association, and classification, allowing for comprehensive benchmarking of tracking performance
even under inaccurate classification, with TETer (Li et al., 2022b) achieving strong results on this
evaluation. OVTrack (Li et al., 2023) leverages the open-vocabulary detector ViLD (Gu et al., 2021),
combining appearance-based association for open-vocabulary tracking, and uses diffusion models
to generate LVIS (Gupta et al., 2019) image pairs for training associations. MASA (Li et al., 2024)
learns a general appearance matching model using a large number of unlabeled images. SLAck (Li
et al., 2025) integrates semantic and location information to enhance tracking performance.
Transformer-based MOT. Association-based trackers have not yet fully realized end-to-end track-
ing, as they still depend on post-processing and explicit matching strategies. In contrast, the Trans-
former model holds advantages as a framework for implementing end-to-end MOT. TransTrack (Sun
et al., 2020) adopts a decoupled network and IoU matching to achieve query-based detection
and tracking. TrackFormer (Meinhardt et al., 2022) and MOTR (Zeng et al., 2022) reformu-
late tracking as a sequence prediction task, where each trajectory is represented by a track query.
MOTRv2 (Zhang et al., 2023) incorporates an additional object detector to generate proposals serv-
ing as anchors, providing detections for MOTR. MOTRv3 (Yu et al., 2023b) refines the label as-
signment process by employing a release-fetch supervision method. Additionally, the attention
mechanism of the Transformer has already been proven effective in handling multi-modal infor-
mation (Nguyen et al., 2024; Zhou et al., 2023; Yu et al., 2023a; Wu et al., 2023a).

3     M ETHOD
3.1   OVERVIEW

Revisiting MOTR. The overall pipeline is illustrated in Fig. 2. We follow the general structure and
basic tracking mechanism of MOTR (Zeng et al., 2022), treating MOT as an iterative sequence pre-
diction problem. In MOTR, each trajectory is represented by a track query. Following a DETR-like
structure (Carion et al., 2020), detect queries Qt=1
                                                 det for the first frame ft=1 are fed into the Trans-
                                                                    t=1
former decoder, where they interact with the image features Eimg        extracted by the Transformer


                                                  3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                                                       Qdet         E img                             ...         Falign   ℒalign         ...
                                                                                                                                                                          Image
                                                                                                                                      ...
                                                                                                                                                  B        ℒbox         Embeddings
                                   Backbone                                                                    OFA
                                                                             P                     C                                  ...         Oimg
                                                                                                    Q       Dual-Branch               ...
                                                                                                                                                  P
                                                          Encoder                ...         ...
                                                                                                             Decoder
                                Text
                              Embeddings ...
                                                                                                                CTI                   ...         Otxt
                                                                                                                                                                         Updater
                                                                                       Qtr                                            ...
                                                                                                    E txt
                                          Text
                                         Encoder
                                                                                                                                                           ℒcls
                                                                                                                          ...   ...         ...

                                              {[surfboard], [person],
                            Shared Prompt +                                                                                           ...
                                             [bicycle], [cab], [wheel],
                                            [car], [kite], [umbrella] ...}
                            Representations


 P / position part             C      learnable content part / content part (track query) Qdet [ , ] detect query   Qtr [ , ] track query                         Q [ Qdet , Qtr ]
 E img image features E txt text features Falign feature for alignment B prediction box Oimg OFA branch output P  updated position part Otxt                 CTI branch output



Figure 2: Overview of OVTR. OVTR processes two modalities of input, with modality interaction
structures in both the encoder and decoder. The dual-branch decoder has the OFA branch, which
serves as the medium through which the CLIP image encoder guides our model to achieve visual
generalization capabilities, and the CTI branch, which handles open-vocabulary interaction and clas-
sification. The updated outputs are used as prior queries for the next frame’s predictions.


encoder. This process yields updated detect queries Q′dett=1 that contain object information. Detec-
                                             t=1                               t=1
tion predictions, including bounding boxes Bdet  and object representations Odet   , are subsequently
                   ′ t=1
extracted from Qdet . In contrast to DETR, for the query-based iterative tracker, Qt=1   det are only
needed to detect newly appeared objects in the current frame. Consequently, one-to-one assign-
ment is performed through bipartite matching exclusively between Q′dett=1 and the ground truth of
the newly appeared objects, rather than matching with the ground truth of all objects.
                  ′ t=1
The matched Qdet        will be used to update and generate the track queries Qt=2    tr , which, for the
second frame ft=2 , are fed once again into the Transformer decoder and interact with the image
           t=2
features Eimg  to extract the representations and locations of the objects targeted by Qt=2  tr , thereby
enabling tracking predictions. Subsequently, the Qt=2   tr   maintain   their object associations and are
updated to generate the Qt=3 tr  for the third frame ft=3 . Parallel to Qt=2
                                                                          tr , and similar to the process
for ft=1 , Qt=2
            det are fed into the decoder to detect newly appeared objects. After binary matching,
the matched Q′dett=2 are transformed into new track queries and added to Qt=3    tr  for ft=3 . The entire
tracking process can be extended to subsequent frames. Regarding optimization, MOTR (Zeng et al.,
2022) employs multi-frame optimization, where the loss is computed by considering both ground
truth and matching results. The matching results for each frame include both the maintained track
associations and the binary matching results between Q′det and newly appeared objects.
Tracking Mechanism During Inference. Similar to MOTR, the network forward process during
inference in OVTR follows the same procedure as during training. The key difference lies in the
conversion of track queries. In detection predictions, if the category confidence score exceeds τdet ,
the corresponding updated detect query is transformed into a new track query, initiating a new track.
Conversely, if a tracked object is lost in the current frame (confidence ≤ τtr ), it is marked as an
inactive track. If an inactive track is lost for Tmiss consecutive frames, it is completely removed.
Empowering Open Vocabulary Tracking. Leveraging the iterative nature of the query-based
framework, OVTR transfers information about tracked objects across frames, aggregating category
information throughout continuous image sequences to achieve robust classification performance.
In the encoder, preliminary image features from the backbone and text embeddings from the CLIP
model (Radford et al., 2021) are processed through pre-fusion to generate fused image features Eimg
and text features Etxt . We propose a dual-branch decoder comprising the OFA branch and the CTI
branch. Upon input of Q = [Qdet , Qtr ], the two branches respectively enable the model to gain open-
vocabulary generalization capabilities in image perception and facilitate deep modality interaction
with Etxt , leading to the outputs Oimg , Otxt . Oimg serve as the input for the category information
propagation (CIP) strategy, injecting category information into the category information flow. This
process is an extension of the aforementioned mechanism where Q′dett generates Qt+1  tr . Meanwhile,
Otxt are utilized for computing category logits and for contrastive learning.


                                                                                                    4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


               Encoder                                                        Dual-Branch
                                      Reference
                                                     ... ...        Self-      Decoder                OFA branch                            B
                                       Points                                                                              Box Head
               Image Features         Generator
                                                                  Attention
                                                                        q       Aligned Queries         Image
                                                                                                                   Oimg                     P
                                                                                                         FFN
                      Self-
                                        FFN
                                                  k, v         Image                   ...                                 Alignment Head   Falign
                    Attention                              Cross-Attention
      Fusion                                      E img                                           q
      Layer
                                                                                             k, v             Text
                                FFN                       E txt        ...
                                                                                                         Cross-Attention
                                                                                                                                 FFN        Otxt
         ...   Text Embeddings                                 sin-cos positional encoding            CTI branch


Figure 3: Architectures of the dual-branch decoder and the encoder. After modality fusion in
the encoder, the resulting image and text features are separately fed into the decoder’s Image Cross-
Attention and Text Cross-Attention for interactions. Aligned queries are processed by the OFA and
CTI branches to generate bounding boxes B, alignment features Falign , and branch outputs Otxt .


3.2   L EVERAGING A LIGNED Q UERIES FOR S EARCH IN C ROSS -ATTENTION

The perception part of OVTR builds on Zhang et al. (2022a), incorporating visual-language modality
fusion in both the encoder and decoder. To efficiently conduct multimodal interaction and learn
generalization ability, the decoder adopts a dual-branch structure, consisting of the object feature
alignment (OFA) branch and the category text interaction (CTI) branch.
Generating Image and Text Embeddings. To obtain the text modality input, we feed the text
and prompts (Du et al., 2022) into the CLIP (Radford et al., 2021) text encoder to generate text
embeddings. Simultaneously, we use ground truth boxes to generate image embeddings via the
CLIP image encoder and combine embeddings of the same category into a single representation.
Unlike the time-consuming preprocessing (Gu et al., 2021; Du et al., 2022) that generates numerous
image embeddings from proposals, which are produced by an additional RPN-based detector and
partially contain novel categories (unseen during training), our approach is simpler. We only need
image embeddings for the closed-set categories. The embeddings are prepared offline.
Feature Pre-fusion and Enhancement. In the encoder, inspired by multi-modal detectors such as
GLIP (Li et al., 2022a) and Grounding DINO (Liu et al., 2023), we integrated image-to-text and text-
to-image cross-attention modules for feature fusion, which enhance image and text representations,
preparing them for interaction in the decoder. Since the encoder outputs preliminary content features
that may introduce misguidance for the decoder, we follow the approach of DINO-DETR (Zhang
et al., 2022a) by generating the content parts of our queries through learnable initialization, while
the position parts are derived from the reference points produced by Eimg , the outputs of the encoder,
through sin-cos positional encoding.
Dual-Branch Structure. As shown in Fig. 3, in the dual-branch structure, the OFA branch consists
of a feedforward network followed by a box head and an alignment head, while the category text
interaction (CTI) branch comprises text cross-attention followed by a feedforward network.
To achieve zero-shot capabilities, we utilize the OFA branch for alignment, distilling visual general-
ization from the CLIP image encoder and guiding the queries produced by the image cross-attention
layer, referred to as aligned queries, to align with CLIP image embeddings. Since the CLIP image
embeddings are aligned with the CLIP text embeddings and the text features Etxt originate from the
CLIP text embeddings, aligned queries that correspond to certain categories are able to align implic-
itly with the Etxt of the same categories. This alignment enables the aligned queries to effectively
focus on the category information conveyed in Etxt during the text cross-attention in the CTI branch.
Consequently, when images and text inputs containing novel categories are provided, the generalized
network produces aligned queries that implicitly capture the features of novel categories. This en-
ables the aligned queries to interact effectively with the Etxt of novel categories, yielding Otxt rich in
novel category information to enhance open-vocabulary classification. The box head is incorporated
into the OFA branch to ensure that the features of aligned queries are instance-level.
Specifically, We distill knowledge from the CLIP image encoder by aligning the outputs Falign ∈
Rn×d from the alignment head with the ground truth CLIP image embeddings Vgt ∈ Rn×d . Falign


                                                                                         5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


corresponds to the matching results mentioned in Sec. 3.1. Each feature is a d-dimensional vector,
where n represents the number of ground truth objects. The alignment loss Lalign is formulated as:
                                             n   d
                                       1 XX
                             Lalign =               (Fi,j,align − Vi,j,gt )2 ,                     (1)
                                      n · d i=1 j=1

Additionally, the dual-branch structure also aims to prevent category text information from affecting
the localization ability.

3.3   ATTENTION I SOLATION FOR D ECODER P ROTECTION

For the decoder, interference may arise from both multiple category information and the content of
the track queries. Specifically, interactions between queries in the self-attention layers can entangle
information corresponding to multiple categories, hurting classification performance. Moreover,
as a tracking-by-query framework, the decoder processes both track and detect queries in parallel.
Track queries contain content about tracked objects, leading to a content gap between them and the
initial detect queries. This gap may cause conflicts within the decoder layers due to the interactions
in self-attention. To address these, we propose attention isolation strategies for decoder protection.
Category Isolation Strategy. The output features of the CTI branch Otxt , undergo dot products
with the text features Etxt , followed by a softmax operation to produce the category score matrix
S ∈ RN ×M , where N denotes the number of queries Q, and M represents the number of selected
categories. We calculate the KL (Kullback-Leibler) divergence (Kullback, 1951) between the cate-
gory score distributions (vectors in S) of each two predictions in Otxt to form a matrix, called the
difference matrix D ∈ RN ×N . The specific formula is as follows:
                                                   M                   X M
                                                   X            Si,k                   Sj,k
    Di,j = DKL (Si,: ∥Sj,: ) + DKL (Sj,: ∥Si,: ) =    Si,k ln         +      Sj,k ln          ,  (2)
                                                                Sj,k                   Si,k
                                                     k=1                         k=1
where Di,j is the sum of the forward and the reverse KL divergences between the category score
vectors in S corresponding respectively to the i-th and j-th queries. DKL represents the calculation
of KL divergence.
We compute the difference matrix D based on S of the current decoder layer to generate the category
isolation mask (I ∈ RN ×N ), which is then added to the attention weights of self-attention layer of
the next decoder layer. The category isolation mask I is generated as follows:

                                           True, if Di,j > τisol
                                 Ii,j =                           ,                              (3)
                                           False, if Di,j ≤ τisol
where τisol is the threshold for the difference matrix D.
When Ii,j is ”True”, it means the category information carried by these two queries is substantially
different. This difference may cause interference between the queries during self-attention. In addi-
tion, interactions among Qtr , which have inherited robust category information, will be maintained
to ensure that the self-attention mechanism inhibits duplicate predictions derived from Qtr .
Content Isolation Strategy. To mitigate the impact of the content gap between track and detect
queries as they jointly enter the decoder, we introduced a content isolation mask. The content distri-
bution differs between the first frame detection and subsequent tracking, and in the latter case, track
queries may interfere with detect queries. Using a vanilla decoder for both could lead to conflicts.
To ensure consistent decoder operations across the two processes, we propose the content isolation
mask to prevent track queries from interfering with the content of detect queries. Specifically, this
mask is added to the attention weights of self-attention in the first decoder layer, with the mask
positions for detect queries and track queries that attend to each other set to True to suppress their
interaction. For further details on these two strategies, please refer to appendix A.4.

3.4   T RACKING WITH C ATEGORY I NFORMATION P ROPAGATION ACROSS F RAMES

To enable continuous category perception and localization, we leverage the iterative nature of the
query-based method and propose the category information propagation (CIP) strategy to aggregate
tracked object information, thereby reinforcing category priors throughout multi-frame predictions.


                                                    6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Inspired by MOTR (Zeng et al., 2022), we use the a modified Transformer decoder layer for the
CIP strategy. We use the outputs of the OFA branch corresponding to the matched updated queries
Q′∗t = [P∗′ t , C∗t ] for the t-th frame ft , denoted as Oimg
                                                          ∗t
                                                              , to update Q′∗t into the track queries Qt+1
                                                                                                        tr  =
[Ptr , Ctr ] for the frame ft+1 . Ctr is the content part of Qt+1
   t+1   t+1                             t+1
                                                                       tr , which   is the core of propagating
category information between frames. It is performed in the updater of Fig. 2 and formulated as:

                                         ∗t
                              Osa = MHA(Oimg + P∗′ t , Oimg
                                                        ∗t
                                                            + P∗′ t , Oimg
                                                                       ∗t
                                                                           ),
                                               ∗t
                               Or = LayerNorm(Oimg + Dropout(Osa )),                                      (4)
                                                   ∗t
                            Ctrt+1 = FFN(FFN(Or , Oimg ), C∗t ),

where P∗′ t and C∗t respectively represent the updated position parts and the content parts of Q′∗t ,
MHA and FFN denote multi-head attention and feedforward network, and Osa and Or are the inter-
                                                                     ∗t
mediate attention outputs and residual outputs. We use the sum of Oimg  and P∗′ t as the queries and
                    ∗t
keys, while using Oimg alone as the values for the MHA.
                                                           ∗t
This network aggregates the category information from Oimg     with historical content C∗t , providing
                     t+1
category priors in Ctr for the next frame predictions. In this way, category information is prop-
agated to the next frame, enabling multi-frame propagation during the iterations of track queries.
Meanwhile, the bounding boxes B∗t corresponding to Q′∗t are transformed via sin-cos positional
encoding into Ptrt+1 of Qt+1
                         tr . We exclusively use the output representations from the OFA branch,
instead of the CTI branch, as the OFA branch contains less direct textual information. This can
                                                                                  ∗t
reduce the content gap between detect and track queries. Additionally, since Oimg    is derived from
the image cross-attention layer, it may more readily align with similar information within that layer
when re-entering, thereby facilitating the continuous capture of the target.

3.5   O PTIMIZATION

When an image sequence of N frames is input, the multi-frame predictions are denoted as yb =
{byi }N                                                          N
      i=1 , and the corresponding ground truth as y = {yi }i=1 . We compute the loss Lseq across mul-
tiple frames, including both tracking loss and detection loss, which share the same components. The
difference is that tracking loss focuses on localizing previously recognized targets, while detection
loss handles newly detected ones. Lseq can be formulated as follows:
                                  PN
                                        (L(bytri |Qtr , ytri ) + L(bi
                                                                   ydet          i
                                                                        |Qdet , ydet ))
                           Lseq = n=1              PN                                   ,         (5)
                                                        n=1 (Ti )
                            i
where ybtri |Qtr , ytri , ybdet          i
                                |Qdet , ydet denote the association predictions, association labels, detection
predictions, and unassociated labels, respectively. Ti is the total number of the targets in ft=i .
The loss function L includes not only the conventional classification loss and bounding box loss
but also the alignment loss Lalign for the OFA branch, which was mentioned in Sec. 3.2. Regarding
the classification loss Lcls , we perform dot products between each Otxt and the text features Etxt to
predict logits, followed by calculating the focal loss. The single-frame loss L can be formulated as:
                           L = λcls Lcls + λL1 LL1 + λgiou Lgiou + λalign Lalign ,                        (6)
where LL1 denotes the L1 loss, Lgiou is the generalized IoU loss, and λcls , λL1 , λgiou , and λalign are
the weighting parameters. We apply auxiliary losses (Al-Rfou et al., 2019) after each decoder layer.

4     E XPERIMENTS
4.1   DATASETS AND E VALUATION M ETRICS

Datasets. We conduct comparative experiments on the TAO and KITTI datasets. The TAO dataset is
a diverse video tracking benchmark with 833 categories spanning various scenarios. We utilized the
Open-Vocabulary MOT benchmark, based on TAO, to assess open-vocabulary tracking performance.
This benchmark adopts the category division setup from prior work, treating rare classes in LVIS as


                                                      7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Table 1: Open-vocabulary MOT performance comparison on TAO dataset. All methods use
ResNet50 (He et al., 2016) as the backbone. G-LVIS: Data generated in OVTrack (Li et al., 2023)
for training association, with the same number of images as LVIS. Proposalsnovel : The use of image
embedding generated from proposals that partially contain novel categories for distillation. Embeds:
The required number of CLIP image embeddings. †: Distills segmentation knowledge from SAM.
                  Method                           Elements                      Novel                            Base
 Validation set                           Data     Embeds Proposalsnovel TETA↑ LocA↑ AssocA↑ ClsA↑ TETA↑ LocA↑ AssocA↑ ClsA↑
 DeepSORT (ViLD)(Wojke et al., 2017)      LVIS,TAO 99.4M       ✓       21.1   46.4     14.7     2.3    26.9   47.1     15.8    17.7
 Tracktor++ (ViLD)(Bergmann et al., 2019) LVIS,TAO 99.4M       ✓       22.7   46.7     19.3     2.2    28.3   47.4     20.5    17.0
 OVTrack(Li et al., 2023)                G-LVIS,LVIS 99.4M     ✓       27.8   48.8     33.6     1.5    35.5   49.3     36.9    20.2
 MASA(Li et al., 2024)†                     LVIS     99.4M     ✓       30.0   54.2     34.6     1.0    36.9   55.1     36.4    19.3
 OVTR                                       LVIS     1,732             31.4   54.4     34.5     5.4    36.6   52.2     37.6    20.1
 (vs. OVTrack)                                -         -      -      (+3.6) (+5.6)   (+0.9)   (+3.9) (+1.1) (+2.9)   (+0.7)
 Test set                                 Data     Embeds Proposalsnovel TETA↑ LocA↑ AssocA↑ ClsA↑ TETA↑ LocA↑ AssocA↑ ClsA↑
 DeepSORT (ViLD)(Wojke et al., 2017)      LVIS,TAO 99.4M       ✓       17.2   38.4     11.6     1.7    24.5   43.8     14.6    15.2
 Tracktor++ (ViLD)(Bergmann et al., 2019) LVIS,TAO 99.4M       ✓       18.0   39.0     13.4     1.7    26.0   44.1     19.0    14.8
 OVTrack(Li et al., 2023)                G-LVIS,LVIS 99.4M     ✓       24.1   41.8     28.7     1.8    32.6   45.6     35.4    16.9
 OVTR                                       LVIS     1,732             27.1   47.1     32.1     2.1    34.5   51.1     37.5    14.9
 (vs. OVTrack)                                -         -      -      (+3.0) (+5.3)   (+3.4)   (+0.3) (+1.9) (+5.5)   (+2.1)


novel categories and frequent/common classes as base categories. It evaluates a tracker’s ability to
handle novel categories unseen during training, simulating real-world scenarios of identifying and
tracking rare objects. The KITTI dataset, comprising 21 training and 29 test sequences, focuses on
autonomous driving scenarios with diverse objects, reflecting realistic driving conditions. It serves
as a benchmark for evaluating trackers’ generalization across datasets. For training, we leveraged
the LVIS dataset, which includes 1,203 categories, offering a rich diversity of objects for open-
vocabulary learning. Under the open-vocabulary setting, these categories are divided into 866 base
and 337 novel categories, enabling comprehensive model training for rare object tracking.
Evaluation metrics. We use TETA as the metric for evaluating open-vocabulary performance.
TETA separates classification from localization and association, providing an effective measure of
a model’s classification ability in an open-vocabulary setting. The key metrics include localization
accuracy (LocA), association accuracy (AssocA), and classification accuracy (ClsA). For general-
ization experiments on the KITTI dataset, we use the CLEAR-MOT metrics, such as multiple object
tracking accuracy (MOTA), ID F1 score (IDF1), mostly tracked rate (MT), mostly lost rate (ML),
and identity switches (IDs). Among these, MOTA and IDF1 serve as the primary metrics.

4.2         I MPLEMENTATION D ETAILS

We use image data from LVIS (Gupta et al., 2019) for training and augment it to create image
sequences. To better train this query-based tracker, we go beyond basic strategies like random
flipping and cropping, incorporating advanced techniques we designed such as random occlusion
and dynamic mosaic augmentation. (see appendix C for details)
To accelerate convergence, we build OVTR with a ResNet50 (He et al., 2016) backbone and apply
a weight-freezing strategy. Training begins with the detection components, using a batch size of
2 for 33 epochs, a learning rate of 4e-5 that decays by a factor of 10 at the 20th epoch. Next,
the dual-branch decoders and the updater are trained with a batch size of 1 for 16 epochs, starting
with a learning rate of 4e-5, which decays at the 13th epoch. Multi-frame training is employed,
progressively increasing the number of frames from 2 to 3, 4, and 5 at the 4th, 7th, and 14th epochs,
respectively. The hyperparameter τisol , the threshold for the matrix D, is set to a multiple of its mean
value due to its variability. Training is conducted on 4 NVIDIA GeForce RTX 3090 GPUs.

4.3         P ERFORMANCE C OMPARISON ON TAO DATASET

We compare OVTR with state-of-the-art methods on the TAO validation and test sets. We evaluate
OVTrack (Li et al., 2023), along with existing methods like DeepSORT (Wojke et al., 2017) and
Tracktor++ (Bergmann et al., 2019) using off-the-shelf OVD (results from Li et al. (2023)), against
our model. All methods are trained solely on base categories, with ResNet50 (He et al., 2016) as the
backbone. Notably, all methods except OVTR utilize image embeddings that contain implicit novel
categories. Additionally, OVTrack leverages DDPM (Ho et al., 2020) for data generation.


                                                              8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Table 2: Zero-shot domain transfer to KITTI dataset. We compare OVTR with OVTrack and Cen-
terTrack. Our method and OVTrack are both trained using only images and undergo a zero-shot
cross-domain transfer evaluation, whereas CenterTrack is trained with in-domain videos.
                       Method                   Data       MOTA↑   IDF1↑   MT↑    ML↓   IDs↓   Frag↓
            Zero-shot:
            OVTrack(Li et al., 2023)         G-LVIS,LVIS    69.8   75.6    62.9   5.8   594    307
            OVTR                                LVIS        71.8   78.3    64.3   5.4   378    169
            Supervised:
            CenterTrack(Zhou et al., 2020)     KITTI        88.7   85.5    90.3   2.2   403     68


According to the results in Tab. 1, OVTR outperforms OVTrack on TETA of both novel and base
categories across the validation and test sets. Specifically, on novel ClsA, OVTR is more than three
times that of OVTrack. On the test set, OVTR outperforms OVTrack by 11.8% on AssocA for novel
categories. This demonstrates OVTR has better generalization in novel category classification and
tracking. Furthermore, OVTR significantly surpasses OVTrack on LocA across both the validation
and test sets. These results, achieved without the use of proposals containing novel category infor-
mation and with less data, confirm the effectiveness of our approach. They validate the contributions
of the CIP strategy and the dual-branch structure in improving open-vocabulary tracking. Addition-
ally, we use MASA (Li et al., 2024) results from Li et al. (2025) for comparison and find that our
method performs better on novel categories, even without distilling segmentation knowledge from
SAM (Kirillov et al., 2023).

4.4   Z ERO - SHOT D OMAIN T RANSFER TO KITTI DATASET

We evaluated our method and the state-of-the-art OVTrack on the KITTI validation set, as divided
by CenterTrack (Zhou et al., 2020), in the zero-shot domain transfer scenario. As KITTI only
evaluates the Car and Pedestrian categories, we set the inference category range to include these
two categories along with nine randomly selected additional categories to increase the challenge
of category diversity. Tab. 2 shows that OVTR demonstrates better results in the Car category,
surpassing OVTrack by 2.9% on MOTA and 3.6% on IDF1, while reducing IDs by 36.3%. This
indicates that our model generalizes well when transferred to another dataset, further validating
OVTR’s adaptability to diverse autonomous driving scenarios. Due to the inconsistency between
the categorization of pedestrians in the KITTI dataset and the open-vocabulary task, we present
additional comparison methods for the Pedestrian category in the supplementary materials.

4.5   A BLATION S TUDY

In this subsection, we verify the effectiveness of the model architecture and strategies through abla-
tion studies. All models are trained on the LVIS dataset, undergoing 24 epochs of detection training
followed by 15 epochs of tracking training. Due to resource constraints, the ablation studies are
conducted on a subset of 40,000 images. For evaluation, we use the TAO validation dataset and
designate certain base categories that were not learned during training as novel categories. We use
ClsAb and ClsAn to represent ClsA of base and novel categories respectively.
Components of the Dual-Branch Decoder. In this part, we verify the effectiveness of the various
components of the dual-branch decoder. We decoupled the OFA branch for analysis, leaving only the
box head in the output section of the OFA branch. The CTI branch is essential for open-vocabulary
interaction and is not analyzed separately. As reported in Tab. 3, the model with the complete
dual-branch structure (row 4) outperforms the model with only the CTI branch (row 1) by 6.4% on
TETA, and improves by 20.6% on ClsAb . In detail, each component contributes to the performance
improvement. The OFA branch (row 2) improves the model slightly on AssocA, while having
an effective improvement of 10.3% on ClsAb . When the alignment head and alignment loss are
incorporated with the OFA branch (row 4), the model performance is further improved. These
findings highlight the effectiveness of the alignment-enabled OFA branch design. In addition, when
alignment is used for the CTI branch (row 3), the model achieves a significant improvement on
AssocA, but the classification performance remains inferior to that of the model with a complete
dual-branch structure (row 4). We analyze that aligning with image embeddings introduces conflicts
in the text cross-attention, which weakens the classification performance. Therefore, it is essential
to utilize both the dual-branch structure and the alignment mechanism simultaneously.


                                                           9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Table 3: Ablation study on decoder compo-                  Table 4: Ablation study on the protection strate-
nents. Align: the alignment head and alignment             gies for the decoders. Category: the category
loss, CTI: the category-text interaction branch,           isolation strategy, Content: the content isolation
OFA: the object feature alignment branch.                  strategy.
    CTI OFA Align TETA AssocA ClsAb ClsAn                       Category Content TETA AssocA ClsAb ClsAn
 1 ✓        ✗   ✗      31.2   31.8     12.6    1.9          1       ✗          ✗    32.1    32.8     14.6    2.3
 2 ✓        ✓   ✗      31.9   32.0     13.9    2.1          2       ✓          ✗    32.2    33.0     15.6    2.5
 3 ✓        ✗   ✓      32.5   33.9     13.8    2.0          3       ✗          ✓    32.4    33.6     14.3    2.5
 4 ✓        ✓   ✓      33.2   34.5     15.2    2.7          4       ✓          ✓    33.2    34.5     15.2    2.7

Table 5: Ablation study on alignment methods.              Table 6: Ablation study on inputs for CIP ICIP .
We evaluate three methods: using text embed-               Otxt denotes output of the category text interac-
dings, image embeddings, and the average of                tion branch, while Oimg represents output of the
both embeddings for alignment.                             object feature alignment branch.
 Alignment      TETA AssocA ClsAb             ClsAn
                                                             ICIP       TETA       AssocA    ClsAb      ClsAn
     Text       31.6      32.6       14.0      2.0
    Image       33.2      34.5       15.2      2.7          Otxt        32.5        33.8      14.7          1.9
     Avg        32.3      33.2       14.1      3.2          Oimg        33.2        34.5      15.2          2.7

Decoder protection Strategies. As shown in Tab. 4, when the category isolation strategy was ap-
plied alone (row 2), it primarily enhanced classification performance, indicating that it effectively
prevents interference between different category information. The content isolation strategy applied
alone (row 3) resulted in an improvement on AssocA. When both strategies were applied together
(row 4), they produced a synergistic effect, resulting in a 3.4% improvement on TETA and a 5.2%
increase on AssocA compared to the model without either strategy, although the classification per-
formance was slightly suppressed compared to using only the category isolation strategy (row 2).
Modality-Specific Embeddings for Alignment. To explore whether aligning with image embed-
dings yields optimal results, we conducted an ablation comparison with three settings: alignment
with text embeddings, alignment with image embeddings, and alignment with the average of both
embeddings. As shown in Tab. 5, aligning with image embeddings outperformed alignment with
text embeddings by 5.1% on TETA. It is evident that aligning with the average of text and image
embeddings leads to improved ClsAn . We believe this is because the average embeddings retain the
generalization ability provided by image embeddings and enable more direct interactions due to the
inclusion of text embeddings. However, using average embeddings leads to suboptimal association
performance, indirectly resulting in a lower ClsAb . In conclusion, aligning with image embeddings
yields improved results in open-vocabulary tracking.
Inputs for Category Information Propagation. In this part, we aim to compare the performance of
the model when using the output of OFA, Oimg versus the output from CTI, Otxt , as input for the CIP
strategy. As shown in Tab. 6, using Oimg demonstrates better open-vocabulary tracking performance
compared to Otxt . This suggests that the category information flow, carrying Oimg aligned with CLIP
image embeddings, facilitates improved target capture and continuous classification.


5    C ONCLUSION

In this paper, we propose OVTR, the first end-to-end open-vocabulary multiple object tracker that
jointly models motion, appearance, and category. By leveraging the category information propaga-
tion strategy, we establish a higher-level category information flow, enabling the model to classify
and track in a stable and continuous manner. The introduction of a dual-branch structure and protec-
tive strategies in the decoder enhances the model’s generalization capability, fosters deep modality
interaction, and allows for harmonious operation of classification and tracking. Our method elimi-
nates the need for explicit track associations, complex post-processing, and time-consuming prepro-
cessing, resulting in faster inference speeds and a simplified workflow. Despite being RPN-free and
not relying on proposals containing novel categories, our model demonstrates strong generalization
capabilities, achieving robust open-vocabulary tracking. As a Transformer-based framework, it is
data-friendly, scalable, and has potential for further optimization. We hope this end-to-end model
provides a more promising solution for open-vocabulary tracking in diverse scenarios.


                                                      10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
This work was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China under Grant
62176096.

R EFERENCES
Rami Al-Rfou, Dokook Choe, Noah Constant, Mandy Guo, and Llion Jones. Character-level lan-
  guage modeling with deeper self-attention. In Proceedings of the AAAI conference on artificial
  intelligence, volume 33, pp. 3159–3166, 2019.
Mk Bashar, Samia Islam, Kashifa Kawaakib Hussain, Md Bakhtiar Hasan, ABM Rahman, and
 Md Hasanul Kabir. Multiple object tracking in recent times: a literature review. arXiv preprint
 arXiv:2209.04796, 2022.
Philipp Bergmann, Tim Meinhardt, and Laura Leal-Taixe. Tracking without bells and whistles. In
  Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF international conference on computer vision, pp. 941–951, 2019.
Nicolas Carion, Francisco Massa, Gabriel Synnaeve, Nicolas Usunier, Alexander Kirillov, and
  Sergey Zagoruyko. End-to-end object detection with transformers. In European conference on
  computer vision, pp. 213–229. Springer, 2020.
Sijia Chen, En Yu, Jinyang Li, and Wenbing Tao. Delving into the trajectory long-tail distribution
   for muti-object tracking. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and
   Pattern Recognition, pp. 19341–19351, 2024a.
Sijia Chen, En Yu, and Wenbing Tao. Cross-view referring multi-object tracking. arXiv preprint
   arXiv:2412.17807, 2024b.
Achal Dave, Tarasha Khurana, Pavel Tokmakov, Cordelia Schmid, and Deva Ramanan. Tao: A
  large-scale benchmark for tracking any object. In Computer Vision–ECCV 2020: 16th European
  Conference, Glasgow, UK, August 23–28, 2020, Proceedings, Part V 16, pp. 436–454. Springer,
  2020.
Yu Du, Fangyun Wei, Zihe Zhang, Miaojing Shi, Yue Gao, and Guoqi Li. Learning to prompt for
  open-vocabulary object detection with vision-language model. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF
  Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 14084–14093, 2022.
Ruopeng Gao and Limin Wang. Memotr: Long-term memory-augmented transformer for multi-
  object tracking. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision,
  pp. 9901–9910, 2023.
Andreas Geiger, Philip Lenz, and Raquel Urtasun. Are we ready for autonomous driving? the kitti
  vision benchmark suite. In 2012 IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition,
  pp. 3354–3361. IEEE, 2012.
Xiuye Gu, Tsung-Yi Lin, Weicheng Kuo, and Yin Cui. Open-vocabulary object detection via vision
  and language knowledge distillation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2104.13921, 2021.
Agrim Gupta, Piotr Dollar, and Ross Girshick. Lvis: A dataset for large vocabulary instance segmen-
  tation. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recognition,
  pp. 5356–5364, 2019.
Kaiming He, Xiangyu Zhang, Shaoqing Ren, and Jian Sun. Deep residual learning for image recog-
  nition. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, pp.
  770–778, 2016.
Jonathan Ho, Ajay Jain, and Pieter Abbeel. Denoising diffusion probabilistic models. Advances in
  neural information processing systems, 33:6840–6851, 2020.
Alexander Kirillov, Eric Mintun, Nikhila Ravi, Hanzi Mao, Chloe Rolland, Laura Gustafson, Tete
  Xiao, Spencer Whitehead, Alexander C Berg, Wan-Yen Lo, et al. Segment anything. In Proceed-
  ings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision, pp. 4015–4026, 2023.


                                                11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Solomon Kullback. Kullback-leibler divergence, 1951.

Liunian Harold Li, Pengchuan Zhang, Haotian Zhang, Jianwei Yang, Chunyuan Li, Yiwu Zhong, Li-
  juan Wang, Lu Yuan, Lei Zhang, Jenq-Neng Hwang, et al. Grounded language-image pre-training.
  In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp.
  10965–10975, 2022a.

Siyuan Li, Martin Danelljan, Henghui Ding, Thomas E Huang, and Fisher Yu. Tracking every thing
  in the wild. In European Conference on Computer Vision, pp. 498–515. Springer, 2022b.

Siyuan Li, Tobias Fischer, Lei Ke, Henghui Ding, Martin Danelljan, and Fisher Yu. Ovtrack: Open-
  vocabulary multiple object tracking. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer
  vision and pattern recognition, pp. 5567–5577, 2023.

Siyuan Li, Lei Ke, Martin Danelljan, Luigi Piccinelli, Mattia Segu, Luc Van Gool, and Fisher Yu.
  Matching anything by segmenting anything. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on
  Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 18963–18973, 2024.

Siyuan Li, Lei Ke, Yung-Hsu Yang, Luigi Piccinelli, Mattia Segù, Martin Danelljan, and Luc Van
  Gool. Slack: Semantic, location, and appearance aware open-vocabulary tracking. In European
  Conference on Computer Vision, pp. 1–18. Springer, 2025.

Haiji Liang and Ruize Han. Ovt-b: A new large-scale benchmark for open-vocabulary multi-object
  tracking. In The Thirty-eight Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems Datasets and
  Benchmarks Track.

Chuang Lin, Peize Sun, Yi Jiang, Ping Luo, Lizhen Qu, Gholamreza Haffari, Zehuan Yuan, and
  Jianfei Cai. Learning object-language alignments for open-vocabulary object detection. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2211.14843, 2022.

Shilong Liu, Zhaoyang Zeng, Tianhe Ren, Feng Li, Hao Zhang, Jie Yang, Chunyuan Li, Jianwei
  Yang, Hang Su, Jun Zhu, et al. Grounding dino: Marrying dino with grounded pre-training for
  open-set object detection. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.05499, 2023.

Tim Meinhardt, Alexander Kirillov, Laura Leal-Taixe, and Christoph Feichtenhofer. Trackformer:
  Multi-object tracking with transformers. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer
  vision and pattern recognition, pp. 8844–8854, 2022.

Pha Nguyen, Kha Gia Quach, Kris Kitani, and Khoa Luu. Type-to-track: Retrieve any object via
  prompt-based tracking. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 36, 2024.

Alec Radford, Jong Wook Kim, Chris Hallacy, Aditya Ramesh, Gabriel Goh, Sandhini Agarwal,
  Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, Pamela Mishkin, Jack Clark, et al. Learning transferable visual
  models from natural language supervision. In International conference on machine learning, pp.
  8748–8763. PMLR, 2021.

Peize Sun, Jinkun Cao, Yi Jiang, Rufeng Zhang, Enze Xie, Zehuan Yuan, Changhu Wang, and Ping
  Luo. Transtrack: Multiple object tracking with transformer. arXiv preprint arXiv:2012.15460,
  2020.

Nicolai Wojke, Alex Bewley, and Dietrich Paulus. Simple online and realtime tracking with a deep
  association metric. In 2017 IEEE international conference on image processing (ICIP), pp. 3645–
  3649. IEEE, 2017.

Dongming Wu, Wencheng Han, Tiancai Wang, Xingping Dong, Xiangyu Zhang, and Jianbing Shen.
  Referring multi-object tracking. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision
  and pattern recognition, pp. 14633–14642, 2023a.

Xiaoshi Wu, Feng Zhu, Rui Zhao, and Hongsheng Li. Cora: Adapting clip for open-vocabulary
  detection with region prompting and anchor pre-matching. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF
  conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, pp. 7031–7040, 2023b.


                                               12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


En Yu, Zhuoling Li, and Shoudong Han. Towards discriminative representation: Multi-view tra-
  jectory contrastive learning for online multi-object tracking. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF
  conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, pp. 8834–8843, 2022.
En Yu, Songtao Liu, Zhuoling Li, Jinrong Yang, Zeming Li, Shoudong Han, and Wenbing Tao.
  Generalizing multiple object tracking to unseen domains by introducing natural language rep-
  resentation. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, volume 37, pp.
  3304–3312, 2023a.
En Yu, Tiancai Wang, Zhuoling Li, Yuang Zhang, Xiangyu Zhang, and Wenbing Tao. Motrv3:
  Release-fetch supervision for end-to-end multi-object tracking. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.14298,
  2023b.
Yuhang Zang, Wei Li, Kaiyang Zhou, Chen Huang, and Chen Change Loy. Open-vocabulary detr
  with conditional matching. In European Conference on Computer Vision, pp. 106–122. Springer,
  2022.
Fangao Zeng, Bin Dong, Yuang Zhang, Tiancai Wang, Xiangyu Zhang, and Yichen Wei. Motr: End-
  to-end multiple-object tracking with transformer. In European Conference on Computer Vision,
  pp. 659–675. Springer, 2022.
Hao Zhang, Feng Li, Shilong Liu, Lei Zhang, Hang Su, Jun Zhu, Lionel M Ni, and Heung-Yeung
  Shum. Dino: Detr with improved denoising anchor boxes for end-to-end object detection. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2203.03605, 2022a.
Yifu Zhang, Peize Sun, Yi Jiang, Dongdong Yu, Fucheng Weng, Zehuan Yuan, Ping Luo, Wenyu
  Liu, and Xinggang Wang. Bytetrack: Multi-object tracking by associating every detection box.
  In European conference on computer vision, pp. 1–21. Springer, 2022b.
Yuang Zhang, Tiancai Wang, and Xiangyu Zhang. Motrv2: Bootstrapping end-to-end multi-object
  tracking by pretrained object detectors. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer
  Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 22056–22065, 2023.
Li Zhou, Zikun Zhou, Kaige Mao, and Zhenyu He. Joint visual grounding and tracking with natural
  language specification. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and
  pattern recognition, pp. 23151–23160, 2023.
Xingyi Zhou, Vladlen Koltun, and Philipp Krähenbühl. Tracking objects as points. In European
  conference on computer vision, pp. 474–490. Springer, 2020.


                                               13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A          M ORE I MPLEMENTATION D ETAILS
A.1         C ATEGORY S ELECTION BASED ON D ISTRIBUTION .

During training, for each frame input, we randomly sample 250 categories based on the dataset’s
class distribution, including the ground truth categories of the current frame. These categories are
represented as text embeddings, defining the scope of classes for classification learning in the current
frame. Specifically, in addition to the ground truth of the current frame, the probability of selecting
a certain category as a negative class is positively correlated with the 0.7th power of the number of
objects in that category. This approach helps mitigate the impact of the long-tailed distribution in
the dataset.

A.2         G ENERATION OF I MAGE E MBEDDINGS

We use the CLIP (Radford et al., 2021) model to generate image and text embeddings. For the
generation of image embeddings, specifically, rather than using a large number of proposals detected
by an additional RPN-based detector, which may include novel categories, we simply extract a
specific number of cropped images for each base category from the dataset. Using the ground truth
bounding boxes, we crop the images with a factor of 1.2 to create these cropped images. The cropped
images for each category are then fed into the CLIP image encoder. The resulting representations
are normalized and averaged to generate the image embedding for that category.

A.3         L EARNABLE S CALING PARAMETERS

The category score matrix obtained through dot products is scaled to an appropriate magnitude
before applying softmax. Learnable scaling parameters are used for scaling, with each layer having
independent scaling parameters to maintain the operational independence across decoder layers.

A.4         D ETAILS OF ATTENTION I SOLATION S TRATEGIES
                                                                                         KL divergence value
                  corresponding query           DKL KL divergence             small                              large        valid mask (True)
                                                             Qdet       Qtr                            Qdet         Qtr             Qdet          Qtr


    “dog”      0.1 0.3 0.5 0.1 0.2 0.1
  “person”     0.1 0.3 0.2 0.2 0.1 0.1
    “car”      0.6 0.1 0.1 0.2 0.1 0.1    DKL                                       isol
“skateboard”
               0.1 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.2 0.1

     ...


                Category Score Matrix S                 Difference Matrix D                     Category Isolation Mask   I   Content Isolation Mask


Figure 4: Attention isolation masks. In the difference matrix, The darker areas indicate a smaller
KL divergence, meaning the category prediction distributions of the corresponding queries in the
current layer are more similar. This suggests that the category information of the corresponding
input queries passed to the next layer is similar. The darker areas of the masks represent masked
positions, while the red dashed box shows that interactions among track queries will be maintained.
The specific masks of the category isolation strategy and the content isolation strategy are illustrated
in Fig. 4. As mentioned in Sec. 3.3, the output Otxt of the current decoder layer predicts the Category
Score Matrix S, which is used to compute the KL divergence between category predictions for
each pair of queries, resulting in the Difference Matrix D. D captures the similarity of category
information among queries. τisol is then applied to D to generate an isolation mask I, which sets
the positions with excessively large KL divergence values to True, thereby masking these positions.
This mask I is subsequently utilized in the self-attention layer of the next decoder layer. Since
queries are updated and propagated between decoder layers, the updated queries ([P ′ , Otxt ]) output
by the current layer serve as the input queries for the next layer. Therefore, the similarity captured
in D from the current layer are well-suited for application to the input queries of the next layer.
Specifically, I is added to the attention weights obtained from the batch matrix multiplication be-
tween q and k (where both q and k are input queries) during the self-attention in decoder layers 2


                                                                               14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025



Table 7: Verifying the effectiveness of com-            Table 8: Different image sequence lengths for
ponents in OVTR. Isol: isolation (protection)           multi-frame optimization. The maximum image
strategies, Dual: dual-branch structure.                sequence lengths set for the four experiments
                                                        are 2, 3, 4 and 5 respectively.
    CIP Isol Dual TETA AssocA ClsAb ClsAn
 1 ✗ ✗        ✗    28.9     29.1    10.7    1.7          Length   TETA AssocA ClsAb            ClsAn
 2 ✓ ✗        ✗    30.3     30.2    12.1    1.8             2      27.9      24.9      13.5      2.2
 3 ✓ ✓        ✗    31.2     31.8    12.6    1.9             3      30.5      32.2      14.5      2.5
 4 ✓ ✗        ✓    32.1     32.8    14.6    2.3             4      31.6      33.8      14.7      2.4
 5 ✓ ✓        ✓    33.2     34.5    15.2    2.7             5      33.2      34.5      15.2      2.7

to 6. Because the coordinates (i, j) of I corresponding to queries i and j with significant category
information differences are set to True (in practice, the value is set to −∞), the attention weight at
this position becomes 0 after the softmax operation. This enforces attention isolation, preventing
category information from interfering with each other. It is worth noting that this mask is not used
in the first decoder layer, as the content part C of the queries fed into the self-attention in the first
decoder layer is initialized through learnable parameters and does not contain category information.
The implementation of the content isolation mask is straightforward, as it simply sets the positions
for detect queries and track queries that attend to each other to True. This mask is applied solely to
the self-attention layer of the first decoder layer for two reasons: first, the content gap between Qdet
and Qtr diminishes after the first decoder layer interaction, as detection queries carry enough object
semantic content; and second, to ensure that track queries can capture global information. Apart
from being applied in different decoder layers, the content isolation mask performs the same oper-
ation in self-attention as the previously mentioned category isolation mask, applied to the attention
weights to restrict the interaction between queries.

B     A DDITIONAL E XPERIMENTS
B.1   V ERIFYING THE E FFECTIVENESS OF C OMPONENTS IN OVTR

In this part, we verify the effectiveness of three core components in OVTR: the category information
propagation (CIP) strategy, the dual-branch structure, and the decoder isolation protection strategies.
The row 1 represents the baseline model we constructed, which does not incorporate category infor-
mation when iterating track queries, essentially lacking a category information flow. Specifically,
in the single-branch structure (CTI only), we designed an auxiliary network structure identical to
the standard MOTR (Zeng et al., 2022) decoder, but it operates entirely independently of the CTI
branch. As a result, the queries passed through this structure lack category information. When using
its output as input to CIP, the category information flow lacks direct category information.
The results are reported in Tab. 7. According to the results, all the components have boosted the
open-vocabulary tracking performance effectively. OVTR (row 5) achieves a 14.9% improvement
on TETA compared to the constructed baseline (row 1). The adoption of the CIP strategy increases
AssocA by 3.8% and ClsAb by 13.1%, significantly improving both association and classification.
This suggests that the inclusion of CIP enables better collaboration between classification and track-
ing. Specifically, with the addition of the CIP strategy, the dual-branch structure (row 4) provides the
greatest performance gain. Compared to using CIP alone (row 2), TETA increases by 5.9%, and both
AssocA and ClsA see significant improvements, particularly with ClsAb increasing by 20.7%. This
suggests that the designed dual-branch structure enhances generalization performance and modal-
ity interaction, leading to a powerful open vocabulary capability. This also demonstrates that the
dual-branch structure strengthens tracking effectively by feeding the aligned representations into the
category information flow, helping capture objects and enhance tracking. In contrast, the isolation
strategies (row 3) provide a smaller gain compared to the dual-branch structure, but still improve
AssocA by 5.3% compared to using CIP alone. This indicates that the protection provided to the
decoder is effective, helping maintain continuity between the initial frame detection and subsequent
tracking, thus improving tracking performance.

B.2   A NALYSIS OF I MAGE S EQUENCES L ENGTH FOR O PTIMIZATION

To investigate whether multi-frame optimization helps the model learn more stable category infor-
mation transfer and tracking, we set the maximum number of optimization frames in the ablation


                                                   15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Table 9: Open-vocabulary MOT inference speed test on TAO dataset. OVTR-Lite excludes the
category isolation strategy and tensor KL divergence computation.
               Method             Speed                  Novel                                             Base
      Validation set              FPS TETA↑ LocA↑ AssocA↑ ClsA↑ TETA↑ LocA↑ AssocA↑ ClsA↑
      OVTrack (Li et al., 2023) 3.1       27.8    48.8       33.6         1.5          35.5         49.3          36.9      20.2
      OVTR (Ours)                3.4      31.4    54.4       34.5         5.4          36.6         52.2          37.6      20.1
      OVTR-Lite (Ours)          12.4      30.1    52.7       34.4         3.1          35.6         51.3          37.0      18.6

experiments to 2, 3, 4 and 5. The first experiment maintains a frame count of 2 throughout. In the
second experiment, we start with 2 frames and increase the number of frames by 1 at the 4th epoch.
The third experiment starts with 2 frames and increases the frame count by 1 at both the 4th and 7th
epochs. The fourth experiment also starts with 2 frames but increases the frame count by 1 at the 4th,
7th, and 14th epochs. As shown in Tab. 8, when the length of the video clip gradually increases from
2 to 5, the TETA, AssocA, and ClsAb metrics improve by 19.0%, 38.6%, and 12.6%, respectively.
This indicates that multi-frame joint optimization contributes to improved tracking performance and
classification stability.

B.3     I NFERENCE S PEED E VALUATION

We evaluated the inference speed of OVTrack and OVTR on a single NVIDIA GeForce RTX 3090
GPU. The results reported in Tab. 9, indicate that OVTR achieves faster inference compared to
OVTrack. Additionally, we tested a lightweight version, OVTR-Lite, which excludes the category
isolation strategy and tensor KL divergence computation. Despite some performance trade-offs,
OVTR-Lite still outperforms OVTrack in overall performance. It achieves 4 times faster inference
speed compared to OVTrack, while keeping memory usage below 4GB during inference. The speed
test is conducted on the TAO validation set.

B.4     E VALUATION OF P EDESTRIAN C ATEGORY ON THE KITTI DATASET
             Table 10: Zero-shot domain transfer to KITTI dataset (Pedestrian category).
                        Method        Data       MOTA↑ IDF1↑ IDs↓ MOTP↑ IDR↑ FN↓
                        OVTrack G-LVIS,LVIS        4.5      11.2    113         67.9       6.2       4083
                        OVTR       LVIS           40.5      56.1    176         74.1      56.1       1332

Since KITTI differentiates between Pedestrian and Cyclist, which the open-vocabulary task does
not, this differentiation results in a higher false positive rate when evaluating the Pedestrian category,
making MOTA metrics less indicative of actual performance for pedestrian tracking. To provide a
more accurate assessment of pedestrian tracking, we selected IDR, FN, and MOTP to compare the
model’s performance on pedestrians. Although there may be numerous false positives for cyclists,
comparing the recall rate for pedestrians is reasonable. The results in Tab. 10 indicate that our
method significantly outperforms OVTrack in capturing and tracking pedestrian targets when trans-
ferred to the KITTI dataset. This finding is consistent with our tests on TAO, where OVTrack often
fails to identify pedestrians. In addition to the model’s design and performance, this may also be
related to the fact that OVTrack includes pedestrians in the classification learning scope during every
frame of training, while the annotations for pedestrians in LVIS are not fully comprehensive.

B.5     E VALUATION ON DATASET WITH H IGHER A NNOTATION F RAME R ATE
            Table 11: Open-vocabulary MOT performance comparison on OVT-B dataset.
         Method                     Elements                              Novel                                          Base
 OVT-B                     Data      Embeds Proposalsnovel TETA↑ LocA↑ AssocA↑ ClsA↑ TETA↑ LocA↑ AssocA↑ ClsA↑
 OVTrack(Li et al., 2023) G-LVIS,LVIS 99.4M       ✓          45.5   61.1         65.5         9.6      46.8       60.5      66.7   13.4
 OVTrack+(Liang & Han) G-LVIS,LVIS 99.4M          ✓          46.4   62.5         67.3         9.4      47.6       61.6      68.2   13.2
 OVTR                      LVIS        1,732                 45.5   59.7         67.6         9.3      47.6       60.9      68.9   12.9


We compare open-vocabulary MOT performance on OVT-B dataset (Liang & Han). Tab. 11 shows
that OVTR outperforms OVTrack on base TETA and matches OVTrack+ performance. Without
using proposals containing novel categories, OVTR still achieves comparable novel TETA results


                                                           16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


             (a) Data Augmentations for OVTrack                                                                  : Ground Truth Object
                    Sampled Image
              Image 1                                                 Mosaic



              Image 2                                                                                                                T1



              Image 3                                                                      Standard Data
                                                                                           Augmentations


              Image 4
                                                                                                                                    T2

                                            Corresponding
                        Sampled Images
                                         Diffusion-Generated
                          for Mosaic
                                                Images



             (b) Data Augmentations for OVTR (Ours)                                                              : Ground Truth Object
                                                     Dynamic Mosaic     Random Occlusion
                    Sampled Image
              Image 1
                                                                                                                                    T1

              Image 2



                                                                                                 Standard Data
              Image 3
                                                                                                 Augmentations
                                                                                                                                     T2


              Image 4


                                                                                                                                     T3
                    Sampled Images
                      for Mosaic


Figure 5: OVTR data augmentations. Unlike OVTrack, which is based on appearance matching,
our method does not utilize diffusion models for data augmentation. Instead, we propose Dynamic
Mosaic and Random Occlusion data augmentation to simulate object appearance and disappearance,
tracking continuity after occlusion, and maintaining correct associations when relative motion oc-
curs between tracked objects and others.

to OVTrack. Our method also achieves the highest AssocA for both base and novel categories,
demonstrating superior tracking performance in high-frame-rate videos.


C    S TATIC I MAGE AUGMENTATIONS FOR Q UERY-BASED T RACKING

Our multi-frame training data augmentations are summarized in Fig. 5. As a MOTR-like query-
based tracker, OVTR requires a different approach to data augmentation and has higher demands for
training data. Our data augmentation includes conventional techniques, such as applying random
resizing, horizontal flipping, color jittering, and random affine transformations to single images to
create distinguishable multi-frame data. This part aligns with OVTrack (Li et al., 2023). Addition-
ally, we propose Dynamic Mosaic and Random Occlusion augmentations, specifically designed for
MOTR-like trackers.
Unlike appearance-matching-based methods, our approach does not rely on diffusion models for ad-
ditional data augmentation. Instead, it focuses on enhancing the motion realism of static images dur-
ing data augmentation, making them more representative of the physical world. Specifically, while
query-based trackers excel at maintaining associations over extended periods, they place higher de-
mands on the realism of object motion patterns in training data. For OVTR, track queries must not
only learn to capture the same object as it moves to a new position in the next frame, but also han-
dle scenarios such as object appearance and disappearance, tracking continuity after occlusion, and
maintaining correct associations when relative motion occurs between tracked objects and others .
To address these challenges, we propose Dynamic Mosaic augmentation, an improvement over the
Mosaic augmentation in OVTrack. In addition to stitching four different images into a single com-
posite, Dynamic Mosaic generates images with varying relative spatial relationships among objects
across different training frames. This simulates scenarios such as objects approaching or reced-
ing from each other, crossing paths, and exhibiting relative size changes. The Random Occlusion
augmentation is employed to simulate situations where objects disappear due to occlusion and then
reappear or suddenly emerge in the scene.


                                                                               17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


     T1


     T2


     T3



             (a) Without Mosaic                         (b) With Dynamic Mosaic

Figure 6: OVTR data augmentations visualization. From the images, it can be observed that
Dynamic Mosaic augmentation introduces relative motion and relative size changes between targets,
while the positional swapping of images simulates target crossing paths. Additionally, the bottom-
center image illustrates a random occlusion applied to a giraffe.

Here, we detail the specific operations during training. Dynamic Mosaic is not applied to every sam-
pled image. To avoid neglecting learning for simple scenes or larger targets, we set the probability
of applying Dynamic Mosaic augmentation to a sampled training image at 0.5. In contrast, Random
Occlusion is applied to every sampled image. For Dynamic Mosaic augmentation, four sampled im-
ages are processed with relative size adjustments, vertical or horizontal translations, random swaps
of positions between two images, and possible horizontal flipping of one or more images. Random
Occlusion requires a simple preprocessing step, where a script is used to mark targets that rarely
overlap with others, based on the ground truth bounding boxes in the annotations. During Random
Occlusion augmentation, only these marked targets are randomly processed, preventing unintended
occlusion of other targets and avoiding negative impacts on model learning. The output images after
data augmentation used for training OVTR, including cases with and without Dynamic Mosaic, are
shown in Fig. 6.


D    M ODEL AND T RAINING H YPERPARAMETERS

Tab. 12 and Tab. 13 present the hyperparameters used in the detection training phase and the tracking
training phase, respectively. The hyperparameters used in the tracking training phase are listed in
Tab. 13, while other unmentioned parameters, such as structural parameters and loss weights, are the
same as those in the detection phase. Our model follows the standard 6-encoder, 6-decoder structure
in DETRs. For the update and propagation of queries between decoder layers, we specifically use
the updated position part P ′ as the input position part of the queries for the next decoder layer, while
the representation Otxt output by the CTI branch is used as the content part for the next decoder
layer. This is because the CTI branch includes an extra cross-attention layer compared to the OFA
branch, allowing Otxt to contain more refined category information, leading to more accurate priors
for classification in subsequent layers. The shuffle ratio, dislocation ratio, single ratio range, and
occlusion ratio range are hyperparameters in the Dynamic Mosaic and Random Occlusion augmen-
tations used to control the extent of augmentation. Sampler lengths specifies the number of frames
for multi-frame training during each of the four phases. Sampler steps indicates the epochs where
these transitions to different multi-frame training lengths occur.


                                                   18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                  Table 12: Hyper-parameters used in the detection training phase.
                                 Item                             Value
                                 optimizer                       AdamW
                                 lr                               4e-5
                                 weight decay                     1e-4
                                 clip max norm                     0.1
                                 number of encoder layers           6
                                 number of decoder layers           6
                                 dim feedforward                  2048
                                 hidden dim                        256
                                 dropout                           0.0
                                 nheads                             8
                                 number of queries                 900
                                 set cost class                    3.0
                                 set cost bbox                     5.0
                                 set cost giou                     2.0
                                 ce loss coef                      2.0
                                 bbox loss coef                    5.0
                                 giou loss coef                    2.0
                                 alignment loss coef               2.0

             Table 13: Additional hyper-parameters used in the tracking training phase.
                                 Item                            Value
                                 lr                              4e-5
                                 lr of backbone                  4e-6
                                 sampler steps                  4, 7, 14
                                 sampler lengths               2, 3, 4, 5
                                 shuffle ratio                    0.1
                                 dislocation ratio                0.25
                                 single ratio range             0.7, 1.2
                                 occlusion ratio range         0.1, 0.13


E    V ISUALIZATION
As shown in the figures, the results on the left represent the tracking outcomes of OVTR, while the
results on the right depict those of OVTrack. Overall, it can be observed from the four sets of images
that our method experiences fewer ID switches and results in fewer false positives.
In Fig. 7, it can be seen that our tracker, OVTR (on the left), maintains stable tracking of the three
sheep without any ID switches, whereas OVTrack (on the right) experiences ID switches and loses
many previously detected targets. In Fig. 8, OVTrack (on the right) generates a significantly higher
number of false positives compared to our method. In Fig. 9, on the left, our OVTR tracks both
the person and the components of the clothing and skateboard, where the person (ID 5) and the
jacket (ID 2) remain consistently tracked over 15 frames (after sampling every 30 frames) in a high-
speed scenario. The tracking remains stable, and the correct categories are preserved, demonstrating
the effectiveness of our dual-branch structure and CIP strategy. In contrast, OVTrack reaches ID
110 at Frame 17, indicating a large number of ID switches, suggesting some challenges in tracking
stability. In Fig. 10, in the second frame, the squirrel on the left partially occludes the squirrel on the
right. After the occlusion ends in the third frame, our tracker (on the left) maintains the same ID for
the squirrel as in the first frame, while OVTrack (on the right) experiences another ID switch and a
significant number of classification errors.
Overall, from the tracking results, it is evident that tracking diverse targets in scenes with a variety
of categories presents challenges. However, our method, combining the CIP strategy with a dual-
branch structure and decoder protection strategies, achieves relatively robust tracking. The results
demonstrated by OVTR suggest that it holds potential for effective tracking in such scenarios.



                                                    19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


      T1


     T2


     T3


                    (a) OVTR (Ours)                          (b) OVTrack

 Figure 7: Qualitative comparison of OVTR and OVTrack in multi-object motion scenario 1.


      T1


     T2


     T3


                    (a) OVTR (Ours)                          (b) OVTrack

 Figure 8: Qualitative comparison of OVTR and OVTrack in multi-object motion scenario 2.


                                               20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


           Frame 3                                  Frame 3



      T1


           Frame 16                                 Frame 16



     T2


           Frame 17                                 Frame 17



     T3


                      (a) OVTR (Ours)                          (b) OVTrack

   Figure 9: Qualitative comparison in a concentrated fast-moving multi-object scenario.


      T1


     T2


     T3


                      (a) OVTR (Ours)                          (b) OVTrack

    Figure 10: Qualitative comparison on rare category objects in an occlusion scenario.


                                               21
