Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


E FFICIENT ACTIVE I MITATION L EARNING WITH
R ANDOM N ETWORK D ISTILLATION
 Emilien Biré1∗, Anthony Kobanda2 , Ludovic Denoyer3 , Rémy Portelas2
 1
  Centrale Supelec 2 Ubisoft La Forge 3 H Company
 remy.portelas@ubisoft.com



                                                  A BSTRACT

              Developing agents for complex and underspecified tasks, where no clear objective
              exists, remains challenging but offers many opportunities. This is especially true in
              video games, where simulated players (bots) need to play realistically, and there is
              no clear reward to evaluate them. While imitation learning has shown promise in
              such domains, these methods often fail when agents encounter out-of-distribution
              scenarios during deployment. Expanding the training dataset is a common solution,
              but it becomes impractical or costly when relying on human demonstrations. This
              article addresses active imitation learning, aiming to trigger expert intervention
              only when necessary, reducing the need for constant expert input along training.
              We introduce Random Network Distillation DAgger (RND-DAgger), a new active
              imitation learning method that limits expert querying by using a learned state-based
              out-of-distribution measure to trigger interventions. This approach avoids frequent
              expert-agent action comparisons, thus making the expert intervene only when it is
              useful. We evaluate RND-DAgger against traditional imitation learning and other
              active approaches in 3D video games (racing and third-person navigation) and in a
              robotic locomotion task and show that RND-DAgger surpasses previous methods
              by reducing expert queries. https://sites.google.com/view/rnd-dagger


1        I NTRODUCTION

Imitation learning has increasingly become a favored approach for learning behaviors in complex
environments, offering a compelling alternative to classical scripted behaviors implemented by
domain specialists (Schaal, 1999; Hussein et al., 2017). It is particularly well suited in problems
where there is not a clear performance measure (or reward). In video games, it is becoming more
and more familiar to game developers that frequently address the problem of implementing bots in
their games which must play in realistic ways (Harmer et al., 2018; Yadgaroff et al., 2024; Mao et al.,
2024). Indeed, since the notion of realism is not well specified, it prevents the use of reinforcement
learning-based approaches where a reward signal is mandatory. By observing and replicating human
players, these bots are trained to execute complex strategies and actions that are both efficient and
human-like.
Imitation learning usually proceeds in two steps: first, a dataset of behaviors is built by leveraging
experts interacting with the dynamical system. Then, a statistical model (e.g. a neural network) is
learned to imitate actions in that dataset, thus expecting this model to generalize to unseen state
and to behave like the experts. Consider a use case where the goal is to train a driving policy in a
video game context capable of controlling a car on a track (see figure 1). In this scenario, the state
is defined by sensor values at time t, which can include information such as the position of the car,
its speed, and raycasts. In this context, Imitation Learning involves manually controlling the car for
many laps to create a learning dataset, training a policy on this dataset using traditional algorithms
like Behavioral Cloning (Bain & Sommut, 1999), and expecting that the resulting bot will control the
car correctly. However, this approach is known to be unreliable, particularly due to the risk of a shift
in the state distribution between training and testing (Ross et al., 2011), known as the problem of
covariate shift (Nair et al., 2019). When covariate shift occurs, the agent struggles to determine the
correct action, leading to compounding errors and ultimately undermining its performance.

     ∗
         Work done during an internship at Ubisoft La Forge.


                                                         1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                     Crash                                                            Back on track


          Autonomous driving                 Expert demonstration              Expert demonstration                   Autonomous driving

                                                                                                                      The learner is confident
          The learner is confident           The learner is lost               The learner is lost
                                                                                                                      again


              (a)                                  (b)                             (c)                                       (d)
                                                                    Recovery


Figure 1: RND-DAgger overview. (a) The learner’s policy controls the agent until (b) our Random
Network Distillation-based out-of-distribution (OOD) measure is triggered. Then (c) the expert takes
control until the OOD measure gets lower than the threshold for at least W steps. (d) Finally, the
current policy takes control of the agent to continue the episode, and can trigger the expert again later.

Facing this issue, the effectiveness of imitation learning hinges on the availability of extensive datasets
comprised of player behaviors, often necessitating thousands of expert traces to achieve reasonable
performance and exhibit credible behaviors (Vinyals et al., 2019; Mao et al., 2024). This dependency
on large volumes of data poses a challenge, particularly in scenarios where collecting such data is
either impractical or costly.
In response to these limitations, some approaches involve human-in-the-loop training framework,
often referred to as active imitation learning (Ross et al., 2011; Judah et al., 2012; Menda et al.,
2019; Hoque et al., 2021). Instead of gathering very large amounts of demonstrations, these methods
focus on the strategic incorporation of human feedback to selectively guide the learning process,
thereby enhancing the efficiency of the training phase. By prioritizing the acquisition of relevant and
impactful expert traces, these approaches seek to expedite the agent’s learning curve without relying
on expansive datasets, and swiftly improve performance. In the aforementioned video game example,
this corresponds to collecting a first set of player traces to bootstrap the agent using classical imitation
learning, and then to gather additional traces in particular race settings during training, i.e. requiring
a player to control the car in particular and relevant situations.
To tackle these challenges, several recent models have been proposed to identify when the expert’s
intervention is necessary to correct the agent’s suboptimal behavior (Zhang & Cho, 2017; Menda
et al., 2019; Kelly et al., 2019; Hoque et al., 2021), with DAgger (Ross et al., 2011) being one of
the most well-known approaches. The primary objective of these methods is to minimize the time
required for human feedback by concentrating interventions on the most critical situations where
the agent is likely to make errors. This allows for a more efficient use of expert time, ensuring that
corrective feedback is provided only when it is essential. But, as explained in Section 2, many of
these methods are not fully satisfying.
Despite these advancements, designing algorithms that effectively incorporate human feedback while
reducing the overall expert effort remains an open research problem. Addressing this issue is the
central focus of this article, as we aim to develop methods that optimize the interaction between
the expert and the learning agent, thereby improving learning efficiency without overburdening the
human supervisor.
Our main contributions are threefold: i) We propose a new method called RND-DAgger, a novel in-
teractive imitation learning approach leveraging state-based out-of-distribution identification through
random network distillation. ii) We perform a comparative analysis of RND-DAgger and existing
methods on 3 tasks: a robotics scenario and two video-game environments. iii) Throughout these
experiments, we demonstrate that RND-DAgger either outperforms or matches existing approaches
in terms of final performance while significantly reducing expert burden.


                                                                        2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Algorithm 1 DAgger                                       Algorithm 2 Lazy/Ensemble DAgger
Require: K, {βi }i∈[1,K] , T , πexp                      Require: K, C ONDITION, T , πexp
 1: Instantiate D dataset of expert trajectories          1: Instantiate D dataset of expert trajectories
 2: Instantiate π0 BC policy trained on D                 2: Instantiate π0 BC policy trained on D
 3: t ← 0                                                 3: nswitch ← 0
 4: for i = 0, . . . , K DAgger iterations do             4: t ← 0
 5:     Di ← ∅                                            5: Di ← ∅
 6:     for T sampling steps do                           6: for i = 0, . . . , K iterations do
 7:         st ∼ Env(at−1 ) (Get a new state)             7:     while #Di < T do
 8:         at ← βi πexp (st ) + (1 − βi )πi (st )        8:         st ∼ Env(at−1 ) (Get a new state)
 9:         Di ← Di ∪ {(at , πexp (st ))}                 9:         Ct ← C ONDITION(πexp , πi , st )
10:         t←t+1                                        10:         if Ct then
11:     Push D ← D ∪ Di                                  11:              at ← πexp (st )
12:     Train πi+1 on D using BC                         12:              Di ← Di ∪ {(at , st )}
13: return πK                                            13:              t←t+1
                                                         14:              if not Ct−1 then
                                                         15:                    nswitch ← nswitch + 1
Figure 2: Above, the DAgger algorithm where the          16:         else
expert action is added to the training set at each       17:              at ← πi (st )
timestep, the agent being alternatively controlled       18:         t←t+1
by the current policy and the expert one. On             19:     D ← D ∪ Di
the right, in Lazy/Ensemble DAgger, the agent            20:     Train πi+1 on D using BC
is controlled by the expert policy only if a given       21: return πK
measure is higher than a threshold λ. Only actions
generated when the expert controls the agent are
added to the training set.


2    P RELIMINARIES AND R ELATED M ODELS
Notations Let us consider a Markov Decision Process described by a state space S and an action
space A. The dynamics of the process are defined by an unknown transition function P (st+1 |at , st ),
where at ∈ A and st ∈ S. Note that we do not consider any reward in this setting since the task
to solve is not explicit (e.g., driving a car); our objective is instead to imitate human behaviors that
may be suboptimal and diverse (e.g., considering multiple players or experts). An episode τ consists
of a sequence of states and actions, τ = (s1 , a1 , . . . , sT , aT ), where T is the length of the episode.
Given a policy π(at |st ), it is possible to sample an episode by sequentially executing the policy until
reaching a stop criterion.

Distributional shift: Given a dataset of expert demonstrations D = (τ1 , . . . , τn ), a common
approach to policy learning is Behavioral Cloning (BC) (Bain & Sammut, 1995; Ding et al., 2019a),
a straightforward imitation learning algorithm. BC enables to learn policies by maximizing the
log-likelihood of the expert actions within the dataset. However, learning a policy from a fixed dataset
can result in the policy encountering out-of-distribution (OOD) states during inference, where it
has not been trained to make accurate decisions (Ross et al., 2011). This phenomenon is referred
to as distributional shift. This shift in the distribution can cause the policy to perform poorly, as it
may not know how to handle unseen situations. For example, consider a driving policy in a racing
game. If the dataset is composed only of demonstrations from expert drivers, the learned policy might
struggle to recover from rare events such as a spin-out, since such situations are absent from the
expert demonstrations. Therefore, the policy may fail to generalize effectively to these unseen states.
This effect can be mitigated by providing more diverse and comprehensive training sets, ensuring
that the policy is exposed to a wider range of scenarios, including edge cases. However, this raises
the challenge of how to efficiently collect such datasets while minimizing the burden on experts.
Gathering enough data to cover all possible situations can be time-consuming and costly, especially
if it relies heavily on expert demonstrations. Thus, the key question becomes how to strategically
collect diverse and representative data in a way that maximizes coverage of the state space while
minimizing the amount of effort required from experts.


                                                     3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


    Algorithm 3 Ensemble-DAgger’s C ONDITION            Algorithm 4 Lazy-DAgger’s C ONDITION
    Require: πnov a mixture of N policies,              Require: f , st , βH , βR
        πexp , st , χ, τ                                 1: mt ← f (st ) which estimates
          2
     1: σnov  ← doubt of the mixture πnov                   ∥πexp (st ) − πi (st )∥2
     2: mt ← ∥πexp (st ) − πnov (st )∥2                  2: if mt > βH then
            2
     3: if σnov  > χ or mt > τ then                      3:     return T RUE
     4:     return T RUE                                 4: else
     5: else                                             5:     if mt < βR then
     6:     return FALSE                                 6:         return FALSE
                                                         7:     else
                                                         8:         return T RUE

Figure 3: In Ensemble-DAgger, the policy is a mixture, and the measure is based on both a dis-
agreement between the models in this mixture, and a disagreement with the expert action. The
computations of these measure require the expert to provide action at each timestep of the process. In
Lazy-DAgger, the measure is based on the disagreement between the current policy and the expert
one, but to avoid the query of the expert action at each timestep, a classifier f is trained to predict if
the discrepancy measure ∥πexp (st ) − πi (st )∥2 is above a given threshold βH or not.

DAgger and variants: To address this issue, one can utilize the DAgger algorithm from Ross et al.
(2011) (Algorithm 1), which iteratively expands the training dataset through the intervention of an
expert, represented by a reference policy denoted as πexp . The reference policy serves two key roles:
first, it determines the appropriate action to execute at each timestep based on a specified decision
rule (line 7) – a mixture between the current policy and the expert one. Second, it helps augment the
training set by adding new samples of states and corresponding expert actions, which are then used to
improve the learned policy (line 11). At regular intervals, the policy is updated via imitation learning
using the expanded dataset, and this process is repeated over multiple iterations. This method helps
to mitigate the issue of distributional shift by continually refining the learned policy with fresh data
that captures a broader range of states.
To better sample relevant states, few variants of the DAgger algorithm have been proposed. One of the
most relevant is Ensemble-DAgger (Menda et al., 2019) which introduces a decision rule to decide if
the agent is controlled by the current policy, or by the expert one. Moreover, pairs of state-actions are
added to the learning dataset only when the action comes from the expert policy (see Figure 2 - right ).
The decision rule is a discrepancy measure that computes the distance between the expert action and
the policy action (combined with a disagreement measure between a mixture of experts) as shown in
Algorithm 3. This approach is not realistic when considering human experts. Indeed, let us revisit our
car driving example, where the goal is to learn an effective driving policy for a video game. Using
the DAgger and Ensemble-DAgger approaches, the expert (i.e. the player) must continuously play
the game during the active imitation learning process, while the car is only partially controlled by the
current learned policy. This setup has two significant drawbacks: i) First, the player is placed in an
unnatural setting, where they are expected to control a car that they do not fully manage. This can
create a disorienting experience, as the player must constantly adapt to actions taken by the policy,
disrupting the natural flow of gameplay. ii) Second, the player remains engaged even when the car is
exhibiting good behavior, spending time providing feedback that may not significantly contribute to
discovering a better policy. This leads to inefficiencies, as the expert’s time is not always optimally
utilized, especially in situations where the current policy already performs well.


3     R ANDOM N ETWORK D ISTILLATION - BASED DAGGER

To address the aforementioned limitations of Menda et al. (2019), Lazy-DAgger (Hoque et al.,
2021) proposes to involve the expert only during critical moments rather than requiring continuous
control. Instead of relying on the expert to partially guide the agent throughout the learning process,
this approach alternates between periods where the agent is completely controlled by the current
policy and periods where it is fully controlled by the expert. During the phases controlled by the
current policy, the expert’s intervention is not required, thereby reducing the time the expert spends
supervising the agent and making their interventions more targeted and efficient.


                                                    4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


  Algorithm 5 RND-DAgger                                  Figure 4: The RND-DAgger algorithm
                                                          proceeds in K iterations. First a policy
  Require: K, πexp , ftarg , fpred , λ, W , T             is trained on a small expert dataset (line
   1: Instantiate D dataset of expert trajectories        2). Then at each iteration (line 6), it
   2: Instantiate π0 BC policy trained on D
   3: nswitch ← 0
                                                          constructs a new dataset Di with T state-
   4: t ← 0                                               action pairs from the expert (line 7). At
   5: D0 ← ∅                                              each timestep, the agent is by default
   6: for i = 0, . . . , K DAgger iterations do           controlled by the current policy (line 23).
   7:     while #Di < T do                                The OOD measure is computed by us-
   8:         st ∼ Env(at−1 ) (Get a new state)           ing the prediction network fpred and the
   9:         mt ← ∥ftarg (st ) − fpred (st )∥2           target network ftarg (line 9). If this mea-
  10:         if mt > λ or w < W then                     sure is greater than a threshold (line 10),
  11:              if mt ≤ λ then (Minimal demo time)     the expert takes over the policy to control
  12:                    w ←w+1                           the agent (line 16) and to add samples to
  13:              else
  14:                    w←0
                                                          the dataset (line 17). The number of con-
  15:              at ← πexp (st )                        text switches is the number of times the
  16:              Di ← Di ∪ {(at , st )}                 expert has taken control (line 19). At the
  17:              if mt−1 ≤ λ then                       end of the iteration, the built dataset is
  18:                    nswitch ← nswitch + 1            aggregated with the current learning set
  19:         else                                        (line 27) and the policy is retrained (line
  20:              w←0                                    28). In addition, the fpred network is
  21:              at ← πi (st )                          also updated (line 29) to allow the future
  22:         t←t+1                                       detection of OOD states. The w counter
  23:     Push D ← D ∪ Di                                 is used to ensure that the algorithm waits
  24:     Train πi+1 on D using BC
                                                          at least W timesteps below the threshold
  25:     Train fpred on D to predict ftarg
  26: return πK                                           before taking control back of the agent.



Lazy-DAgger replaces the traditional action-based discrepancy measure between expert and policy
actions with a classifier-based approximation — see Figure 4. This approach allows the algorithm to
predict when expert intervention is necessary without requiring an expert action at every timestep,
thereby significantly reducing the expert burden compared to methods like Ensemble-DAgger. How-
ever, this method has a notable drawback: similar to Ensemble-DAgger, it relies on comparing the
actions of the expert and the current policy for a given state. While this approach works well when
the expert is optimal and acts deterministically, it becomes problematic when dealing with humans
or imperfect experts. Human experts often exhibit variability and may choose different actions for
the same state depending on context or personal preference. This results in a noisy and unreliable
measure of discrepancy. To address this issue, one could rely on a state-based discrepancy measure
that would focus on meaningful divergences compared to an action-based one.
We propose the RND-DAgger algorithm, which builds upon Random Network Distillation (RND)
(Burda et al., 2019). The core assumption of RND-DAgger is that expert feedback is only necessary
when the agent encounters out-of-distribution (OOD) states—states that are not well represented in
the training set and where the policy is more likely to fail. This is crucial because when an agent
operates in OOD states, it faces a higher risk of taking suboptimal actions that could hinder learning
or lead to unsafe outcomes. Once the agent returns to familiar, in-distribution states, the expert’s
feedback is no longer required, and the intervention is ended. Our method differs fundamentally
from existing approaches like Ensemble-DAgger and Lazy-DAgger, which rely on action-based
discrepancy measures to determine when to intervene. As such, our approach remains robust to
variations in expert behavior, ensuring that interventions only occur when the agent genuinely faces
unfamiliar and potentially risky states.
To further improve the stability of expert interventions, we introduce a mechanism called minimal
demonstration time. This concept addresses the issue of overly frequent and brief expert interventions,
which can interrupt learning and increase the cognitive load on the expert. Minimal demonstration
time defines a lower bound on the duration for which the expert must maintain control once they start
an intervention. The key idea is that the expert should provide a sufficient number of consecutive
corrective actions to guide the agent back to a stable state, instead of immediately handing control


                                                   5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


back to the policy after a single correction. We describe these two components below. The detailed
algorithm is provided in Algorithm 4 with a complete explanation of the different steps.

Random Network Distillation To measure if a state is OOD, RND-DAgger relies on the Random
Network Distillation technique, which is a classical approach developed initially for the problem
of exploration in Reinforcement Learning to detect new states to explore (Burda et al., 2019). The
principle of RND is to use a randomly initialized neural network as a fixed target ftarg and train
a second neural network fpred (the predictor) to approximate the output of the target network. As
the predictor network improves over time, the error between the predictor and the target network
decreases for familiar states (in-distribution), but remains high for unseen or out-of-distribution states.
This prediction error thus serves as a measure of novelty, allowing the agent to recognize when it
has encountered a new or unfamiliar state. In RND-DAgger, the measure is used to decide when to
trigger the expert, and when to trigger back the current policy, alternating phases where the expert is
controlling the agent and when the agent is controlled by the current policy. Note that, contrary to the
described baselines, this measure does not involve the expert action, thus avoiding the need to have
an expert acting at each timestep.

Minimal demonstration time Relying exclusively on the OOD measure can lead to a behavior
where the expert is asked too often for short demonstrations (see appendix Figure C.2). To account
for this limitation, we introduce the notion of minimal expert time (MET). It is defined as W the
number of consecutive "in-distribution" frames required to switch control back from the expert to
the autonomous policy (i.e. the number of frames where mt < ∥ftarg (st ) − fpred (st )∥2 ). This
mechanism ensures that the expert will provide a minimal amount of information at each intervention,
resulting in fewer, but longer, demonstration sequences.


4       E XPERIMENTS

The primary objectives of our experimental evaluation are twofold: first, to assess the efficiency
of our approach in discovering an effective policy, and second, to evaluate its ability to reduce the
expert’s burden.

Environments: Our first environment is HalfCheetah which is a classical reinforcement learning
environment1 where the objective is to learn a running strategy for the agent. The goal of the agent
is to locomote as fast as possible. The HalfCheetah is controlled by applying motor torques, and
the agent manipulates a 6-degree-of-freedom (6-DOF) motor joint vector. The observation space
consists of 18 values, which include the position and velocity of the agent’s body, the angles and
angular velocities of its six joints, as well as the angle of the center of mass. We also propose and
open-source two new environments developed for video game research . RaceCar (see Figure 5)
features a physics-based car controller that must complete a single lap on a given track. After each
lap, the car is reset to a random position on the starting line. The track presents several challenges,
including speed bumps, a ramp in front of a pillar, and sharp 90-degree turns, making the optimal
driving behavior non-trivial. Additionally, crossing the ramp and red sloped walls provides a speed
boost, adding complexity to the strategy. The car is controlled using four discrete actions: forward,
backward, left, and right. The observation space consists of 22 dimensions, including the car’s 3D
position, linear velocity (3D), angular velocity (3D), rotation (encoded as the cosine and sine of the
angle), and data from seven raycasts to detect obstacles. Finally, the 3D Maze environment allows
us to study our strategy in goal-conditioned navigation scenarios. A classical human-like character
is spawned at a random location within the maze and tasked with reaching a randomly assigned
goal. The agent is controlled using four movement actions: walk forward, walk backward, strafe
left, and strafe right, as well as a one-dimensional rotation action to change its facing direction.The
observation space consists of the agent’s absolute position (3D), the goal’s position (3D), and 131
raycasts, which provide a low-resolution depth map of the surroundings. Since the objective in this
environment is to navigate to any goal location, we replace the traditional Behavioral Cloning (BC)
approach with a Goal-Conditioned Behavioral Cloning (GCBC) approach (Ding et al., 2019b) as
the base learning algorithm. This adaptation ensures that the agent learns not just to imitate expert
    1
        https://github.com/araffin/pybullet_envs_gymnasium


                                                       6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


      (a) RaceCar        (b) RaceCar (Player view)              (c) Maze              (d) HalfCheetah

Figure 5: Illustration of the three different environments used in our experiments. The objective is to
learn a good driving, navigating, and walking policy while minimizing expert interventions.


trajectories, but also to generalize its navigation strategies based on varying goal positions within the
maze.

Baselines:     We compare our approach RND-DAgger to multiple approaches from the active
imitation learning literature: DAgger Ross et al. (2011), a classical approach which queries the
supervisor for an action in every state that the learner visits. Ensemble-DAgger Menda et al.
(2019), which propose an automated approach to measure OOD and trigger expert demonstration.
Ensemble-DAgger relies on two metrics: A disagreement measure defined as the correlation between
an ensemble of policies, and a discrepancy measure computing the difference between the bot action
and the expert action at every step. Lazy-DAgger uses the same discrepancy measure as Ensemble-
DAgger and reduces bot-expert context switching by using an additional threshold parameter to
define a hysteresis band. Note that, we rely on a simplified version proposed in (Hoque et al., 2021)
that has been shown to be more efficient and generates less context switches than the original version.
This variant discards the classifier for the benefit of the true discrepancy measure. Human-Gated
DAgger (HG-DAgger) from Kelly et al. (2019) involves a human supervisor monitoring the agent’s
behavior in real-time and deciding when to take control. While similar in essence to our proposed
RND-DAgger, HG-DAgger relies entirely on human judgment to identify when intervention is
necessary, rather than using an automatic OOD measure. This requires the expert to continuously
observe the agent’s actions at every timestep, leading to a higher cognitive load and less efficient use
of expert time. Finally, we also consider Behavioral Cloning (BC) as the classical baseline, which
does not include any active learning mechanism.
The set of hyperparameters used for the different approaches is described in Appendix A. For each
method, a first training set is collected by the expert, without active imitation learning techniques.
Then the different algorithms are executed to collect additional examples and to update the policy.

Metrics: To assess the performance of the methods considered, we rely on several key metrics: i)
The Task Performance measures whether the learned agent is successfully solving the environment.
For the Race Car and Maze environments, we use the success rate (i.e., whether the agent completes
a lap or reaches the goal). For HalfCheetah, we track the cumulative episode reward, which reflects
the overall effectiveness of the agent’s locomotion strategy. ii) The Dataset Size indicates the number
of expert actions added to the training dataset, providing insight into how much expert information is
being utilized to train the agent. A smaller dataset size suggests the agent is learning efficiently with
fewer expert interventions, while a larger dataset implies greater reliance on expert input. iii) The
Context Switches which corresponds to the nswitch variable in Algorithms 1 and ω measures the
number of contiguous periods during which the expert is actually controlling the agent. This helps
quantify how often the expert is involved in directly providing relevant training samples. For RND-
DAgger, this measure accurately reflects the expert’s involvement, as the agent is fully controlled by
the policy between switches. The metrics are averaged over 8 seeded runs for each method.

4.1     R ESULTS

Oracle-based Performance: To conduct extensive experiments, we replace the human expert
with a predefined oracle policy. This substitution allows us to run multiple trials efficiently without
depending on human participants, which would be impractical in terms of both time and resources
(experiments using human experts are reported separately later in the section). For the Race Car


                                                     7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                                                                        Task Performance                                                                                                                             # Context Switch
                                                   Env
                                                                                       RC                                                  HC                                      Maze                                     RC                                  HC                                   Maze
                      Method
                      BC                                               0.883 ± 0.029                                                2455 ± 424                         0.367 ± 0.043                                      -                                      -                                -
                      DAgger                                           0.940 ± 0.026                                                2343 ± 209                         0.450 ± 0.074                                      -                                      -                                -
                      Lazy-DAgger                                      0.939 ± 0.025                                                2314 ± 278                         0.575 ± 0.101                                  3437 ± 89                              312 ± 45                         1238 ± 79
                      Ensemble-DAgger                                  0.952 ± 0.018                                                2489 ± 108                         0.626 ± 0.045                                  2785 ± 41                             1452 ± 134                        2871 ± 94
                      RND-DAgger                                       0.944 ± 0.014                                                2490 ± 160                         0.717 ± 0.018                                  368 ± 11                               708 ± 130                        1214 ± 25

Table 1: Overall performance: This table illustrates the performance of the different algorithms at
the end of the K iterations. It also provides the value of the nswitch variable that accounts for the
number of expert interventions. Best, Second best


environment, the oracle is learned through a separate active imitation learning process with a large
interaction budget, ensuring the agent has access to high-quality demonstrations. In the 3D Maze
environment, the oracle is a NavMesh-based agent, which programatically solves any navigation
scenario, making it easy to generate trajectory data. For HalfCheetah, we use an open-source
reinforcement learning agent (Kuznetsov et al., 2020) from the RL Zoo repository (Raffin, 2020) as
the oracle, providing an optimal policy for locomotion tasks. This approach ensures consistency and
scalability across experiments.
Table 1 and Figure 6 present the performance metrics across the evaluated environments. To ensure a
fair comparison, we report results based on the hyperparameter settings that achieve the highest final
performance for each model.

               1.0                                                                                                         3000                                                                                                            1.0

               0.9
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           0.8
                                                                                                                           2000
               0.8
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           0.6
Performance


                                                                                                        Performance


                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Performance
               0.7                                                                                                         1000
               0.6                                                                                                                                                                                                                         0.4

                                                                                                                                    0
               0.5                                                                                                                                                                                                                         0.2
                                                        DAgger                         RND-DAgger                                                                          DAgger                      RND-DAgger                                                             DAgger                   RND-DAgger
               0.4                                      LazyDAgger                     BC                                                                                  LazyDAgger                  BC                                                                     LazyDAgger               BC
                                                        EnsembleDAgger                 Expert                              1000                                            EnsembleDAgger              Expert                              0.0                                EnsembleDAgger           Expert
                        2000    4000      6000          8000     10000         12000    14000   16000                                   2000          4000            6000             8000         10000           12000                            6000     8000           10000        12000       14000      16000
                                       Length of dataset (# expert frames)                                                                                   Length of dataset (# expert frames)                                                              Length of dataset (# expert frames)



                      (a) Task performance RaceCar                                                            (b) Task performance HalfCheetah                                                                                                     (c) Task performance Maze

                                                                                                                               103

                 103
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             103
 # context switches


                                                                                                               # context switches


                                                                                                                                                                                                                             # context switches


                 102                                                                                                           102

                                                                                   LazyDAgger                                                                                                       LazyDAgger                                                                                       LazyDAgger
                                                                                   EnsembleDAgger                                                                                                   EnsembleDAgger                                                                                   EnsembleDAgger
                                                                                   RND-DAgger                                                                                                       RND-DAgger                                                                                       RND-DAgger
                         4000     6000           8000          10000      12000         14000                                           4000   5000     6000        7000       8000       9000     10000    11000                                     8000           10000           12000           14000
                                         Length of dataset (# expert frames)                                                                                 Length of dataset (# expert frames)                                                               Length of dataset (# expert frames)



                      (d) Context switches RaceCar                                                                  (e) Context switches HalfCheetah                                                                                               (f) Context switches Maze

Figure 6: Performance and context switches for the different environments. The X-axis corresponds
to the size of the training set D that increases at each iteration of the algorithms.

Our method, RND-DAgger, demonstrates competitive performance relative to Ensemble-DAgger
and Lazy-DAgger, indicating that it effectively learns robust policies across different environments.
For example, in the HalfCheetah environment, RND-DAgger achieves a cumulative reward of 2490,
compared to 2489 for Ensemble-DAgger and 2314 for Lazy-DAgger. These results highlight that
RND-DAgger is capable of discovering efficient policies, matching or surpassing the baselines in
terms of overall task success. When analyzing performance relative to the size of the training set,
RND-DAgger outperforms the other methods in the early stages of the active imitation learning
process (Fig. 6b). This suggests that RND-DAgger is more effective at focusing on critical states
where expert guidance is most needed, thereby gathering valuable feedback more efficiently. By
concentrating on key interventions, RND-DAgger accelerates policy improvement and requires fewer
training samples to achieve comparable or superior results, making it especially advantageous in
scenarios with limited expert availability. In summary, the experimental results demonstrate that
RND-DAgger not only achieves strong final performance but also exhibits a more sample-efficient


                                                                                                                                                                           8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


      (a) RND-DAgger                        (b) Lazy-DAgger                     (c) Ensemble-DAgger

Figure 7: Visualization of agent’s trajectories (blue) and expert intervention trajectories (red) in
RaceCar. RND-DAgger predominantly requests expert intervention in challenging sections of the
track, requiring fewer expert interventions overall compared to baseline methods.

learning curve compared to existing methods (Fig. 6a, 6b and 6c), validating its capability to optimize
expert interventions and rapidly improve policy quality.
When examining the number of context switches between the different methods, RND-DAgger
consistently results in significantly fewer context switches compared to Ensemble-DAgger across
all environments. This indicates that RND-DAgger is more stable and requires fewer handovers
between the expert and the policy, reducing the burden on the expert. When compared to Lazy-
DAgger, RND-DAgger shows mixed results. In the RaceCar environment, RND-DAgger generates
fewer context switches (Fig. 6d), highlighting its efficiency in minimizing expert interventions.
However, in the HalfCheetah and Maze environments, RND-DAgger produces a similar number
of switches (Fig. 6e and 6f). This similarity in HalfCheetah can be attributed to the use of an
oracle expert policy, which performs consistently without generating diverse actions. Under these
circumstances, the discrepancy measure used by Lazy-DAgger, which relies on comparing expert
and policy actions, remains effective for detecting when to switch. In the Maze environment, despite
having a comparable number of context switches to Lazy-DAgger (Fig. 6f), RND-DAgger achieves a
higher final performance (Fig. 6c).This suggests that RND-DAgger intervention criterion leads to
more informative expert interventions and is better able to leverage the expert. Thus, in scenarios like
Maze, where achieving high task performance is critical, RND-DAgger is the better choice due to its
ability to drive the agent towards optimal behavior.
Overall, these findings indicate that RND-DAgger strikes a favorable balance between reducing
context switches and achieving strong policy performance, making it a more efficient and reliable
choice.

Qualitative study: To gain a deeper understanding of when our algorithm requests expert supervi-
sion, Figure 7 visualizes the context switches between the current policy and the expert (additional
figures are provided in Appendix B). As seen in the figure, both Ensemble-DAgger and Lazy-DAgger
query the expert significantly more frequently, leading to a higher number of context switches com-
pared to RND-DAgger. The visualization also reveals that RND-DAgger identifies and focuses on
critical areas of the track that are challenging for the agent during early learning stages. Specifically,
it requests expert intervention primarily in the problematic zones, such as the bottom section of the
track and the obstacle immediately following the speeding ramp (top-left corner of the track). These
are regions where the bot initially struggles, making precise interventions crucial for improving
performance. This observation indicates that RND-DAgger not only minimizes the number of expert
queries but also targets the most relevant segments of the environment where guidance is essential.
By focusing on challenging states rather than spreading expert effort across all states, RND-DAgger
makes more strategic use of expert supervision, resulting in fewer yet more impactful interventions.

Human Expert-based performance: We conducted a series of experiments (Figure 8) using
a real human expert instead of an oracle policy. In this setup, collecting expert actions while the
agent was being controlled by its own policy (rather than having the expert take direct control) felt
unintuitive for the human participants, making it challenging to apply traditional baselines effectively.


                                                    9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


          1.0                                                                                        1.0

          0.9                                                                                        0.9

          0.8                                                                                        0.8
Performance


                                                                                           Performance
          0.7                                                                                        0.7

          0.6                                                                                        0.6
                                                                         HG-DAgger                                                                                    HG-DAgger
          0.5                                                            RND-DAgger                  0.5                                                              RND-DAgger
                                                                         BC                                                                                           BC
                                                                         Expert                                                                                       Expert
                  1000   2000        3000           4000          5000       6000                          1000       2000        3000           4000          5000       6000
                            Length of dataset (# expert frames)                                                          Length of dataset (# expert frames)


                            (a) Performance                                                                       (b) Performance (time spent)

Figure 8: Task performance on RaceCar with a human expert. (a) RND-DAgger achieves similar
task performance to HG-DAgger with a comparable number of demonstrations. (b) However, by
reducing the need for constant expert monitoring, RND-DAgger significantly lowers the total expert
time required.


As such we focused our comparison on HG-DAgger, which allows the human expert to decide when
to intervene and take control from the agent.
Our results show that RND-DAgger performs comparably to HG-DAgger, but with a significant
advantage: it does not require the human expert to continuously monitor the agent’s behavior. Instead,
RND-DAgger automates the decision of when to request expert input based on state novelty, reducing
the cognitive load on the expert. Figure 8b demonstrates the relationship between policy performance
and the actual time the expert spends observing the screen. In RND-DAgger, the agent can run at
accelerated speeds without the need for constant supervision, as the expert only needs to intervene at
specific moments rather than watching the agent’s entire trajectory.
Additional experiments Appendix C presents ablation studies of RND-DAgger, including an analysis
of the impact of the Minimal Expert Time mechanism (showing how it reduces expert context
switches). Appendix D focuses on studying the impact of using Ensemble-DAgger compared to
RND-DAgger regarding expert time spent (the metric used in Figure 8b), showing how RND-DAgger
better minimizes expert burden.



5               C ONCLUSION AND LIMITATIONS

In this work, we presented RND-DAgger, a novel approach to active imitation learning that efficiently
minimizes the need for expert interventions by leveraging a state-based measure derived from Random
Network Distillation (RND). Unlike traditional methods that rely on action-based discrepancies to
detect when to seek expert guidance, RND-DAgger focuses on identifying out-of-distribution states
where the agent is most at risk of making errors. This allows our method to selectively request
expert feedback only when it is truly necessary, thereby reducing the number of context switches and
optimizing the allocation of expert time. Overall, our method provides a step forward in developing
more practical and human-efficient imitation learning algorithms, making it a valuable tool for
training autonomous agents in complex environments.
Limitations RND-DAgger requires the expert to immediately take control of the agent, which may
be impossible or dangerous in complex real-time environments. Predictive approaches to alert the
expert before intervention is an interesting area of improvement. Studying how to scale RND-DAgger
to more complex environments such as Partially observable MDPs – e.g. pixel-based environments –
would be a natural extension of our work. In such scenarios, noisy-TV problems i.e. environments
featuring distracting random or diverse observations, bring important new challenges, which may be
addressed through representation learning or explicit high-entropy filtering. Lastly, incorporating
richer forms of expert feedback is another valuable future line of work.


                                                                                      10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


6   ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

This work was granted access to the HPC resources of IDRIS under the allocation 2024-
AD011015218 made by GENCI.

7   R EPRODUCIBILITY S TATEMENT

To ensure the reproducibility of our work, we provide detailed pseudo-code in section 2 and section
3. A comprehensive open-source codebase, including all environments, datasets, oracle model
checkpoints, active learning algorithms, and a detailed guide on how to reproduce our experiments
and results is available at https://sites.google.com/view/rnd-dagger.

R EFERENCES
Michael Bain and Claude Sammut. A framework for behavioural cloning. In Machine Intelligence
 15, pp. 103–129, 1995.

Michael Bain and Claude Sommut. A framework for behavioural cloning. In Machine Intelligence
 15, volume 15, pp. 103. Oxford University Press, 1999.

Yuri Burda, Harrison Edwards, Amos J. Storkey, and Oleg Klimov. Exploration by random network
  distillation. In 7th International Conference on Learning Representations, ICLR 2019, New
  Orleans, LA, USA, May 6-9, 2019. OpenReview.net, 2019. URL https://openreview.
  net/forum?id=H1lJJnR5Ym.

Yiming Ding, Carlos Florensa, Pieter Abbeel, and Mariano Phielipp. Goal-conditioned imitation
  learning. Advances in neural information processing systems, 32, 2019a.

Yiming Ding, Carlos Florensa, Mariano Phielipp, and Pieter Abbeel. Goal-conditioned imitation
  learning. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2019b. URL http://arxiv.
  org/abs/1906.05838.

Jack Harmer, Linus Gisslén, Jorge del Val, Henrik Holst, Joakim Bergdahl, Tom Olsson, Kristoffer
  Sjöö, and Magnus Nordin. Imitation learning with concurrent actions in 3d games. In 2018 IEEE
  Conference on Computational Intelligence and Games (CIG), pp. 1–8. IEEE, 2018.

Ryan Hoque, Ashwin Balakrishna, Carl Putterman, Michael Luo, Daniel S Brown, Daniel Seita,
  Brijen Thananjeyan, Ellen Novoseller, and Ken Goldberg. Lazydagger: Reducing context switching
  in interactive imitation learning. In 2021 IEEE 17th international conference on automation science
  and engineering (case), pp. 502–509. IEEE, 2021.

Ahmed Hussein, Mohamed Medhat Gaber, Eyad Elyan, and Chrisina Jayne. Imitation learning: A
  survey of learning methods. ACM Computing Surveys (CSUR), 50(2):1–35, 2017.

Kshitij Judah, Alan Paul Fern, and Thomas Glenn Dietterich. Active imitation learning via reduction
  to iid active learning. In 2012 AAAI fall symposium series, 2012.

Michael Kelly, Chelsea Sidrane, Katherine Driggs-Campbell, and Mykel J Kochenderfer. Hg-dagger:
 Interactive imitation learning with human experts. In 2019 International Conference on Robotics
 and Automation (ICRA), pp. 8077–8083. IEEE, 2019.

Arsenii Kuznetsov, Pavel Shvechikov, Alexander Grishin, and Dmitry Vetrov. Controlling overesti-
  mation bias with truncated mixture of continuous distributional quantile critics. In International
  Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 5556–5566. PMLR, 2020.

Yihuan Mao, Chengjie Wu, Xi Chen, Hao Hu, Ji Jiang, Tianze Zhou, Tangjie Lv, Changjie Fan,
  Zhipeng Hu, Yi Wu, et al. Stylized offline reinforcement learning: Extracting diverse high-quality
  behaviors from heterogeneous datasets. In The Twelfth International Conference on Learning
  Representations, 2024.


                                                11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Kunal Menda, Katherine Driggs-Campbell, and Mykel J Kochenderfer. Ensembledagger: A bayesian
  approach to safe imitation learning. In 2019 IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent
  Robots and Systems (IROS), pp. 5041–5048. IEEE, 2019.
Nimisha G Nair, Pallavi Satpathy, Jabez Christopher, et al. Covariate shift: A review and analysis on
  classifiers. In 2019 Global Conference for Advancement in Technology (GCAT), pp. 1–6. IEEE,
  2019.
Antonin Raffin. Rl baselines3 zoo. https://github.com/DLR-RM/rl-baselines3-zoo,
  2020.
Stéphane Ross, Geoffrey Gordon, and Drew Bagnell. A reduction of imitation learning and structured
  prediction to no-regret online learning. In Proceedings of the fourteenth international conference
  on artificial intelligence and statistics, pp. 627–635. JMLR Workshop and Conference Proceedings,
  2011.
Stefan Schaal. Is imitation learning the route to humanoid robots? Trends in cognitive sciences, 3(6):
  233–242, 1999.
Oriol Vinyals, Igor Babuschkin, Wojciech M Czarnecki, Michaël Mathieu, Andrew Dudzik, Junyoung
  Chung, David H Choi, Richard Powell, Timo Ewalds, Petko Georgiev, et al. Grandmaster level in
  starcraft ii using multi-agent reinforcement learning. nature, 575(7782):350–354, 2019.
Derek Yadgaroff, Alessandro Sestini, Konrad Tollmar, Ayça Özçelikkale, and Linus Gisslén. Improv-
  ing generalization in game agents with data augmentation in imitation learning. In IEEE Congress
  on Evolutionary Computation, CEC 2024, Yokohama, Japan, June 30 - July 5, 2024, pp. 1–8.
  IEEE, 2024. doi: 10.1109/CEC60901.2024.10612178. URL https://doi.org/10.1109/
  CEC60901.2024.10612178.
Jiakai Zhang and Kyunghyun Cho. Query-efficient imitation learning for end-to-end simu-
   lated driving. In AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, 2017. URL https://api.
   semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:5929487.


                                                 12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A    E XPERIMENTAL D ETAILS
Dataset Figure 9a and 9b showcase examples of generated trajectories for the RaceCar and Maze
environments.


                 Episode traces                                              Episode traces


        (a) RaceCar dataset examples                             (b) Navigation dataset examples

Figure 9: Dataset examples: the trajectories of the expert from which we bootstrapped to train our
initial BC policies and out BC baselines.


Hyperparameters For each decision rule, several key hyperparameters had to be tuned:

      • DAgger
          – The probability β of a frame to be controlled by the bot. The probability is decreased
            at each DAgger epoch by βi ← β0i−1
      • RND-DAgger
          – Threshold λ of OOD detection
          – The historic context length, that is the number of frames in the past we take along with
            the current state to detect its OOD nature
          – The Minimal Expert Time W
          – The size of the random network, represented by the number of layers and neurons per
            layer the predictor and target networks have.
      • Ensemble-DAgger
          – Threshold τ for discrepancy measure
          – Threshold χ for doubt measure
          – The number of models N
      • Lazy-DAgger
          – Threshold βH for discrepancy measure
          – Threshold βR for the backward controlled loop (i.e. the criterion to switch back from
            expert to autonomous)

Computing thresholds For all the methods that necessitate at least one threshold (RND-DAgger,
Lazy-DAgger, Ensemble-DAgger), we computed them following the following methodology: the
threshold was set to be a positive factor of the mean measure on the training set. In other words,
before each new sessions, the measure was ran over the training dataset, and the threshold (χ and τ
for Ensemble-DAgger, βH for Lazy-DAgger and λ for RND-DAgger) were calculated as :

                                  λ ← M EASURE({(at , st ) ∈ Dtrain }) × L                         (1)


                                                    13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                   Table 2: Hyperparameter search

                                          (a) Ensemble-DAgger
              Hyperparameter            Values               RaceCar      HalfCheetah    Maze
              χ factor            [0, 1, 1.5, 2, 3, 4]         1.5             0          0.5
              τ factor            [0, 1, 1.5, 2, 3, 4]         1.5            1.5          3
              N                        [2, 3, 5]                5              5           3
                                             (b) RND-DAgger
           Hyperparameter                     Values              RaceCar        HalfCheetah    Maze
        λ factor                           [1, 2, 3, 4]              2                2          2
        Hidden size                         [32, 128]               32               128         32
        Number of layers                     [0, 1, 2]               0                2          0
        Historic context length        [0, 2, 5, 10, 15]            10                0          2
        W                          [1, 2, 5, 10, 15, 30, 50]        30                5          5
                                             (c) Lazy-DAgger
               Hyperparameter            Values              RaceCar     HalfCheetah    Maze
               βH factor             [0, 1, 2, 3, 4]           1.5            0           2
               βR divider           [1, 1.5, 2, 3, 4]           2            1.5         2.5
                                                (d) DAgger
      Hyperparameter                    Values                         RaceCar    HalfCheetah    Maze
      β                   [0.2, 0.5, 0.6, 0.7, 0.8, 0.9, 0.95]           0.5          0.7         0.8



With L being a positive factor, a hyperparameter to be tuned. For the second threshold of Lazy-
DAgger, we set it to be a factor of the first one: βR = βH /L∗ , with L∗ being the hyperparameter
tuned. That’s a different method compared to other methods, such as Zhang & Cho (2017) or Hoque
et al. (2021) who set their threshold so that approximately 20% of the initial dataset is unsafe, or
Ensemble-DAgger Menda et al. (2019) that directly grid searched the value. The Table 2 summarizes
the values used for our grid search.


B    I NTERACTIVE SESSION VISUALIZATIONS

Typical interactive situations In Figure 11, one can understand better how, in the RaceCar
environment, an oracle (and by extend a human taken as an expert) would interact with the learner. In
(a), the current learned policy has control of the car, and the OOD measure (green circle) is below
the threshold: the learner is confident. In (b), the car crashes into a wall, so the measure (red circle)
queries the expert to take control (transparent red capsule). From (c) to (e), the expert demonstrates
how to get back on track, until (f) the measure falls below the threshold again (green circle) for at
least W consecutive frames (see Section 3 for further explanations)


Qualitative study On Figure 10, we reported the context switches and full trajectories on both
the RaceCar and Maze environments. The results are taken from the same session and the same
seed to better compare the figures. From (a) to (b), it is clear that Ensemble-DAgger exhibits the
most context switches compared to Lazy-DAgger and RND-DAgger, which show comparable counts.
However, the context switches in Lazy-DAgger are more concentrated in specific areas, whereas those
in RND-DAgger are more evenly distributed. Then, from (d) to (f) we can see the corresponding
episodes with expert demonstrations (in red) added to the dataset during that session. We can see
that the expert demonstrations are either way longer (the whole episode) or way shorter (only a few
frames) for Lazy-DAgger compared to our method, providing more consistency throughout the map.
The difference is clearer on the RaceCar environment. Indeed, on both context switch figures, we see
that Lazy-DAgger and Ensemble-DAgger are comparable, and that the queries for RND-DAgger are
concentrated around only two zones that generated most of the failure cases.


                                                        14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


       (a) RND-DAgger                     (b) Lazy-DAgger                 (c) Ensemble-DAgger


       (d) RND-DAgger                     (e) Lazy-DAgger                  (f) Ensemble-DAgger


       (g) RND-DAgger                     (h) Lazy-DAgger                  (i) Ensemble-DAgger


       (j) RND-DAgger                     (k) Lazy-DAgger                  (l) Ensemble-DAgger


Figure 10: We conduct a qualitative analysis of the the different query methods. (a)-(d) and (g)-(i):
Each dot represents a context switch : a transition from autonomous to expert control. (e)-(h) and
(j)-(l): In red, the expert demonstrations, in blue the novice segments.


                                                 15
      Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                               (a) 0                                                                                                                                                   (b) 1                                                                                                                                                    (c) 2


                                               (d) 3                                                                                                                                                   (e) 4                                                                                                                                                    (f) 5


      Figure 11: (a) The agent has control. (b) The OOD measure is triggered (RND), the expert is given
      control. (c)-(e) The expert demonstrates how to recover. (f) The state is in distribution, the expert
      keeps the control until the Minimal Expert Time is reached.



         C                          A BLATION S TUDY

         C.1                             RND-DAGGER ON H ALF C HEETAH

      In this ablation study, we evaluate RND-DAgger, focusing on the additive advantages of three key
      enhancements: a Minimal Expert Time (MET) of size W , historical context, and the architecture
      of the random networks (see Section 2 for insights on the values tested). The addition of a Minimal
      Expert Time should increase the quality of the frames by letting the expert finish its demonstration
      and making sure the learner is fully recovered before letting it the control again. The historical context
      enriches decision-making by incorporating temporal information from past actions and concatenating
      them to the current state. This particularly helps in tasks where there is a strong relation between
      the states. For example, a state where the car is close to a wall is not necessarily a bad state, unless
      the car is going towards it for several frames in a row. However, a historical context chosen too big
      is detrimental, because it can overshadow useful dimensions of the sate, and thus preventing the
      predictor network to seize useful information.
   Results of that ablation are reported in Table 3 and Figure 12. We note that the Minimal Expert
   Time W helps reducing the context switching, without impacting that much the performance at the
   end of the sessions of RND-DAgger. In other words, it helps decreasing the expert burden, without
   impacting the task performance.


                                                                                                                                                                                                                 FRQWH[W VZLWFKHV
3HUIRUPDQFH


                                                           51' '$JJHU   VWDE  ZLQGRZ                              51' '$JJHU   VPDOO         %&

                                                       51' '$JJHU                                                            51' '$JJHU   KLVWRULF   ([SHUW


                                                                   /HQJWK RI GDWDVHW  H[SHUW IUDPHV                                                                                                                                                       /HQJWK RI GDWDVHW  H[SHUW IUDPHV


                                               (a) HalfCheetah (Task perf)                                                                                                                                                                                                   (b) # context switches

  Figure 12: Ablation study on our method. RND-DAgger compared to: (light blue) RND w/o MET,
  (orange) bigger historical context, (dark blue) smaller architecture for the random networks.



                                                                                                                                                                                                          16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                             Task Performance         # Context Switch
                 BC                             2455 ± 424                    -
                 RND-DAgger                     2490 ± 160               708 ± 130
                 RND-DAgger - MET               2432 ± 175              1985 ± 215
                 RND-DAgger - small             2167 ± 140               1136 ± 76
                 RND-DAgger - historic          2172 ± 290                554 ± 90
                 Lazy-DAgger                    2314 ± 278                312 ± 45

Table 3: Performance and context switches at the end of the sessions. We report the results of the key
ablations on RND-DAgger, along with the results of Lazy-DAgger for further comparisons


C.2   M INIMAL E XPERT T IME FOCUS

Ablation study on all the methods We further investigated the impact of the Minimal Expert
Time (MET) on our method and on our baselines, across all the tasks. We reported the results of that
study in Figure 13 and Table 4. In particular, we can see that LazyDAgger + MET isn’t appropriate in
HalfCheetah. The combination of the Lazy mechanism (introduction of a second threshold to create a
hysteresis band) and the MET forces the expert to always have control over the agent, which explains
the extremely low value for the context switches (which happens only once per episode) and the poor
performance learning curve (Fig. 13b). The same remark holds for Ensemble-DAgger on RaceCar,
but in this case, this behavior doesn’t seem to impact the task performance of the method (Fig. 13a).


  (a) Task performance RaceCar     (b) Task performance HalfCheetah        (c) Task performance Maze


  (d) Context switches RaceCar     (e) Context switches HalfCheetah        (f) Context switches Maze

Figure 13: Results for the ablation study with focus on the addition of the Minimal Expert Time
(MET) on the baselines Ensemble-DAgger and LazyDAgger. RND-DAgger remains the same as in
Table 1



Qualitative interpretation On Figure 14 we report the context switches on the RaceCar environ-
ment, at the second DAgger epoch of a given seed with and without a MET. We can clearly see that
the number of context switches increases and a third critical zone appeared at the top right of the map
for RND-DAgger (Fig. 14a). We interpret that the bot is fairly confident in the top straight line of the
course, but the last turn is difficult to manage when the velocity of the car is too high, inducing a
query to the expert. There are also more context switches at the entrance of that straight line, because
the learner has to be precise to pass without touching the walls or the speed ramps on the sides. We
conclude that the MET increases the quality of the demonstrations without impacting the quality of
the measure, that still grasps the relevant critical areas of the track.


                                                  17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                          Task Performance                          # Context Switch
                               RC                HC         Maze           RC             HC            Maze
 Lazy-DAgger + MET        0.943 ± 0.011      2374 ± 325 0.575 ± 0.101    759 ± 39       78 ± 0.0      876 ± 71
 Lazy-DAgger              0.939 ± 0.025      2314 ± 278 0.590 ± 0.057   3437 ± 89       312 ± 45     1238 ± 79
 Ensemble-DAgger + MET    0.935 ± 0.019      2502 ± 228 0.707 ± 0.023     77 ± 4        315 ± 84     2034 ± 79
 Ensemble-DAgger          0.952 ± 0.018      2489 ± 108 0.626 ± 0.045   2785 ± 41     1452 ± 134 2871 ± 94
 RND-DAgger               0.944 ± 0.014      2490 ± 160 0.717 ± 0.018    368 ± 11      708 ± 130     1214 ± 25
 RND-DAgger w/o MET             -            2432 ± 175       -              -        1985 ± 215          -

Table 4: We conduct an ablation study on the impact of the Minimal Expert Time (MET) on all
baselines across our three environments. We report the final task performance and number of context
switches. We conducted the same grid search for the value of W as for RND-DAgger (see section A
for more details).


    (a) RND-DAgger W = 0              (b) Ensemble-DAgger W = 0               (c) LazyDAgger W = 0


    (d) RND-DAgger W = 30            (e) Ensemble-DAgger W = 30               (f) LazyDAgger W = 10

Figure 14: Ablation study: a focus on the effect of the MET on the RaceCar environment. We see an
increase of the context switches and shorter episode traces as there is no Minimal Expert Time for all
the methods. RND-DAgger seems to have a better grasp on the difficult zones of the track, whereas
the two other measures trigger the expert rather uniformly across the track.


D    T OTAL EXPERT TIME COMPARISONS

While focusing solely on task performance and context switches provides important insights on
the efficiency of a method and on a given task, it doesn’t tell the complete story about expert
burden. We conducted an additional analysis on the Total Expert Time, as we did in the Fig 8b
on human experiments. The Table 5 shows that Ensemble-Dagger is highly time consuming for the
expert without statistically outperforming RND-Dagger. For example, on Maze, it is three times
longer to achieve a similar performance than with RND-DAgger, even with the addition of our MET
mechanism on that baseline. This demonstrates that we are more efficient in real human expert


                                                     18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


scenarios. Moreover, and especially in a fast-paced environment like RaceCar, that baseline - and its
improved MET variant - requires the expert to input actions at the same time as the agent to be able
to compute the discrepancy measure, which is not natural in practice.
                                         Task Performance                                        Total Expert Time
                              RC                HC              Maze               RC                   HC                  Maze
                                                                               16664 ± 73          11968 ± 107           16173 ± 44
 RND-DAgger              0.944 ± 0.014     2490 ± 160       0.717 ± 0.018   (27.8 ± 0.1 mins)   (6.60 ± 0.06 mins)   (27.0 ± 0.1 mins)
                                                                              31394 ± 506          21535 ± 774         51434 ± 1507
 Ensemble-DAgger         0.952 ± 0.018     2489 ± 108       0.626 ± 0.045   (52.3 ± 0.8 mins)    (11.8 ± 0.4 mins)   (85.7 ± 2.5 mins)
                                                                              18216 ± 165          13474 ± 631          48125 ± 900
 Ensemble-DAgger + MET   0.935 ± 0.019     2502 ± 228       0.707 ± 0.023   (30.4 ± 0.3 mins)   (7.40 ± 0.35 mins)   (80.2 ± 1.5 mins)


Table 5: The results considering the Total Expert Time i.e. the total number of frames on which the
expert had to be involved to provide an action. In the case of Ensemble-DAgger, the expert action
is needed at each time step to compute the discrepancy measure between the mean action of the
ensemble of policies and the expert action. The time spent in minutes is computed with a typical
frame rate of 30 for HalfCheetah (arbitrary) and 60 with one action taken every 6 frames, for the two
game environments.


                                                                 19
