Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


S TRATEGIST : S ELF - IMPROVEMENT OF LLM D ECISION
M AKING VIA B I -L EVEL T REE S EARCH
 Jonathan Light1 Min Cai2 Weiqin Chen1 Guanzhi Wang5 Xiusi Chen3
 Wei Cheng4 Yisong Yue5 Ziniu Hu5
 1
   Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute, 2 Shenzhen University,
 3
   University of California, Los Angeles, 4 NEC laboratories America,
 5
   California Institute of Technology
 https://llm-strategist.github.io

                                           A BSTRACT
         Traditional reinforcement learning and planning typically requires vast amounts
         of data and training to develop effective policies. In contrast, large language mod-
         els (LLMs) exhibit strong generalization and zero-shot capabilities, but struggle
         with tasks that require detailed planning and decision-making in complex action
         spaces. We introduce S TRATEGIST, a novel approach that integrates the strengths
         of both methods. Our approach leverages LLMs to search and update high-level
         strategies (as text), which are then refined and executed by low-level Monte Carlo
         Tree Search (MCTS). S TRATEGIST is a generalizable framework to optimize the
         strategy through population-based self-play simulations without the need for any
         training data. We demonstrate the effectiveness of S TRATEGIST in learning optimal
         strategies for competitive, multi-turn games with partial information, including
         Game of Pure Strategy (GOPS) and multi-agent, hidden-identity discussion games
         like The Resistance: Avalon. Our results show that agents equipped with S TRATE -
         GIST outperform those trained with traditional RL methods, other LLM-based skill
         acquisition techniques, pre-existing LLM agents across both game environments
         and achieves comparable performance against human players.

1   I NTRODUCTION
Recent studies have shown the potential of Large
Language Models (LLMs) for learning skills
and improving decision-making in interactive
environments Wang et al. (2022; 2023a; 2024);
Xi et al. (2023); Zhao et al. (2024); Liu et al.
(2023). However, adversarial, multi-agent envi-
ronments present a significant challenge. LLMs
must reason about opponent actions, plan ahead
strategically, and navigate a vast policy space
Kambhampati et al. (2024); Valmeekam et al.
(2023); Kambhampati (2024). This complex-
ity hinders the LLM’s ability to identify, under-
stand, and translate optimal policies into effec-
tive actions. Simply generating decision rules
by querying the LLM proves inefficient and im-
practical in such settings. This raises two critical
questions: (1) How can LLMs effectively learn
complex policies in adversarial multi-agent en-
vironments? (2) What is the best approach to
improve these policies?                              Figure 1: Overview of S TRATEGIST. We use an
                                                     LLM to generate and improve high-level strategy
This paper introduces S TRATEGIST, a novel abstractions using environment feedback, then re-
framework that leverages LLMs to develop high- fine strategy into a policy using tree search or CoT.
level strategies, represented as interpretable text,
which are then refined and translated into executable policies using a low-level executor (Figure 1).
Our approach combines LLM self-improvement with a hierarchical search process, operating on both
a high-level strategy space and a low-level action space.


                                                  1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


At the high level, S TRATEGIST constructs a strategy tree through an evolutionary process, iteratively
testing and improving strategies via LLM-guided revisions based on self-play feedback. This process
fosters the emergence of robust, adaptable strategies. To further enhance strategy improvement, we
maintain a queue of "improvement ideas" sampled via a bandit algorithm to guide LLM revisions. At
the low level, we employ fine-grained tree search techniques (e.g., MCTS) guided by the high-level
strategy to refine the agent’s policy. We can run the policy against itself through self-play in the multi-
agent strategic game, and use win-rate as final outcome reward. The reward can be backpropagated to
help update the strategy. This bi-level approach effectively integrates the generalization capabilities
of LLMs with the precise planning of MCTS. Both levels are updated through simulated self-play,
eliminating the need for extensive training data.
We demonstrate the effectiveness of S TRATEGIST in two challenging games: the Game of Pure
Strategy (GOPS) and Resistance: Avalon (Ross, 1971; Light et al., 2023), chosen for their strategic
complexity and differing levels of natural language interaction. Our results show that S TRATEGIST
outperforms existing LLM-based self-improvement methods and traditional RL approaches, achieving
superior performance within the same computational and data budget. Furthermore, we highlight
the successful integration of feedback across the different levels of our framework, demonstrating
the synergistic interplay between high-level strategy improvement and low-level policy refinement.
Moreover, S TRATEGIST matches human performance in Avalon while employing a more sophisticated
mixed strategy and strategic randomization to deceive others and conceal its identity.
To summarize, our main contributions are:
• We propose S TRATEGIST, a general non-parametric bilevel skill-learning framework that uses
  LLMs to learn high-level strategy abstractions, refined into low-level policies by a modular executor.
  These abstractions can define strategic profiles for all players in the game.
• We introduce a modular improvement method for high-level strategies using population-based
  self-play without training data, demonstrating superior performance over existing LLM-based skill
  learning methods.
• We apply S TRATEGIST to GOPS and Avalon, demonstrating its effectiveness in learning policies
  for both dialogue and non-dialogue actions, achieving higher win rates than both existing agents
  and human players. Examples of learned strategies are provided in H.3 and I.3.

2    M ETHODOLOGY
2.1 D ECISION MAKING SETTING AND GAMES
The general goal in our decision-making setting is to learn a good policy function in a sequential
decision-making setting (generally formulated as a partially observable Markov decision game
(POMDG)). Our strategy-learning framework is generalizable to any decision making setting.
Problem definition. Given state space S and action space A, a policy function ϕ in policy space Φ is
a mapping ϕ : S → ∆A where we allow ϕ to output a probability distribution over the actions (∆A).
An environment E = ⟨S, A, N , T, R, A, ϕϵ ⟩ defines the state space S, the action space A, a set of
actors N , a transition function T : S × A → S, a reward function R : S × A → R|N | that specifies
intermediate rewards for each actor, an action function A : S → N , P(A) that specifies which actor
may take what legal actions at some state where P is power set, and ϕϵ , the policy function for the
environment actor. Note that transitions are deterministic in our notation, and stochastic transitions are
handled by the environment actor ϵ ∈ N instead, so we cover stochastic, deterministic, multi-agent,
and single agent cases. For a partial information setting, we also have a space of information sets I
and a function H : S × N → I that maps from hidden states and actors to hidden information sets.
Hence, ϕ : I → ∆A is a function from information sets to action distributions instead. A strategic
profile ϕ = [ϕi ]|N | describes the policies for every player i ∈ N .
Let f : Σ → Φ be the function that maps strategies to policies. A high-level strategy σ ∈ Σ helps
parameterize policies so that we can search over the lower dimension Σ space instead of Φ. Let Φ−i
denote the space of possible opponent policies, where −i are the indices of players other than i. Then
our goal is to find the optimal strategy σi that approximates finding the optimal policy given the
policies of the other agents ϕ−i , i.e.
                                                                                     
                                        X                                X
             argmax        E              Ri (s, a) ≈ argmax E              Ri (s, a)
                σi    τ ∼(f (σi ),ϕ−i )                     τ ∼(ϕi ,ϕ−i )
                                          (s,a)∈τ                           (s,a)∈τ



                                                    2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


where τ = (s0 , a0 , ...) is the simulated trajectory according to the strategic profile (ϕi , ϕ−i ) and the
transition function T , with at ∼ ϕ(at |st ) and st+1 = T (st , at ). Thus, a key part of these settings
involves learning the probable strategic profile of other players, usually by assuming that they play
optimally like in a Nash equilibrium (Perolat et al., 2022).
The state space, action space, and actor space are different depending on the setting. In non-stochastic,
single agent settings such as question answering (Yang et al., 2018; Wang et al., 2022; Shridhar et al.,
2020; Thorne et al., 2018), N = {0}. In stochastic single agent settings such as web browsing (Yao
et al., 2022a; Deng et al., 2024; Zhou et al., 2023), N = {ϵ, 0} where we add an environment agent ϵ.
We specifically focus on adversarial, multi-agent stochastic game (N = {ϵ, 0, 1, ...}) settings where
the other agents are actively working against each other. In non-dialogue-based card games such as
GOPS (see B for rules) for example, S consists of the cards played so far, N = {ϵ, 0, 1} for players 1
and 2 respectively, and A consists of the cards you can play. In dialogue-based games such as Avalon
(see A for rules), A consists of both the discrete actions (moves) such as voting, and language actions
which consist of text. Similarly, S consists of both the historical moves and historical dialogue record,
and N = {ϵ, 0, 1, ...} depending on the number of players involved, with |N | ≥ 6.
2.2 A BSTRACTING HIGH LEVEL STRATEGIES AS PROCESSES
A key part of our framework abstracts key features of the policy ϕ, representing them as a high-level
strategy σ, which is more suitable for LLM-driven improvement. σ is then executed and refined by a
low-level executor, often during inference, resulting in the execution policy ϕσ .
          feedback from environment → LLM-Improver → σ → Executor(σ) → ϕσ
Abstraction offers two key benefits: (1) High-level strategies provide a more abstract, compressed,
and intuitive representation of the problem, which the LLM better understands, enabling its
generalization and reasoning capabilities. (2) Searching over high-level strategies is more efficient
than low-level policy exploration, as it simplifies the search space by focusing on core principles
rather than fine details. This approach guides the search toward promising areas more quickly,
leveraging domain knowledge, patterns, or heuristics that generalize across scenarios.
For non-dialogue actions, while the action spaces A and state spaces S are typically discrete and
finite, the number of possible functions Φ mapping state to action is vast. Most LLM-agents query
the LLM directly with state information to decide the next action in decision-making environments
(Yao et al., 2023; Shinn et al., 2024; Zhao et al., 2024). However, this is costly because the LLM must
be queried for every move, and in Avalon, each player makes at least 20 moves. This becomes even
more expensive when incorporating look-ahead search, which requires querying the LLM for future
actions and states. Traditionally, policy-gradient reinforcement learning addresses the large policy
space by parameterizing the policy and optimizing these parameters, reducing the search space.
We abstract and “parameterize” the policy ϕ as a value heuristic (VH) σ := v : S → R|N | that
estimates the expected cumulative returns for each player at a given state, typically the expected
probability of winning for each player. Using a value heuristic simplifies reasoning, as it’s easier to
describe how good a state is than to specify the optimal action. This makes it intuitive for the LLM to
reason about winning probabilities. Additionally, we represent the value heuristic as Python code,
allowing the LLM to easily process and modify the logic for computing the value for each state.

    Example LLM Generated Value Heuristic Function
    def evaluate_state(state):
        # Calculating the potential scores for each player
        player_0_potential_score = sum(state.player_0_hand)
        player_1_potential_score = sum(state.player_1_hand)
       # Calculating the potential final scores for each player
       player_0_final_score = player_0_score + player_0_potential_score
       player_1_final_score = player_1_score + player_1_potential_score
       # Storing the intermediate values used to calculate the scores
       intermediate_values = {
           ’player_0_potential_score’: player_0_potential_score,
           ’player_1_potential_score’: player_1_potential_score
       }
       return player_scores, intermediate_values


At the low-level, we execute the strategy (value function) by selecting the action that leads to
the best state: ϕi (s) = argmaxa∈A Q(s, a) = argmaxa∈A Ri (s, a) + vi (s′ )|s′ = T (s, a). Since


                                                       3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


we learn the value vi for each actor, we can compute the best action for each actor i, refining the
value function into a strategic profile ϕ. Since value heuristics can be inaccurate, we can refine the
policy using search such as MCTS to look ahead through multiple action-state sequences, resulting
in a better policy (Grill et al., 2020; Silver et al., 2017; Schrittwieser et al., 2020). MCTS also
generates additional feedback by comparing the updated value estimate from MCTS with the initial
value heuristic.The estimated win-rate from search provides a shaped reward signal, which is
more informative than the simple win/lose outcome reward. We focus on key states with the largest
discrepancy between the MCTS estimate and the episode outcome for self-improvement feedback.
More details on our MCTS implementation are in Appendix F.
Dialogue generation poses a unique challenge for self-improvement. Both the action space A,
representing possible word sequences for each discussion round, and the state space S, representing
prior input dialogues, are enormous. As a result, the number of possible dialogue generation policies
Φ is vast, making traditional parameter training approaches difficult to optimize. To address this, we
develop a high-level strategy guide that the agent processes before speaking. This guide formalizes
a chain-of-thought process to analyze the situation before generating dialogue (Wei et al., 2022b).
It is implemented as a question-and-answer worksheet, where the agent answers all questions in the
guide before using it as a prompt for dialogue generation.

      Example (fully generated) Chain of Thought Dialogue Strategy Guide

      Q1: Who are the players you suspect are on the Evil side and why?
      A1: I suspect Player 2 and Player 4 are on the Evil side. Player 2’s suggestion for the team consisting of
      themselves and Player 1 seems too convenient, as it would allow Evil to easily fail the quest. Player 4’s
      agreement with Player 1 and Player 2’s proposed team without offering any alternative suggestions
      raises suspicion.

      Q2: Draft a subtle statement that casts doubt on these players without directly accusing them.
      A2: "I can’t help but wonder if some players are pushing for certain team compositions to benefit
      themselves rather than considering what is truly best for the success of our Quest."

      Generated dialogue: “I have observed patterns in the voting that suggest certain players may be working
      together to push for specific team compositions. This raises suspicion and calls into question their true
      intentions. We must not allow ourselves to be swayed by potentially deceitful tactics.”


2.3     M ODULAR SEARCH FOR HIGH -L EVEL STRATEGY IMPROVEMENT


Figure 2: Overview of our high-level strategy improvement method: The process alternates
between two steps—idea generation and strategy improvement. For more details see Figure 11.


                                                          4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Our framework alternates between two steps: idea generation and strategy improvement, as shown
in Figure 2 and detailed in App. D. Each cycle refines strategies stored in a tree structure based on
feedback from self-play simulations and generates new improvement ideas stored in a priority queue.

2.3.1    I DEA G ENERATION
In the idea generation step, a strategy σ and its feedback trajectory τσ are selected from the strategy
tree using an adaptive selection policy (e.g., UCB or BFS). Feedback consists of trajectories from
previous self-play simulations, including visited states, actions taken, estimated win rates, final
outcomes, and intermediate values. To avoid processing lengthy trajectories, we select key states that
best capture discrepancies between the strategy’s value heuristic and search-based estimates.
These key states are translated into natural language and used to prompt the LLM for new improvement
ideas. The ideas are added to the idea queue with a prior score estimating their potential effectiveness:
         Idea-queue ← LLM-idea-inventor(Sampled strategy, strategy feedback)
2.3.2    S TRATEGY I MPROVEMENT
In the strategy improvement step, we sample a strategy σ from the strategy tree and an idea d from
the queue, using a method that balances exploration and exploitation (e.g., UCB). The LLM refines
σ using d, generating a new strategy σnew . This new strategy is evaluated via self-play simulations,
which produce win rates W [σ] and trajectory feedback T [σ].
During simulations, players conduct MCTS tree searches to estimate win rates at different states,
providing additional feedback. The strategy tree is updated with the new strategy and its performance:
        Strategy-library ← LLM-reviser(Sampled idea, sampled prior strategy)
The improvement score of the idea d is updated based on how much it improved σ.

2.3.3    S EARCH M ODULARIZATION
A key feature of our framework is the use of an idea queue to modularize the search process. By
refining strategies incrementally rather than globally, we avoid confounding factors and ensure
interpretability of changes. The queue also tracks successful improvements that are generalizable
across strategies, enabling transfer and reuse of ideas. Improvements are often additive (e.g., penalties
or adjustments) and enhance performance when applied to similar strategies (Table 2).
We use UCB sampling to balance exploration of new ideas and exploitation of proven ones:
                                                       s
                                                          ln(Ntotal )
                                U CB(idea) = z idea + c
                                                             Nidea
where z is the empirical average improvement score, Ntotal is the total number of ideas implemented,
and Nidea is the number of implementations of the specific idea.
To simplify the improvement process, we optimize dialogue generation and gameplay moves sepa-
rately in Avalon before integrating them into a unified agent (Appendix E). This modular approach
mirrors strategies used in related domains, such as Diplomacy (FAIR).

2.4     P OPULATION BASED SELF - PLAY SIMULATION

Recent works focus on using either another LLM for critique-based feedback (Madaan et al., 2024;
Shinn et al., 2024), real environment interactions (Nottingham et al., 2024), or a combination of
both (Wang et al., 2023a) during the LLM-improvement process. Our method improves on this
by simulating opponents using the learned high-level strategy, enabling higher-quality feedback.
Since our high-level strategies can be refined into a policy for any player, we can easily pit different
strategies against each other by refining them into specific policies for different players. Specifically,
we use population based self-play, where we conduct round-robin games among the top ten strategies
generated and use the average performance as the strategy score for each strategy (Xu et al., 2023b).
During round-robin games, strategies are given the same level of low-level refinement to ensure
fairness. This evolutionary approach makes the final improved strategy more robust to different
opponent policies, since it will have survived multiple round-robin tournaments. We demonstrate the
effectiveness of this method in section 3.5.


                                                    5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


3     E XPERIMENTS

We evaluate the effectiveness of our bi-level framework through four key experiments: demonstrating
S TRATEGIST’s competitiveness with human players, its superiority over RL-based deep learning
methods, its advantage over LLM-based agents, and the effectiveness of our LLM-improvement
method compared to other techniques. Our approach is tested on two games with distinct challenges.
Game of Pure Strategy (GOPS) is a two-player, zero-sum card game requiring strategic decisions
under partial information and simultaneous moves (see B) (Ross, 1971; Lanctot et al., 2009). The
Resistance: Avalon is a multi-agent (5+ players), team-based game combining language, deception,
and deduction (see A) (Light et al., 2023). These games highlight S TRATEGIST’s versatility in
handling strategic and social complexities.


Figure 3: Action analysis of S TRATEGIST and humans when playing against each other in
Avalon. S TRATEGIST conducts more strategic randomization than humans, making its identity harder
to deduce based on actions.

3.1   H UMAN E VALUATIONS
                                                                      Persuasiveness
We conducted human experiments in the six-                                                          Merlin Concealability
player Avalon setting, using the following char-
acter roles: Merlin, 3 Servants of Arthur, 1 As-       Adaptability
                                                                                                4        5 6
sassin, and 1 Minion of Mordred. Ten partici-
                                                                                        1   2 3
pants were recruited and randomly assigned to
                                                                                                               Cooperation
one of the roles, playing against five S TRATE -
GIST agents. In total, 30 games were collected
and analyzed. As presented in Table 1, S TRATE -        Reasoning
GIST achieved a win rate comparable to human
players. After each session, participants com-                                                      Evil Concealability
pleted a survey evaluating the performance of                          Evil Detection
S TRATEGIST across seven key metrics, while
an experimenter independently assessed human                                   Human        Strategist
performance. The survey results are visualized
in Figure 4, revealing that S TRATEGIST outper-    Figure 4: Human vs S TRATEGIST performance
formed humans in concealment and adaptability      metrics in Avalon. We ask humans to evaluate the
to human playstyles, but lagged behind in rea-     performance of S TRATEGIST and human players in
soning, deduction, and cooperation.                ad-hoc human-AI games. S TRATEGIST performs
                                                   better than humans at concealment, but worse at
Additionally, we conducted an action analysis      reasoning and cooperation.
to compare the behavior of S TRATEGIST and
human players, shown in Figure 3. Specifically, we examined the distribution of approval votes—a
pivotal action in Avalon. The data revealed that human players exhibited distinct voting patterns based
on their roles, facilitating the deduction of their identities. In contrast, S TRATEGIST demonstrated
strategic randomization, producing more uniform action distributions across roles and thereby
making its identity harder to infer. More details on human evaluations can be found in Appendix O.


                                                   6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Table 2: Comparison of different self-improvement methods. The improvement process was run
with the same number of strategies generated for each method (40 for GOPS, 24 for Avalon) on
the same seed functions, all with GPT3.5. We collect 9 functions from each process and play them
against each other (a total of 5 × 9 = 40 different agents), reporting the average number of points
you win over your opponents for GOPS and the average winrate for Avalon. For the dialogue guide,
we show the improvement over the baseline seed function, which has a score z = −0.875 ∈ [−2, 2],
a rating from opponents which we describe in G.

 Self-Improvement          Line      search   Greedy search         Best First Search            BFS     with       S TRATEGIST
 Methodology               (Madaan et al.,    (Ma et al., 2023)     (BFS) (Yao et al.,           thought
                           2024;      Shinn                         2024)
                           et al., 2024)
 GOPS Value Heuristic      -0.47 ±0.74        -0.54 ±0.45           0.092 ±0.67                  -0.48±0.375        1.5 ±0.99
 Avalon Value Heuristic    0.54 ±0.11         0.47 ±0.11            0.50 ±0.085                  0.55 ±0.065        0.59 ±0.11
 Merlin Dialogue Guide     0.37 ± 0.19        0.62 ± 0.13           0.49 ± 0.063                 0.37 ± 0.06        0.88 ±0.063
 Assassin Dialogue Guide   1.83 ± 0.25        1.81 ± 0.063          1.82 ± 0.063                 1.89±0.063         1.98 ±0.042

We further analyzed the proportion of correct                      Strategist Playstyle                Human Playstyle
votes, defined as rejecting teams with at least
one Evil player or approving teams with only                                                             20.0%      30.0%
Good players. This metric indicates a player’s                       40.0%           40.0%
ability to infer Good and Evil identities, a skill                                                     20.0%
particularly crucial for the Merlin role. As                                 20.0%                               30.0%
shown in Figure 3, S TRATEGIST employed in-
creased randomization as Merlin, minimizing                       Logical            Deceptive         Aggressive           Cautious
information leakage through voting patterns.
Conversely, human players displayed highly                Figure 5: Description of S TRATEGIST play-style
role-specific correctness trends. These findings          compared to human players, as evaluated by hu-
align with survey feedback, corroborating that            man participants. S TRATEGIST is described as
S TRATEGIST excels in concealment strategies              being more logical and cautious.
compared to human counterparts.

3.2   D IFFERENT LLM I MPROVEMENT M ETHODS

We demonstrate the effectiveness of our strat-
egy improvement method by benchmarking it             Table 1: Results of S TRATEGIST vs Human.
against four other skill-improvement methods.
Line search (Madaan et al., 2024) always re-
                                                       Metric           Human S TRATEGIST
flects and improves upon the latest improved
strategy. Greedy search (Ma et al., 2023) se-          Win Rate           0.367         0.333
lects the best strategy from the last generation       Standard Error     0.089         0.061
of improved strategies to improve upon each im-
provement cycle. Best first search (Yao et al., 2024) improves upon the k best strategies generated in
any iteration of each improvement cycle. Best first search with thought enhances BFS by prompting
the LLM to reflect, think, and propose ideas on how to improve the previous strategy before improving
the strategy itself (Yao et al., 2022b). S TRATEGIST is our method that uses an additional idea queue
Q and an idea generation step to guide the improvement process. Comparing BFS with thought and
S TRATEGIST helps demonstrate the value of having a modularized reflection and idea proposition
process that is separate from strategy generation. More details can be found in Appendix N.
Our results, presented in Table 2, use the same feedback method (simulation-based population self-
play) while varying the improvement methods, with a constant number of new strategies generated
across all methods. Figure 12 (right) shows the gameplay scores of these strategies on GOPS. Even
when controlling for the number of output tokens generated by the LLM, our method outperforms
the others, as demonstrated in Figure 18. We attribute this to (1) the idea queue, which helps test
incremental improvements and guide the search process, and (2) our strategy and idea selection
policy, which more efficiently explores the strategy space and escapes local maxima (Figure 12 left).

3.3   I NTERACTION BETWEEN LOW- LEVEL REFINEMENT AND HIGH LEVEL STRATEGY SEARCH


                                                         7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


We demonstrate that both our high-level
strategy improvement and low-level refine-
ment processes scale effectively with in-
creased budgets by showing how differ-
ent high-level strategies performance with
varying MCTS search budgets. A higher
search budget allows for more nodes to
be looked ahead before taking actions,
resulting in a more refined policy. As       Figure 6: Performance of high level strategies on
shown in Figure 6, strategies improved       GOPS as we vary the level of low-level MCTS re-
with more iterations using S TRATEGIST ex-   finement (MCTS search budget). Left: Scaling curve
hibit both higher performance and greater    for initial unimproved LLM-generated value-heuristic.
performance gains with increased refine-     Right: Scaling curve for improved value-heuristic us-
ment. Policy refinement also scales excep-   ing S TRATEGIST after 20 and 40 iterations (steps) of
tionally well.                               self-improvement respectively. S TRATEGIST improved
                                             value heuristics scale better with increased low-level
3.4 LLM- IMPROVEMENT                         refinement.
VS . R EINFORCEMENT
L EARNING (RL) BASED METHODS

We demonstrate the effectiveness of our
method compared to traditional RL-based
approaches for learning a good policy.
Specifically, we show that our method
learns a value heuristic function more effi-
ciently than deep RL, as used in AlphaGo,
MuZero (Silver et al., 2017; Schrittwieser
et al., 2020), and DeepRole (Serrino et al.,
2019). While AlphaGo uses MCTS (Koc-
sis & Szepesvári, 2006) with a deep value Figure 7: Performance of different training methods
network, DeepRole combines counterfac- against the baseline in Avalon and GOPS.
tual regret minimization with a deep value
network (Moravčík et al., 2017; Zinkevich et al., 2007). We adapt both algorithms to our setting.
Although deep RL can approximate the true value function with enough data, training, and a large
network, we ensure a fair comparison by (1) limiting both RL methods and our approach to the
same number of simulated episodes, and (2) capping the number of training steps after each batch of
episode trajectory data. While both RL methods and S TRATEGIST use the same number of self-play
episodes, S TRATEGIST only trains on a small subset of transition steps, whereas RL methods train
on the entire dataset. Our results, shown in Table 3 and Figure 7, demonstrate that S TRATEGIST
consistently outperforms both AlphaGo and DeepRole. More details on our RL implementation and
the effects of increased sample size can be found in Appendix L, where we observe performance
improvements with additional samples.

Table 3: Comparison of reinforcement learning vs our method. We run each process 10 times,
taking the best strategy generated by each run and playing them against each other for 1024 games.
Average win-rates, total number of self-play episodes, and training transition steps across best
generated strategies are shown here.

 Setting        Metric                  VS Alpha-go                        VS DeepRole
                                 Alpha-go         S TRATEGIST        DeepRole        S TRATEGIST
            Point difference   −0.39 ± 0.22       0.33 ± 0.38      −0.56 ± 0.18      1.14 ± 0.09
  GOPS       Self-play eps.    320 episodes       320 episodes     320 episodes      320 episodes
              Trans. steps     ∼ 3, 840 steps      100 steps       ∼ 3, 840 steps     100 steps
                Winrate         0.30 ± 0.03       0.38 ± 0.04      0.33 ± 0.04       0.44 ± 0.02
 Avalon      Self-play eps.     160 episodes      160 episodes     160 episodes      160 episodes
              Trans. steps     ∼ 24, 000 steps      60 steps      ∼ 24, 000 steps      60 steps



                                                 8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


3.5    F EEDBACK Q UALITY AND R EWARD S IGNAL

We benchmark our feedback method (population based self-play) against (1) an LLM-critic (Madaan
et al., 2024) and (2) trajectory feedback from a fixed opponent policy, with results in Table 4
showing superior performance in both GOPS action planning and dialogue generation. This shows
the effectiveness of our evolutionary population based self-play approach, and that of our strategy
abstraction that learns a strategic profile for all players.

Table 4: Comparison of different methods of collecting feedback. All methods use the same high-
level improvement process (S TRATEGIST). For GOPS we collect 24 generated functions from each
method and play them against each other. For Avalon we evaluate 9 generated guides. We simulated
32 games for GOPS and 4 rounds of discussion for Avalon to collect gameplay feedback during each
improvement step, across 10 and 6 improvement rounds for GOPS and Avalon respectively.

 Setting/Method           Metric         LLM-critic      Fixed opponent      Population-based
                                                                             Self-play
                      Point difference   −0.27 ± 1.1        0.089 ± 0.86     0.87 ±1.5
        GOPS
                      # of opponents         0                    1          4
                         Winrate         0.37 ± 0.063       0.62 ± 0.13      0.88 ±0.06
        Avalon
                      # of opponents           0                 1           4


3.6    S TRATEGIST VS . LLM AGENTS

We demonstrate that our method also achieves better performance against other LLM-agents. ReAct
is a popular LLM-agent that prompts the LLM to think before taking an action (Yao et al., 2022b).
ReCon is a LLM-agent for hidden identity games that prompts the LLM to recursively contemplate
on what opponents are thinking and might do before taking actions (Wang et al., 2023b). We adapt
ReCon to our setting by asking the agent to recursively contemplate. Our gameplay results are shown
in Table 5. This suggests that through S TRATEGIST, our LLM-agent is able to learn high-level
strategies similar in performance to those of ReCon, such as recursive contemplation.

    Table 5: Results of S TRATEGIST playing against LLM-based baselines, i.e., ReAct and ReCon.

                                     VS ReAct                        VS ReCon
         Metric
                                ReAct    S TRATEGIST             ReCon    S TRATEGIST
         Winrate              47.5 ± 2.5      52.5 ± 2.5       38.9 ± 5.5       61.1 ± 5.5
         #Tokens per round    56 ± 14.3      164.3 ± 27.7     245.7 ± 21.2     248.2 ± 24.1



4     R ELATED W ORK

LLMs for Text Agents. Large language models (LLMs) demonstrate emergent capabilities such as
zero-shot prompting, reasoning, and extensive world knowledge (Bommasani et al., 2021; Brown
et al., 2020; Wei et al., 2022a; Yu et al., 2023a). Recent frameworks like ReAct (Yao et al., 2023)
and Reflexion (Shinn et al., 2024) have incorporated reasoning, memory, feedback, and tool use to
improve decision-making (Wang et al., 2023a; Huang et al., 2022; Schick et al., 2024). Prompting
techniques like Chain-of-Thought and Tree-of-Thought are effective for reasoning (Wei et al., 2022b;
Yao et al., 2024) but fall short in complex games requiring iterative self-improvement. Our method,
S TRATEGIST, introduces a bi-level tree search combining high-level planning and self-play for
feedback-driven strategy refinement.
Skill Learning with LLMs. LLMs have been used to acquire skills by learning textual memories
or insights (Shinn et al., 2024; Zhao et al., 2024). However, textual approaches struggle with long,
quantitative trajectories. We focus on high-level strategies optimized through simulational self-play,
enabling robust skill learning in multi-agent environments. While reward models learned by LLMs


                                                  9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


excel in single-agent tasks (Ma et al., 2023; Yu et al., 2023b), we extend these ideas to multi-agent
settings by introducing methods for feedback generation and strategy improvement.
AI in Strategy Games. Advances like AlphaGo and MuZero highlight the synergy of MCTS, deep
learning, and self-play (Silver et al., 2017; Schrittwieser et al., 2020). LLMs have also been integrated
into dialogue-based games such as Diplomacy (, FAIR) and Texas Hold’em (Zhang et al., 2024).
Our approach bridges these domains by enabling LLMs to both train value heuristics more efficiently
than RL and generate dialogue for social deduction games without human examples. Additionally,
our method has potential applications in negotiation tasks (Abdelnabi et al., 2023; Fu et al., 2023).
LLM-agents for discussion games. There has been much recent interest in using LLMs to develop
agents for discussion-based games, as these games provide an excellent benchmark for assessing the
reasoning, planning, and strategic deception capabilities of LLMs. This includes Werewolf (Bailis
et al., 2024; Xu et al., 2023b;a; Wu et al., 2024), another social deduction game, and other negotiation
and word games (Fu et al., 2023; Cheng et al., 2024). We give a more detailed comparison of our
work to other AI agents in Table 6 and App. P.
                                EnReaWolf


                                                               LARLWolf


                                                                                                     Agent-Pro
                                                     ComWolf


                                                                                                                         DeepRole

                                                                                                                                    Strategist
                                                                                           ICL-AIF
                                                                                 AlphaGo


                                                                                                                 ReCon
                                            Cicero


                                                                          SPAG
    Metric


    Used in Avalon              ✗           ✗        ✗          ✗         ✗       ✗        ✗          ✗          ✓       ✓          ✓
    Parameter-free              ✗           ✗        ✓          ✗         ✗       ✗        ✓         ✓           ✓        ✗         ✓
    Uses LM                     ✓           ✓        ✓         ✓          ✓       ✗        ✓         ✓           ✓        ✗         ✓
    Self-improve                ✓           ✓        ✗         ✓          ✓      ✓         ✓         ✓           ✗       ✓          ✓
    Tree Search                 ✗           ✓        ✗          ✗         ✗      ✓         ✗          ✗          ✗       ✓          ✓
    Human-annotation free       ✗           ✗        ✓         ✓          ✓      ✓         ✓         ✓           ✓       ✓          ✓
    Belief updates              ✗           ✗        ✗          ✗         ✗       ✗        ✗         ✓           ✗       ✓          ✓
    Bi-level improvement        ✗           ✗        ✗          ✗         ✗       ✗        ✗          ✗          ✗        ✗         ✓

Table 6: Comparison of Strategist with Related Works. We use an bi-level improvement approach,
paired with an advanced high-level strategy learning process that is parameter free. Our approach
handles beliefs and partial observability and uses low-level policy refinement (tree-search) to further
enhance our policy. For details see App. P

5    C ONCLUSION
In conclusion, we have introduced S TRATEGIST, a bi-level framework that facilitates high-level
abstract strategy learning with LLMs and a generalizable non-parametric self-improvement mecha-
nism. This approach enables the model to learn and refine skills autonomously. Without relying on
task-specific prompts or human-generated policy data, our method demonstrates its ability to learn
effective strategies through population-based self-play, guided solely by the rules of the game.
The performance of S TRATEGIST highlights the potential of leveraging LLMs for generating high-
level strategic abstractions, while using low-level tree search to iteratively refine the policy. This
dual approach not only showcases the power of modular guidance—whether through high-level
strategy exploration or low-level self-play feedback—but also underlines the value of integrating
these processes for accelerated and robust skill acquisition in LLMs.
Furthermore, our results suggest broader implications for the development of LLM-driven decision-
making agents across a range of complex domains. By embedding flexible and adaptive learning
mechanisms, our framework paves the way for more autonomous systems capable of mastering tasks
with minimal human intervention. This opens new avenues for the application of LLMs in areas
such as multi-agent systems, reinforcement learning, and general AI, where strategic planning and
self-improvement are key.


                                                               10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


R EFERENCES
Sahar Abdelnabi, Amr Gomaa, Sarath Sivaprasad, Lea Schönherr, and Mario Fritz. Llm-deliberation:
  Evaluating llms with interactive multi-agent negotiation games. arXiv preprint arXiv:2309.17234,
  2023.

Suma Bailis, Jane Friedhoff, and Feiyang Chen. Werewolf arena: A case study in llm evaluation via
  social deduction. arXiv preprint arXiv:2407.13943, 2024.

Rishi Bommasani, Drew A. Hudson, Ehsan Adeli, Russ Altman, Simran Arora, Sydney von Arx,
  Michael S. Bernstein, Jeannette Bohg, Antoine Bosselut, Emma Brunskill, Erik Brynjolfsson,
  Shyamal Buch, Dallas Card, Rodrigo Castellon, Niladri Chatterji, Annie Chen, Kathleen Creel,
  Jared Quincy Davis, Dora Demszky, Chris Donahue, Moussa Doumbouya, Esin Durmus, Stefano
  Ermon, John Etchemendy, Kawin Ethayarajh, Li Fei-Fei, Chelsea Finn, Trevor Gale, Lauren
  Gillespie, Karan Goel, Noah Goodman, Shelby Grossman, Neel Guha, Tatsunori Hashimoto, Peter
  Henderson, John Hewitt, Daniel E. Ho, Jenny Hong, Kyle Hsu, Jing Huang, Thomas Icard, Saahil
  Jain, Dan Jurafsky, Pratyusha Kalluri, Siddharth Karamcheti, Geoff Keeling, Fereshte Khani, Omar
  Khattab, Pang Wei Koh, Mark Krass, Ranjay Krishna, Rohith Kuditipudi, Ananya Kumar, Faisal
  Ladhak, Mina Lee, Tony Lee, Jure Leskovec, Isabelle Levent, Xiang Lisa Li, Xuechen Li, Tengyu
  Ma, Ali Malik, Christopher D. Manning, Suvir Mirchandani, Eric Mitchell, Zanele Munyikwa,
  Suraj Nair, Avanika Narayan, Deepak Narayanan, Ben Newman, Allen Nie, Juan Carlos Niebles,
  Hamed Nilforoshan, Julian Nyarko, Giray Ogut, Laurel Orr, Isabel Papadimitriou, Joon Sung
  Park, Chris Piech, Eva Portelance, Christopher Potts, Aditi Raghunathan, Rob Reich, Hongyu
  Ren, Frieda Rong, Yusuf Roohani, Camilo Ruiz, Jack Ryan, Christopher Ré, Dorsa Sadigh,
  Shiori Sagawa, Keshav Santhanam, Andy Shih, Krishnan Srinivasan, Alex Tamkin, Rohan Taori,
  Armin W. Thomas, Florian Tramèr, Rose E. Wang, William Wang, Bohan Wu, Jiajun Wu, Yuhuai
  Wu, Sang Michael Xie, Michihiro Yasunaga, Jiaxuan You, Matei Zaharia, Michael Zhang, Tianyi
  Zhang, Xikun Zhang, Yuhui Zhang, Lucia Zheng, Kaitlyn Zhou, and Percy Liang. On the
  opportunities and risks of foundation models. arXiv preprint arXiv: Arxiv-2108.07258, 2021.

Tom B. Brown, Benjamin Mann, Nick Ryder, Melanie Subbiah, Jared Kaplan, Prafulla Dhari-
  wal, Arvind Neelakantan, Pranav Shyam, Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, Sandhini Agar-
  wal, Ariel Herbert-Voss, Gretchen Krueger, Tom Henighan, Rewon Child, Aditya Ramesh,
  Daniel M. Ziegler, Jeffrey Wu, Clemens Winter, Christopher Hesse, Mark Chen, Eric Sigler,
  Mateusz Litwin, Scott Gray, Benjamin Chess, Jack Clark, Christopher Berner, Sam McCan-
  dlish, Alec Radford, Ilya Sutskever, and Dario Amodei. Language models are few-shot
  learners. In Hugo Larochelle, Marc’Aurelio Ranzato, Raia Hadsell, Maria-Florina Balcan,
  and Hsuan-Tien Lin (eds.), Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 33: Annual
  Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems 2020, NeurIPS 2020, December 6-12,
  2020, virtual, 2020. URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper/2020/hash/
  1457c0d6bfcb4967418bfb8ac142f64a-Abstract.html.

Pengyu Cheng, Tianhao Hu, Han Xu, Zhisong Zhang, Yong Dai, Lei Han, and Nan Du. Self-playing
  adversarial language game enhances llm reasoning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2404.10642, 2024.

Xiang Deng, Yu Gu, Boyuan Zheng, Shijie Chen, Sam Stevens, Boshi Wang, Huan Sun, and Yu Su.
  Mind2web: Towards a generalist agent for the web. Advances in Neural Information Processing
  Systems, 36, 2024.

Meta Fundamental AI Research Diplomacy Team (FAIR)†, Anton Bakhtin, Noam Brown, Emily
 Dinan, Gabriele Farina, Colin Flaherty, Daniel Fried, Andrew Goff, Jonathan Gray, Hengyuan Hu,
 et al. Human-level play in the game of diplomacy by combining language models with strategic
 reasoning. Science, 378(6624):1067–1074, 2022.

Yao Fu, Hao Peng, Tushar Khot, and Mirella Lapata. Improving language model negotiation with
  self-play and in-context learning from ai feedback. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.10142, 2023.

Jean-Bastien Grill, Florent Altché, Yunhao Tang, Thomas Hubert, Michal Valko, Ioannis Antonoglou,
  and Rémi Munos. Monte-carlo tree search as regularized policy optimization. In International
  Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 3769–3778. PMLR, 2020.


                                               11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Wenlong Huang, Fei Xia, Ted Xiao, Harris Chan, Jacky Liang, Pete Florence, Andy Zeng, Jonathan
 Tompson, Igor Mordatch, Yevgen Chebotar, Pierre Sermanet, Noah Brown, Tomas Jackson, Linda
 Luu, Sergey Levine, Karol Hausman, and Brian Ichter. Inner monologue: Embodied reasoning
 through planning with language models. arXiv preprint arXiv: Arxiv-2207.05608, 2022.
Subbarao Kambhampati. Can large language models reason and plan? Annals of the New York
  Academy of Sciences, 1534(1):15–18, 2024.
Subbarao Kambhampati, Karthik Valmeekam, Lin Guan, Kaya Stechly, Mudit Verma, Siddhant
  Bhambri, Lucas Saldyt, and Anil Murthy. Llms can’t plan, but can help planning in llm-modulo
  frameworks. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.01817, 2024.
Levente Kocsis and Csaba Szepesvári. Bandit based monte-carlo planning. In European conference
  on machine learning, pp. 282–293. Springer, 2006.
Marc Lanctot, Kevin Waugh, Martin Zinkevich, and Michael Bowling. Monte carlo sampling for
 regret minimization in extensive games. Advances in neural information processing systems, 22,
 2009.
Jonathan Light, Min Cai, Sheng Shen, and Ziniu Hu. From text to tactic: Evaluating llms playing the
  game of avalon. arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.05036, 2023.
Xiao Liu, Hao Yu, Hanchen Zhang, Yifan Xu, Xuanyu Lei, Hanyu Lai, Yu Gu, Hangliang Ding,
  Kaiwen Men, Kejuan Yang, et al. Agentbench: Evaluating llms as agents. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2308.03688, 2023.
Yecheng Jason Ma, William Liang, Guanzhi Wang, De-An Huang, Osbert Bastani, Dinesh Jayaraman,
  Yuke Zhu, Linxi Fan, and Anima Anandkumar. Eureka: Human-level reward design via coding
  large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.12931, 2023.
Aman Madaan, Niket Tandon, Prakhar Gupta, Skyler Hallinan, Luyu Gao, Sarah Wiegreffe, Uri
 Alon, Nouha Dziri, Shrimai Prabhumoye, Yiming Yang, et al. Self-refine: Iterative refinement
 with self-feedback. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 36, 2024.
Matej Moravčík, Martin Schmid, Neil Burch, Viliam Lisỳ, Dustin Morrill, Nolan Bard, Trevor
 Davis, Kevin Waugh, Michael Johanson, and Michael Bowling. Deepstack: Expert-level artificial
 intelligence in heads-up no-limit poker. Science, 356(6337):508–513, 2017.
Kolby Nottingham, Bodhisattwa Prasad Majumder, Bhavana Dalvi Mishra, Sameer Singh, Peter
  Clark, and Roy Fox. Skill set optimization: Reinforcing language model behavior via transferable
  skills. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.03244, 2024.
Julien Perolat, Bart De Vylder, Daniel Hennes, Eugene Tarassov, Florian Strub, Vincent de Boer,
  Paul Muller, Jerome T Connor, Neil Burch, Thomas Anthony, et al. Mastering the game of stratego
  with model-free multiagent reinforcement learning. Science, 378(6623):990–996, 2022.
Sheldon M Ross. Goofspiel—the game of pure strategy. Journal of Applied Probability, 8(3):
  621–625, 1971.
Timo Schick, Jane Dwivedi-Yu, Roberto Dessì, Roberta Raileanu, Maria Lomeli, Eric Hambro, Luke
  Zettlemoyer, Nicola Cancedda, and Thomas Scialom. Toolformer: Language models can teach
  themselves to use tools. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 36, 2024.
Julian Schrittwieser, Ioannis Antonoglou, Thomas Hubert, Karen Simonyan, Laurent Sifre, Simon
  Schmitt, Arthur Guez, Edward Lockhart, Demis Hassabis, Thore Graepel, et al. Mastering atari,
  go, chess and shogi by planning with a learned model. Nature, 588(7839):604–609, 2020.
Jack Serrino, Max Kleiman-Weiner, David C Parkes, and Josh Tenenbaum. Finding friend and foe in
  multi-agent games. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 32, 2019.
Noah Shinn, Federico Cassano, Ashwin Gopinath, Karthik Narasimhan, and Shunyu Yao. Reflexion:
  Language agents with verbal reinforcement learning. Advances in Neural Information Processing
  Systems, 36, 2024.


                                                12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Mohit Shridhar, Xingdi Yuan, Marc-Alexandre Côté, Yonatan Bisk, Adam Trischler, and Matthew
 Hausknecht. Alfworld: Aligning text and embodied environments for interactive learning. arXiv
 preprint arXiv:2010.03768, 2020.
David Silver, Julian Schrittwieser, Karen Simonyan, Ioannis Antonoglou, Aja Huang, Arthur Guez,
  Thomas Hubert, Lucas Baker, Matthew Lai, Adrian Bolton, et al. Mastering the game of go without
  human knowledge. nature, 550(7676):354–359, 2017.
Richard S Sutton and Andrew G Barto. Reinforcement learning: An introduction. MIT press, 2018.
James Thorne, Andreas Vlachos, Christos Christodoulopoulos, and Arpit Mittal. Fever: a large-scale
  dataset for fact extraction and verification. arXiv preprint arXiv:1803.05355, 2018.
Karthik Valmeekam, Matthew Marquez, Sarath Sreedharan, and Subbarao Kambhampati. On the
  planning abilities of large language models-a critical investigation. Advances in Neural Information
  Processing Systems, 36:75993–76005, 2023.
Guanzhi Wang, Yuqi Xie, Yunfan Jiang, Ajay Mandlekar, Chaowei Xiao, Yuke Zhu, Linxi Fan, and
 Anima Anandkumar. Voyager: An open-ended embodied agent with large language models. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2305.16291, 2023a.
Lei Wang, Chen Ma, Xueyang Feng, Zeyu Zhang, Hao Yang, Jingsen Zhang, Zhiyuan Chen, Jiakai
  Tang, Xu Chen, Yankai Lin, et al. A survey on large language model based autonomous agents.
  Frontiers of Computer Science, 18(6):186345, 2024.
Ruoyao Wang, Peter Jansen, Marc-Alexandre Côté, and Prithviraj Ammanabrolu. Scienceworld: Is
  your agent smarter than a 5th grader? arXiv preprint arXiv:2203.07540, 2022.
Shenzhi Wang, Chang Liu, Zilong Zheng, Siyuan Qi, Shuo Chen, Qisen Yang, Andrew Zhao, Chaofei
  Wang, Shiji Song, and Gao Huang. Avalon’s game of thoughts: Battle against deception through
  recursive contemplation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.01320, 2023b.
Jason Wei, Yi Tay, Rishi Bommasani, Colin Raffel, Barret Zoph, Sebastian Borgeaud, Dani Yogatama,
  Maarten Bosma, Denny Zhou, Donald Metzler, Ed H. Chi, Tatsunori Hashimoto, Oriol Vinyals,
  Percy Liang, Jeff Dean, and William Fedus. Emergent abilities of large language models. arXiv
  preprint arXiv: Arxiv-2206.07682, 2022a.
Jason Wei, Xuezhi Wang, Dale Schuurmans, Maarten Bosma, Ed Chi, Quoc Le, and Denny
  Zhou. Chain of thought prompting elicits reasoning in large language models. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2201.11903, 2022b.
Wikipedia contributors. Goofspiel — Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia, 2023. URL https://en.
 wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Goofspiel&oldid=1174471596. [Online;
 accessed 22-May-2024].
Shuang Wu, Liwen Zhu, Tao Yang, Shiwei Xu, Qiang Fu, Yang Wei, and Haobo Fu. Enhance
  reasoning for large language models in the game werewolf. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.02330,
  2024.
Zhiheng Xi, Wenxiang Chen, Xin Guo, Wei He, Yiwen Ding, Boyang Hong, Ming Zhang, Junzhe
  Wang, Senjie Jin, Enyu Zhou, et al. The rise and potential of large language model based agents:
  A survey. arXiv preprint arXiv:2309.07864, 2023.
Yuzhuang Xu, Shuo Wang, Peng Li, Fuwen Luo, Xiaolong Wang, Weidong Liu, and Yang Liu.
  Exploring large language models for communication games: An empirical study on werewolf.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2309.04658, 2023a.
Zelai Xu, Chao Yu, Fei Fang, Yu Wang, and Yi Wu. Language agents with reinforcement learning for
  strategic play in the werewolf game. arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.18940, 2023b.
Zhilin Yang, Peng Qi, Saizheng Zhang, Yoshua Bengio, William W Cohen, Ruslan Salakhutdinov,
  and Christopher D Manning. Hotpotqa: A dataset for diverse, explainable multi-hop question
  answering. arXiv preprint arXiv:1809.09600, 2018.


                                                 13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Shunyu Yao, Howard Chen, John Yang, and Karthik Narasimhan. Webshop: Towards scalable
  real-world web interaction with grounded language agents. Advances in Neural Information
  Processing Systems, 35:20744–20757, 2022a.
Shunyu Yao, Jeffrey Zhao, Dian Yu, Nan Du, Izhak Shafran, Karthik Narasimhan, and Yuan Cao.
  React: Synergizing reasoning and acting in language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2210.03629,
  2022b.
Shunyu Yao, Jeffrey Zhao, Dian Yu, Nan Du, Izhak Shafran, Karthik Narasimhan, and Yuan Cao.
  React: Synergizing reasoning and acting in language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2210.03629,
  2023.
Shunyu Yao, Dian Yu, Jeffrey Zhao, Izhak Shafran, Tom Griffiths, Yuan Cao, and Karthik Narasimhan.
  Tree of thoughts: Deliberate problem solving with large language models. Advances in Neural
  Information Processing Systems, 36, 2024.
Jifan Yu, Xiaozhi Wang, Shangqing Tu, Shulin Cao, Daniel Zhang-Li, Xin Lv, Hao Peng, Zijun
   Yao, Xiaohan Zhang, Hanming Li, et al. Kola: Carefully benchmarking world knowledge of large
   language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.09296, 2023a.
Wenhao Yu, Nimrod Gileadi, Chuyuan Fu, Sean Kirmani, Kuang-Huei Lee, Montse Gonzalez Arenas,
 Hao-Tien Lewis Chiang, Tom Erez, Leonard Hasenclever, Jan Humplik, et al. Language to rewards
 for robotic skill synthesis. arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.08647, 2023b.
Wenqi Zhang, Ke Tang, Hai Wu, Mengna Wang, Yongliang Shen, Guiyang Hou, Zeqi Tan, Peng Li,
 Yueting Zhuang, and Weiming Lu. Agent-pro: Learning to evolve via policy-level reflection and
 optimization. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.17574, 2024.
Andrew Zhao, Daniel Huang, Quentin Xu, Matthieu Lin, Yong-Jin Liu, and Gao Huang. Expel: Llm
  agents are experiential learners. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence,
  volume 38, pp. 19632–19642, 2024.
Shuyan Zhou, Frank F Xu, Hao Zhu, Xuhui Zhou, Robert Lo, Abishek Sridhar, Xianyi Cheng,
  Tianyue Ou, Yonatan Bisk, Daniel Fried, et al. Webarena: A realistic web environment for building
  autonomous agents. arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.13854, 2023.
Martin Zinkevich, Michael Johanson, Michael Bowling, and Carmelo Piccione. Regret minimization
 in games with incomplete information. Advances in neural information processing systems, 20,
 2007.


                                                14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A     R ESISTANCE : AVALON G AME D ESCRIPTION


Figure 8: The three phases per round of Resistance game. Good players are shown in blue, while
Evil players in red. In Selection Phase, the team leader (player 5 in this round) proposes a team
(player 1 and 5, himself). In Voting Phase, all players vote publicly whether to approve this team
or not. If the strict majority votes yes, the team is approved and moves on to the mission phase.
Otherwise, redo the Selection Phase with the next player as leader. If the team goes on the Mission
Phase, selected team members (player 1 and 5) anonymously vote to pass or fail the mission. If at
least one person (player 1, as he is the evil player) votes fail, the mission fails. Otherwise, it succeeds.

We describe the game in more detail here. There are four phases in the game where players need to
make decisions: (1) team selection phase, (2) voting phase, (3) quest phase, and (4) assassination
phase. The game alternates between the first three phases until the end condition is reached, at which
point we move on to the assassination phase. Each phase also contains discussion where players can
challenge others, defend themselves, and negotiate. A flowchart of the game is presented in Figure
10, and an Avalon Rule Prompt is included in Section A.4.

A.1    ROLES

There are four basic roles in Resistance Avalon: Servant of Arthur, Minion of Mordred, Merlin, and
Assassin. The Servant is a basic good character who does not know the identity of any of the other
players. The Minion is a base evil character who knows who is good and evil but does not know the
specific roles of each player. Merlin is a unique good character who knows who is good and evil.
The Assassin is a unique evil character who knows who is good and evil, and in addition, has the
ability to assassinate a character at the end of the game. If that character is Merlin, the evil team
wins.
Good players will always outnumber evil players. Hence, evil players must pretend to be good in
order to be voted in on teams (and thus sabotage missions). S ERVANTs will thus need to sniff out
the evil players through their actions and dialogue. M ERLIN is usually the only good player with
additional information, so they will need to discreetly guide the S ERVANTs in the right direction.
Servants also need to protect M ERLIN, so a common strategy is for S ERVANTs to pretend to have
hidden information so that evil players will think that they are M ERLIN. Evil players will be trying to
sniff out M ERLIN at the same time, so deduction skills are required for all roles.

A.2    ACTIONS FOR EACH P HASE

Depending on the phase team selection, voting, quest, and assassination, players may conduct
different actions. We detail the specific actions that players can take in each of these phases below.
During the team selection phase, only the current leader has to make a choice. Leadership passes
around the players sequentially in a loop. The action space of team selection for the leader consists of
all subsets of the players with size equal to the mission team size. The mission team size is different


                                                    15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 9: Communication Skills required to play Avalon. 1) First, they use logical reasoning
to analyze the voting pattern and dialogue of other players and deduce their motives. 2) they must
coordinate, communicate, and persuade their teammates to follow a particular strategy. 3) they must
also hide their identity and motives through deception.

                    Team Selection                           5th
                        Phase          Team
                                      Members
                                                            (Last)           Yes                                              Evil wins!
                       (Leader)                            Round?
                                                                               Quest
                                                                                                 3 Quests
                                                                               Phase               Fail
                                                              No
                                                                          (Team Members)
                                                                                                                               Correctly
                                           Voting                                                                           Identifies Merlin
 Game      Switch          Majority                                   Majority                                                                          Game
                           Rejected        Phase                     Approved          Outcome
 Start     Leader                                                                                                                                        End
                                        (All Players)
                                                                                                 3 Quests
                                                                                                 Succeed    Assassination   Fails to Identify   Good
                                                                                                               Phase             Merlin
                                                < 3 Success/Fail                                                                                wins!
                                                                                                             (Assassin)


Figure 10: Flowchart illustrating the various game states and transition diagram. Round boxes
indicate game states (phases) where the player (role highlighted in bracket) has to make decisions


for each mission and is determined by the total number of players in the game. For example, in a
5-player game, on mission No.4, the mission team size is 3, so any subset of {1, 2, 3, 4, 5} with size
3 would be a valid action. After the team proposal is determined by the leader, we move on to the
voting phase with the selected players.
During the voting phase, every player in the game needs to simultaneously vote either A PPROVE
(1) or R EJECT (0). Votes are publicly revealed to all players, so players can see what other players
voted. If a strict majority votes APPROVE (1), we then move on to the quest phase with the team
that was approved. Otherwise, we move back to the selection phase. Note that if four teams have
been rejected in a row, and this is the fifth time a team is proposed (for the same mission), we skip
the voting and move directly to the quest phase. This prevents the game from dragging on forever.
During the quest phase, each selected player on the approved team votes anonymously to either PASS
(1) or FAIL (0) the mission. The number of votes of PASS vs FAIL are then revealed to everybody. If
the number of FAILs is greater than or equal to the number of FAILs required for the mission to fail
(usually 1), then this mission is marked as a failure. Otherwise, this mission is marked as a success.
Hence, good players usually have no incentive to fail missions, while evil players will want to have
enough failures to pass the failure threshold. If three out of five missions fail, evil wins immediately.
Otherwise, if three out of five missions succeed, we move on to the assassination phase.

A.3      D ISCUSSION

Group discussion occurs between the quest and selection phases, as well as right before the as-
sassination phase. Players may not communicate during any other time. All conversations are
public, and there is no private communication. Typically players may discuss in any format of their
choosing as long as only one person is speaking at a time. Some examples of formats include a


                                                                                 16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


natural (spontaneous) seminar style (most common, where there is no fixed order of speaking), or
sequentially (where players speak in some predefined order). Interruptions and arguments between
two players are very common between human players.
Usually, players will spend this time discussing a couple of key topics, including (1) the observations
they made, (2) the guessed identities and sides of players, and (3) the plan for the next mission.
The team leader will usually spend this time asking for advice on what team to select and gathering
support for that team. Persuasion and adhering to the preferences of other players are usually key to
getting a team approved. Players can also accuse other players of being evil, though arguments will
need to be justified in order to be persuasive.
For example, a player (player 3) could start off by stating their (1) observations of what happened in
the previous mission. One FAIL was observed, so at least one player on the previous team (consisting
of players (1,2,3)) is evil. Player 3 then emphasizes that both Players 1 and 2 voted A PPROVE for
the previous mission, which ended up a failure. Moreover, the team was proposed by Player 1 in
the first place. Player 3 then moves on to discuss the (2) identities of other players. The player
says that, despite the fact that only one FAIL was observed, both Players 1 and 2 are evil since they
both voted to A PPROVE previously. Player 0 is probably good since they voted to R EJECT in the
previous mission, and Player 3 is also good since they also voted to R EJECT, even though they were
on the mission. Player 3 then says what they think the (3) plan should be. Specifically, Player 3 says
that they should reject the current team no matter what since Player 2 is the leader and is evil. The
leadership will then pass to Player 3, who will choose the team (0, 3, 4), which good players should
vote to approve since it does not contain any suspected evil players1 .


A.4    G AME E NDING AND A SSASSINATION


In classic R ESISTANCE, a good team wins immediately if three missions are successful. In R ESIS -
TANCE AVALON , there is an additional assassination phase if three missions are successful. During
the assassination phase, the A SSASSIN player chooses one player to assassinate. If that player is
M ERLIN, then evil wins. Otherwise good wins.
Before they assassinate a player, the A SSASSIN player can and is encouraged to discuss with the
other players (mostly their teammates). good players are also welcome to join in on this discussion
to mislead the evil players, though it rarely helps. Players can discuss in a format of their choosing,
though there is usually a time limit on how long players can discuss before reaching a decision.


   1
     At this point, Player 2 reveals that they are the assassin and assassinates Player 3, who is indeed M ERLIN.
Player 3’s intuition and analysis were way too correct to be a S ERVANT


                                                      17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


   Avalon rules prompt

   The game you are interested in is called The Resistance: Avalon. The Resistance: Avalon is
   the game of hidden identities and social deduction. There are two teams in the game: Good
   and Evil. Each player has a hidden identity (role) and side.

   There are five Quests in the game and five turns, one for each quest. Good players aim to help
   three Quests succeed, while Evil players aim to fail three Quests. Different quests require
   different numbers of players to participate.

   At the beginning of the game, each player is assigned a role secretly and randomly. Private
   information is then revealed to each player. A random player is selected as the leader for the
   first round.

   Each round, after a round of discussion, the leader will select a team of players to participate
   in the Quest. Then, all players will vote on whether to approve or reject the team publicly. If
   the team is approved (a strict majority vote to approve), the Quest will be carried out. If the
   team is not approved, the next player becomes the leader and the next round will start. If four
   teams are rejected in a row, the fifth team will automatically be approved.

   If the team is approved, each team member chooses to pass or fail the Quest anonymously.
   Usually, if there is at least one failed vote, the Quest fails. Otherwise, the Quest succeeds. In
   either case, we move on to the next turn and the next quest.

   Below are the roles in the game:
   Servant of Arthur (Servant): A Good player who does not know who is on the Evil side. The
   Servant’s job is to make sure that the three Quests succeed.
   Minion of Mordred (Minion): An Evil player who knows who is on the Evil side. Minion’s
   job is to fail three Quests without being identified by the Good players.
   Merlin: A Good player who knows who is on the Evil side. Merlin’s job is to make sure that
   the three Quests succeed without revealing themself to Evil.
   Assassin: An Evil player who knows who is on the Evil side. Assassin’s job is to assassinate
   Merlin if the Evil players can identify who Merlin is. If the Assassin successfully assassinates
   Merlin, the Evil players win the game immediately, even if three quests succeed.
   Hence, Evil players usually know who is on the Evil side, but Good players usually do not
   know who is on the Evil side.

   Players may make any claims during the game, at any point in the game. Discussion,
   deception, accusation, persuasion, and logical deduction are all equally important in order for
   Good to prevail or Evil to rule the day. Hence, players should rarely reveal their true identity
   to other players. Players will, can, and should lie to achieve their goals.


                                                 18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


B    G AME OF P URE S TRATEGY (GOPS) G AME D ESCRIPTION
Game of Pure Strategy (GOPS) is a card game for two or more players with a standard deck of card,
which is commonly used as an example of multi-stage move game in artificial intelligence (Wikipedia
contributors (2023)). In our experiments we play 5 or 6 card GOPS. Specifically, the score cards are
{1, 2, ....n} and each player starts with a hand of cards {1, 2, ....n} where n is the number of cards
and rounds. The GOPS rules prompt is included in this section below.
    GOPS rules prompt

    The game you want to write a function for is GOPS (game of pure strategy), also known as
    Goofspiel. The game has two players, and is played with a deck of score cards. Each player
    is dealt the same hand of cards at the beginning. The goal of the game is to get a score higher
    than your opponent. At the beginning of each round, a score card is randomly drawn without
    replacement from the score deck. Then each player plays a card simultaneously from their
    hand. The player who plays the higher card wins the round and gets the score card. They
    add the score of the score card to their total score. If the two cards played are the same, the
    person who wins the next round will get both score cards. The game continues until all score
    cards have been played. The player with the highest total score wins the game.


                                                  19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


C    L IMITATIONS
While our method performs better on average, individual runs can have high variance. Since the
performance of an agent in multi-agent adversarial game settings is highly dependent on opponents’
policies, feedback from these environments tend to be highly noisy, with noise increasing with the
number of players. This is especially true when learning Avalon heuristics, where the performance
depends on the policies of 5 other players, teammates and opponents. We believe that running more
game simulations with different opponent policies can help reduce this feedback noise. We also
acknowledge the inherent noisiness in LLM generations and how that can impact our results. We
tried to reduce this noise by (1) using the same seed functions when benchmarking the different LLM
improvement methods and (2) collecting generated strategies from multiple runs. We also did not test
our method on other non-adversarial environments such as question answering and text-based worlds.
However, given the strong performance of our method in adversarial multi-agent settings, we believe
that similar performance will be observed in single agent, non-adversarial settings.


                                                20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 11: Overview of our high-level strategy improvement method: The process alternates
between two steps—idea generation and strategy improvement.



D     I MPROVEMENT P ROCESS I MPLEMENTATION D ETAILS

Our method alternates between two main steps: idea generation and strategy implementation, as
illustrated in Figure 11. These steps are structured around the optimization of strategies stored in a
hierarchical tree structure T . Below, we detail the key components of our implementation.


D.1   S TRATEGY T REE AND I DEA Q UEUE

The strategy tree T maintains all discovered strategies, their associated feedback (τs ), and priority
scores (zs ), which determine their likelihood of being selected for further refinement. Complementing
this is the idea queue Q, a priority-based queue that stores candidate ideas generated during the
improvement process. Each idea d ∈ Q is initialized with a prior score zd = 0.0 and a usage count
nd = 0.


                                                 21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Algorithm 1: S TRATEGIST Pseudocode
Data : T : strategy tree storing strategy s, feedback (τs ), and priority score (zs ), Q: idea queue, ‘seed
      functions’, Nideas : number of ideas, Nstrategies : number of strategies, Nevolutions : number of
      evolutions, Nf eedback_examples : number of states of give as feedback,
Function select_strategy(T ):
   σbest ← arg softmaxzσ // one possible implementation where you take one
             σ∈T2
         of the best two strategies in the whole tree randomly (BFS2)
   return sbest
Function select_idea(Q, σ):
   dbest ← softargmaxd∈Q U CB(zd , nd ) // one possible implementation where you
         take the best strategy in the queue using softmax UCB, zd being
         the empirical q-value and nd being the number of tries
   return σbest
Function select_key_states(τσ ):
   Kσ ← arg maxk (SearchEstimate(s) − vσ (s))2 // one possible way to select key
            s∈τ
        states for σ that is a value heuristic vσ
   return Kσ
Function generate_ideas(Nideas ):
   σ ← select_strategy(T );
   Kσ ← select_key_states (τσ ) // Kσ is a set of key states from the
        trajectory feedback τσ for strategy σ
   Dnew ideas ← LLM(Generate Nideas new ideas based on string description of Kσ , which includes the
    output of the strategy, action taken, state description, final outcome of the trajectory, search estimate of
    the state, and any intermediate values used to compute the output of the strategy);
   for d ∈ Dnew ideas do
        Store d in Q with prior score zd = 0.0 and nd = 0;
   end
Function implement_strategies(Nstrategies ):
   Σnew , D, P = [], {}, {} // list of new generated strategies, dictionary
        mapping new generated strategy to the idea that generated it,
        and dictionary mapping generated strategies to their parents
   for i ← 1 to Nstrategies do
        σ ← select_strategy(T );
        d ← select_idea(Q, σ);
        σnew ← LLM(Improve σ using d);
       Σnew .append(σnew );
        D[σnew ] = d;
        P [σnew ] = σ;
   end
   W, T ← SelfplaySimulate(Σnew ∪ unique(P.values)) // simulate games, getting
        average winrates W [σ] for each strategy σ and simulated
        trajectory feedback T [σ]
   for σ ∈ Σnew do
        T.add(σ, P [σ], D[σ]) // add new strategy to tree from parent based on
             idea
        zσ ← W [σ] // add function score
                    n
        zD[σ] ← n D[σ]+1 zD[σ] + n 1 +1 (W [σ] − W [P [σ]]) // update idea score with
                    D[σ]              D[σ]
             how much it improved the strategy by
    end
repeat
    generate_ideas(Nideas );
    implement_strategies(Nstrategies );
until Nevolutions ;
return Best strategies in T according to their scores zs



D.2    K EY F UNCTIONS

Selecting Strategies (SelectStrategy) To identify promising strategies for refinement, we
use a softmax over the priority scores zs stored in T . One implementation chooses between the two
highest-priority strategies in a breadth-first search order.


                                                        22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Selecting Ideas (SelectIdea) Ideas are selected from Q using an Upper Confidence Bound
(UCB) approach. Each idea’s selection balances its empirical improvement potential (zd ) with its
exploration term nd , ensuring both promising and underexplored ideas are considered.

Selecting Key States (SelectKeyStates) Key states Kσ for a given strategy σ are selected
based on a heuristic that emphasizes discrepancies between a search-based estimate and the strategy’s
value function vσ . These states highlight areas where the strategy can be improved.

D.3   I DEA G ENERATION

During the idea generation step, the algorithm:

      1. Selects a strategy σ from T using SelectStrategy.
      2. Extracts key states Kσ from the trajectory feedback τσ using SelectKeyStates.
      3. Uses a language model (LLM) to propose Nideas new ideas based on the string description
         of Kσ . This description includes the strategy’s actions, state details, trajectory outcomes,
         search estimates, and intermediate values.
      4. Adds the generated ideas to Q with default priority and usage counts.

D.4   S TRATEGY I MPLEMENTATION

In the strategy implementation step, the algorithm:

      1. Selects a strategy σ from T and an idea d from Q using SelectStrategy and
         SelectIdea.
      2. Refines σ using d, producing a new strategy σnew .
      3. Simulates self-play games for σnew and related strategies to evaluate performance (win rates
         W [σ]) and collect trajectory feedback (T [σ]).
      4. Updates the strategy tree T with σnew , linking it to its parent strategy and the idea that
         inspired it.
      5. Updates the priority scores zσ for strategies and zd for ideas based on the observed improve-
         ments.

D.5   I TERATIVE E VOLUTION

The improvement process repeats for Nevolutions iterations. In each iteration, new ideas and strategies
are generated and evaluated, incrementally building a tree of optimized strategies.

D.6   S CALABILITY AND E FFICIENCY

Our method leverages efficient UCB-based selection and hierarchical feedback propagation to scale to
large T and Q. By iteratively refining strategies through targeted improvements, it ensures continuous
enhancement while maintaining computational feasibility.


                                                  23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 12: Left: Example performance of value heuristics strategy tree for GOPS. Points indicate the
final evaluation scores and the generation of improved functions, with lines showing the evolutionary
path between functions. Our method successfully escapes local maxima and continues exploring the
strategy space. These scores reflect final gameplay results against a fixed set of opponents, differing
from the intermediate self-play scores used to guide strategy improvements. Right: Comparison of
different improvement methods on 6-card GOPS, where 9 functions generated by each method play
against one another over 1024 total games.


E     AVALON AGENT I MPLEMENTATION D ETAILS

We describe in detail how we implement our model below and as shown in figure 13. Unless otherwise
specified, the word ‘action’ will refer to non-dialogue actions. Note that we do not conduct search
over raw dialogue space since that is not very computationally feasible. Instead, we search over
intended actions and condition our dialogue on that.
Specifically, the language component consists of a dialogue analyzer and a dialogue generator, while
the moves component consist of the action planner. Whenever the agent needs to speak, they first
analyze what was said so far in the current discussion round using the dialogue analyzer. The dialogue
analyzer, with the help of an LLM, updates the internal beliefs of the agent. For example, in Avalon,
internal beliefs might include the probability that the agent assigns to each other player of being
Evil and of being Merlin. These beliefs are then passed to the action planner, which uses them to
figure out the best next move, i.e. the action intent. The action intent is then passed to the dialogue
generator, which generates dialogue with the help of an LLM. When the agent needs to take a move,
we run through the same process except that the agent takes the action intent as the move and no
dialogue is generated.

E.1   D IALOGUE A NALYZER (D ISCRIMINATOR )

The dialogue analyzer fana takes as input I information set (partial information) of the current
state for the player, dt the discussion so far this round, and b some prior beliefs about the hidden
state of the game, and returns b  b, the updated beliefs, and Π b t , the predicted joint action policy of
the all the players (i.e. the action intent) for the next action step t. Recall that simultaneous games
can be expanded as partial information games, where the simultaneous moves are treated as hidden
information. Hence, we are essentially predicting a distribution over the hidden states s given the
information set I using the dialogue analyzer.

                                        b, Π
                                        b  b t = fana (I, dt , b)

In the context of Avalon, I will contain information such as (1) the dialogue this round so far (2)
summary of the dialogue from previous rounds (3) mission track record (4) historical record of
actions taken by players in previous rounds, and (5) private information of the player such as who is
Good and Evil. b will contain information on (1) the probability of each player being Evil and (2)


                                                   24
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 13: Overview of the LLM-powered agent, including the three main modules that we use to
generate dialogue during discussion


the probability of each player being Merlin, both conditioned on the private information contained
in I. While a full treatment of the distribution over the hidden state space S we require assigning
probabilities to each possible combination of Good and Evil players, not just assessing the marginal
probability of each player being Good individually, in practice
We implement fana using an LLM, which is fed I, d, b (converted to natural language form) as
prompts, along with some instruction prompt ϕana that prompts it to produce b
                                                                            b, Π
                                                                               b t . Specifically,


                                 fana (I, dt , b) = fLLM (ϕdis , I, d, b)

We show examples of such prompts in Appendix J.

E.2   ACTION P LANNER

Given bb the belief prior, Πb t the predicted joint action policy for all players, and s the representation
of the current state, the action generation model fact generates a probability distribution over possible
actions π i for the main player i that is the best response to Πb t . We do so by using search techniques
to look ahead and find the best response.

                                          π i = fact (b
                                                      b, Π
                                                         b t , I)

More specifically, in our search implementation, at the first layer, we first sample across possible
hidden states s ∼ b b according to the belief prior. At the second layer (i.e. the first action stage
t), we calculate expected q-values for each action a ∈ A that the main player can take if the other
players play actions a ∼ Π   b t according to the predicted joint distribution. In subsequent action
stages, the search process will assume that other players play according to their policy simulated and
induced by the value heuristic that is not dialogue dependent. We then take the best response action
a∗i = max(π i ) as the intended action. Since this is a partial information game, expected q-values are
taken across information sets, not states. We describe how our action planner is implemented in more
detail in Appendix F.


                                                    25
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


E.3   D IALOGUE G ENERATION

The dialogue generator fgen takes as input I some representation of the current information set and
a∗i , the intended best response action, and outputs dialogue d.
                                           d = fgen (I, a∗i )
We will implement fgen using an LLM, which is fed I and a∗i directly as prompts, along with some
instruction prompt ϕgen that prompts it to produce realistic sounding dialogue that helps it achieve its
intended action.
For example, perhaps the player wants to approve the next team. Then it should try to generated
dialogue that convinces the other players to also approve.
We show examples of such prompts in Appendix J.


                                                  26
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


F    VALUE H EURISTIC I MPLEMENTATION D ETAILS


Figure 14: Overview of how we utilize the trained value heuristics in MCTS tree search to get
a non-dialogue based policy. While we only display the values for a single player in the diagram,
note that in practice we infer and update the values for all players at the same time. Next states
are sampled using the PUCT formula we described. We sample an initial hidden state based on
the internal beliefs of the agent. Metropolis-Hastings is used to sample since it may be difficult to
calculate the probability density specified by the internal beliefs. Note that values estimated using
MCTS are also passed as feedback to the evaluator.

The MCTS search process is depicted in Figure 14, where we simulate a trajectory from the hidden
state we are at until we reach some unexpanded state s. The probability of transitioning to a
state during simulations is computed assuming that each player samples from their optimal actions
according to their PUCT (polynomial upper confidence trees) values (and ϕe for the environment
actor) (Schrittwieser et al., 2020). Since in some environments players may only be able to observe
information sets, when computing the PUCT values we average over all expanded states in that
information set. Moreover, the initial hidden state can be sampled according to a prior (or empirical
prior) over the states in the information set that the player observed. Then, using our value heuristic,
we compute the values of each of the next hidden states. We then backpropogate our new values back
up the simulated trajectory, updating the intermediate states. After running a few MCTS simulations
(roll-outs) like the one we described, the planner then outputs the action which leads to the highest
value next state. We show our information set PUCT formula below, where N (s, a) is the number
of times we took action a at state s during MCTS rollouts, P (s, a) is the prior prior probability of
selecting action a from state s, C is the exploration constant, Qemp is the empirical average of MCTS
roll-out outcomes, Q(s,
                     b a) is the prior computed by our value heuristic, α controls how much weight
be put on the prior (often α = 1), and πB is the distribution across hidden states in the information
set given our beliefs B, someP    parametrization of πB . Since πB is often hard to compute, we can
                                N (s,b)
simply set πB (s|I) = P ′ bP N (s′ ,b) to be the empirical roll-out distribution, given that we sample
                           s ∈I   b
initial states s0 ∼ πB (s0 |I) according to our beliefs. For example, in Avalon, we can sample the
hidden roles according to our beliefs B using Metropolis-Hastings for the initial state s0 .
                        N (s, a) · Qemp (s, a) + α · Q(s,
                                                     b a)
               Q(s, a) =                                                                            (1)
                                    N (s, a) + α
                                          "                        pP             #
                                                                       b N (s, b)
                            X
               PUCT(I, a) =      πB (s|I) Q(s, a) + C · P (s, a) ·                                  (2)
                                                                   1 + N (s, a)
                               s∈I


                                                  27
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


G    D IALOGUE G UIDE I MPROVEMENT E VALUATION I MPLEMENTATION
     D ETAILS
We provide more details on our dialogue improvement evaluation process here and as shown in figure
15. The improvement method (skill coach) remains the same as we described before.
We first generate a synthetic dataset by simulating a game of Avalon with initial dialogue and move
policies ϕ. Given the dialogue guide σ we want to evaluate, we then sample ‘scenarios’ from the
dataset. A scenario consists of a game state, intended action, and private information in the simulated
trajectory. We create an Avalon agent like the one we described in E for each player in the game,
initialized with their corresponding private information. The Avalon agent is then asked to generate
dialogue using the dialogue guide σ.
Using this new generated dialogue, we then simulate the next round of dialogue analysis for each
Avalon agent. This produces analysis scores based on how likely they think the player is to be Merlin
zmerlin , and how likely they think the player is to be Evil zevil , where zmerlin , zevil ∈ [−2, 2]. For
evaluating Merlin, we get the average zmerlin scores from the Evil players, z merlin , along with
the average zevil scores from the Good players z evil . We then take the minimum of these two as
the feedback score z = min{z evil , z merlin }. This is because Merlin wants to both minimize the
probability of being detected by the Evil players, and also minimize the probability of being identified
as Evil by the Good players.


Figure 15: Overview of our improvement process for learning dialogue generation strategies.
This includes how we evaluate the dialogue and how we collect feedback. The skill coach here can
be implemented as either our improvement method, S TRATEGIST, or any of the baseline methods we
described.

The dialogue analyzer (discriminator) is described in more detail in Appendix E and the specific
generation and analysis prompts are shown in Appendix J.


                                                   28
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


H     VALUE H EURISTIC LLM P ROMPT AND O UTPUT E XAMPLES


H.1    S YSTEM P ROMPTS


System prompt are guidelines for LLM to generate outputs align with the intended goals. In our case,
the goal is to generate a function that evaluates the value of a state in a game under low cost.


    Value heuristic system prompt

    You are a function engineer trying to write a function that can evaluate the value of a state in a
    game. This is known as a value heuristic, and will be used in look-ahead search algorithms to
    evaluate the value of unexplored states. Your goal is to develop a heuristic that is as accurate
    as possible without being too expensive to compute. Hence, you are not allowed to runs
    simulations in the function.


The following example is a detailed prompt telling the LLM how to format the value heuristics
specifically in the GOPS game. The format of input and output are clearly defined in the prompt with
illustrations, examples and structures.


                                                   29
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


   GOPS value heuristics function signature

   The function (written in python) should be named ‘evaluate state’ and take in a tuple called
   ‘state’ of the game state as input. Specifically, the input tuple will be of length 9, and it should
    return 2 elements. The first element should be a tuple with 2 floats: the first element being
    the score you expect player 0 will get at the end of the game, and the second element being
    the score you expect player 1 will get at the end of the game. The second element should be a
    dictionary of any important intermediate values that you used to calculate the scores. For
    example, if you think player 0 will win 12 total points by the end of the game and player 1
   will win 8 total points, the function should return (12, 8).

   Make sure your output only includes the code of the function itself in plain text such that it is
   executable using exec() in python. Any helper functions should be defined within the scope
   of the function ‘evaluate state’. Include comments in your code so that it is readable, but
   everything should be implemented.

   The signature of the function should be as follows:
   def evaluate_state(state) -> tuple[tuple[float, float], dict]:
       score_cards = state[0] # a python list of the score cards (integers) that have been played, in the
             order they were played
       player_0_played_cards = state[1] # a python list of the cards (integers) player 0 has played, in the
              order they were played.
       player_1_played_cards = state[2] # a python list of the cards (integers) player 1 has played, in the
              order they were played.
       is_turn = state[3] # bool, true if it is you and your opponent’s turn to play, false if it is time
             to draw a new score card
       player_0_score = state[4] # float or integer, player 0’s score so far
       player_1_score = state[5] # float or integer, player 1’s score so far
       score_deck = state[6] # a python set of the score cards (integers) left in the deck, either same
             length as player_0_hand and player_1_hand or one less since the score card appears before the
             players play. May be empty
       player_0_hand = state[7] # a python set of the cards (integers) left in player 0’s hand. May be
             empty
       player_1_hand = state[8] # a python set of the cards (integers) left in player 1’s hand. May be
             empty
       # explanation of what we do next
       ...
       <intermediate_value1> = value1
       # explanation of what we do next
       ...
       <intermediate_value2> = value2
       # explanation of what we do next
       ...
       player_scores = (player_0_expected_score, player_1_expected_score)
       intermediate_values = {’<intermediate_value1>’: intermediate_value1, ’<intermediate_value2>’:
             intermediate_value2, ...}
       return player_scores, intermediate_values # make sure the return is exactly in this format

   Where you can use your own names for the intermediate values and the values themselves.
   Please start with "def evaluate state(state):"


H.2   I DEA G ENERATION E XAMPLES


The idea generation prompt included system prompt, game rules, previous guide and feedback
reflections. Following those four components, we construct the format and an example of ideas to
guide the generation of LLM.


                                                     30
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


   Prompt for idea generation

   <System prompt>
   <Game rules>
   <Previous guide>
   <Feedback reflections>

   Based on the function, feedback, and conclusions you drew, what are 2 improvements that
   you can make to the function that you think will have the most impact? Be as specific and
   concrete as possible, and write them out in the following format:

          • Thoughts: <your thoughts here>
          • Idea 1: <your idea here>
          • Idea 2: <your idea here>
   ...
   Here’s an example of what this might look like for 3 improvement ideas:
          • Thoughts: I should consider the number of cards left in the deck when evaluating
            the value of a state.
          • Idea 1: I should add a term to the value function that penalizes states where there
            are fewer cards left in the deck.
          • Idea 2: I should add a term to the value function that rewards states where the player
            has more cards in their hand than the opponent.
          • Idea 3: I should add a term to the value function that rewards states where the player
            has more cards in their hand than the opponent and there are fewer cards left in the
            deck.


Below is an instance of Feedback of GOPS game, showing the setup of two players, the intermediate
values involved in the computation, and the actual scores.


                                                 31
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


   Feedback example

   Example 9:

   The state you were trying to estimate a value for is:

   The current state of the game is as follows:
          • The score cards that have been revealed are: (2, 4, 5, 1, 3)
          • The cards that player 0 has played are: (1, 2, 4, 3, 5)
          • The cards that player 1 has played are: (3, 5, 1, 2, 4)
          • Player 0’s score so far is: 9
          • Player 1’s score so far is: 6
          • The score cards left in the deck are: set()
          • The cards left in player 0’s hand are: set()
          • The cards left in player 1’s hand are: set()
   The function you generated returned the following values:

   {0: 3, 1: -3}

   for the expected end of game scores of the players.

   Some intermediate values that you used to calculate the scores were:

   {’player_0_expected_score’:         9,    ’player_1_expected_score’:        6,     ’dy-
   namic_penalty’: 0.0, ’player_0_hand_reward’: 0, ’player_1_hand_reward’: 0,
   ’player_0_adjustment’: 0, ’player_1_adjustment’: 0, ’player_0_strategic_adjustment’: 0,
   ’player_1_strategic_adjustment’: 0}

   The estimated end of game scores of the players using lookahead search with your function
   was:

   {0: 0.0, 1: 0.0}

   The actual scores of the players at the end of the game in the simulation were:

   {0: 3.0, 1: -3.0}


Recall that feedback reflection refers to feedback for strategy, which is used to generate ideas.
For prompting, We specify that game rules, previous guide and feedback examples are generated
previously. The following is the prompt for feedback reflections.


                                                  32
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


   Prompt for feedback reflections

   <System prompt>
   <Game rules>
   Previously you generated the following function to evaluate the value of a state in the game.
   <Previous guide>
   Below is some feedback on how the function you generated performed when we tested it.
   Note that simulations involve high variance and the actual scores may not match the expected
   scores exactly. Hence, you should focus on trying to get the scores produced by your function
   to match those predicted by look-ahead search as closely as possible.
   <Feedback examples>
   Based on the feedback given and the function you generated previously, what are some
   conclusions you can draw from the feedback? Make sure to cite the specific examples in the
   feedback to justify your analysis.



Below is the feedback reflections from the LLM.



   Feedback reflections
   From the feedback provided, we can draw several conclusions regarding the performance of
   the function in evaluating the value of a state in the GOPS game:

   1. Discrepancy in Expected Scores: In several examples (e.g., Example 4, Example 7,
   Example 8), the expected end-of-game scores returned by the function do not match the
   scores predicted by look-ahead search closely. This indicates that the function may not be
   accurately estimating the value of the states in the game.

   2. Inconsistencies in Strategic Adjustments: The function includes a strategic adjustment
   based on the opponent’s played cards, but in all cases, the strategic adjustments are zero.
   This suggests that the strategic adjustments made in the function may not be capturing the
   true strategic implications of the opponent’s moves effectively.

   3. Dynamic Penalty Adjustment: The function includes a dynamic penalty adjustment
   based on the remaining high-value score cards in the deck. However, the dynamic penalty
   adjustments may not be accurately reflecting the impact of high-value score cards left in the
   deck on the game outcome.

   4. Limited Hand Size Reward: The function rewards states where a player has more cards
   in their hand than the opponent. While this reward is included, it might not be capturing the
   full strategic implications of having more cards in hand effectively.

   5. Simulation vs. Expected Scores: The actual scores at the end of the game in the
   simulations do not match the expected scores returned by the function precisely. This
   indicates that the function’s evaluation may not be aligning well with the actual game
   outcomes.

   In conclusion, the function may need further refinement in terms of capturing strategic
   adjustments, dynamic penalties, and hand size rewards to improve the accuracy of the state
   evaluation in the GOPS game. Additionally, considering the discrepancies between the
   expected and actual scores, further testing and adjustments may be necessary to enhance the
   function’s performance in evaluating the value of states accurately.



Also, with the prompts of idea generation, below is the generated new ideas by LLM.


                                                33
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


   Generated new ideas
   Thoughts: The function needs to better capture the strategic implications of the opponent’s
   moves and adjust the expected scores accordingly. Additionally, the dynamic penalty
   adjustment and hand size rewards could be improved to better reflect their impact on the
   game outcome.

   Idea 1: Enhance the strategic adjustment component of the function by analyzing the
   opponent’s played cards more deeply. This could involve considering patterns in the
   opponent’s moves, potential card combinations, and predicting future moves based on past
   actions.

   Idea 2: Revise the dynamic penalty adjustment to more accurately reflect the impact of
   high-value score cards left in the deck. This could involve adjusting the penalty dynamically
   based on the remaining high-value cards and their likelihood of being drawn in future rounds.
   This adjustment could help in better assessing the risk associated with certain states in the
   game.


H.3     S TRATEGY I MPLEMENTATION E XAMPLES


During the strategy implementation step, we first select a strategy and an idea from the libraries
using the adaptive selection policy. Then, we prompt the LLM to implement the idea on the strategy,
generating a new improved strategy.
In this section, we showcase two examples. Each example illustrates strategies before and after
enhancements made by the LLM. This comparison highlights the effectiveness of our strategy
implementation. The improved parts by LLM are highlighted in yellow.
Below is the prompt for strategy implementation.


   Prompt for implementation

   <System prompt>
   <Game rules>
   Previously you generated the following function to evaluate the value of a state in the game:
   <Previous guide>
   Here is a possible way to improve this function:
   <Improvement ideas>


H.3.1    E XAMPLE 1


Below is the GOPS Value Heuristics Function before the strategy improvement.


                                                34
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


   GOPS Value Heuristics Function (Before)

   def evaluate_state(state) -> tuple[tuple[float, float], dict]:
       score_cards = state[0]
       player_0_played_cards = state[1]
       player_1_played_cards = state[2]
       is_turn = state[3]
       player_0_score = state[4]
       player_1_score = state[5]
       score_deck = state[6]
       player_0_hand = state[7]
       player_1_hand = state[8]

       # Calculate the potential scores for each player based on the remaining score cards
       player_potential_score = player_0_score
       opponent_potential_score = player_1_score

       if len(score_deck) > 0:
           remaining_score_cards = len(score_deck)
           if len(player_0_played_cards) > len(player_1_played_cards):
               player_potential_score += remaining_score_cards / 2
           elif len(player_1_played_cards) > len(player_0_played_cards):
               opponent_potential_score += remaining_score_cards / 2

       player_advantage = player_potential_score - opponent_potential_score

       return (player_potential_score, opponent_potential_score), {’player_advantage’: player_advantage}


Below is the selected idea to improve the above strategy.


   Selected GOPS Value Heuristics Improvement Idea

   Update the function to calculate the advantage of winning future rounds based on the potential
   scores each player could achieve with the remaining score cards and their current scores. This
   would involve considering the number of cards left in the deck, the players’ hands, and the
   current scores to determine the advantage one player may have over the other in the upcoming
   rounds.


Below is the GOPS Value Heuristics Function after enhancement by LLM. The improved parts by
LLM are highlighted in yellow.


                                                     35
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


   GOPS Value Heuristics Function (After)

   def evaluate_state(state) -> tuple[tuple[float, float], dict]:
       score_cards = state[0]
       player_0_played_cards = state[1]
       player_1_played_cards = state[2]
       is_turn = state[3]
       player_0_score = state[4]
       player_1_score = state[5]
       score_deck = state[6]
       player_0_hand = state[7]
       player_1_hand = state[8]

        # Calculate the potential scores for each player based on the remaining score cards
        # and current scores
        player_potential_score = player_0_score + sum(score_deck) / 2
        opponent_potential_score = player_1_score + sum(score_deck) / 2

        # Determine the advantage of winning future rounds based on potential score
        if is_turn:
           player_potential_scores = [player_potential_score + card for card in player_0_hand]
           opponent_potential_scores = [opponent_potential_score + card for card in player_1_hand]


           player_advantage = sum(player_potential_scores) / len(player_potential_scores)
            - sum(opponent_potential_scores) / len(opponent_potential_scores)
        else:
           player_advantage = player_potential_score - opponent_potential_score

        return (player_potential_score, opponent_potential_score), {’player_advantage’: player_advantage}


H.3.2    E XAMPLE 2


Below is the Avalon Value Heuristics Function before improvements.


                                                      36
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


   Avalon Value Heuristics Function (Before)


   def evaluate_state(state):
       num_successful_quests = sum(historical_quest_results)
       num_failed_quests = len(historical_quest_results) - num_successful_quests
       num_remaining_quests = len(num_participants_per_quest) - len(historical_quest_results)

       num_evil = len(players) - num_good
       num_evil_in_quest_team = len([player for player in quest_team if not is_good[player]])

       success_probability = 0.5
       if phase == 0:
           if num_successful_quests >= 3:
               success_probability = 0.9
           elif num_failed_quests >= 3:
               success_probability = 0.1
       elif phase == 1:
           success_probability = 0.8 if num_evil_in_quest_team == 0 else 0.2
       elif phase == 2:
           success_probability = 0.9 if num_successful_quests > num_failed_quests else 0.1
       elif phase == 3:
           if ’Merlin’ in roles and ’Assassin’ in roles:
               merlin_index = roles.index(’Merlin’)
               assassin_index = roles.index(’Assassin’)
               if assassin_index in quest_team:
                   success_probability = 0.1
               else:
                   success_probability = 0.9

       expected_winrates_per_player = dict()
       for player in players:
           if is_good[player]:
               expected_winrates_per_player[player] = success_probability
           else:
               expected_winrates_per_player[player] = 1 - success_probability

       intermediate_values = {
           ’num_successful_quests’: num_successful_quests,
           ’num_failed_quests’: num_failed_quests,
           ’num_remaining_quests’: num_remaining_quests,
           ’num_evil_in_quest_team’: num_evil_in_quest_team
       }

       return expected_winrates_per_player, intermediate_values


Below is the improvement idea pf Avalon Value Heuristics Function.


   Avalon Value Heuristics Function Improvement Idea

   Incorporate a more nuanced success probability calculation based on the roles of the players
   and the current phase of the game. For example, in phase 1 (team selection), consider
   the balance of Good and Evil players on the quest team and adjust the success probability
   accordingly. This can help better reflect the strategic considerations during team selection.


The following is Avalon Value Heuristics Function after enhancements, highlighted in yellow.


                                                     37
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


   Avalon Value Heuristics Function (After)

   def evaluate_state(state: dict) -> tuple[dict[int, float], dict]:

      prob_good_victory = 0.5 # probability that Good will win

      if phase == 0: # team selection phase
          num_successful_quests = sum(historical_quest_results)
          num_failed_quests = len(historical_quest_results) - num_successful_quests
          num_remaining_quests = len(num_participants_per_quest) - len(historical_quest_results)
          num_evil = len(players) - num_good
          num_evil_in_quest_team = len([player for player in quest_team if not is_good[player]])

          if num_successful_quests >= 3:
              prob_good_victory = 0.9
          elif num_failed_quests >= 3:
              prob_good_victory = 0.1

          intermediate_value1 = {’num_successful_quests’: num_successful_quests, ’num_failed_quests’:
            num_failed_quests,
                                 ’num_remaining_quests’: num_remaining_quests}
          intermediate_value2 = {’num_evil_in_quest_team’: num_evil_in_quest_team}

      elif phase == 1: # team approval phase
          num_evil_in_quest_team = len([player for player in quest_team if not is_good[player]])

          prob_good_victory = 0.8 if num_evil_in_quest_team == 0 else 0.2

          intermediate_value1 = {’num_evil_in_quest_team’: num_evil_in_quest_team}
          intermediate_value2 = {} # Initialize empty dictionary to avoid the error

      elif phase == 2: # quest phase
          num_successful_quests = sum(historical_quest_results)
          num_failed_quests = len(historical_quest_results) - num_successful_quests

          prob_good_victory = 0.9 if num_successful_quests > num_failed_quests else 0.1

          intermediate_value1 = {’num_successful_quests’: num_successful_quests, ’num_failed_quests’:
            num_failed_quests}
          intermediate_value2 = {} # Initialize empty dictionary to avoid the error


      elif phase == 3: # assassination phase
          merlin_index = roles.index(’Merlin’)
          assassin_index = roles.index(’Assassin’)

          if assassin_index in quest_team:
              prob_good_victory = 0.1
          else:
              prob_good_victory = 0.9

      intermediate_value1 = {’merlin_index’: merlin_index, ’assassin_index’: assassin_index}
      intermediate_value2 = {} # Initialize empty dictionary to avoid the error

      expected_winrates_per_player = dict()
      prob_evil_victory = 1 - prob_good_victory
      for player in players:
          if is_good[player]:
              expected_winrates_per_player[player] = prob_good_victory
          else:
              expected_winrates_per_player[player] = prob_evil_victory

      intermediate_values = {’intermediate_value1’: intermediate_value1, ’intermediate_value2’:
            intermediate_value2}

      return expected_winrates_per_player, intermediate_values


                                                     38
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


H.3.3    E XAMPLE 3


Below is the GOPS Value Heuristics Function before the strategy improvement.


   GOPS Value Heuristics Function (Before)

   def evaluate_state(state) -> tuple[tuple[float, float], dict]:
       score_cards = state[0]
       player_0_played_cards = state[1]
       player_1_played_cards = state[2]
       is_turn = state[3]
       player_0_score = state[4]
       player_1_score = state[5]
       score_deck = state[6]
       player_0_hand = state[7]
       player_1_hand = state[8]

        # Calculate initial potentials
        player_0_potential = sum(player_0_hand)
        player_1_potential = sum(player_1_hand)
        score_potential = sum(score_deck)

        # Update player potentials based on remaining cards and score deck
        player_0_potential += sum(card for card in player_0_hand if any(card > score for score in score_deck
              ))
        player_1_potential += sum(card for card in player_1_hand if any(card > score for score in score_deck
              ))

        # Add half of the score potential to the player who has the turn
        if is_turn:
            player_0_potential += score_potential / 2
        else:
            player_1_potential += score_potential / 2

        # Count the number of certain wins for each player
        player_0_certain_wins = sum(card > max(player_1_hand) for card in player_0_hand)
        player_1_certain_wins = sum(card > max(player_0_hand) for card in player_1_hand)

        rounds_left = len(score_deck)

        # Dynamic adjustment based on specific cards played
        player_0_certain_wins_adjust = 0
        player_1_certain_wins_adjust = 0
        for i in range(len(player_0_played_cards)):
            if player_0_played_cards[i] > player_1_played_cards[i]:
                player_0_certain_wins_adjust += 1
            elif player_1_played_cards[i] > player_0_played_cards[i]:
                player_1_certain_wins_adjust += 1

        player_0_certain_wins += player_0_certain_wins_adjust
        player_1_certain_wins += player_1_certain_wins_adjust

        # Add potential scores from certain wins
        if rounds_left <= player_0_certain_wins:
            highest_scores = sorted(score_deck)[-rounds_left:]
            player_0_potential += sum(highest_scores)

        if rounds_left <= player_1_certain_wins:
            highest_scores = sorted(score_deck)[-rounds_left:]
            player_1_potential += sum(highest_scores)


                                                      39
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


       # Calculate expected scores
       player_0_expected_score = player_0_score + player_0_potential
       player_1_expected_score = player_1_score + player_1_potential

       # Calculate the difference in the sum of played cards
       sum_player_0_played_cards = sum(player_0_played_cards)
       sum_player_1_played_cards = sum(player_1_played_cards)
       sum_played_cards_diff = sum_player_0_played_cards - sum_player_1_played_cards

       # Adjust scores based on the difference in the sum of played cards
       adjustment_factor = 0.1 # Adjust this factor based on the level of adjustment desired
       player_0_expected_score += sum_played_cards_diff * adjustment_factor
       player_1_expected_score -= sum_played_cards_diff * adjustment_factor

       # Dynamic adjustment based on uncertainty in the game state
       uncertainty_factor = 0.1 * rounds_left # Adjust this factor based on the level of uncertainty
             desired
       player_0_expected_score += player_0_potential * uncertainty_factor
       player_1_expected_score += player_1_potential * uncertainty_factor

       # Refine uncertainty factor based on specific conditions
       if len(player_0_hand) == 1:
           uncertainty_factor *= 0.5
       if len(player_1_hand) == 1:
           uncertainty_factor *= 0.5

       # Store intermediate values in a dictionary
       intermediate_values = {
           ’player_0_potential’: player_0_potential,
           ’player_1_potential’: player_1_potential,
           ’score_potential’: score_potential,
           ’player_0_certain_wins’: player_0_certain_wins,
           ’player_1_certain_wins’: player_1_certain_wins,
           ’player_0_certain_wins_adjust’: player_0_certain_wins_adjust,
           ’player_1_certain_wins_adjust’: player_1_certain_wins_adjust,
           ’sum_played_cards_diff’: sum_played_cards_diff,
           ’uncertainty_factor’: uncertainty_factor
       }

       return (player_0_expected_score, player_1_expected_score), intermediate_values


Below is the selected idea to improve the above strategy.


   Selected GOPS Value Heuristics Improvement Idea

   Incorporate a term in the value function that takes into account the distribution of score cards
   left in the deck. Certain score cards may have a higher value or strategic importance, so
   adjusting the potentials based on the presence of these cards can provide a more accurate
   evaluation of the state.


Below is the GOPS Value Heuristics Function after enhancement by LLM. The improved parts by
LLM are highlighted in yellow.


                                                     40
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


   GOPS Value Heuristics Function (After)

   def evaluate_state(state) -> tuple[tuple[float, float], dict]:
       score_cards = state[0]
       player_0_played_cards = state[1]
       player_1_played_cards = state[2]
       is_turn = state[3]
       player_0_score = state[4]
       player_1_score = state[5]
       score_deck = state[6]
       player_0_hand = state[7]
       player_1_hand = state[8]

      # Calculate initial potentials
      player_0_potential = sum(player_0_hand)
      player_1_potential = sum(player_1_hand)
      score_potential = sum(score_deck)

      # Update player potentials based on remaining cards and score deck
      player_0_potential += sum(card for card in player_0_hand if any(card > score for score in score_deck
            ))
      player_1_potential += sum(card for card in player_1_hand if any(card > score for score in score_deck
            ))

      # Add half of the score potential to the player who has the turn
      if is_turn:
          player_0_potential += score_potential / 2
      else:
          player_1_potential += score_potential / 2

      # Count the number of certain wins for each player
      player_0_certain_wins = sum(card > max(player_1_hand) for card in player_0_hand)
      player_1_certain_wins = sum(card > max(player_0_hand) for card in player_1_hand)

      rounds_left = len(score_deck)

      # Dynamic adjustment based on specific cards played
      player_0_certain_wins_adjust = 0
      player_1_certain_wins_adjust = 0
      for i in range(len(player_0_played_cards)):
          if player_0_played_cards[i] > player_1_played_cards[i]:
              player_0_certain_wins_adjust += 1
          elif player_1_played_cards[i] > player_0_played_cards[i]:
              player_1_certain_wins_adjust += 1

      player_0_certain_wins += player_0_certain_wins_adjust
      player_1_certain_wins += player_1_certain_wins_adjust

      # Add potential scores from certain wins
      if rounds_left <= player_0_certain_wins:
          highest_scores = sorted(score_deck)[-rounds_left:]
          player_0_potential += sum(highest_scores)

      if rounds_left <= player_1_certain_wins:
          highest_scores = sorted(score_deck)[-rounds_left:]
          player_1_potential += sum(highest_scores)

        # Incorporate distribution of score cards left in the deck
       important_score_cards = {7, 10, 13} # Example: define important score cards
       player_0_potential += sum(card for card in player_0_hand if card in important_score_cards)
       player_1_potential += sum(card for card in player_1_hand if card in important_score_cards)

      # Calculate expected scores
      player_0_expected_score = player_0_score + player_0_potential
      player_1_expected_score = player_1_score + player_1_potential

      # Calculate the difference in the sum of played cards
      sum_player_0_played_cards = sum(player_0_played_cards)
      sum_player_1_played_cards = sum(player_1_played_cards)
      sum_played_cards_diff = sum_player_0_played_cards - sum_player_1_played_cards


                                                     41
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


        # Adjust scores based on the difference in the sum of played cards
        adjustment_factor = 0.1 # Adjust this factor based on the level of adjustment desired
        player_0_expected_score += sum_played_cards_diff * adjustment_factor
        player_1_expected_score -= sum_played_cards_diff * adjustment_factor

        # Dynamic adjustment based on uncertainty in the game state
        uncertainty_factor = 0.1 * rounds_left # Adjust this factor based on the level of uncertainty
              desired
        player_0_expected_score += player_0_potential * uncertainty_factor
        player_1_expected_score += player_1_potential * uncertainty_factor

        # Refine uncertainty factor based on specific conditions
        if len(player_0_hand) == 1:
            uncertainty_factor *= 0.5
        if len(player_1_hand) == 1:
            uncertainty_factor *= 0.5

        # Store intermediate values in a dictionary
        intermediate_values = {
            ’player_0_potential’: player_0_potential,
            ’player_1_potential’: player_1_potential,
            ’score_potential’: score_potential,
            ’player_0_certain_wins’: player_0_certain_wins,
            ’player_1_certain_wins’: player_1_certain_wins,
            ’player_0_certain_wins_adjust’: player_0_certain_wins_adjust,
            ’player_1_certain_wins_adjust’: player_1_certain_wins_adjust,
            ’sum_played_cards_diff’: sum_played_cards_diff,
            ’uncertainty_factor’: uncertainty_factor
        }

        return (player_0_expected_score, player_1_expected_score), intermediate_values


H.3.4    E XAMPLE 4


Below is the GOPS Value Heuristics Function before the strategy improvement.


                                                      42
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


   GOPS Value Heuristics Function (Before)

   def evaluate_state(state) -> tuple[tuple[float, float], dict]:
       score_cards = state[0]
       player_0_played_cards = state[1]
       player_1_played_cards = state[2]
       is_turn = state[3]
       player_0_score = state[4]
       player_1_score = state[5]
       score_deck = state[6]
       player_0_hand = state[7]
       player_1_hand = state[8]

       # Calculate initial potentials
       player_0_potential = sum(player_0_hand)
       player_1_potential = sum(player_1_hand)
       score_potential = sum(score_deck)

       # Add half of the score potential to the player who has the turn
       if is_turn:
           player_0_potential += score_potential / 2
       else:
           player_1_potential += score_potential / 2

       # Count the number of certain wins for each player
       player_0_certain_wins = sum(card > max(player_1_hand) for card in player_0_hand)
       player_1_certain_wins = sum(card > max(player_0_hand) for card in player_1_hand)

       rounds_left = len(score_deck)

       # Add potential scores from certain wins
       if rounds_left <= player_0_certain_wins:
           highest_scores = sorted(score_deck)[-rounds_left:]
           player_0_potential += sum(highest_scores)

       if rounds_left <= player_1_certain_wins:
           highest_scores = sorted(score_deck)[-rounds_left:]
           player_1_potential += sum(highest_scores)

       # New improvement: Incorporate a probabilistic approach based on the remaining score cards
       player_0_expected_score = player_0_score + player_0_potential
       player_1_expected_score = player_1_score + player_1_potential

       # Dynamic evaluation of opponent’s potential moves
       opponent_potential = sum(player_0_hand) if is_turn else sum(player_1_hand)
       opponent_certain_wins = sum(card > max(player_1_hand) for card in player_0_hand) if is_turn else sum
             (card > max(player_0_hand) for card in player_1_hand)

       # Adjust evaluation based on opponent’s potential plays
       if rounds_left <= opponent_certain_wins:
           highest_scores = sorted(score_deck)[-rounds_left:]
           if is_turn:
               player_1_potential += sum(highest_scores)
           else:
               player_0_potential += sum(highest_scores)

       # Store intermediate values in a dictionary
       intermediate_values = {
           ’player_0_potential’: player_0_potential,
           ’player_1_potential’: player_1_potential,
           ’score_potential’: score_potential,
           ’player_0_certain_wins’: player_0_certain_wins,
           ’player_1_certain_wins’: player_1_certain_wins,
           ’opponent_potential’: opponent_potential,
           ’opponent_certain_wins’: opponent_certain_wins,
           ’player_0_expected_score’: player_0_expected_score,
           ’player_1_expected_score’: player_1_expected_score
       }

       return (player_0_expected_score, player_1_expected_score), intermediate_values


Below is the selected idea to improve the above strategy.


                                                     43
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


   Selected GOPS Value Heuristics Improvement Idea

   Introduce a penalty factor for potential scores that are excessively high, indicating potential
   overestimation. By capping the potential scores or applying a scaling factor based on certain
   thresholds, we can prevent the function from assigning unrealistic values and improve the
   accuracy of the value heuristic.


Below is the GOPS Value Heuristics Function after enhancement by LLM. The improved parts by
LLM are highlighted in yellow.


   GOPS Value Heuristics Function (After)


   def evaluate_state(state) -> tuple[tuple[float, float], dict]:
       score_cards = state[0]
       player_0_played_cards = state[1]
       player_1_played_cards = state[2]
       is_turn = state[3]
       player_0_score = state[4]
       player_1_score = state[5]
       score_deck = state[6]
       player_0_hand = state[7]
       player_1_hand = state[8]

      # Calculate initial potentials
      player_0_potential = sum(player_0_hand)
      player_1_potential = sum(player_1_hand)
      score_potential = sum(score_deck)

      # Add half of the score potential to the player who has the turn
      if is_turn:
          player_0_potential += score_potential / 2
      else:
          player_1_potential += score_potential / 2

      # Count the number of certain wins for each player
      player_0_certain_wins = sum(card > max(player_1_hand) for card in player_0_hand)
      player_1_certain_wins = sum(card > max(player_0_hand) for card in player_1_hand)

      rounds_left = len(score_deck)

      # Add potential scores from certain wins
      if rounds_left <= player_0_certain_wins:
          highest_scores = sorted(score_deck)[-rounds_left:]
          player_0_potential += sum(highest_scores)

      if rounds_left <= player_1_certain_wins:
          highest_scores = sorted(score_deck)[-rounds_left:]
          player_1_potential += sum(highest_scores)


                                                     44
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


      # New improvement: Incorporate a probabilistic approach based on the remaining score cards
      player_0_expected_score = player_0_score + player_0_potential
      player_1_expected_score = player_1_score + player_1_potential

      # Dynamic evaluation of opponent’s potential moves
      opponent_potential = sum(player_0_hand) if is_turn else sum(player_1_hand)
      opponent_certain_wins = sum(card > max(player_1_hand) for card in player_0_hand) if is_turn else sum
            (card > max(player_0_hand) for card in player_1_hand)

      # Adjust evaluation based on opponent’s potential plays
      if rounds_left <= opponent_certain_wins:
          highest_scores = sorted(score_deck)[-rounds_left:]
          if is_turn:
              player_1_potential += sum(highest_scores)
          else:
              player_0_potential += sum(highest_scores)

       # Introduce a penalty factor for excessively high potential scores
       penalty_threshold = 100 # Define a threshold for potential scores to trigger penalty
       penalty_factor = 0.5 # Define a factor by which to reduce potential scores above threshold


       if player_0_potential > penalty_threshold:
          player_0_potential = penalty_threshold + (player_0_potential - penalty_threshold) *
           penalty_factor


       if player_1_potential > penalty_threshold:
          player_1_potential = penalty_threshold + (player_1_potential - penalty_threshold) *
           penalty_factor

      # Store intermediate values in a dictionary
      intermediate_values = {
          ’player_0_potential’: player_0_potential,
          ’player_1_potential’: player_1_potential,
          ’score_potential’: score_potential,
          ’player_0_certain_wins’: player_0_certain_wins,
          ’player_1_certain_wins’: player_1_certain_wins,
          ’opponent_potential’: opponent_potential,
          ’opponent_certain_wins’: opponent_certain_wins,
          ’player_0_expected_score’: player_0_expected_score,
          ’player_1_expected_score’: player_1_expected_score
      }

      return (player_0_expected_score, player_1_expected_score), intermediate_values


                                                    45
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


I     D IALOGUE G UIDE LLM P ROMPT AND O UTPUT E XAMPLES


This sections shows the system prompts of dialogue guidance on LLM and several examples, including
system prompts, idea generation prompts, and strategy implementation examples.


I.1    S YSTEM P ROMPTS


Below is the Dialogue guide system prompt.



      Dialogue guide system prompt

      You are a coach trying to write a section of a strategy guide on how to play a game well.

      The specific section of the strategy guide you are writing right now is on how to play the
      Merlin role effectively during the discussion phase so that they can win the game. Recall that
      players often use the discussion phase to (1) gather information about other players, (2) try to
      convince other players of their innocence or guilt, and (3) try to persuade other players of a
      particular course of action. The game you are interested in is called The Resistance: Avalon.
      The Resistance: Avalon is the game of hidden identities and social deduction. There are two
      teams in the game: Good and Evil. Each player has a hidden identity (role) and side.



Dialogue guide signature follows, specifying the structures and contents dialogues regarding role
playing the Merlin.



      Dialogue guide signature

      Your guide should be in the form of a worksheet that the student can use to build their speech.
      You should order the worksheet questions in a way that makes logical sense, and you should
      have no more than six questions. Your questions should instruct the reader to write parts of
      their speech.

      The title of your section should be “Questions to fill out before speaking as the Merlin role”.
      Below is an example of how your worksheet should look like:

            1. Questions to fill out before speaking as the Merlin role
            2. Q1: Which player seems the most suspicious of you and why?
            3. Q2: For the player that seems the most suspicious of you, produce a statement
               addressing their suspicious.
            4. Q3: Which player is the quest leader?
            5. Q4: Produce a statement addressing the quest leader to convince them to support
               your intended course of action/ desired team.
            6. Q5: Which player is the most supportive of you?
            7. Q6: Produce a statement addressing the supportive player to convince them to
               support your intended course of action/ desired team.



                                                    46
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


      Example Generated Dialogue Strategy Guide for Assassin

            1. Q1: Which player seems to have a deeper understanding of the game flow than
               normal Servants should possess?
            2. Q2: Develop a non-confrontational statement to subtly challenge this player. This
               should cause them to either prove their innocence or reveal more clues about their
               identity.
            3. Q3: Who has been the most influential in the team selection and voting process?
            4. Q4: Devise a statement to express agreement with this player’s viewpoint sub-
               tly. This should make you less suspicious while enabling you to manipulate the
               discussion.
            5. Q5: Which player seems the most supportive of your views and actions in the game?
            6. Q6: Craft a statement subtly emphasizing your alignment with this supportive
               player’s thoughts. This should increase your chances of being included in quest
               teams and reduce suspicion around you.


I.2    I DEA G ENERATION E XAMPLES


The following is the selected dialouge guide speaking as the Merlin role.


      Select dialogue guide

      Questions to fill out before speaking as the Merlin role
            1. Who are the players you suspect are on the Evil side and why?
            2. Draft a subtle statement that casts doubt on these players without directly accusing
               them.
            3. Who is the current round leader and which players are you considering to suggest
               for the team?
            4. Create a subtle suggestion that influences the leader’s team decision towards your
               preferred team without revealing your knowledge.
            5. What are the voting patterns you’ve observed and what do these patterns indicate
               about the players’ identities?
            6. Analyze the voting patterns and team compositions proposed by each player to
               identify potential alliances or suspicious behaviors. Craft a statement to subtly
               address these observations without revealing your role.
            7. Which player seems the most supportive of Good and how can you align with them
               during the discussion phase to better ensure success for your team?


A feedback example is provided for better understanding of dialogue guidance to teach LLM how to
role play Merlin.


                                                   47
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


   Feedback example description

   Example 2:

   The student using your guide was playing as player 0 in this example filled out your guide as
   follows:
         1. Q1: Based on the statements made so far, I suspect Players 2 and 4 are on the Evil
            side. Player 2’s suggestion of a team consisting of Player 1 and Player 2 seems too
            convenient, possibly indicating a desire to control the team composition. Player
            4’s agreement with Player 1 and Player 2 without offering any alternative team
            suggestions raises suspicion as well.
         2. Q2: "I can’t help but wonder if some players are trying to steer the team selection
            process in a particular direction. It’s important for us to carefully consider all
            perspectives and not be swayed by potentially self-serving suggestions."
         3. Q3: The current round leader is Player 1. I would suggest a team consisting of
            Player 0 (Merlin) and Player 1, as this would allow me to closely observe the actions
            of the other players and potentially guide the team towards success.
         4. Q4: "Player 1, I believe that a team comprised of Player 0 and Player 1 would
            provide a strong foundation for success. By working closely together, we can ensure
            that our mission is carried out effectively."
         5. Q5: The voting patterns so far show agreement among Players 1, 2, and 4, indicating
            a potential alliance or shared goals. Player 3’s suggestion of including themselves in
            the team may also indicate a desire to control the outcome of the quest.
         6. Q6: "I’ve noticed a pattern of agreement among certain players in the team selection
            process. It’s important for us to consider all perspectives and not be swayed by
            potentially biased suggestions. Let’s focus on working together as a team to achieve
            our common goal."
         7. Q7: Player 1 seems the most supportive of Good based on their consistent emphasis
            on unity and success for the Quests. I will align with Player 1 during the discussion
            phase to ensure that our team is selected and the quest is completed successfully.
   Then they said the following during the discussion phase:

   "Fellow players, as we embark on this quest, it is crucial that we approach the team selection
   process with caution and consideration. I have noticed a pattern of agreement among certain
   players, which could potentially indicate a desire to steer the outcome in a particular direction.
   It is important for us to carefully consider all perspectives and not be swayed by potentially
   biased suggestions.

   I believe that a team comprised of Player 0 and Player 1 would provide a strong foundation
   for success. By working closely together, we can ensure that our mission is carried out
   effectively. Player 1 has consistently emphasized unity and success for the Quests, making
   them a trustworthy ally in this endeavor.

   Let us focus on working together as a team to achieve our common goal, rather than allowing
   personal agendas to influence our decisions. Let us approach this quest with unity and
   determination, ensuring that Good prevails in the end. Thank you for your attention."


                                                  48
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


    Below is some feedback from the other players on how player 0 performed during the
    discussion phase. Recall that Good players are trying to access which other players are likely
    to be Good, while Evil players are trying to access which Good player is likely to be Merlin.

    Player 3 with role Servant had the following thoughts on this discussion round:

   Thought:
   Player 1’s speech emphasizes unity and success for the Quests, which aligns with the goals of
   Good and decreases the probability of Player 1 being Evil. Player 2’s statement also focuses
   on unity and careful consideration, indicating a commitment to the success of Good and
   decreasing the probability of Player 2 being Evil. Player 3’s response as a Servant of Arthur
   is focused on the success of the Quests and unity, which aligns with the goals of Good and
   decreases the probability of Player 3 being Evil. Player 4’s speech seems overly enthusiastic
   and focused on unity and cooperation, which could be a tactic to divert attention from their
   true identity as an Evil player. This raises suspicion and increases the probability of Player 4
   being Evil.

    Dictionary: {0: (-1, ’decreased slightly’), 1: (-1, ’decreased slightly’), 2: (0, ’stayed the
    same’), 3: (-2, ’decreased significantly’), 4: (2, ’increased significantly’)}

    Player 4 with role Assassin had the following thoughts on this discussion round:

   Thought:
   Player 2 seems to suspect the Evil players (Player 3 and Player 4) without any evidence and
   is trying to steer the conversation towards them. This aligns with the behavior of Merlin,
   who knows the identity of the Evil players and is trying to subtly guide the Good players
   towards the correct decisions. This increases the probability of Player 2 being Merlin. On the
   other hand, Player 3’s speech seems generally clueless and lacks any strategic insight, which
   decreases the probability of Player 3 being Merlin.

    Dictionary: {0: (0, ’stayed the same’), 1: (0, ’stayed the same’), 2: (2, ’increased signifi-
    cantly’), 3: (-2, ’decreased significantly’), 4: (-2, ’decreased significantly’)}


This is the prompt for feedback reflections.


    Prompt for feedback reflections

   <System prompt>
   <Game rules>
   You previously generated the following section of the strategy guide: <Previous guide>
   Below is some feedback on how your guide performed when a student used it to play the
   game:
   <Feedback examples>
   Based on the feedback given and the guide section you generated previously, what are some
   conclusions you can draw from the feedback? Make sure to cite the specific examples in the
   feedback to justify your analysis.


The following are the feedback reflections generated by LLM.


                                                 49
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


   Generated feedback reflections
   In Example 0, Player 0 effectively followed the guide by suspecting certain players of being
   on the Evil side, crafting subtle statements to cast doubt on them, and aligning with players
   supportive of Good. This led to Player 0 being perceived positively by other players, with
   Player 2’s probability of being Merlin decreasing significantly due to their behavior aligning
   more with the Evil side.

   In Example 1, Player 0 again effectively followed the guide by suspecting players, making
   subtle statements, aligning with a supportive player, and emphasizing unity and success in
   their speech. This resulted in Player 0 being perceived positively by other players, with
   Player 4’s probability of being Merlin decreasing significantly due to their lack of strategic
   insight.

   In Example 2, Player 0 successfully identified suspicious behavior in other players, made
   subtle statements, and aligned with a supportive player. This led to Player 0 being perceived
   positively, with Player 2’s probability of being Merlin decreasing significantly due to their
   behavior aligning more with the Evil side.

   In Example 3, Player 0 effectively followed the guide by suspecting players, making subtle
   statements, aligning with a supportive player, and emphasizing unity. This resulted in Player
   0 being perceived positively by other players, with Player 4’s probability of being Merlin
   increasing significantly due to their behavior raising suspicion.
          • Overall, the guide’s emphasis on analyzing player behavior, making subtle state-
            ments, and aligning with supportive players has proven to be successful in helping
            players navigate the discussion phase effectively as the Merlin role in The Resistance:
            Avalon.
          • Players who followed the guide were able to strategically assess the situation, cast
            doubt on potential Evil players, and align with Good players to increase their chances
            of success.


Below is the Prompt for idea generation regarding this dialogue guides


                                                 50
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


      Prompt for idea generation

      <System prompt>
      <Game rules>
      You previously generated the following section of the strategy guide:
      <Previous guide>
      Here is a possible way to improve your guide:
      <Feedback reflections>

      Based on the worksheet, feedback, and conclusions you drew, what are 2 improvements that
      you can make to the worksheet that you think will have the most impact?
      Be as specific and concrete as possible, including what questions to add, edit, or remove, and
      write them out in the following format:
             • Thoughts: <your thoughts here>
             • Idea 1: <your idea here>
             • Idea 2: <your idea here>
             • ...
      Here’s an example of what this might look like for 3 improvement ideas:
             • Thoughts: I should tell the reader to address each player individually in the guide.
             • Idea 1: Add a question asking the reader who they think is most suspicious of them
               and produce a statement addressing their suspicions.
             • Idea 2: Add a question asking the reader to consider which other player is most
               supportive of them and produce a statement addressing their support.
             • Idea 3: Add a question asking the reader produce a statement addressed

Generated new improvement ideas are demonstrated below, showing the improvements made by
LLM following the prompt for idea generation.

      Generated new improvement ideas

      Thoughts: The current worksheet focuses on analyzing player behavior, making subtle
      statements, and aligning with supportive players, which are all crucial strategies for playing
      the Merlin role effectively. To enhance the guide further, we can add questions that prompt
      the player to consider their own actions and statements more explicitly.

            1. Idea 1: Add a question asking the player to reflect on how their proposed team
               composition would benefit the success of the Quest and provide a statement justifying
               their choices.
            2. Idea 2: Add a question asking the player to assess their level of suspicion towards
               each player and craft a statement addressing how they will interact with those players
               during the discussion phase.
            3. Idea 3: Add a question asking the player to consider how they can subtly guide the
               discussion towards a successful Quest.


I.3     S TRATEGY I MPLEMENTATION E XAMPLES

Recall the strategy implementation mentioned in the paper before. Here, we implement strategy
improvements on dialogue guide. The improved dialogue guide is highlighted.

I.3.1     E XAMPLE 1

Below is the dialogue guide before any improvements happened.


                                                    51
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


   Dialogue guide (previous)

   Questions to fill out before speaking as the Merlin role
         1. Who are the players you suspect are on the Evil side and why?
         2. Draft a subtle statement that casts doubt on these players without directly accusing
            them.
         3. Who is the current round leader and which players are you considering to suggest
            for the team?
         4. Create a subtle suggestion that influences the leader’s team decision towards your
            preferred team without revealing your knowledge.
         5. What are the voting patterns you’ve observed and what do these patterns indicate
            about the players’ identities?
         6. Analyze the voting patterns and team compositions proposed by each player to
            identify potential alliances or suspicious behaviors. Craft a statement to subtly
            address these observations without revealing your role.
         7. Which player seems the most supportive of Good and how can you align with them
            during the discussion phase to better ensure success for your team?


Below is the improvement idea prompted into LLM.



   Improvement idea

   Add a question asking the player to assess their level of suspicion towards each player and
   craft a statement addressing how they will interact with those players during the discussion
   phase.


Here, implementation prompty follows to teach LLM how to improve the dialogue guide.



   Implementation prompt

   <System prompt>
   <Game rules>
   You previously generated the following section of the strategy guide:
   <Previous guide>
   Here is a possible way to improve your guide:
   <Improvement idea>
   Implement this improvement into the guide section as best as you can, but do not change the
   original guide too much. Make sure to stay within the scope of the guide section, which we
   reiterate below:
   <Guide signature>


Finally, we have a improved dialogue guide, where the changes are highlighted below comparing to
the previous guide.


                                                52
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


   Dialogue guide (improved)

   Questions to fill out before speaking as the Merlin role
         1. Who are the players you suspect are on the Evil side and why?
         2. Draft a subtle statement that casts doubt on these players without directly accusing
            them.
         3. Who is the current round leader and which players are you considering to suggest
            for the team?
         4. Create a subtle suggestion that influences the leader’s team decision towards your
            preferred team without revealing your knowledge.
         5. What are the voting patterns you’ve observed and what do these patterns indicate
            about the players’ identities?
         6. Analyze the voting patterns and team compositions proposed by each player to
            identify potential alliances or suspicious behaviors. Craft a statement to subtly
            address these observations without revealing your role.
         7. Which player seems the most supportive of Good and how can you align with them
            during the discussion phase to better ensure success for your team?
         8. Assess your level of suspicion towards each player and craft a statement addressing
            how you will interact with those players during the discussion.



I.3.2   E XAMPLE 2

Below is the dialogue guide before any improvements happened.


   Dialogue guide (previous)

   Questions to fill out before speaking as the Merlin role
         1. Who are the players you suspect are on the Evil side and why?
         2. Draft a subtle statement that casts doubt on these players without directly accusing
            them.
         3. Who is the current round leader and which players are you considering to suggest
            for the team?
         4. Create a subtle suggestion that influences the leader’s team decision towards your
            preferred team without revealing your knowledge.
         5. What are the voting patterns you’ve observed and what do these patterns indicate
            about the players’ identities?
         6. Craft a statement to share these observations subtly without giving away your role.


Below is the improvement idea prompted into LLM.


   Improvement idea

   Add a question asking the reader to identify which players they feel most aligned with in
   terms of strategy and decision-making, and how they can subtly align themselves with these
   players during the discussion phase.


Here, implementation prompt follows to teach LLM how to improve the dialogue guide.


                                                53
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


   Implementation prompt

   <System prompt>
   <Game rules>
   You previously generated the following section of the strategy guide:
   <Previous guide>
   Here is a possible way to improve your guide:
   <Improvement idea>
   Implement this improvement into the guide section as best as you can, but do not change the
   original guide too much. Make sure to stay within the scope of the guide section, which we
   reiterate below:
   <Guide signature>


Finally, we have a improved dialogue guide, where the changes are highlighted below comparing to
the previous guide


   Dialogue guide (improved)

   Questions to fill out before speaking as the Merlin role
         1. Who are the players you suspect are on the Evil side and why?
         2. Draft a subtle statement that casts doubt on these players without directly accusing
            them.
         3. Who is the current round leader and which players are you considering to suggest
            for the team?
         4. Create a subtle suggestion that influences the leader’s team decision towards your
            preferred team without revealing your knowledge.
         5. What are the voting patterns you’ve observed and what do these patterns indicate
            about the players’ identities?
         6. Craft a statement to share these observations subtly without giving away your role.
         7. Which player seems the most aligned with your strategic decisions and why?
         8. Produce a statement to subtly align yourself with the player you feel most aligned
            with during the discussion phase.


I.3.3   E XAMPLE 3



Below is the dialogue guide before any improvements happened.


                                                54
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


   Dialogue guide (previous)

   Questions to fill out before speaking as the Merlin role
         1. Who are the players you suspect are on the Evil side and why?
         2. Draft a subtle statement that casts doubt on these players without directly accusing
            them.
         3. Who is the current round leader and which players are you considering to suggest
            for the team?
         4. Create a subtle suggestion that influences the leader’s team decision towards your
            preferred team without revealing your knowledge.
         5. What are the voting patterns you’ve observed and what do these patterns indicate
            about the players’ identities?
         6. Craft a statement to share these observations subtly without giving away your role.
         7. Which player seems the most aligned with your strategic decisions and why?
         8. Produce a statement to subtly align yourself with the player you feel most aligned
            with during the discussion phase.


Below is the improvement idea prompted into LLM.


   Improvement idea

   Add a question asking the reader to analyze the voting patterns and craft a statement subtly
   highlighting any inconsistencies or suspicious trends in the voting behavior of specific players.


Here, implementation prompt follows to teach LLM how to improve the dialogue guide.


   Implementation prompt

   <System prompt>
   <Game rules>
   You previously generated the following section of the strategy guide:
   <Previous guide>
   Here is a possible way to improve your guide:
   <Improvement idea>
   Implement this improvement into the guide section as best as you can, but do not change the
   original guide too much. Make sure to stay within the scope of the guide section, which we
   reiterate below:
   <Guide signature>


Finally, we have a improved dialogue guide, where the changes are highlighted below comparing to
the previous guide


                                                 55
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


   Dialogue guide (improved)

   Questions to fill out before speaking as the Merlin role
         1. Who are the players you suspect are on the Evil side and why?
         2. Draft a subtle statement that casts doubt on these players without directly accusing
            them.
         3. Who is the current round leader and which players are you considering to suggest
            for the team?
         4. Create a subtle suggestion that influences the leader’s team decision towards your
            preferred team without revealing your knowledge.
         5. What are the voting patterns you’ve observed and what do these patterns indicate
            about the players’ identities?
         6. Craft a statement to share these observations subtly without giving away your role.
         7. Which player seems the most aligned with your strategic decisions and why?
         8. Produce a statement to subtly align yourself with the player you feel most aligned
            with during the discussion phase.
         9. Analyze the voting patterns and craft a statement subtly highlighting any inconsis-
            tencies or suspicious trends in the voting behavior of specific players.


                                                56
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


J     D IALOGUE G ENERATION AND A NALYSIS E XAMPLE LLM I NPUTS AND
      O UTPUTS

This sections shows the examples of dialogue generation and analysis, including descriptive prompts,
dialogue generation, and dialogue analysis.


J.1    D ESCRIPTIVE P ROMPTS

Below is the discussion history prompted into LLM for better knowledge of dialogue generation.

      Discussion history

      Here is a summary of previous rounds of discussion so far:
            • Player 1: "Greetings, fellow players. As a Servant of Arthur, my primary goal is to
              ensure the success of our Quests. I am committed to working together with all of you
              to achieve victory for Good. I believe that for this first Quest, a team consisting of
              Player 1 and Player 4 would be a strong choice. I hope for your support in approving
              this team, as I am confident that we can work effectively together to accomplish our
              goal. I encourage everyone to share their thoughts and strategies openly. Let’s work
              together to assess each other’s intentions and make the best decisions for the success
              of our Quest. Remember, the fate of Camelot rests in our hands, and we must be
              vigilant against the forces of Evil."
            • Player 2: "Greetings, noble companions. I echo Player 1’s sentiment in working
              together for the success of our Quests. I believe it is essential to carefully consider
              our team choices to ensure victory for Good. I suggest that for this first Quest, a
              team consisting of Player 1 and Player 2 would provide a strong foundation for
              success. Together, we can overcome any challenges that come our way. Let us unite
              in our efforts and show our unwavering dedication to the cause. I urge all players to
              carefully evaluate each team proposal and remember that unity is key to thwarting
              the forces of Evil."
            • Player 3: "Greetings, noble companions. I echo the sentiments shared by Player 1
              and Player 2 regarding our shared goal of ensuring the success of our Quests. Unity
              and cooperation will be key in our endeavors to protect Camelot from the forces of
              Evil. As we deliberate on the composition of our team for this first Quest, I would
              like to offer a perspective that considers the balance and strength of our choices. A
              team comprised of Player 1 and Player 3 would bring together a diverse set of skills
              and viewpoints that can greatly contribute to our success. By including Player 3 in
              the team, we can ensure a comprehensive approach to overcoming any challenges
              that may arise. Let us work together in harmony, leveraging our individual strengths
              for the greater good of Camelot. I urge my fellow players to consider this team
              proposal thoughtfully, as I believe it holds great promise for the success of our
              Quest."
            • Player 4: "Greetings, honorable players. I appreciate the dedication and commitment
              displayed by Player 1, Player 2, and Player 3 towards our common goal of ensuring
              the success of this Quest. Unity and cooperation are indeed vital in our quest to
              safeguard Camelot. I believe that the proposed team of Player 1 and Player 2 presents
              a strong foundation for success. Their combined skills and perspectives can greatly
              benefit our mission, and I urge all players to consider this team thoughtfully for the
              betterment of our cause. Let us unite our strengths and work together seamlessly
              to overcome any challenges that may arise. By standing united, we can ensure the
              triumph of Good over the forces of Evil. I urge all players to support the team of
              Player 1 and Player 2 for the success of this Quest."


State description shows LLM which state it will be for role playing and dialogue generation.


                                                   57
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


      State description

      You are Player 0, with identity Merlin. You are on the side of Good. The Evil players are
      Players 2 and 4. Please do not forget your identity throughout the game.

      The current state of the game is as follows:
             • The number of players in the game is: 5
             • This is the quest number 0 which requires 2 players and 1 fails to fail
             • This is the 0 round of discussion
             • The previous results for the quest were () (True for Success, False for Fail)
             • The current phase of the game is the team selection phase
             • The current leader is player 1
      You would like the following team to be approved: [0, 1]


J.2    D IALOGUE GENERATION

Below is the prompt for filling out worksheet. Filling out this worksheet assists LLM generated better
dialogue aligned with the role, Merlin as in the example.


      Prompt for filling out worksheet

      <System prompt>
      <Game rules>
      <Discussion history>
      <State description>

      Given the discussion history, current state, and your intended action, answer the above
      worksheet to the best of your ability. The answers should be based on the information you
      have and your own reasoning.

      Six questions to fill out before speaking as the Merlin role

      Q1: Who are the players you suspect are on the Evil side and why?

      Q2: Draft a subtle statement that casts doubt on these players without directly accusing them.

      Q3: Who is the current round leader and which players are you considering to suggest for the
      team?

      Q4: Create a subtle suggestion that influences the leader’s team decision towards your
      preferred team without revealing your knowledge.

      Q5: What are the voting patterns you’ve observed and what do these patterns indicate about
      the players’ identities?

      Q6: Craft a statement to share these observations subtly without giving away your role.


The worksheet filled out by LLM follows, demonstrating the LLM capability and the effectiveness of
prompting.


                                                     58
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


   LLM filled out worksheet
   Q1: I suspect Players 2 and 4 are on the Evil side because they both proposed the same team
   composition of Player 1 and Player 2, which seems too coordinated and potentially trying to
   exclude other players from the team.

   Q2: "I’ve noticed a strong push for the same team composition from certain players, which
   may raise questions about their motivations and potential alliances within the group."

   Q3: The current round leader is Player 1. I would suggest Player 0 and Player 1 for the team,
   as I believe this composition would provide a strong foundation for success and help me
   subtly guide the decision towards my preferred team.

   Q4: "Player 1, I have a feeling that selecting Player 0 and Player 1 for the team could bring a
   diverse set of skills and viewpoints that may greatly contribute to our success. Let’s consider
   all options carefully for the betterment of our cause."

   Q5: The voting patterns have shown a strong push for the team composition proposed by
   Players 1 and 2, indicating potential coordination or alignment between these players. Player
   3’s suggestion of including themselves in the team also raises suspicions of wanting to secure
   a spot on the quest.

   Q6: "I’ve noticed a pattern in the team composition suggestions and voting behaviors that
   may reveal certain alliances or motivations within the group. It’s important for us to carefully
   evaluate all options and consider the implications for the success of our quest."

Below is the prompt for speech generation. Worksheet completion assists LLM to understand the
states and role. The following prompt asks LLM to assemble responses to the questionaire filled out
above.

   Prompt for speech generation

   <System prompt>
   <Filled out worksheet>

   Assemble your responses to the questionaire you just answered into a speech that would help
   you achieve your intent. Note that dialogue will be seen by all players in the game, so you
   should not reveal your identity.

   Your speech:

Finally we have LLM generated speech after the preparations.

   LLM generated speech

   I’ve noticed a strong push for the same team composition from certain players, which may
   raise questions about their motivations and potential alliances within the group. The voting
   patterns have shown a strong push for the team composition proposed by Players 1 and 2,
   indicating potential coordination or alignment between these players. Player 3’s suggestion
   of including themselves in the team also raises suspicions of wanting to secure a spot on the
   quest. It’s important for us to carefully evaluate all options and consider the implications for
   the success of our quest. Let’s consider all options carefully for the betterment of our cause. I
   have a feeling that selecting Player 0 and Player 1 for the team could bring a diverse set of
   skills and viewpoints that may greatly contribute to our success. As the current round leader,
   Player 1, I would suggest Player 0 and Player 1 for the team, as I believe this composition
   would provide a strong foundation for success and help me subtly guide the decision towards
   my preferred team. Thank you for considering my input.


                                                  59
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


J.3     D IALOGUE A NALYSIS

After dialogue generation, we continue have LLM assume the role of Merlin, and dialogue analysis is
conducted.
Below is the prompt for dialogue analysis regarding to the role of Merlin. A thought is included to
guide LLM analyze.


      Prompt for dialogue analysis: Merlin

      <System prompt>
      <Game rules>
      <Discussion history>
      <State description>

      Based on the discussions this round, for each player in players 0, 1, 2, 3, 4, do you think the
      probability of the player being Merlin (2) increased significantly (1) increased slightly (0)
      stayed the same (-1) decreased slightly or (-2) decreased significantly and why? Begin with
      your reasoning and end with a dictionary of player to your multiple choice answer, i.e. {0: (2,
      ’increased significantly’), ..., 4: (0, ’stayed the same’)}. Make sure you include quotes around
      the dictionary values that are strings.

      Here’s an example:

      Thought:
      Player 2 seems to suspect the Evil players (Player 3 and Player 4) without any evidence and
      is trying to steer the conversation towards them. This aligns with the behavior of Merlin,
      who knows the identity of the Evil players and is trying to subtly guide the Good players
      towards the correct decisions. This increases the probability of Player 2 being Merlin. On the
      other hand, Player 4’s speech seems generally clueless and lacks any strategic insight, which
      decreases the probability of Player 4 being Merlin.

      Dictionary:
      {0: (0, ’stayed the same’), 1: (0, ’stayed the same’), 2: (2, ’increased significantly’), 3: (-2,
      ’decreased significantly’), 4: (0, ’stayed the same’)}


Generated dialogue analysis follows. The role is Merlin.


      LLM generated dialogue analysis: Merlin

      Thought:
      Player 2 is actively participating in the discussion and proposing team compositions, which is
      a behavior that could align with the role of Merlin, who knows the Evil players and wants to
      guide the Good players towards success. This increases the probability of Player 2 being
      Merlin. Player 4, on the other hand, seems to be going along with the proposed teams without
      much strategic insight, which decreases the probability of Player 4 being Merlin.

      Dictionary:
      {0: (0, ’stayed the same’), 1: (0, ’stayed the same’), 2: (2, ’increased significantly’), 3: (0,
      ’stayed the same’), 4: (-2, ’decreased significantly’)}


Under dialouge analysis, besides focusing on one specific role, we also have LLM target on good and
evil in the game, which is broader in terms of role playing. Below is the prompt for dialogue analysis
regarding to Good and Evil.


                                                     60
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


   Prompt for dialogue analysis: Good and Evil

   <System prompt>
   <Game rules>
   <Discussion history>
   <State description>

   Based on the discussions this round, for each player in players 0, 1, 2, 3, 4, do you think
   the probability of the player being Evil (2) increased significantly (1) increased slightly (0)
   stayed the same (-1) decreased slightly or (-2) decreased significantly and why? Begin with
   your reasoning and end with a dictionary of player to your multiple choice answer, i.e. {0: (2,
   ’increased significantly’), ..., 4: (0, ’stayed the same’)}. Make sure you include quotes around
   the dictionary values that are strings.

   Here’s an example:

   Thought: Player 4’s speech seems overly enthusiastic and focused on unity and cooperation,
   which could be a tactic to divert attention from their true identity as an Evil player. This
   raises suspicion and increases the probability of Player 4 being Evil. On the other hand,
   Player 3’s response as a Servant of Arthur is more focused on the success of the Quests and
   unity, which aligns with the goals of Good and decreases the probability of Player 3 being Evil.

   Dictionary: {0: (0, ’stayed the same’), 1: (0, ’stayed the same’), 2: (2, ’increased signifi-
   cantly’), 3: (-2, ’decreased significantly’), 4: (0, ’stayed the same’)}

Below is the dialogue analysis generated by LLM on Good and Evil.
   LLM generated dialogue analysis: Good and Evil

   Thought:
   Player 1’s speech is aligned with the goals of Good and focuses on ensuring the success
   of the Quests, which decreases the probability of Player 1 being Evil. Player 2’s speech
   also emphasizes unity and cooperation, which is in line with the goals of Good and
   decreases the probability of Player 2 being Evil. Player 3’s response suggests including
   themselves in the team, which may raise suspicions of wanting to secure a spot on the
   quest, potentially increasing the probability of Player 3 being Evil. Player 4’s speech seems
   overly enthusiastic and focused on unity and cooperation, which could be a tactic to divert
   attention from their true identity as an Evil player, increasing the probability of Player 4
   being Evil. Player 0’s speech suggests a different team composition that may bring a di-
   verse set of skills and viewpoints, potentially decreasing the probability of Player 0 being Evil.

   Dictionary:
   {0: (-1, ’decreased slightly’), 1: (-1, ’decreased slightly’), 2: (1, ’increased slightly’), 3: (1,
   ’increased slightly’), 4: (2, ’increased significantly’)}


                                                   61
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


K    OTHER A BLATION S TUDIES
K.0.1   BASE LLM M ODEL
We show the performance of different base models in Figure 16.


Figure 16: Game play performance of base LLM models on six card GOPS: GPT3.5 and GPT4.0.
We see that the two language models perform similarly with our method.


K.0.2   S EARCH B UDGET
How does the effectiveness of the search+LLM agent scale with regards to the search budget? Does
having a larger search process help achieve better performance?

Table 7: Average score difference for MCTS (num_rollout=32) + LLMFunction (Player1, top-3 func-
tions shown in the table) vs. MCTS (num_rollout=32) + RandomRollout (Player2, num_rollout=10);
100 games for each experiment;

                         Best Func.          2nd Best Func.       3rd Best Func.
            budget
                     Player 1 Player 2     Player 1 Player 2     Player 1 Player 2
              16       -0.91      0.91       -0.7       0.7       -0.88      0.88
              32       -0.95      0.95       0.44      -0.44      -0.73      0.73
              64       -1.14      1.14       1.15      -1.15       0.46      -0.46
             128       -1.28      1.28      0.36       -0.36      0.25       -0.25
             256       -0.45      0.45      -0.85      0.85       -0.42      0.42
             inf        -1.5       1.5      -2.26       2.26      -1.03       1.03


                                               62
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                     (a) Avalon                                            (b) GOPS

Figure 17: The training curves of the value heuristic via reinforcement learning in five-player Avalon
and five-card GOPS, averaged across five independent runs. The solid lines show the mean and the
shaded areas depict the standard deviation.


L    D ETAILS ON L EARNING THE VALUE H EURISTIC VIA R EINFORCEMENT
     L EARNING
We employ Monte-Carlo based RL approach (Sutton & Barto (2018)) to train a value heuristic for
both five-player Avalon and five-card GOPS games. To do so, we construct a MSE loss in each
episode for training the value function, i.e.,
                                       N X
                                       X T                                 2
                              argmin              Vθi (st ) − Scorei (st )
                                  θ     i   t=0

where N represents the number of actors, Vθi (st ), i = 1, 2, · · · , N denotes the value function for
each actor, and T is the time horizon. Notice that st and Scorei (st ) denote the state at time step t
                                                               PT
and the corresponding cumulative reward for each actor, i.e., t Ri (st , at ). It is worth pointing that
Scorei (st ) (the cumulative reward starting from st ) is the unbiased estimate of the value function
Vθi (st ).
For both Avalon and GOPS games, the value function Vθi (st ) is predicted by a neural network. We
then train the value function network by minimizing the aforementioned loss function over episodes.
In Avalon, we consider 20 evolutions (epochs) for the training process. At the end of each evolution,
30 batch runs (episodes) are generated and used to train the value function network, i.e., a total of
600 episodes for training. In GOPS, we train by 20 evolutions as well while considering 60 batch
runs each (1200 episodes in total). We evaluate the final performance over 10 episodes in both games.
The neural network is constructed by a multilayer perceptron (MLP) with 2 hidden layers. We select
a hidden layer size of 128 ∗ 128 for Avalon and that of 64 ∗ 64 for GOPS. Likewise, the chosen
learning rates are 5e − 4 and 8e − 4, respectively. The value function is expected to predict the score
for each player in the game, e.g., two for GOPS and number of players for Avalon. All experimental
hyper-parameters are summarized in Table 8.
Having introduced the set up, one can observe in Figure 17 an increased performance of RL-trained
value heuristic in both five-player Avalon and five-card GOPS games. This validates the improvement
for training value heuristic via reinforcement learning within limited evolutions.


                                                   63
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                     Table 8: Summary of experimental hyper-parameters
                     in RL-training value heuristic

                              Parameters              Avalon       GOPS
                        Type of neural network         MLP         MLP
                       Number of hidden layers           2           2
                           Hidden layer size         128*128       64*64
                             Learning rate             5e-4        8e-4
                           Output dimension         # of players    2
                         Number of evolutions           20          20
                         Number of batch runs           30          60
                      Number of final batch runs        10          10


M    E XPERIMENTAL C OMPUTE R ESOURCES
All experiments in this work were performed on a workstation with an NVIDIA GeForce RTX 3070
GPU, Intel Core i9-10900 CPU at 2.80 GHz, and a Macbook Pro.


                                               64
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


N    I MPROVEMENT METHOD BASELINES
Line search is a straightforward iterative process that continuously builds upon the most recent
improved strategy. In each iteration, a strategy is generated and evaluated based on feedback from
the environment. The feedback is then used to enhance the strategy via the LLM, and this cycle is
repeated—similar to the Reflexion framework (Madaan et al., 2024). The essence of line search lies
in its focus on immediate feedback, where only the latest strategy is considered for improvement,
ensuring that progress is always aligned with the most recent understanding of the problem space.
Greedy search takes a more competitive approach by selecting the best-performing strategy from
the last generation to serve as the foundation for the next cycle of improvements. During each cycle,
the best strategy is used to generate n variations, each an attempt at improvement. These variations
are evaluated, and feedback from the environment is gathered to determine the best candidate for
the subsequent cycle. This method is inspired by the Eureka framework (Ma et al., 2023), where
LLMs are leveraged to iteratively refine reward functions in a manner akin to evolutionary algorithms,
focusing on a winner-takes-all selection mechanism.
Best-first search generalizes the improvement process by considering the top k strategies at each
iteration, as opposed to focusing on a single best option. This is reminiscent of beam search but with
a flexible branching factor that allows for the generation of multiple strategies from each selected
candidate. By expanding multiple promising pathways simultaneously, the search can escape local
optima and explore a broader solution space. This approach is related to the Tree of Thought
method (Yao et al., 2024), which similarly employs a branching mechanism to explore various
strategies in parallel during self-improvement cycles.
Best-first search with thought enhances best-first search by incorporating a reasoning layer into
the improvement process. Before generating new strategies, the LLM is prompted to first refine the
underlying “thoughts” or decision-making processes that led to the generation of the top k strategies,
including possible improvement ideas, before generating a new strategy. This meta-cognitive step
draws from the React framework (Yao et al., 2022b), which emphasizes reasoning and actions during
strategy development, adding an introspective element that encourages deeper exploration of strategy
refinements.
S TRATEGIST introduces an additional layer of guidance through the use of an idea queue, Q. In
this approach, ideas are generated and stored in Q, providing a reservoir of potential directions for
improvement. The LLM uses these ideas to steer the strategy enhancement process, enabling more
structured exploration. By separating idea generation from strategy improvement, S TRATEGIST
facilitates a more focused and deliberate search, ensuring that each iteration explores both immediate
refinements and novel directions.
All methods were run with the same computational budget—i.e., each method was allowed to
generate the same number of improved strategies—ensuring a fair comparison across approaches in
our experiments.
We display a scaling curve for the various improvement methods in Figure 18.


                                                 65
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 18: Number of output tokens from LLM vs game-play performance of generated value
heuristics for 6-card GOPS. Each method was run 20 times at different token budgets, and the best
function generated by each method was benchmarked against a baseline opponent policy.


O    H UMAN E VALUATION D ETAILS
We recruited ten experienced graduate students to participate in a study involving a total of forty
games of Resistance: Avalon with six players per game. Each human participant was randomly
assigned a character, while the remaining five characters were controlled by S TRATEGIST agents. The
characters used in the games were as follows: Merlin, three Servants of Arthur, Minion of Mordred,
and Assassin.
Participants completed surveys both before and after the games. In the pre-game survey, participants
rated their familiarity and skill level with Resistance: Avalon on a scale of 1 to 6. The results,
summarized in Figures 19 and 20, indicate that participants were generally familiar with the game’s
rules and displayed strong skill levels.


              Figure 19: Familiarity of human participants with Resistance: Avalon.

The study consisted of two experimental setups. Participants played one game of Avalon with
dialogue against the S TRATEGIST agents, which lasted approximately 30-40 minutes. They also
played three games of Avalon without dialogue, each lasting about 10 minutes.


                                                66
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                Figure 20: Skill Level of human participants in Resistance: Avalon.


After completing the games, participants rated the S TRATEGIST agents on seven key metrics (Figure
4) using a scale from 1 to 6. Additionally, the experimenter independently evaluated the human
participants on the same metrics to ensure consistency. Participants were also asked to select a single
word that best described the S TRATEGIST agents from the following options: logical, deceptive,
emotional, aggressive, cautious. Similarly, the experimenter selected a word to describe each human
participant’s playstyle. The results of these qualitative assessments are summarized in Figure 5.


                                                  67
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


P    R ELATED W ORKS D ETAILS
In this section, we provide an in-depth discussion of related works that were briefly mentioned in the
main paper:

       • ICL-AIL (Fu et al., 2023) includes textual feedback and descriptions of previous self-play
         experiences as few-shot prompts to improve the negotiation abilities of the LLM-agent.
         The framework iteratively improves negotiation strategies by incorporating AI-generated
         feedback and historical dialogues.
       • SPAG (Cheng et al., 2024) employs reinforcement learning to train an LLM-agent for the
         game Adversarial Taboo. The agent learns reasoning and adversarial strategy improvements
         through self-play, resulting in enhanced performance across various reasoning benchmarks.
       • Agent-Pro (Zhang et al., 2024) updates textual memories (prior experiences) and tex-
         tual beliefs about itself and the environment through reflection as it plays Blackjack and
         Texas Hold’em. The agent’s policy optimization enhances its decision-making capabilities,
         outperforming baseline models.
       • LARLWorf (Xu et al., 2023b) integrates reinforcement learning to optimize the action
         distribution suggested by the LLM. This approach addresses the biases in the LLM’s
         suggestions and results in superior strategic play in the social deduction game Werewolf.
       • ComWorf (Xu et al., 2023a) creates an LLM-agent that reflects on past experiences to
         improve its performance in the game Werewolf. The framework uses retrieval and reflection
         on prior interactions without requiring additional parameter tuning.
       • EnReaWolf (Wu et al., 2024) leverages a dataset of human games to fine-tune an LLM-
         agent for the Werewolf game. This fine-tuning improves both reasoning and communication
         capabilities, allowing the agent to surpass standard LLM performance.


                                                 68
