Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


C OMPOSING U NBALANCED F LOWS FOR
F LEXIBLE D OCKING AND R ELAXATION
 Gabriele Corso ∗                         Vignesh Ram Somnath ∗                          Noah Getz ∗
 MIT                                      ETH Zurich                                     MIT

 Regina Barzilay                      Tommi Jaakkola                    Andreas Krause
 MIT                                  MIT                               ETH Zurich



                                              A BSTRACT

            Diffusion models have emerged as a successful approach for molecular docking,
            but they often cannot model protein flexibility or generate nonphysical poses. We
            argue that both these challenges can be tackled by framing the problem as a trans-
            port between distributions. Still, existing paradigms lack the flexibility to define
            effective maps between such complex distributions. To address this limitation, we
            propose Unbalanced Flow Matching, a generalization of Flow Matching (FM) that
            allows trading off sample efficiency with approximation accuracy and enables more
            accurate transport. Empirically, we apply Unbalanced FM on flexible docking
            and structure relaxation, demonstrating our ability to model protein flexibility and
            generate energetically favorable poses1 . On the PDBBind docking benchmark,
            our method F LEX D OCK improves the docking performance while increasing the
            proportion of energetically favorable poses from 30% to 73%.


1       I NTRODUCTION

The mechanism of action of most drug molecules is often rationalized by studying how the molecule
binds to one or more key proteins. Computationally, predicting the structure of these binding
interactions constitutes the molecular docking task. Over the past decades, significant progress has
been made in molecular docking, initially through classical search techniques and more recently
with deep learning models. However, these methods primarily focus on rigid docking, assuming the
protein has a fixed structure.
Proteins however are flexible entities and often undergo conformational changes during docking.
Computational methods for understanding flexibility fall into two categories: co-folding and flexible
docking. Co-folding involves predicting the bound structure of the protein and the ligand from
scratch as a single task. Flexible docking, instead, aims at only modeling the limited structural
transformation between unbound and bound protein structures, a formulation that allows for more
efficient, interpretable, and controllable methods.
However, existing flexible docking methods have so far failed to provide satisfactory levels of
accuracy. Among these, search-based techniques struggle to account for protein degrees of freedom
due to the significantly increased dimensionality of the search space (Koes et al., 2013; McNutt et al.,
2021). Deep learning methods have improved on this by extending diffusion or flow processes to
include the protein flexibility, but these either severely limit the degrees-of-freedoms or implicitly
force the model to learn protein folding entirely, resulting in structure predictions that are frequently
inaccurate (Qiao et al., 2024; Lu et al., 2024). Furthermore, recent works have highlighted the
tendency of ML docking models to generate non-physical structures (Buttenschoen et al., 2024).
Addressing the challenges above requires new techniques for precise transport between the complex
distributions of unbound (apo) and bound (holo) protein structures. Flow matching (FM) (Lipman
et al., 2022; Albergo et al., 2023), in principle, can learn such a transport. However, we show that
    ∗
        Equal contribution. Correspondence to gcorso@csail.mit.edu and vsomnath@inf.ethz.ch.
    1
        Our code and models are available at https://github.com/vsomnath/flexdock.


                                                     1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                          Manifold                                    Structure
                          Docking                                     Relaxation

                       Manifold Unbalanced                         Euclidean Unbalanced
                      Flow Matching: 𝜀 = 4Å                       Flow Matching: 𝜀 = 2Å

                                  apo structures                        predicted structures


                              holo structures                            bound structures



Figure 1: Schematic representation of the F LEX D OCK docking framework formed by the chaining of
two unbalanced flows. The first (details in Section 4.1) is aimed at resolving the approximate pose
by working on longer flows but reduced degrees of freedom, and the second (Section 4.2) aims at
relaxing the generated structure producing high-quality poses.


directly applying flow matching to this task results in complex mappings, a difficult learning task,
and consequently poor performance. To address this, we propose Unbalanced Flow Matching, where
we relax the marginal constraints of FM through a more careful choice of coupling distribution. We
study these choices both formally and empirically, resulting in a higher docking performance. We
further consider composing short unbalanced flows and show that, in the limit, this corresponds to
local likelihood gradient steps towards the desired marginal.
Based on the insights above, we construct a new flexible pocket-based docking method F LEX D OCK
by chaining two separate Unbalanced Flows (see Figure 1). The first, referred to as manifold docking,
is defined on a low dimensional space and aims to predict the approximate ligand pose and protein
structural change. The second, relaxation, is defined on the full Euclidean space but with shorter
maps and aims to provide a fast yet effective relaxation of the structure.
Empirically, we demonstrate that the new modeling perspective of F LEX D OCK enhances structure
prediction quality, especially for protein conformations. On the PDBBind flexible pocket-based dock-
ing benchmark, F LEX D OCK improves the proportion of very accurate protein structure predictions
(all-atom RMSD below 1Å) from 32% of DiffDock-Pocket to 42% while having the same training
data and model architecture. Furthermore, thanks to the relaxation flow, the generated poses are far
more physically realistic, as demonstrated by the proportion of poses passing PoseBusters checks
(Buttenschoen et al., 2024) which increases from 30% to 73%.
In summary, we propose Unbalanced Flow Matching, a new distribution matching framework, and
prove it provides a way to balance sample efficiency and sample quality. Furthermore, by chaining
together new manifold docking and structure relaxation models based on Unbalanced FM, we develop
a flexible docking method that addresses two major limitations of previous docking techniques:
accurate protein flexibility modeling and the generation of energetically favorable poses.

2    BACKGROUND AND R ELATED W ORK
Flow matching. Given two distributions q0 and q1 , Flow Matching (Lipman et al., 2022; Albergo
et al., 2023) provides a way of learning a vector field vt which induces a continuous normalizing flow
ψt (x) that transports q0 to q1 , i.e., q1 (x) = [ψ1 ]# q0 (x), where # denotes the pushforward operator.
The key idea in FM is to define a conditional flow ψt (x0 |x1 ) interpolating between x0 ∼ q0 and
                                                         d
x1 ∼ q1 , and its associated vector field ut (xt |x1 ) = dt ψt (xt |x1 ). One can then learn the marginal
vector field vt (x) with a neural network vt (x; θ), by regressing against the conditional vector field
with the conditional flow matching (CFM) objective:
                                                                                    2
                          LCFM = Et,x0 ∼q0 ,x1 ∼q1 ∥vt (xt ; θ) − ut (xt |x1 )∥                       (1)

FM was further generalized by Pooladian et al. (2023) and Tong et al. (2023) who show that the
CFM objective does not require independent samples from q0 and q1 , but it can use an arbitrary
joint sampling distribution q(x0 , x1 ), the coupling distribution, as long as it satisfies the marginal


                                                    2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


constraints being q0 and q1 respectively. This formulation enables drawing a connection between FM
and optimal transport (OT). When using OT to define the coupling distribution q, the flows become
                                                          2
straight and the transport cost Eq0 (x0 ) ∥ψ1 (x0 ) − x0 ∥ is the OT cost W22 (q0 , q1 ). An extension of
flow matching to the unbalanced setting was first explored in (Eyring et al., 2024), with couplings q
estimated using Unbalanced OT(UOT). In this work, we focus on arbitrary couplings q and provide a
formal and empirical characterization of the associated objectives.

Flexible Docking. Flexible docking assumes access to unbound structures of proteins (known as
apo) and predicts how these will change upon ligand binding (producing holo-structures). Traditional
search-based docking methods define a scoring function and search the space of possible poses,
aiming to find the pose minimizing the scoring function (Alhossary et al., 2015; McNutt et al.,
2021). These methods can in principle incorporate protein flexibility by adding torsion angles of the
sidechains in the pocket to the search space. However, they struggle to find optimal joint poses due to
the increased dimensionality and they are unable to model proteins’ flexibility beyond the sidechains.
Recently, a few deep learning methods for flexible docking have been proposed. D IFF D OCK -P OCKET
(Plainer et al., 2023) and R E -D OCK (Huang et al., 2024) use diffusion and diffusion bridge models
to capture the flexibility in protein pocket sidechains in addition to ligand flexibility, they, however,
once again cannot model proteins’ flexibility beyond sidechain torsion angles. DYNAMIC B IND
(Lu et al., 2024) incorporates backbone flexibility but uses hardcoded noise perturbation rules to
interpolate from apo residue frames to holo residue frames. Somnath et al. (2023) explicitly predicts
the conformational changes between apo and holo states of proteins using Diffusion Schrödinger
Bridges by treating the apo and holo states as paired data.

Structure Relaxation. Even in rigid docking, ML methods, despite improving geometric prediction
accuracy, often produce poses with nonphysical properties like steric clashes and strained bonds
(Buttenschoen et al., 2024). These artifacts can hinder downstream prediction tasks, necessitating
relaxation using molecular dynamics force fields. However, this relaxation process is often long
(Bryant et al., 2024), complicating its use in large-scale screening.

3     U NBALANCED F LOW M ATCHING
The motivation for flexible docking over co-folding is to leverage the unbound distribution of proteins
and focus on modeling the precise effects of ligand binding. Formally, we wish to approximate a flow
ψt (equivalently vector field vt ), whose pushforward transports the distribution over apo-structures q0
to the distribution over holo-structures q1 .
The flexible docking setting presents two challenges that make a direct application of flow matching
for this task ineffective (as we will also demonstrate empirically). First, X-ray crystallography data
are the main source of bound conformations, resulting in the availability of a single sample for
holo-structure for most known complexes. This prevents one from using minibatch-OT based flow
matching methods (Pooladian et al., 2023) and leads to a large expected length of conditional flows.
Second, even if one could construct the optimal transport mapping q between q0 and q1 , the induced
expected cost will likely remain very high. In fact, although the different conformational states of
the protein do not change significantly upon ligand binding, their relative weights are often notably
altered. Training FM in this setting requires the model to move the protein between conformations,
leading to long and complex conditional and marginal flows, and a harder learning task.
We propose the Unbalanced Flow Matching framework to tackle such problems.

3.1    F ORMALIZATION

Let q0 be the input distribution, and q1 a target distribution, defined over a data space X . Unbalanced
Flow Matching (UFM) aims to learn a continuous normalizing flow parameterized with a vector field
vt (xt ; θ) that minimizes the following objective:

                                  h                                      i
                                                                       2
    LUFM (q, θ) = α Et,(x0 ,x1 )∼q ∥vt (xt ; θ) − ut (xt | (x0 , x1 ))∥ + D2 (q0 |qx0 ) + D2 (qx1 |q1 ) (2)
                    |                        {z                          } |            {z           }
                                                                               Mass-variation penalty
                                    Conditional flow matching


                                                         3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                               (a) Flow Matching            (b) Unbalanced FM


                                            𝑞"                           𝑞"


                                                   𝑞!                           𝑞!

Figure 2: Schematic depiction of the difference between FM and Unbalanced FM. The first builds
couplings that maintain the marginal distributions regardless of the difference between the distribu-
tions and the consequent expected transport cost. The second trades off some distributional coverage
to obtain couplings with significantly reduced transport costs.


where q is an arbitrary coupling distribution whose marginals we denote by qx0 and qx1 , and D2 is
the Rényi Divergence of order 2. In Section 3.2, we show that this objective describes a tractable
upper bound to the fundamental approximation vs efficiency trade-off.
Flow matching and its variants choose a coupling distribution q such that marginals are conserved.
Although this implies a zero mass-variation penalty in Equation 2, the conditional flow matching
term can suffer significantly from this choice, as it might require the learning of complex couplings
and consequently a poor approximation. In contrast, our framework jointly accounts for the flow
matching and mass-variation penalty terms. However, jointly optimizing q and θ to find a global
minimum is typically intractable. Our approach thus relies on finding an approximation q, and using
the flow matching objective with the chosen q. From Equation 2 (and assuming the space of vt (·, θ)
includes the zero function), it is easy to see that:
                                             h                    i
                                                                2
    min LUFM (q, θ) ≤ min αEt,(x0 ,x1 )∼q ∥ut (xt | (x0 , x1 ))∥ + D2 (q0 |qx0 ) + D2 (qx1 |q1 ) (3)
       q,θ                      q


For X = Rd , ut (xt | (x0 , x1 )) = x1 − x0 is a common choice. Plugging this into Equation 3 gives us:
                                        h              i
                                                     2
 min LUFM (q, θ) ≤ min Et,(x0 ,x1 )∼q α ∥x1 − x0 ∥ + D2 (q0 |qx0 ) + D2 (qx1 |q1 ) ≜ UOT(q0 , q1 )
 q,θ                       q
                                                                                                   (4)
The upper bound corresponds to the Unbalanced Optimal Transport (UOT) objective with quadratic
                  2
cost α ∥x1 − x0 ∥ that we can approximate to choose q. Fixing q, we can then learn θ via SGD with
the resulting simplification of Equation 2:
                                                h                                      i
                                                                                     2
                    LUFM (θ; q) = Et,(x0 ,x1 )∼q ∥vt (xt ; θ) − ut (xt | (x0 , x1 ))∥         (5)

By lifting the mass-conservation requirement of FM, we now simplify the learning task (see Figure 5
for an empirical validation). However, now even with a perfectly trained vector field, the pushforward
of q0 will no longer correspond to q1 . Our goal of obtaining samples from q1 , therefore, involves
reweighting the samples generated by the learned flow. In practice, we approximate this re-weighting
with a discriminator c akin to the confidence model used in (Corso et al., 2022) (see Algorithm 1,
and Section 4.1).

Algorithm 1: U NBALANCED FM I NFERENCE
Sample prior x0 (i) ∼ q0
Use flow ψ̂1 (·|q, θ) to map x0 (i) to x1 (i)
Reweight or reject with learned discriminator c
Return [x1 (1) , x1 (2) , ..., x1 (n) ]


                                                        4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


3.2    E FFICIENCY VS A PPROXIMATION T RADE - OFF

In this section, we show how the UFM objective arises from optimizing the trade-off between sample
efficiency and approximation accuracy. Sample efficiency refers to the number of samples from
q0 needed to obtain an approximate sample of q1 (passing the discriminator) under the learned
flow. These approximate samples of q1 still incur some imprecision due to the flow not being
learned perfectly; the approximation accuracy refers to the Wasserstein distance between q1 and
the distribution of these approximate samples. To study this, we consider a modified version of the
Unbalanced FM inference procedure (Algorithm 1). The main difference of this procedure (Algorithm
2) is that we perform some filtering not only after the flow but also before it. Algorithm 2 is, thus, at
most as sample efficient as Algorithm 1 but easier to study.

Algorithm 2: UFM E FFICIENCY L OWER B OUND
Sample prior x0 (i) ∼ q0
                                            q       (x (i) )
Reweight or reject based on approx. qx00(x00(i) )
Use flow ψ̂1 (·|q, θ) to map x0 (i) to x1 (i) ∼ q̂x1
                                                       (i)
Reweight or reject based on approx. qqx1 (x1    )
                                          (x1 (i) )
                                                1
Return [x1 (1) , x1 (2) , ..., x1 (n) ]

Algorithm 2: High-level inference routine for modi-                Figure 3: Relationship between the dif-
fied Unbalanced FM routine used to define theoretical              ferent distributions introduced in the the-
a lower bound on the efficiency of the original Unbal-             oretical analysis of the Unbalanced FM
anced FM routine of Algorithm 1.                                   efficiency lower bound algorithm.


Formalization. Let ψ1 (·; q) be the optimal flow from the Unbalanced FM objective with couplings
q and ψ̂1 (·; q, θ) its approximation we are able to learn. FM guarantees us that qx1 = [ψ1 (·|q)]# qx0
and let q̂x1 (·|θ) = [ψ̂1 (·|q, θ)]# qx0 . We summarize all the defined distributions and their relationship
in Figure 3.
The definition of Unbalanced FM as a method to bridge two distributions q0 and q1 leads us
to analyze the trade-off between the approximation error when learning the flow, formalized as
W22 (q̂x1 (·|θ), qx1 ), and the sample efficiency ESS∗ (q) that derives from having to perform rejection
sampling to bridge the gaps between q0 and qx0 and between qx1 and q1 . Simple mappings will result
in low approximation errors but potentially lower efficiency, and vice versa.

Approximation error. Using Theorem 1 from Benton et al. (2023) we can show, under appropriate
assumptions that the approximation error for a given coupling distribution q, W22 (q̂x1 (·|θ), qx1 ), is
bounded by FM objective:

 W22 (q̂x1 (·|θ), qx1 ) ≤ L2 · Et,q ∥vt (xt ; θ) − vt (xt )∥2 ≤ L2 · Et,q ∥vt (xt ; θ) − ut (xt |x1 )∥2 (6)


                 R1
where L = exp[ 0 Lt dt] and Lt is a constant such that vθ (x, t) is Lt -Lipschitz in x. The second
inequality follows from the convexity of the squared norm.

Sample efficiency. We can measure the sample efficiency that the model has when converting
samples of q0 to unbiased samples of q1 via the effective sample size ESS∗ (q), i.e., the reciprocal of
how many samples from q0 it takes using the ideal flow ψ1 (·, q) to generate an unbiased sample from
q1 . In Proposition 1 (derivation in Appendix A.1), we demonstrate that for an ideal flow this sample
efficiency is bounded by the similarity between q0 and q1 and the respective marginals of q:
Proposition 1. The effective sample size, ESS∗ , for sampling q1 when having access to samples of q0
and a perfectly trained flow with coupling distribution q is bounded by:

                                 ESS∗ (q) ≥ exp [−D2 (q0 |qx0 ) − D2 (qx1 |q1 )] .                        (7)


                                                               5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Trade-off upper bound. The trade-off between approximation error and sampling efficiency in the
choice of optimal flow can then be expressed as a joint objective:
                         β W22 (q̂x1 (·|θ), qx1 ) − log ESS∗ (q) ≤ LUFM (θ, q)                           (8)
                           |        {z         }    |    {z    }
                              Approximation error   Sampling efficiency

where the inequality derives from setting α = L2 β and using the derivation above. This motivates
the UFM objective as a way to optimize an upper bound on the joint approximation error and sample
(in-) efficiency trade-off.
In practice, since we only have access to one sample for the distribution over bound structures
(the crystal structure in PDB, typically unique), we cannot define q via exact optimal Unbalanced
OT. In our experiments, we approximate the optimal coupling with the distribution q(x0 , x1 ) ∝
q0 (x0 )q1 (x1 )Ic(x0 ,x1 )<ctask , where c(x0 , x1 ) is some, task-specific, transport cost, and ctask is an
empirically chosen cutoff to balance sample efficiency and mapping complexity.

3.3   C OMPOSING U NBALANCED F LOWS

In Section 4.2, we will show how we obtain effective structure relaxations by learning a further
unbalanced flow with smaller matching costs on top of the distribution learned by the initial manifold
docking unbalanced flow. In this section, we analyze the effect of composing flows together in the
case of short distance couplings that corresponds to the setting of structure relaxation.
Each flow tries to learn the matching from the output distribution of the previous flow and the
final distribution. We consider the specific coupling introduced in the previous section q(x0 , x1 ) =
q0 (x0 )q1 (x1 )I∥x0 −x1 ∥≤ϵ with q0 now representing the output distribution of the previous flow. In
Proposition 2 (derivation in Appendix A.2), we demonstrate that taking ϵ → 0 leads to approximate
local likelihood gradient steps that push q0 towards matching q1 :
Proposition 2. A coupling q(x0 , x1 ) ∝ q0 (x0 )q1 (x1 )I∥x0 −x1 ∥≤ϵ with ϵ → 0 generated a marginal
flow ψ1 that has the form:
                       ψ1 (x0 ) ≈ x0 + Cϵ,n [q0 (x0 )∇q1 (x0 ) − q1 (x0 )∇q0 (x0 )]                      (9)
where Cϵ,n is a constant that depends on ϵ and the dimensionality of the space n.

therefore, for all the points x0 sampled from q0 that have low likelihood under the final distribution q1
(so q1 (x0 ) << q0 (x0 )), the transform ψ1 (x0 ) ≈ x0 + Cϵ,n q0 (x0 )∇x0 q1 (x0 ) will push the sample
toward the regions of higher likelihood of q1 . Notably, the learned flows also have the property
ψ1 (x0 ) = x0 when q0 = q1 .

4     F LEXIBLE D OCKING
In the flexible docking task, our goal is to learn the joint distribution over the bound structures
(equivalently, poses thereof) of a protein-ligand complex given the distribution over the unbound
structures of the protein. We focus on the pocket-based flexible docking task, but all components of
our framework can be applied to the blind docking setting as well (unknown protein pocket).
In the previous section, we motivated the necessity of Unbalanced FM for the flexible docking task,
and the attractive properties that emerge from composing unbalanced flows. In this section, we
leverage these insights to decompose the flexible docking task into two subtasks, both modeled as
unbalanced flows: i) docking over the manifold degrees of freedom (Section 4.1), and ii) structure
relaxation (Section 4.2).

4.1   D OCKING OVER M ANIFOLD D EGREES OF F REEDOM

Ligand and protein poses can be regarded as elements of R3nl and R3np , where nl and np are the
number of atoms in the ligand and protein respectively. However, during docking, ligand flexibility is
largely concentrated in the torsion angles at rotatable bonds (Jing et al., 2022), while for proteins, the
flexibility lies in the backbone frames and sidechain torsion angles (Jumper et al., 2021). Motivated
by the success of Intrinsic Diffusion Models (Corso, 2023) in similar domains, we reduce the space
of ligand and protein poses by defining our generative model over these degrees of freedom.


                                                     6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Transport of distributions formulation. For the distribution over ligand poses, we largely follow
D IFF D OCK (Corso et al., 2022), learning a diffusion model over the product space of rotations, trans-
lations, and torsions, P = SO(3) × R3 × Tml . To model conformational changes in protein structures
upon docking, we employ our Unbalanced FM framework. The prior q0 is defined as the distribution
of (computationally generated) unbound structures, while the target distribution q1 is defined over
the crystallized bound structures. For the prior, given the current inability of computational models
to sample the diverse conformational space (Jing et al., 2024), we use outputs from ESMFold (Lin
et al., 2022) with the addition of small Gaussian noise. Designing an Unbalanced FM objective then
amounts to choosing a coupling q(x0 , x1 ), a conditional probability path pt (x|x0 , x1 ), (x0 , x1 ) ∼ q,
and the associated conditional vector field ut (x|x0 , x1 ).

Choice of coupling q. A key requirement for q is to be able to sample pairs during training.
Because we typically only have access to one sample for the distribution over bound structures
(the crystal structure in PDB, typically unique), we cannot define q via Unbalanced OT. Therefore,
we approximate the optimal coupling with the distribution q(x0 , x1 ) ∝ q0 (x0 )q1 (x1 )Ic(x0 ,x1 )<cdock ,
where c(x0 , x1 ) is defined as the aligned RMSD between the Cα positions of the residues in the
pocket and its neighborhood, and cdock is an empirically chosen cutoff to balance sample efficiency
and mapping complexity. We can sample from q by taking independent samples from q0 and q1 and
rejecting if c(x0 , x1 ) ≥ cdock .

Flow Matching on SE(3) and T. For a protein with n residues and mp sidechain torsions, we
define the flow over the product space SE(3)n × SO(2)mp , where the SE(3) frame for each residue
corresponds to a roto-translation around the Cα atom, and the hypertorus Tmp over sidechain torsions.
Following the disintegration of measures (Pollard, 2002), every SE(3)-invariant measure can be
broken down into a SO(3)-invariant measure and a measure proportional to the Lebesgue measure
on R3 , allowing us to build flows independently on SO(3) and R3 . Following Chen & Lipman
(2024), given two points (x0 , x1 ) ∼ q, the conditional probability path between x0 and x1 is given
by the geodesic between them, x = expx0 (t logx0 (x1 )), and the corresponding conditional flow is
                      logxt x1
ut (xt |x0 , x1 ) =     1−t .

For SO(3), the geodesics can be computed efficiently by using the axis-angle representation
(equivalent to log(x1 )) and the parallel transport operation (left multiplication with x0 ), while
exp is simply the matrix exponential. We view the torus T as the quotient space R/2πZ,
thus expx0 (x1 ) = (x0 + x1 ) mod 2π (equivalent to wrapping around R), and logx0 x1 =
arctan 2(sin(x1 − x0 ), cos(x1 − x0 )).

Confidence discriminator. As discussed in Section 3.1, it is necessary to apply a rejection or
filtering step at the end of the unbalanced flow. This is because, by the design of the Unbalanced FM
framework, some of the samples produced will be incorrect (i.e. far from high-likelihood regions
of q1 ). To do this we train a confidence model (Corso et al., 2022) to predict the likelihood that a
sample from q1 is within 2Å ligand-RMSD and 1Å AA-RMSD of the input pose. This confidence
score is then used to rank or select different samples obtained from the flow.

4.2   S TRUCTURE R ELAXATION

Motivated by the results from Section 3.3, we frame structure relaxation as an (unbalanced) flow,
where the prior q0 is now the distribution over poses generated by the manifold docking process in
Section 4.1, and the target distribution q1 is still defined over the crystallized bound structures.

Choice of coupling q. We adopt a similar definition for q as Section 4.1, except now c(x0 , x1 ) is
defined as the average of the aligned atomic RMSDs between the predicted pose for both the ligand
and protein (not just the latter) and their ground truth counterparts. We also use a smaller cutoff
crelax < cdock to enforce small structural changes.

Flow Matching for Relaxation. We define the flow over the Euclidean space. Given (x0 , x1 ) ∼ q,
the conditional probability path pt (x|x0 , x1 ) is defined as x0 · (1 − t) + x1 · t, and the associated
                                            1 −x
conditional vector field ut (x|x0 , x1 ) = x1−t  .

                                                    7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Energy-based loss. Molecular structures are characterized by degrees of freedom with vastly
different stiffness, for example the Generalized Amber Force Field (GAFF) is specified such that a
single bond between Carbon and Nitrogen atoms allows oscillations with a vibrational frequency of
4401 cm−1 (Wang et al., 2004). This causes even small W2 approximation errors to be particularly
problematic along such degrees of freedom. Therefore, to further improve the flow’s ability to
accurately relax degrees of freedom with narrow distributions, we introduce an additional energy-
based loss to encourage the model to sample low-energy poses.
A similar approach has been explored in the scope of works on Boltzmann Generators (Noé et al.,
2019) where models are trained directly to minimize the reverse KL divergence between the generated
samples and some energy function by evaluating the energy of the generated poses and their log-
likelihood under the model. Our approach distinguishes from this in two main aspects: firstly, to
preserve the stable and efficient training regime of (unbalanced) flow matching we do not use full
sampling trajectories but only evaluate the energy of the x̂1 = xt + (1 − t)vt (xt ; θ) predicted poses
for t close to 1; secondly, instead of using force-field based energy functions that tend to be very
unstable on non-equilibrium poses we employ a handcrafted flat-bottom potential with the following
form:

                                  (i)    (j)                                (i)      (j)
                     X
          Lenergy =     max x̂1 − x̂1 − Ui,j , 0 + max Li,j − x̂1 − x̂1 , 0                        (10)
                    i,j

where Li,j and Ui,j are lower and upper bounds (if any) on the distance between each pair of atoms
(i, j) and depend on whether atoms i and j are covalently bonded, substituents of the same central
atom, or constitute an intermolecular cross term between the protein and ligand. Further details on
the formulation are provided in Appendix B.1.

Energy filtering. During inference, we utilize this flat-bottom potential combined with the initial
poses confidence scores as the Unbalanced FM discriminator to select the predictions for which
relaxation was successful. Starting with conformers predicted by the flexible docking model, we use
the docking confidence model to score and prioritize the predictions. After relaxation, we use the flat
bottomed potential to select only the relaxed conformers for which the potential is zero. We then
choose the relaxed pose with the greatest confidence score. If all relaxed conformers have a non-zero
potential value, we instead return the highest confidence conformer prior to relaxation.


5   E XPERIMENTS

Benchmark. We train and test our models on the widely adopted PDBBind benchmark (Liu et al.,
2017). We use computationally generated structures from ESMF OLD (Lin et al., 2022) as samples
from the distribution of unbound structures. We also evaluate on PoseBusters, a recent benchmark
dataset curated from the PDB, with several filtering steps and sequence-based clustering. Since we
focus on the flexible docking task, we evaluate the accuracy of both the predicted ligand and pocket
atom poses. We first align the predicted pocket atoms to their ground truth counterparts, and then
compute the heavy-atom RMSD between the predicted and ground truth poses for the ligand (with
permutation symmetry correction) and pocket atoms. For the ligand, following Huang et al. (2024),
we report the median and the percentage of predictions with RMSD below 2Å. For the pocket atoms,
we similarly report the percentage of predictions with RMSD below 1Å. Finally, we report the pose
quality using the percentage of top-1 predictions passing the series of tests from Buttenschoen et al.
(2024) referred to as PoseBusters checks.

Baselines. For the PDBBind benchmark, we compare F LEX D OCK to well established search-based
methods SMINA and GNINA, and flexible ML-based pocket level docking methods in D IFF D OCK -
P OCKET (Plainer et al., 2023) and R E -D OCK (Huang et al., 2024). All methods receive as input – i)
the ligand with an initial seed conformation (using RDKit), ii) the ESMFold predicted structure, and
iii) the pocket residues. Additional details regarding the experimental setup, data, and baselines can
be found in Appendix D along with a link to the code used for our experiments. For the PoseBusters
benchmark we also report other baselines for pocket-based docking – these include both rigid methods
taking in the holo-structure like D EEP D OCK (Liao et al., 2019), U NI M OL (Zhou et al., 2023), GOLD
(Verdonk et al., 2003) and V INA (Trott & Olson, 2010) as well as ML-based cofolding methods
U MOL (Bryant et al., 2024) and A LPHA F OLD 3 (Abramson et al., 2024).

                                                  8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Table 1: Top-1 PDBBind ESMFold Docking Performance We standardize all the generative
modeling-based methods to take 10 samples. - indicates results missing due to baselines taken
from previous work where output structures were not provided. ∗ Note that R E D OCK uses a slightly
different definition of pocket making the results not fully comparable, while their code is not available.

                                                                   Ligand RMSD                All-Atom RMSD                          % PB           % PB valid and
         Method                                                                                                                                                            Runtime (s)
                                                               % < 2Å ↑ Median Å ↓                % < 1Å ↑                           valid ↑       L-RMSD < 2 Å ↑
         SMINA (rigid)                                                6.6             7.7                        N.A.                  -                     -                  258
         SMINA                                                        3.6             7.3                        5.2                   -                     -                  1914
         GNINA (rigid)                                                6.7             7.1                        N.A.                 93.3                  6.7                 260
         GNINA                                                        8.4             7.9                        4.5                  91.3                  7.7                 1575
          D IFF D OCK -P OCKET (rigid)                                37.5            3.0                        N.A.                 25.9                  4.9                   17
          D IFF D OCK -P OCKET                                        41.8            2.5                        32.4                 30.1                  5.9                   17
          R E D OCK∗                                                  39.0            2.5                        39.8                  -                     -                    15
          F LEX D OCK                                                 39.7            2.5                          41.7               72.9                 33.7                   11


                                        Posebusters V2 -- Pocket Residues Specified                                                                                       UFM (Cutoff cdock)
                                   RMSD < 2A                                                                           30                                                       UFM (2A)
                                   PB-Valid & RMSD < 2A                                                                                                                         UFM (4A)
                           80                                                                                                                                                   UFM (6A)
                                                                                                                       25                                                       UFM (10A)
                                                                                                                                                                                FM
                                                                                                  Oracle Performance
% of passing predictions


                           60                                                                                          20

                                                                                                                       15
                           40
                                                                                                                       10

                           20                                                                                           5

                                                                                                                        0
                           0                                                                                                Ligand RMSD < 2A         All-Atom RMSD < 1A
                                DeepDock UniMol     Umol   FlexDock    GOLD   VINA      AF3                                                    Metric

Figure 4: Performance of different pocket-based                                                   Figure 5: Docking performance for different
methods on the PoseBusters v2 benchmark.                                                          cutoffs cdock . FM corresponds to UFM with
GOLD, VINA, DeepDock and UniMol take as in-                                                       cdock = ∞. We generate 10 samples using a
put the holo-structure of the protein, while UMol,                                                small model (4M parameters) without any addi-
FlexDock and AlphaFold3 only the sequence.                                                        tional filtering or relaxation, and evaluate the best
AlphaFold3 was trained on a dataset ∼10x larger.                                                  prediction of these samples for every complex.


Results. Table 1 presents the comparison of previous methods in the field with the overall F LEX -
D OCK model which shows improvements in many metrics. To better understand the value of our
methodological contributions, it is useful to directly compare with D IFF D OCK -P OCKET, as this uses
the same architecture and training regime. Here we see large improvements in the pocket all-atom
accuracy with AA-RMSD < 1 Å improving from 32% to 42% and the pose quality (measured by the
proportion of PB valid poses) improving from 30% to 73%.
On PoseBusters, our method performs significantly better than the fast ML-based rigid docking
models D EEP D OCK and U NI M OL even without receiving the holo-structure. When compared to
large-scale co-folding models, it has similar RMSD performance but significantly better validity than
U MOL while being significantly faster (average of 11s per complex for F LEX D OCK and 206s for
U MOL excluding its MSA computation step). A LPHA F OLD 3 performs significantly better, however,
it has been trained on more than one order of magnitude extra data compared to F LEX D OCK and
U MOL.

Ablations. Ablations regarding the choice of cutoff cdock (See Para. 4.1) can be found in Figure 5.
The comparison with standard FM highlights the importance of unbalanced flows in tackling this task.
Using a cutoff of 4Å gives better performance across both ligand and protein pose prediction metrics.
We also perform ablation studies in Table 2 to decompose the improvements from the different
components of F LEX D OCK. This shows that, on the one hand, the improvement in All-Atom RMSD


                                                                                              9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Table 2: Ablation of the effect of the various components of the relaxation unbalanced flow described
in Section 4.2.We now split the runtime into the docking time + relaxation time.

                                                  Ligand RMSD      All-Atom RMSD   % PB    % PB valid and
 Method                                                                                                     Runtime (s)
                                              % < 2Å↑ Median Å ↓       % < 1Å ↑    valid   L-RMSD < 2 Å
 F LEX D OCK (no relaxation)                   38.8       2.6          43.8        13.1         9.4             10
 F LEX D OCK (OpenMM Relaxation)               38.2       2.6          42.1        68.4         30.3         10 + 155
 F LEX D OCK (relaxation w/out energy loss)    40.9       2.5          44.1        17.3         12.1         10 + 0.3
 F LEX D OCK (no energy filtering)             40.4       2.5          40.6        64.5         32.2         10 + 0.3
 F LEX D OCK                                   39.7       2.5          41.7        72.9         33.7         10 + 0.3



can be attributed to the improved modeling of protein flexibility through the Unbalanced FM over the
manifold degrees of freedom, not the relaxation. On the other hand, the improvement in pose quality
can be largely attributed to the different steps of the relaxation Unbalanced FM which improves
the %-PB valid from 13 to 73. Among these, we highlight the critical role of the energy loss. We
additionally compare our relaxation to the OpenMM relaxation offered in the PoseBusters benchmark.
Our relaxation routine achieves an improvement of 4.5% in PB-Valid metrics, while being at least 2
order of magnitude faster.

6    C ONCLUSION
While generative models are revolutionizing the field of structural biology, existing frameworks
lack the flexibility needed to tackle outstanding domain-specific issues. In this work, we presented
Unbalanced Flow Matching, a generalization of the Flow Matching framework that relaxes the
marginal preservation assumption. Theoretically, we showed this approach allows us to improve the
approximation error FM incurs at the cost of some sample efficiency. We apply Unbalanced FM
to enhance the ability of flexible docking models to model the flexibility of protein structures and
predict poses with good energetic properties. Empirically, we show that the resulting framework
F LEX D OCK improves these properties over the best existing methods on the PDBBind benchmark.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
We thank Ya-Ping Hsieh, Itamar Chinn, Hannes Stark, and Bowen Jing for their valuable feedback
and insightful discussions.
This work was supported by NCCR Catalysis (grant numbers 180544 and 225147), a National
Centre of Competence in Research funded by the Swiss National Science Foundation, the NSF
Expeditions grant (award 1918839: Collaborative Research: Understanding the World Through Code),
the Abdul Latif Jameel Clinic for Machine Learning in Health, the DTRA Discovery of Medical
Countermeasures Against New and Emerging (DOMANE) Threats program, the MATCHMAKERS
project supported by the Cancer Grand Challenges partnership financed by CRUK (CGCATF-
2023/100001) and the National Cancer Institute (OT2CA297463) and the Machine Learning for
Pharmaceutical Discovery and Synthesis (MLPDS) consortium.


                                                            10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


R EFERENCES
Josh Abramson, Jonas Adler, Jack Dunger, Richard Evans, Tim Green, Alexander Pritzel, Olaf
  Ronneberger, Lindsay Willmore, Andrew J Ballard, Joshua Bambrick, et al. Accurate structure
  prediction of biomolecular interactions with alphafold 3. Nature, pp. 1–3, 2024.
Michael S Albergo, Nicholas M Boffi, and Eric Vanden-Eijnden. Stochastic interpolants: A unifying
 framework for flows and diffusions. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.08797, 2023.
Amr Alhossary, Stephanus Daniel Handoko, Yuguang Mu, and Chee-Keong Kwoh. Fast, accurate,
 and reliable molecular docking with quickvina 2. Bioinformatics, 31(13):2214–2216, 2015.
Joe Benton, George Deligiannidis, and Arnaud Doucet. Error bounds for flow matching methods.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.16860, 2023.
Patrick Bryant, Atharva Kelkar, Andrea Guljas, Cecilia Clementi, and Frank Noé. Structure prediction
  of protein-ligand complexes from sequence information with umol. Nature Communications, 15
  (1):4536, 2024.
Martin Buttenschoen, Garrett M Morris, and Charlotte M Deane. Posebusters: Ai-based docking
 methods fail to generate physically valid poses or generalise to novel sequences. Chemical Science,
 2024.
Ricky TQ Chen and Yaron Lipman. Flow matching on general geometries. In The Twelfth Interna-
  tional Conference on Learning Representations, 2024.
Gabriele Corso. Modeling molecular structures with intrinsic diffusion models. Massachusetts
  Institute of Technology, 2023.
Gabriele Corso, Hannes Stärk, Bowen Jing, Regina Barzilay, and Tommi Jaakkola. Diffdock:
  Diffusion steps, twists, and turns for molecular docking. arXiv preprint arXiv:2210.01776, 2022.
Peter Eastman, Jason Swails, John D Chodera, Robert T McGibbon, Yutong Zhao, Kyle A Beauchamp,
  Lee-Ping Wang, Andrew C Simmonett, Matthew P Harrigan, Chaya D Stern, et al. Openmm 7:
  Rapid development of high performance algorithms for molecular dynamics. PLoS computational
  biology, 13(7):e1005659, 2017.
Luca Eyring, Dominik Klein, Théo Uscidda, Giovanni Palla, Niki Kilbertus, Zeynep Akata, and
  Fabian J Theis. Unbalancedness in neural monge maps improves unpaired domain translation.
  In The Twelfth International Conference on Learning Representations, 2024. URL https:
  //openreview.net/forum?id=2UnCj3jeao.
Nafisa M Hassan, Amr A Alhossary, Yuguang Mu, and Chee-Keong Kwoh. Protein-ligand blind
  docking using quickvina-w with inter-process spatio-temporal integration. Scientific reports, 7(1):
 15451, 2017.
Yufei Huang, Odin Zhang, Lirong Wu, Cheng Tan, Haitao Lin, Zhangyang Gao, Siyuan Li, Stan
  Li, et al. Re-dock: Towards flexible and realistic molecular docking with diffusion bridge. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2402.11459, 2024.
Bowen Jing, Gabriele Corso, Jeffrey Chang, Regina Barzilay, and Tommi Jaakkola. Torsional
  diffusion for molecular conformer generation. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
  35:24240–24253, 2022.
Bowen Jing, Bonnie Berger, and Tommi Jaakkola. Alphafold meets flow matching for generating
  protein ensembles. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.04845, 2024.
John Jumper, Richard Evans, Alexander Pritzel, Tim Green, Michael Figurnov, Olaf Ronneberger,
  Kathryn Tunyasuvunakool, Russ Bates, Augustin Žídek, Anna Potapenko, et al. Highly accurate
  protein structure prediction with alphafold. Nature, 596(7873):583–589, 2021.
David Ryan Koes, Matthew P Baumgartner, and Carlos J Camacho. Lessons learned in empirical
  scoring with smina from the csar 2011 benchmarking exercise. Journal of chemical information
  and modeling, 53(8):1893–1904, 2013.


                                                11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Zhirui Liao, Ronghui You, Xiaodi Huang, Xiaojun Yao, Tao Huang, and Shanfeng Zhu. Deepdock:
  enhancing ligand-protein interaction prediction by a combination of ligand and structure infor-
  mation. In 2019 IEEE International Conference on Bioinformatics and Biomedicine (BIBM), pp.
  311–317. IEEE, 2019.

Zeming Lin, Halil Akin, Roshan Rao, Brian Hie, Zhongkai Zhu, Wenting Lu, Allan dos Santos Costa,
  Maryam Fazel-Zarandi, Tom Sercu, Sal Candido, et al. Language models of protein sequences at
  the scale of evolution enable accurate structure prediction. BioRxiv, 2022:500902, 2022.

Yaron Lipman, Ricky TQ Chen, Heli Ben-Hamu, Maximilian Nickel, and Matt Le. Flow matching
  for generative modeling. arXiv preprint arXiv:2210.02747, 2022.

Zhihai Liu, Minyi Su, Li Han, Jie Liu, Qifan Yang, Yan Li, and Renxiao Wang. Forging the basis for
  developing protein–ligand interaction scoring functions. Accounts of chemical research, 50(2):
  302–309, 2017.

Wei Lu, Jixian Zhang, Weifeng Huang, Ziqiao Zhang, Xiangyu Jia, Zhenyu Wang, Leilei Shi,
 Chengtao Li, Peter G Wolynes, and Shuangjia Zheng. Dynamicbind: Predicting ligand-specific
 protein-ligand complex structure with a deep equivariant generative model. Nature Communica-
 tions, 15(1):1071, 2024.

Felipe Maia Polo and Renato Vicente. Effective sample size, dimensionality, and generalization in
  covariate shift adaptation. Neural Computing and Applications, 35(25):18187–18199, 2023.

Andrew T McNutt, Paul Francoeur, Rishal Aggarwal, Tomohide Masuda, Rocco Meli, Matthew
  Ragoza, Jocelyn Sunseri, and David Ryan Koes. Gnina 1.0: molecular docking with deep learning.
 Journal of cheminformatics, 13(1):43, 2021.

Frank Noé, Simon Olsson, Jonas Köhler, and Hao Wu. Boltzmann generators: Sampling equilibrium
  states of many-body systems with deep learning. Science, 365(6457):eaaw1147, 2019.

Michael Plainer, Marcella Toth, Simon Dobers, Hannes Stark, Gabriele Corso, Céline Marquet, and
 Regina Barzilay. Diffdock-pocket: Diffusion for pocket-level docking with sidechain flexibility.
 2023.

David Pollard. A user’s guide to measure theoretic probability. Number 8. Cambridge University
  Press, 2002.

Aram-Alexandre Pooladian, Heli Ben-Hamu, Carles Domingo-Enrich, Brandon Amos, Yaron Lipman,
  and Ricky TQ Chen. Multisample flow matching: Straightening flows with minibatch couplings.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2304.14772, 2023.

Zhuoran Qiao, Weili Nie, Arash Vahdat, Thomas F Miller III, and Animashree Anandkumar. State-
  specific protein–ligand complex structure prediction with a multiscale deep generative model.
  Nature Machine Intelligence, pp. 1–14, 2024.

Vignesh Ram Somnath, Matteo Pariset, Ya-Ping Hsieh, Maria Rodriguez Martinez, Andreas Krause,
  and Charlotte Bunne. Aligned diffusion schrödinger bridges. In Uncertainty in Artificial Intelli-
  gence, pp. 1985–1995. PMLR, 2023.

Hannes Stärk, Octavian Ganea, Lagnajit Pattanaik, Regina Barzilay, and Tommi Jaakkola. Equibind:
  Geometric deep learning for drug binding structure prediction. In International conference on
  machine learning, pp. 20503–20521. PMLR, 2022.

Alexander Tong, Nikolay Malkin, Guillaume Huguet, Yanlei Zhang, Jarrid Rector-Brooks, Kilian
  Fatras, Guy Wolf, and Yoshua Bengio. Improving and generalizing flow-based generative models
  with minibatch optimal transport. arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.00482, 2023.

Oleg Trott and Arthur J Olson. Autodock vina: improving the speed and accuracy of docking with
  a new scoring function, efficient optimization, and multithreading. Journal of computational
  chemistry, 31(2):455–461, 2010.


                                               12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Marcel L Verdonk, Jason C Cole, Michael J Hartshorn, Christopher W Murray, and Richard D Taylor.
 Improved protein–ligand docking using gold. Proteins: Structure, Function, and Bioinformatics,
 52(4):609–623, 2003.
Junmei Wang, Romain M Wolf, James W Caldwell, Peter A Kollman, and David A Case. Devel-
  opment and testing of a general amber force field. Journal of computational chemistry, 25(9):
  1157–1174, 2004.
Gengmo Zhou, Zhifeng Gao, Qiankun Ding, Hang Zheng, Hongteng Xu, Zhewei Wei, Linfeng Zhang,
  and Guolin Ke. Uni-mol: A universal 3d molecular representation learning framework. 2023.


                                               13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A     P ROOFS

Note: in all derivations and definitions in this section, we will assume that the distributions we work
with are defined in Euclidean space and have full support.

A.1    U NBALANCED FM S AMPLE E FFICIENCY

Proposition 1. The effective sample size, ESS∗ , for sampling q1 when having access to samples of q0
and a perfectly trained flow with coupling distribution q is bounded by:
                              ESS∗ (q) ≥ exp [−D2 (q0 |qx0 ) − D2 (qx1 |q1 )]                      (11)
where D2 is the Rényi Divergence of order 2.

Proof. When comparing pairs of distributions p and q the (population) effective sample size
ESS∗ (p, q) is defined as (Maia Polo & Vicente, 2023):
                                     ESS∗ (p, q) := exp[−D2 (p|q)]
and it can be considered as the percentage of effective samples from q one can obtain when taking
samples from p.
Similarly, we define ESS∗ (q) in our setting as the percentage of effective samples from q1 one can
obtain from q0 using ψ1 . While ψ1 could be directly applied to any distribution, including q0 , it is
hard to model its pushforward analytically. On the other hand, we know that qx1 is the pushforward
of qx0 , therefore we can obtain samples from q1 by (1) reweighting samples of q0 into samples of
qx0 , (2) transporting samples from qx0 to samples of qx1 and (3) reweighting samples from qx1 into
samples from q1 . By assumption of perfect flow step (2) has perfect efficiency, however, steps (1)
and (3) both may require more than one sample in expectation to be unbiased. This translates into an
efficiency equal to the product of the two effective sample sizes:
        ESS∗ (q) ≥ ESS∗ (q0 , qx0 ) ESS∗ (qx1 , q1 ) = exp [−D2 (q0 |qx0 )] exp [−D2 (qx1 |q1 )]
                                  = exp [−D2 (q0 |qx0 ) − D2 (qx1 |q1 )] .
where the inequality derives from the possibility of the existence of more effective procedures for this
sampling that do not require passing from samples of qx0 and qx1 .



A.2    C OMPOSING U NBALANCED F LOWS

Proposition 2. Assuming q0 and q1 are densities with a bounded Lipschitz constant. A coupling
q(x0 , x1 ) ∝ q0 (x0 )q1 (x1 )I∥x0 −x1 ∥≤ϵ with ϵ → 0 generates a marginal flow ψ1 that has the form:
                       ψ1 (x0 ) ≈ x0 + Cϵ,n [q0 (x0 )∇q1 (x0 ) − q1 (x0 )∇q0 (x0 )]                (12)
where Cϵ,n is a constant that depends on ϵ and the dimensionality of the space n.

                                                                  d
Proof. Let ut (xt ) be the vector field that generates the flow: dt ψt (x) = ut (ψt (x)). By definition
ut (xt ) is the marginal vector field that optimizes the objective function of the defined Unbalanced
FM. Therefore its derivative must be zero:

                          0 = ∇ut (xt ) E(x0 ,x1 )∼q ∥ut (xt ) − ut (xt |x1 )∥2


              = ∇ut (xt ) E(x0 ,x1 )∼q0 (x0 )q1 (x1 )I∥x0 −x1 ∥<ϵ /Zq ∥ut (xt ) − (x1 − x0 )∥2


Let δ = x1 − x0 . Expressing the expectation as a n-dimensional ball integral:
                   Z
                             2q0 (xt − δt)q1 (xt + δ(1 − t))(ut (xt ) − δ) Zq dδ = 0
                     ∥δ∥≤ϵ


                                                     14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Therefore:                                 Z
                              ut (xt ) =           δq0 (xt − δt)q1 (xt + δ(1 − t)) dδ
                                           ∥δ∥≤ϵ


To approximate this integral as ϵ → 0, we expand q0 and q1 using a Taylor series expansion around
xt :
                               q0 (xt − δt) ≈ q0 (xt ) − tδ · ∇q0 (xt )

                              q1 (xt + δ(1 − t)) ≈ q1 (xt ) + (1 − t)δ · ∇q1 (xt )

Substituting the approximations into the integral:

                          Z
             ut (xt ) ≈           δ [(q0 (xt ) − tδ · ∇q0 (xt )) (q1 (xt ) + (1 − t)δ · ∇q1 (xt ))] dδ
                          ∥δ∥≤ϵ


Expanding the product inside the integral:
                Z
     ut (xt ) ≈       δ [q0 (xt )q1 (xt ) + q0 (xt )(1 − t)δ · ∇q1 (xt ) − tδ · ∇q0 (xt )q1 (xt )] dδ
                    ∥δ∥≤ϵ

Higher-order terms involving (δ · ∇q0 )(δ · ∇q1 ) will be of order ϵ2 and can be neglected as ϵ → 0.
Since the integral is over a symmetric ball, terms with odd powers of δ vanish. Hence, only the cross
terms contribute:
                          Z
               ut (xt ) ≈       δ [(1 − t)q0 (xt )δ · ∇q1 (xt ) − tq1 (xt )δ · ∇q0 (xt )] dδ
                               ∥δ∥≤ϵ

Using the symmetry and volume element:

                                             ϵn+2     π n/2
                           Z
                                  δi δj dδ =      δij
                            ∥δ∥≤ϵ            n + 2 Γ(n/2 + 1)

Therefore:
                              ϵn+2     π n/2
                ut (xt ) ≈                     [(1 − t)q0 (xt )∇q1 (xt ) − tq1 (xt )∇q0 (xt )]
                              n + 2 Γ(n/2 + 1)

To determine the residual transformation brought by the full marginal flow, we need to integrate
the vector field ut (xt ) over the path. Integrating over the path is challenging, but since we have
restricted the flows to be smaller than ϵ, the Lipschitz constant of ut is bounded (because the Lipschitz
constants of q0 and q1 are bounded), and we are taking ϵ → 0. The change in ut within the flow will
be negligible. Therefore, we can approximate the marginal flow as:
                        Z 1
                                   π n/2 ϵn+2
      ψ1 (x0 ) ≈ x0 +                               [(1 − t)q0 (x0 )∇q1 (x0 ) − tq1 (x0 )∇q0 (x0 )] dt
                         t=0 (n + 2)Γ(n/2 + 1)

Evaluating the integral:
                                                                                          1
                         π n/2 ϵn+2
                                         2
                                         t                    (1 − t)2
     ψ1 (x0 ) ≈ x0 +                    − q1 (x0 )∇q0 (x0 ) −          q0 (x0 )∇q1 (x0 )
                     (n + 2)Γ(n/2 + 1)   2                       2                        0


                                        π n/2 ϵn+2
              ψ1 (x0 ) ≈ x0 +                         (q0 (x0 )∇q1 (x0 ) − q1 (x0 )∇q0 (x0 ))
                                   2(n + 2)Γ(n/2 + 1)


                                                         15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


B    T RAINING AND I NFERENCE

In this section, we present the training and inference procedures for our manifold docking (Algorithms
3 and4) and relaxation models (Algorithms 5 and6). We refer to unbound protein structures as apo
structures, and the bound structures as holo structures. Recall that our goal is to learn a distribution
over holo structures, given the apo structure and a seed conformation of the ligand. Similar to
(Corso et al., 2022), we are in a setting, where traditional generative modeling where one has access
to multiple samples from the same data distribution, we only have a single (x∗ , yapo , yholo ) per
protein-ligand complex. This implies that the training loop (Algorithms 3 and5) now proceeds over
different distributions, along with a single sample from that distribution. This sample is then accepted
or rejected depending on the cutoff cdock , thus inducing an unbalanced coupling and flow.

Algorithm 3: T RAINING E POCH : M ANIFOLD D OCKING
Input: Training Pairs {(x∗ , yapo , yholo )}; RDKit predictions {c}, RMSD cutoff cdock
Input: Pocket radius r; Pocket Buffer b
Input: Cα operator [·]Cα
foreach c, x∗ , yapo , yholo do
    Let x0 ← arg minx RMSD(x∗ , x)
    ycenter , {i}pocket = E XTRACT P OCKET(yapo , yholo , r, b)
    yapo ← RMSDA LIGN(yapo , yholo , {i}pocket )
    if RMSD(yapo , yholo ) > cdock then
        continue
    else
          FA
        yapo   , ∆Rbb ← F RAME A LIGN(yapo , yholo )
          FA,SC
        yapo , ∆θsc ← SCC ONF M ATCH(yapo    FA
                                                  , yholo )
        Sample t ∼ U(0, 1)
        // Ligand Diffusion
        Sample ∆r, ∆R, ∆θ from diffusion kernels ptrt (·|0), prot       tor
                                                              t (·|0), pt (·|0)
        Compute xt by applying (∆r, ∆R, ∆θ) to x0
        // Protein Flow
        tsc , tbb     bb                        sc  bb    bb
               rot , ttr = C OMPUTE T IME (t, α , αrot , αtr )
        Interpolate ∆rt ← [y ]Cα · (1 − t) + yholo Cα · t
                            bb     apo

        utr,bb
                            holo
          t (·|z) ← y             Cα
                                     − [yapo ]Cα

        Interpolate ∆Rtbb ← exp tbb                bb
                                        rot log(∆R )
                          log∆Rbb (∆Rbb )
        urot,bb
         t      (·|z) ←         t
                              1−tbb
                                 rot

        Interpolate ∆θtsc ← exp (tsc log(∆θsc ))
                     log∆θsc (∆θ sc )
        usc
         t (·|z) ←
                       t
                     1−tsc
        Compute yt by applying ∆rbb , ∆Rbb , ∆θsc to yapo

        Predict scores and drifts α, β, γ, δ, ϵ, η ← s(xt , yt , t)
        // Ligand Loss
        Llig = ∥α − ∇ log ptrt (·|0)∥2 + ∥β − ∇ log prot     2              tor
                                                     t (·|0)∥ + ∥γ − ∇ log pt (·|0)∥
                                                                                    2

        // Protein Loss
        Lprot = ∥δ − utr,bb   2        rot,bb
                      t (·|z)∥ + ∥ϵ − ut      (·|z)∥2 + ∥η − usc
                                                              t (·|z)∥
                                                                       2

      Apply optimization step on L = Lprot + Llig
   end
end


Pocket Extraction. As our focus is on the flexible protein docking task, we first extract the protein
pocket given apo and holo-structures. We define the pocket residues as all residues in the holo-


                                                     16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Algorithm 4: I NFERENCE : M ANIFOLD D OCKING
Input: RDKit predictions {c}, Apo structure yapo of the protein pocket
Input: Inference Steps N
Sample ΘN ∼ U(SO(2)m ), RN ∼ U(SO(3)), rn ∼ N (0, σtr2 )
Apply ΘN , RN , rn to c to get xN
Set yN ← yapo
∆t ← 1/N
for n ← N to 1 do
    t ← n/N
    Predict scores and drifts α, β, γ, δ, ϵ, η ← s(xn , yn , t)
    // Ligand Updates
   ∆σtr2 = σtr2 (n/N ) − σtr2 ((n − 1)/N )
     2         2               2
   ∆σrot = σrot  (n/N ) − σrot   ((n − 1)/N )
     2         2               2
   ∆σtor = σtor (n/N ) − σtor    ((n − 1)/N )
   Sample ztr , zrot , ztor from N (0, σtr2 ), N (0, σrot
                                                      2             2
                                                          ), N (0, σtor )
   Apply (α, β, γ) to xn to get xn−1
    // Protein Updates
   ∆rnbb ← δ · ∆t
   ∆Rnbb ← ϵ · ∆t
   ∆θnsc ← η · ∆t
   Apply ∆rnbb , ∆Rtbb , ∆θnsc to yn to get yn−1
end


structure that have at least one heavy atom within 5Å of any ligand atom. Given these pocket residues,
the pocket center is defined based on the positions of the Cα atom in the apo structure. To construct
the geometric graphs (Appendix D), we also use the residues which have a Cα atom within 20Å of
the pocket center. This additional buffer is added to improve the model’s robustness to exact pocket
definitions, and also add geometric information from the pocket neighborhood.

Aligning Apo-Holo Frames. A residue frame (Jumper et al., 2021), is characterized by a tuple
(R, t) ∈ SE(3), where the rotation R is about the origin of the residue, and t specifies the position
of the Cα atom. Before applying the conformer matching step (explained below) to the protein
sidechains, we align the frames of the apo and holo structures, by computing the rotation that
aligns the N − Cα vectors of the corresponding residues. The alignment will not be perfect owing
to differences in the bond lengths and bond angles between the computationally generated and
ground truth structures, but provides the closest modification of the apo structure backbone to the
holo-structure one.

Conformer Matching. For both the ligand and the protein sidechains, we apply the conformer
matching procedures in (Jing et al., 2022) and (Plainer et al., 2023), where, given the local structures
from computational methods, we find the closest (in an RMSD sense) structure to the ground truth
by modifying the appropriate torsion angles. The conformer matching procedure is employed to
prevent a distribution shift between training and inference in the local structures that are considered
rigid in the manifold docking process. To elaborate, the local structures (such as bond lengths and
bond angles) vary between RDKit (for ligands) and ESMFold (for proteins) generated structures, and
their ground truth counterparts. If we train our models with ground truth local structures, this would
cause a distribution shift at inference time, when we only have access to local structures, provided by
RDKit and ESMFold.

B.1   E NERGY LOSS FORMULATION

To construct the flat-bottom potential defined in Equation 10, for any pair of atoms (i, j), we define
the lower and upper distances bounds Li,j and Ui,j in the following manner:

      1. If the atom pair (i, j) represents a covalent bond between ligand atoms


                                                         17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Algorithm 5: T RAINING E POCH : R ELAXATION
Input: Training Pairs {(xdock , xholo , ydock , yholo , {i}pocket )}, RMSD cutoff crelax
foreach xdock , xholo , ydock , yholo , {i}pocket do
    if 0.5 · RMSD(ydock , yholo ) + 0.5 · RMSD(xdock , xholo ) > crelax then
         continue
    else
         Sample t ∼ U(0, 1)
        // Ligand Flow
        Interpolate ∆rtlig ← xdock · (1 − t) + xholo · t
        ulig
         t (·|z) ← xholo − xdock
        Apply ∆rtlig to xdock to get xt
        // Protein Flow
        Interpolate ∆rtprot ← ydock · (1 − t) + yholo · t
        uprot
         t (·|z) ← yholo − ydock
        Apply ∆rtprot to ydock to get yt
        // Make Prediction
        Predict drifts α, β ← sr (xt , yt , t)
        Apply α to xdock to get x̂1
        Apply β to ydock to get ŷ1
        x̂1 , ŷ1 ← RMSDA LIGN(x̂1 , ŷ1 , yholo , {i}pocket )
        // Compute Loss
                    PN (i)        (i)
        Llig = N1 i ∥x̂1 − xholo ∥2
                   1
                      P  M    (i)   (i) 2
        Lprot = M        i ∥ŷ1 − yholo
                                       ∥
                           P             (i)   (j)                     (i)   (j)
        Linternal_energy = i,j max x̂1 − x̂1 − Ui,j , 0 + max Li,j − x̂1 − x̂1 , 0

                          P                  (i)   (j)
        Lcross_energy = i,j max Li,j − x̂1 − ŷ1 , 0
      L = λlig Llig + λatom Latom + λenergy
                                     t      (Linternal_energy + Lcross_energy )
   end
end


             • Li,j is set to 0.75 times the lower distance bound used by RDKit
             • Ui,j is set to 1.25 times the upper distance bound used by RDKit
      2. If the atom pair (i, j) represents two substituents of the same central ligand atom
             • Li,j is set to 0.75 times the lower distance bound used by RDKit
             • Ui,j is set to 1.25 times the upper distance bound used by RDKit
      3. If the atom pair (i, j) represents two ligand atoms that are neither covalently bonded nor
         bonded to the same central atom
             • Li,j is set to 0.8 times the lower distance bound used by RDKit
             • No upper bound is used
      4. If the atom pair (i, j) includes one protein and one ligand atom
             • Li,j is set to the sum of each atom’s Van der Waal’s radius used by RDKit minus 0.75
             • No upper bound is used
      5. If the atom pair (i, j) represents two protein atoms
             • No lower bound is used
             • No upper bound is used

Under this formulation, any conformation for which the potential is zero will pass the following
PoseBusters validity checks as defined in Buttenschoen et al. (2024):


                                                     18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Algorithm 6: I NFERENCE : R ELAXATION
Input: Manifold Docking Predictions (xdock , ydock )
Input: Inference Steps N
Set x1 ← xdock
Set y1 ← ydock
∆t ← 1/N
for n ← 0toN − 1 do
    t ← n/N
    Predict scores α, β ← s(xn , yn , t)
    Apply α to xn to get xn1
    Apply β to yn to get yn1
end


       • Bond length validity due to condition (1)
       • Bond angle validity due to condition (2)
       • Internal steric clash due to condition (3)
       • Minimum protein-ligand distance due to condition (4)

During training, we scale the energy loss term from a weight of 0 at t = 0 to 1 at t = 1 with the
                                    αt
exponential schedule: λenergy
                          t
                                       −1
                                = eeα −1  and α = −2.5. Additionally, since the RMSD of the ligand
is typically greater than that of the protein in docked poses, we further scale the ligand and protein
losses with weights λlig = 1.0 and λprot respectively.

C    M ODEL A RCHITECTURE
We use message passing networks based on tensor products of irreducible representations (irreps) of
SO(3), implemented with the e3nn library.

Graph Construction. We represent structures as geometric heterogeneous graphs, with nodes
comprising ligand heavy atoms, receptor residues in the pocket and neighborhood (located at the
position of Cα atoms), and the heavy atoms of the pocket residues. We chose to only model the
heavy atoms of the pocket residues for two reasons - i) this provides a useful sparsity constraint
for computational and memory efficiency, and ii) typically, most of the conformational changes
in the protein involve the pocket atoms, and modeling this explicitly would facilitate downstream
applications such as affinity prediction. We also adopt different cutoffs depending on the types of
nodes being connected, largely following (Corso et al., 2022):

      1. Ligand atoms-ligand atoms, receptor atoms-receptor atoms, and ligand atom-receptor atom
         interactions use a cutoff of 5Å. Covalent bonds between ligand atoms are explicitly modeled
         with initial edge embeddings to reflect the type of bond. For receptor atoms, we limit the
         maximum number of neighbors to 12.
      2. For receptor residue interactions, we use a distance cutoff of 15Å, with a maximum neighbor
         limit of 24.
      3. For interactions between ligand atoms and receptor residues, unlike (Corso et al., 2022),
         we found using the dynamic cutoff based on the ligand translation noise to cause NaNs
         during training, possibly due to missing connections. We thus used a distance cutoff of 80Å
         between ligand atoms and receptor residues.
      4. Receptor pocket atoms are also connected to their corresponding residues.

Featurization. We adopted the same featurization as D IFF D OCK, using the residue type and
the embeddings with ESM2 Language model for the residues, the atom type, and other chemical
properties for the ligand and receptor atoms. The relaxation model additionally uses the Van der
Waals radii as features for ligand and receptor atoms as well as the RDKit upper and lower distance
geometry bounds as features for ligand edges.


                                                 19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Manifold Docking and Relaxation We retain the core architecture of D IFF D OCK (Corso et al.,
2022), with the tensor product convolution-based message-passing layers, followed by a convolution
with the center of mass to predict the rotational and translation scores for the ligand. For the torsion
angles in the ligand and sidechain torsion angles in the protein, we use the pseudotorque layer from
(Jing et al., 2022), adapted accordingly for the sidechains. To predict the rotation and translation flows
for the residues (which are SE(3) equivariant), we use a linear layer that transforms the irreps of the
residue embeddings to a single odd and even vector (one for each flow). Since the residues constitute
a coarse-grained representation of the protein, we sum the odd and even vector representations to
obtain the predictions. For the relaxation model, we predict a single vector for each ligand and protein
atom. The magnitudes of the predictions are then adjusted with an MLP.

Confidence Model. The embedding layers for the confidence model follow the same architecture
as the manifold docking and relaxation. The aggregated ligand, receptor residue, and receptor atom
embeddings are concatenated, and updated with an MLP to predict the final confidence (a SE(3)
invariant output).


D    E XPERIMENTAL D ETAILS

The code used for running our experiments can be found at https://github.com/vsomnath/
flexdock.

Data. For training our models, we use the PDBBind dataset (Liu et al., 2017) whose complexes were
extracted from the PDB. Following (Stärk et al., 2022; Corso et al., 2022), we adopt the time-based
split of PDBBind, where the 17k complexes before 2019 were divided into training and validation
sets, while the 363 complexes after 2019 form the test set. We download the PDBBind data as it is
provided by EquiBind Stärk et al. (2022). These files are first processed by PDBFixer from the
OpenMM toolbox (Eastman et al., 2017), to replace non standard residues and add missing atoms. We
then used the PDBFixer processed files to extract the protein sequence, and predict its structure with
ESMFold (Lin et al., 2022). The ESMFold generated files are also processed by PDBFixer to add
missing atoms such as terminal oxygens, at the end of a chain. These processed files now constitute
our apo structures, while the processed analogues from PDBBind constitute our holo structures. We
further remove hydrogen atoms while aligning the apo and holo structures.
To measure the validity and physicality of generated poses, we also use the PoseBusters suite of tests
(Buttenschoen et al., 2024), which evaluate i) chemical validity, ii) intramolecular validity for the
ligand poses based on energetics and geometry, and iii) intermolecular interactions and steric clashes
between protein and ligand.

Metrics. To evaluate the generated ligand and protein pocket poses, we compute the RMSD between
the predicted and ground truth poses after alignment. This alignment is computed based on the
Kabsch alignment between the atoms in the protein pocket, in the ground truth and predicted poses.
To account for permutation symmetries in the ligand, we use the symmetry-corrected RMSD of
sPyRMSD. For the ligand, besides the median RMSD, we report the % of RMSDs below 2Å, which
is a commonly adopted metric for judging the quality of docking predictions (Alhossary et al., 2015;
Hassan et al., 2017; McNutt et al., 2021). For the protein pocket atoms, besides the median RMSD,
we report the % of RMSDs below 1Å, where we chose the 1Å cutoff, typically treated as atomic
accuracy.

Training Details. For our manifold docking model (75.3 M parameters), we use an exponential
moving average of weights (EMA) during training, which is updated at every optimization step, with
a decay factor of 0.999. We train the model on 4 RTX A6000 GPUs, with a batch size of 4 per GPU.
Every 10 epochs, we run inference for 20 steps with the EMA weights on 500 complexes in the
validation set, and save the model with the largest percentage of ligand RMSDs < 2Å. The initial
learning rate of the model is 0.001, which is updated with a learning rate scheduler with decay 0.7 if
the percentage of complexes with ligand RMSDs < 2Å does not improve over 30 epochs. We train
our model for 600 epochs, after which we did not observe a noticeable increase in ligand RMSDs <
2Å metric. We use the A DAM optimizer for all our models.


                                                   20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                                 Posebusters V2 - Checks
                        100                                                                                        AF3
                                                                                                                   FlexDock
                                                                                                                   DiffDock
                        80
% of passing examples


                        60

                        40

                        20

                         0
                                                                             reo lity
                                 ds

                                                                                   rF n


                                                                                 nd ds


                                                                              ou ings
                                                                Bo dral ula



                                                                                              ry


                                                                            rom ngles



                                                                             l S onds

                                                                              En lash

                                                                                                o
                                                                 Pla Bon ths


                                                                             nic nce


                                                                                              ns
                                                                               ic C ors

                                                                             wit tors



                                                                              nic ors

                                                                                                s
                                                                                           tor
                                                  um tanc Liga Rati
                                                                                             io


                                                                                          ist
                                loa


                                                                                            n


                                                                          ga rotei
                                          t
                                                                                         rm

                                                                         Ste hira


                                                                                         ng


                                                                                           t


                                                                         rga act
                                                                                        Bo


                                                                                          a
                                      iza


                                             Vo Volu Inorg ofac

                                              lum erla rlap fac


                                                                                       fac
                                                                                         C
                                                                        na tic R
                                                                                      em


                                                                                        B


                                                         tan o Or Dist
                                                                                    dA
                                                                                      Le


                                                                                    rgy
                                                                                       o
                              File


                                                                                     ric


                                                                      ino cof
                                     nit


                                                                      Int ble


                                                                                  hp
                                                                                      o


                                                                                   co
                                                                                     C
                                                                                  ch


                                                                                   C
                                                                                   a



                                                                                   e

                                                                                  e
                                     Sa


                                                                                 d
                                           ula


                                                                                 t


                                                                                ic
                                                                               n
                                                                            Bo


                                                                              n
                                                                           an
                                                                          rD
                                          lec

                                                                            e


                                                                         era


                                                                          ga
                                                                         rA
                                                                         ah


                                                         rla th or
                                      Mo

                                               r


                                                                      na


                                                                     ein
                                                                     nd
                                            Tet


                                                                       e
                                                                  Pla


                                                                  ov



                                                                ith
                                                                   t

                                                                  t


                                                                   i
                                                                to



                                                   eo pw
                                                   um Pro

                                                                e



                                                             me



                                                            pw
                                                             ce
                                                             le


                                                            m
                                                ub


                                           Min imu

                                                       Dis
                                            Do


                                                        v
                                                     Dis


                                                      ve
                                                     eo
                                                   Min


                                                 lum
                                                im
                                              im


                                           Vo
                                          Min
                         Figure 6: Detailed comparison of the validty checks offered in PoseBusters V2 benchmark


For the confidence model, we use a smaller version of the manifold docking model 4 M parameters
to generate 20 poses (both ligand and protein) per training complex. For the ligand, we assign label 1
if the RMSDS between predicted (after alignment) and ground truth pose is <2Å, while for protein
pocket atoms, we adopt an RMSD cutoff of 1Å. We train the confidence model for around 100 epochs,
and save the model with the best accuracy. We found the model predicting only the ligand pose
confidence to offer the best tradeoff between ligand and pocket atom prediction confidence.

Runtimes. Similar to other ML docking baselines, we measure runtimes for the manifold docking
and confidence model. These runtimes are calculated on a single RTX A100 80GB GPU, with the
preprocessing steps entailing ESM2 embedding generation and RDKit conformer generation. The
geometric graphs are generated on the fly as part of the model and thus are already included in the
runtimes.

E                        A DDITIONAL A NALYSIS
E.1                           C OMPARISONS ON P OSEBUSTERS BENCHMARK

We include a stratification of different validity checks adopted in PoseBusters, comparing against
A LPHA F OLD 3 and D IFF D OCK in Figure 6 . The numbers for A LPHA F OLD 3 and D IFF D OCK were
taken from (Abramson et al., 2024). We find that F LEX D OCK generates highly valid molecules with
very low computational overhead ( 0.3s), and has a significant improvement from D IFF D OCK on the
intermolecular validity checks.
E.2                           C OMPARING RMSD D ISTRIBUTIONS

Training and Test Distributions In Figure 7, we plot the all-atom (AA) RMSDs between ESM-
F OLD and holo structures in the training and test sets. While the AA-RMSDs is largely within 4A,
there is a very long tail of significantly larger distances which impact the expected squared coupling
distance when using Flow Matching.

Large Conformational Changes. In Figure 8, we plot the AA-RMSDs between the ESMFold
and holo structures, and also between the corresponding predicted and holo structures for large
conformational changes (> 4Å). We find that F LEX D OCK is able to shift the distributions towards


                                                                   21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                      Training
          0.6                                         Test                                              pred_holo_aa_rmsds
                                                                                0.30                    apo_holo_aa_rmsds
          0.5
                                                                                0.25
          0.4
                                                                                0.20
Density


                                                                      Density
          0.3
                                                                                0.15
          0.2
                                                                                0.10
          0.1
                                                                                0.05
          0.0
                0    5    10       15       20   25       30                    0.00
                           All-Atom (AA) RMSDs                                         4   6   8       10       12           14
                                                                                               RMSDs

Figure 7: Distributions of AA-RMSDs between                           Figure 8: RMSD Distributions for Large Confor-
ESMFold and holo structures in the training and
test sets.                                                            mational Changes (>4Å)



lower RMSDs compared to the initial distribution. This is reasonable since the model updates the
apo structure to the closest structure based on the learned underlying transport. Additionally, we find
that 77.5% of poses pass the Posebusters validity checks, indicating the ability of our model to find
physically meaningful poses, even in this extreme setting.

ESMFlow vs ESMFold In Figure 8, we plot the AA-RMSDs between the apo and holo structures,
where the apo structures are generated either using ESMFold or its flow matching counterpart
ESMFlow (Jing et al., 2024). The distributions look largely similar, with most of the RMSDs within
5A, followed by a long tail of larger RMSDs. This also highlights the limited ability of current
methods to capture the diversity in the conformational space of apo protein structures.


Figure 9: AA-RMSD distributions between apo and holo structures, with apo structures generated
using ESMFold or ESMFlow


E.3             S AMPLE E FFICIENCY

In practice, rather than the actual sampling efficiency, one is often interested in indirect measurements
of the same, and using that to compare different methods. These indirect measurements are based


                                                                 22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                   40                                                                  40
                                                        1 samples                                                           1 samples
                   35                                   5 samples                      35                                   5 samples
                                                        10 samples                                                          10 samples
                   30                                                                  30
% Lig-RMSDs < 2A


                                                                     % AA-RMSDs < 1A
                   25                                                                  25
                   20                                                                  20
                   15                                                                  15
                   10                                                                  10
                    5                                                                   5
                    0                                                                   0
                        2.0   4.0       6.0      10.0      FM=                              2.0   4.0       6.0      10.0      FM=
                                    Cutoff cdock                                                        Cutoff cdock

                                    Figure 10: Sample Efficiency for different cutoffs cdock


on performance achieves on desired metrics, with a fixed number of samples. In Figure 10, we plot
the best achievable performance for each cdock for 1, 5, 10 samples. Comparing FM with UFM (4A),
where cdock = 4.0 for instance, we can clearly see that even with 10 samples, FM achieves a worse
performance on ligand docking, compared to UFM (4A), with 5 samples, making UFM (4A) more
sample efficient.


                                                                     23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


F   V ISUALIZED E XAMPLES


(a) 6FE5, L-RMSD: 0.66, AA-RMSD: 0.72,              (b) 6OD6, L-RMSD: 0.61, AA-RMSD: 0.81,
APO-HOLO-RMSD: 3.93                                 APO-HOLO-RMSD: 1.67


(c) 6BQD, L-RMSD: 0.51, AA-RMSD: 0.42,              (d) 6ROT, L-RMSD: 0.71, AA-RMSD: 0.57,
APO-HOLO-RMSD: 0.56                                 APO-HOLO-RMSD: 0.94


 (e) 6OOY, L-RMSD: 3.97, AA-RMSD: 8.75               (f) 6CKL, L-RMSD: 3.51, AA-RMSD: 9.01

Figure 11: Visualized predictions for the complexes 6FE5, 6OD6, 6BQD, 6ROT, 6OOY, and 6CKL
in the PDBBind test dataset. L-RMSD and AA-RMSD denote Ligand RMSD and All-Atom RMSD
respectively, after aligning the predicted and ground truth pockets. Color Code: Holo protein (in
lime), predicted protein (magenta), true ligand (cyan) and predicted ligand (orange).


                                               24
