Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


R ETHINKING V ISUAL C OUNTERFACTUAL
E XPLANATIONS T HROUGH R EGION C ONSTRAINT
 Bartlomiej Sobieski ∗                             Jakub Grzywaczewski
 University of Warsaw                              Warsaw University of Technology
 b.sobieski@uw.edu.pl                              jakub.grzywaczewski2.stud@pw.edu.pl

 Bartlomiej Sadlej                                                    Matthew Tivnan
 University of Warsaw                                                 Harvard Medical School
 b.sadlej@student.uw.edu.pl                                           mtivnan@mgh.harvard.edu

 Przemyslaw Biecek
 University of Warsaw, Warsaw University of Technology
 przemyslaw.biecek@pw.edu.pl



                                                A BSTRACT

             Visual counterfactual explanations (VCEs) have recently gained immense popu-
             larity as a tool for clarifying the decision-making process of image classifiers. This
             trend is largely motivated by what these explanations promise to deliver – indicate
             semantically meaningful factors that change the classifier’s decision. However, we
             argue that current state-of-the-art approaches lack a crucial component – the re-
             gion constraint – whose absence prevents from drawing explicit conclusions, and
             may even lead to faulty reasoning due to phenomenons like confirmation bias. To
             address the issue of previous methods, which modify images in a very entangled
             and widely dispersed manner, we propose region-constrained VCEs (RVCEs),
             which assume that only a predefined image region can be modified to influence
             the model’s prediction. To effectively sample from this subclass of VCEs, we pro-
             pose Region-Constrained Counterfactual Schrödinger Bridges (RCSB), an adap-
             tation of a tractable subclass of Schrödinger Bridges to the problem of conditional
             inpainting, where the conditioning signal originates from the classifier of interest.
             In addition to setting a new state-of-the-art by a large margin, we extend RCSB
             to allow for exact counterfactual reasoning, where the predefined region contains
             only the factor of interest, and incorporating the user to actively interact with the
             RVCE by predefining the regions manually.


1       I NTRODUCTION

Visual counterfactual explanations (VCEs) aim at explaining the decision-making process of an
image classifier by modifying the input image in a semantically meaningful and minimal way so
that its decision changes. Over time, they have become an independent research direction with the
latest methods presenting impressive and visually appealing results. Nevertheless, in this work we
show that they possess a fundamental flaw at a conceptual level – the lack of region constraint and
its proper utilization.
Consider the image x∗ in Fig. 1, which the classifier f correctly predicts to be a jay. In
essence, VCEs focus on semantically editing x∗ so that the prediction of f changes to some
target class – bulbul in this case – hence providing an answer to a specific what-if ques-
tion, through which the model’s reasoning is explained. Consider now an example VCE for
x∗ , denoted as xVCE , obtained with a recent state-of-the-art (SOTA) method. While xVCE
is successful at changing the prediction of f and can be considered both realistic and se-
mantically close to x∗ , answering why f now predicts it as a bulbul is close to impossible.
    ∗
        Corresponding author


                                                       1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


The algorithm simultaneously modifies the
bird’s head and feathers, changes the texture
of the branch and even modifies the copy-
right caption. The entanglement and disper-
sion of introduced changes hence leaves the
question unanswered. We argue that to cir-
cumvent these fundamental difficulties, VCEs
should be synthesized with a hard constraint
on the region, where the changes are allowed
to appear, while leaving the rest of the image
unchanged. For example, consider the image
x∗R with regions of the bird’s head (R1 ) and
body (R2 ) overlayed. Constraining the VCEs
to introduce changes only to predetermined re-
gions leads to two distinct explanations, xR1
and xR2 , of why the decision changes to bul-
bul. By isolating the modified factors, the ex-
planatory process greatly simplifies – one can
now state with certainty that f ’s new predic-
tion is based either on the modified feathers       Figure 1: Previous methods create VCEs with un-
(xR2 ) or the changed characteristics of its head   constrained changes, making it virtually impossi-
(xR1 ). Region-constrained VCEs (RVCEs) al-         ble to understand the decision-making process of
low, therefore, to reason about the model’s         a model. We propose region-constrained VCEs,
thought process in a causal and principled man-     establishing a new paradigm for comprehensible
ner, mitigating the potential confirmation bias     and actionable explanatory process.
and clarifying the explanatory process.
By putting RVCEs in the spotlight, our work establishes new frontiers in the field of VCE genera-
tion. First, we define the objective of finding RVCEs as solving a conditional inpainting task. By
building on top of the Image-to-Image Schrödinger Bridge (I2 SB, Liu et al. (2023a)) approach and
adapting it to the classifier guidance scheme, we develop an efficient algorithm which synthesizes
RVCEs with extreme realism, sparsity and closeness to the original image. Specifically, we set a
new quantitative state-of-the-art (SOTA) on ImageNet (Deng et al., 2009) with up to 4 times better
scores in FID and 3 times better sFID (realism), up to 2 times higher COUT (sparsity), and match or
exceed S3 (similarity) and Flip Rate (efficiency) achieved by previous methods. Through large-scale
experiments, we demonstrate that, besides a fully automated way of synthesizing meaningful and
highly interpretable RVCEs, our approach, Region-constrained Counterfactual Schrödinger Bridge
(RCSB), allows to infer causally about the model’s change in prediction and enables the user to
actively interact with the explanatory process by manually defining the region of interest. More-
over, our results highlight the importance of RVCEs in future research, indicating potential pitfalls
of unconstrained methods that could lead to drawing misleading conclusions.

2   BACKGROUND & R ELATED W ORK
In this section, we introduce the necessary background knowledge connected with score-based gen-
erative models (SGMs) and I2 SB, which forms the foundation of our method. We then present an
overview of recent methods for VCE generation based on SGMs. For an extended literature review
and detailed description of the theoretical basis, please refer to the Appendix.
SGM. Following the work of Song et al. (2021), SGMs can be constructed through the framework
of stochastic differential equations (SDEs), where samples from a complex distribution p0 (e.g.,
natural images) are mapped to a Gaussian distribution p1 , while the model is trained to reverse this
mapping. Formally, converting data to noise is performed by following the forward SDE (Eq. (1a)),
while denoising happens through the reverse SDE (Eq. (1b), Anderson (1982)):
                                            p
                         dxt = Ft (xt )dt + βt dw,                                              (1a)
                                                                    p
                         dxt = (Ft (xt ) − βt ∇xt log p(xt , t))dt + βt dw̄,                    (1b)
where xt is the noisy version of a clean image x ∈ Rn for some n ∈ N at timestep t ∈ [0, 1] ,
w and w̄ denote the Wiener process and its reversed (in time) counterpart, Ft (xt ) : Rn → Rn is


                                                    2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


the drift coefficient, βt ∈ R is the diffusion coefficient and ∇xt log p(xt , t) is the score function.
An SGM sθ , where θ denotes the model’s parameters, is trained to approximate the score, i.e.,
sθ (xt , t) ≈ ∇xt log p(xt , t). During sampling, denoising begins from pure noise x1 ∼ p1 and
follows some discretized version of Eq. (1b) with the approximate score sθ .
SGMs can also be adapted to conditional generation, where y represents the conditioning variable.
In this case, the score ∇xt log p(xt , t) is replaced by ∇xt log p(xt , t | y), which can be decomposed
with Bayes’ Theorem into ∇xt log p(xt , t | y) = ∇xt log p(xt , t) + ∇xt log p(y | xt , t). While
∇xt log p(xt , t) can be approximated with an already trained sθ , ∇xt log p(y | xt , t) must be mod-
eled additionally. For y representing class labels, p(y | xt , t) can be approximated with an auxiliary
time-dependent classifier pϕ (y | xt , t) trained on noisy images {xt }t∈[0,1] . Incorporating pϕ into
the sampling process is termed as classifier guidance (CG), and can be strengthened (or weakened)
with guidance scale s through ∇xt log p(xt , t)+s·∇xt log p(y | xt , t). Therefore, class-conditional
sampling in SGMs amounts to additionally maximizing the likelihood pϕ (y | xt , t) of the classi-
fier throughout the generative process to arrive at images from the data manifold, which resemble
(according to pϕ ) instances of a specific class. We emphasize this fact here for further reference.
I2 SB. The framework of I2 SB ex-
tends SGMs to p1 representing an
arbitrary data distribution.       For
training, I2 SB requires paired data,
e.g., in the form of clean and par-
tially masked samples for inpainting,
where it learns to infill the miss-
ing parts. While SGMs can also
be adapted to solve inverse prob-
lems like inpainting, I2 SB maps these
samples directly (see Fig. 2 for a                                             2
comparison of their generative tra- Figure 2: Generative2 trajectories of I SB and SGM. Inter-
jectories). Therefore, I2 SB follows mediate images of I SB are much closer to the data mani-
the same theoretical paradigm, where fold.
sampling is achieved by discretizing
Eq. (1b) and using a score approximator sψ , but the generative process begins from a corrupted
(e.g., masked) image instead of pure noise. Hence, I2 SB can also be adapted to conditional gen-
eration in the same manner as SGMs, especially for class-conditioning with an auxiliary classifier.
Importantly, a special case of I2 SB follows an optimal transport ordinary differential equation (OT-
ODE) when βt → 0, eliminating stochasticity beyond the initial sampling step (see Appendix). We
utilize the OT-ODE version of I2 SB in our implementation.
SGM-based VCEs. The initial approach of adapting SGMs to VCE generation, DiME (Jeanneret
et al., 2022), obtains the classifier’s gradient by mapping the noised image to its clean version at
each step through the reverse process. Augustin et al. (2022) (DVCE) incorporate the gradient of a
robust classifier and a cone projection scheme. Jeanneret et al. (2023) (ACE) decompose the VCE
generation into pre-explanation construction and refinement using RePaint (Lugmayr et al., 2022).
Jeanneret et al. (2024) utilize a foundation model, Stable Diffusion (SD, Rombach et al. (2022)), to
generate VCEs in a black-box scenario. Farid et al. (2023) (LDCE) and Motzkus et al. (2024) utilize
Latent Diffusion Models (LDMs), including SD, in a white-box context. Weng et al. (2024) propose
FastDiME to accelerate the generation process in a shortcut learning scenario. Also in black-box
context, Sobieski & Biecek (2024) utilize a Diffusion Autoencoder (Preechakul et al., 2022) to find
semantic latent directions that globally flip the classifier’s decision. Augustin et al. (2024) also make
use of SD in various contexts, including classifier disagreement and neuron activation besides VCEs.
While ACE and FastDiME also assume constraints to some regions, those are always classifier-
dependent. In this work, we consider a more general definition provided in the next section.
3   M ETHOD
In this section, we describe the details of our approach, beginning with the formulation of RVCEs
as solutions to conditional inpainting task. Next, we motivate the use of I2 SB as an effective prior
for synthesizing meaningful RVCEs and follow with a series of steps that better align the gradients
of a standard classifier w.r.t corrupted images from its generative trajectory. We conclude with a
description of the automated region extraction method, forming the basis of our algorithm.


                                                   3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


     Factual       Region         Naive      + Tweedie's     + ADAM           + Adaptive    + Trajectory
                                               estimate       stabilization   normalization   truncation


                                   46.4       27.5 (-18.9)     23.1 (-4.4)      20.2 (-2.9)   16.1 (-4.1)
Figure 3: Series of proposed improvements to better align the gradient’s of the classifier of interest
with the generative trajectory. Changes to the factual image are constrained to the indicated region.
Subsequent images illustrate the influence of each new adaptation. Numbers below images corre-
spond to FID (↓) values obtained in a larger-scale experiment (for details, see Appendix).

RVCEs through conditional inpainting. We define the problem of finding RVCEs for the classifier
f from a given image x∗ , a region R and target class label y, where arg maxy′ f (y ′ | x∗ ) ̸= y, as
the task of sampling from

                   p(x | arg max f (y ′ | x) = y, (1 − R) ⊙ x = (1 − R) ⊙ x∗ ),                             (2)
                             y′

where R is a binary mask with 1 indicating the region which is not restricted to depend on the
classifier f . Intuitively, sampling from Eq. (2) means obtaining x with the complement of R un-
changed and the content of R modified in a way that changes the decision of f to y, i.e., performing
inpainting with additional condition coming from the classifier f .
Synthesizing meaningful RVCEs. Looking at Eq. (2), one quickly realizes that obtaining seman-
tically meaningful RVCEs requires maximizing the likelihood f (y | x) of the classifier while in-
painting R with content that keeps x in the data manifold. These conditions greatly resemble the
CG scheme in the context of I2 SB, since the score estimate sψ serves as an effective prior for gen-
erating in-manifold infills, while the likelihood pϕ (y | x) of an auxiliary classifier is maximized
to ensure that pϕ predicts them as instances of y. Moreover, I2 SB maps masked images directly to
clean samples, leaving the content outside R unchanged in the final image.
The above arguments suggest that inserting f in place of pϕ should function as an effective mech-
anism for sampling meaningful RVCEs. However, a fundamental drawback of this naive approach
is that, throughout the generative process, f ’s gradients originate from evaluating it on images with
highly noised infills inside R (see Fig. 2). Such corrupted images are far from what f observed
during training, hence leading to a misalignment of its gradients with the correct trajectory and
generation of out-of-manifold samples. Similar issue has been identified by previously mentioned
SGM-based methods for VCEs, which can be generally unified as attempts to replace the auxiliary
classifier pϕ with f in the CG scheme in SGMs and correct f ’s gradients. Following Fig. 2, one
should expect the misalignment in these methods to be of great extent, as the generative trajectory
consists of highly noised images, leaving no meaningful content for f to provide accurate gradients.
There, as shown in Fig. 2, I2 SB provides a crucial advantage, which stems from its generative tra-
jectory being much closer to the data manifold. Moreover, by using I2 SB, f is able to effectively
utilize the readily available context outside R. Hence, in the following, we focus on reducing the
misalignment problem caused by the noised content inside R, in the end arriving at a highly effective
algorithm for meaningful RVCEs.
Aligning the gradients. We propose to adapt the gradients of f to properly align with the generative
trajectory of I2 SB through a series of incremental steps. To provide the intuition standing behind the
introduction of each consecutive improvement, Fig. 3 provides an example RVCE task, where the
factual image depicts a zebra correctly predicted by the model (ResNet50 (He et al., 2016)), and the
goal is to change the decision to ‘sorrel’. We set the region constraint to include the entire animal to
make the task challenging enough and verify the improvements quantitatively through a large-scale
experiment with around 2000 images. For each step, we compute FID between the RVCEs and
original images to assess their realism. For details on the experimental setup, see Appendix.
Naive. We first verify that naively plugging f in place of pϕ does not provide meaningful results.
Indeed, as shown in Fig. 3, the method struggles to include the information from f . The unrealistic
infill also suggests that the classifier’s signal negatively influences the score from I2 SB.


                                                   4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Tweedie’s formula. To begin with closing the gap between the data manifold and the generative
trajectory, we refer to a classic result of Tweedie’s formula (Robbins, 1992; Chung et al., 2022;
Weng et al., 2024), which states that a denoised estimate of the final image at step t can be achieved
by computing the posterior expectation
                          x̂0 (xt ) := E[x0 | xt ] = xt + σt2 ∇xt log p(xt , t),                    (3)
              R t
where σt2 = 0 βτ dτ . For visual differences between xt and x̂0 (xt ), see Appendix. Crucially,
one has access to approximate x̂0 (xt ) at every step t by utilizing I2 SB as the approximate score.
Replacing ∇xt log f (y | xt ) with ∇xt log f (y | x̂0 (xt )) brings the inputs of f much closer to what
it expects, improving the conditional inpainting process as indicated by Fig. 3, which now shows a
structure resembling a sorrel and a much smaller FID.
ADAM stabilization. Despite utilizing the Tweedie’s estimate, we observed the norms of f ’s gradi-
ents to have a very noisy tendency throughout the generation process, pointing out a possible cause
for visible artifacts and the missing parts of the animal. Hence, we propose to smooth out the gra-
dients by applying the ADAM update rule at each step (Vaeth et al., 2024; Kingma, 2019), to which
we simply refer as ADAM stabilization. Figure 3 indicates that this modification allows for filling
in the missing parts of the sorrel and further lowering FID.
Adaptive normalization. Incorporating ADAM stabilization required greatly lowering the guid-
ance scale to values on the order of 1e−2, as using standard s = 1 led to extreme artifacts. This
phenomenon suggested that the step size could also be adjusted throughout the generation process.
While we initially experimented with various types of schedulers (see Appendix), using adaptive
normalization has empirically proven to be the most effective approach. Specifically, at the begin-
ning of the conditional inpainting process, we register the norm of the first encountered gradient
of the log-likelihood of f . We then use it as a normalizing constant for each subsequent gradient,
meaning that the generation begins with gradient of unit norm. This simple modification not only
further lowered FID, but also reduced the final visible artifacts and improved color balance (Fig. 3).
Trajectory truncation. Up until this point, we relied solely on the ability of I2 SB and the classifier’s
signal to correctly infill the missing regions with semantically meaningful content, with no knowl-
edge of the structure of the missing objects. Since a possible infill of the region is always available
from the original image, one can begin the inpainting process from some intermediate step instead
of the final one. This intervention allows for mixing the available information with the one coming
from the classifier, and gives direct control over the preservation of the original content. As our ap-
proach does not bias the conditional score with signal from any additional losses (like Learned Per-
ceptual Image Patch Similarity (LPIPS Zhang et al. (2018)) or l2 in other works), we can fully rely
on the conceptual compression of I2 SB, similarly to SGMs (Ho et al., 2020), which decomposes the
generation process into initial phases responsible for the overall structure of objects and later ones re-
sponsible for small details. Figure 3 showcases the effect of using this trajectory truncation (τ ) at the
0.4 level, meaning that the infilling process starts from t = τ · T , where T denotes the final timestep.
Understandably, trajectory truncation greatly
lowers the FID score, as much more informa-
tion is available from the very beginning of
the process, and introduces much more sub-
tle changes to the image. We explore the ef-
fect of manipulating τ further in the Appendix,
showing that it functions as a very interpretable
mechanism for controlling the content preser-
vation.
Automated region extraction. While the
introduced algorithmical improvements effec-
tively incorporate the classifier’s signal into the
inpainting process, they do not address the issue
of predetermining the region for the resulting        Figure 4: Example region obtained with our auto-
explanation. To this end, the optimal strategy        mated region extraction. Instead of directly bina-
would be fully automated and focus on regions         rizing an attribution map (upper row), we amplify
that are both important to the classifier’s predic-   the focus on semantic concepts (bottom row) with
tion and point to semantically meaningful con-        a simple approach based on grid cells.
cepts. This description closely resembles the


                                                      5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


role of visual attribution methods, which assign importance values to pixels based on their relevance
to the model’s output (Holzinger et al., 2022). Figure 4 shows an example attribution map obtained
with Integrated Gradients (IG, Sundararajan et al. (2017)) method for the squirrel prediction of a
ResNet50 model. Perceptually, highest attributions are focused around the squirrel’s head. To ex-
tract a region from such attributions, one can threshold them to cover a specific fraction a of the total
image area. However, after binarizing the attributions with a = 0.05, we observe that the resulting
region is highly scattered, losing focus from semantic concepts. To address this issue, we divide the
image into a grid of square cells of size c × c, where each cell receives the value equal to the sum
of the absolute pixel attributions inside it. Figure 4 shows that this postprocessing mechanism (here
with c = 16) greatly amplifies the focus of the resulting map. By thresholding it with a = 0.05, we
observe the extracted region to focus solely on the squirrel’s head. This leads to a fully automated
strategy for obtaining regions that are both aligned with semantically meaningful concepts and based
on pixels that are important for the classifier.
We term the final version of the algorithm which combines all of the aforementioned improvements
with the automated region extraction as RCSB. For the pseudocode of the entire procedure, see
Appendix. We include our implementation at https://github.com/sobieskibj/rcsb.



4   E XPERIMENTS

Following previous works for VCEs on Ima-
                                                       Method     FID       sFID      S3     COUT     FR
geNet, we base the quantitative evaluation on
3 challenging main VCE generation tasks: Ze-                               Zebra – Sorrel

bra – Sorrel, Cheetah – Cougar, Egyptian                ACE l1    84.5      122.7    0.92    −0.45   47.0
                                                        ACE l2    67.7       98.4    0.90    −0.25   81.0
Cat – Persian Cat, where each task requires            LDCE-cls   84.2      107.2    0.78    −0.06   88.0
creating VCEs for images from both classes             LDCE-txt   82.4      107.2    0.71    −0.21   81.0
and flipping the decision to their counterparts.         DVCE     33.1       43.9    0.62    −0.21   57.8
                                                        RCSBC     13.0       20.4    0.82    0.70    99.7
We treat it as a general benchmark for evaluat-         RCSBB     9.51       17.4    0.86    0.72    97.4
ing the effectiveness of RCSB in various sce-           RCSBA     8.0       16.2     0.88    0.74    94.7
narios. We use FID (↓) and sFID (↓) to assess                             Cheetah – Cougar
realism (Heusel et al., 2017), S3 (↑) for repre-
                                                        ACE l1    70.2      100.5    0.91    0.02     77.0
sentation similarity (Chen & He, 2021), COUT            ACE l2    74.1      102.5    0.88    0.12     95.0
∈ [−1, 1] (↑) (Khorram & Fuxin, 2022) for              LDCE-cls   71.0       91.8    0.62    0.51    100.0
sparsity and Flip Rate (FR) (↑) for efficiency.        LDCE-txt   91.2      117.0    0.59    0.34     98.0
                                                         DVCE     46.9       54.1    0.70    0.49     99.0
For qualitative examples, we extend the main            RCSBC     30.2       39.2    0.87    0.79    100.0
tasks with a large array of other tasks, which          RCSBB     23.4       32.4    0.90    0.85     99.9
we show throughout the paper and the Ap-                RCSBA     17.2      26.6     0.92    0.92    100.0
pendix, where more details regarding the exper-                     Egyptian Cat – Persian Cat
imental setup and the metrics description can be        ACE l1    93.6      156.7    0.85    0.25     85.0
found.                                                  ACE l2    107.3     160.4    0.78    0.34     97.0
                                                       LDCE-cls   102.7     140.7    0.63    0.52     99.0
RCSB sets new SOTA for VCEs. We first ver-             LDCE-txt   121.7     162.4    0.61    0.56     99.0
                                                         DVCE     46.6       59.2    0.59    0.60     98.5
ify that synthesizing RVCEs with RCSB leads             RCSBC     41.1       56.3    0.79    0.82    100.0
to new SOTA in VCE generation. Table 1 quan-            RCSBB     31.3       48.1    0.84    0.87    100.0
titatively compares RCSB with recent SOTA               RCSBA     23.0      40.0     0.87    0.92    100.0
approaches to VCEs on ImageNet. Our RVCEs
are much more realistic (at least 2 − 4× de- Table 1: Quantitative comparison with SOTA.
crease in FID and sFID), stay close to orig- RCSB outperforms previous methods by a large
inal images (match or exceed best values of margin across all metrics. The best results are ob-
S3 ) and almost always flip the model’s decision tained with A(a = 0.1, c = 4, s = 3, τ = 0.6),
(FR ≈ 1.0). RCSB also solves a long-standing but the superiority is clear for various configura-
challenge of achieving extremely sparse expla- tions, including B(a = 0.2, c = 4, s = 1.5, τ =
nations on ImageNet, especially on Zebra – 0.6), C(a = 0.3, c = 4, s = 1.5, τ = 0.6).
Sorrel task. While all other methods fail to
achieve nonnegative values, RCSB approaches the upper bound of COUT. Our method is clearly
the most balanced, as it does not struggle on any specific metric like, e.g., DVCE on S3 . In the
Appendix, we show that it is also the most computationally efficient.


                                                   6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 5: Qualitative examples obtained with RCSB using automated region extraction. Each task
of the form predicted class → target class shows the factual image, the extracted region and the
RVCE obtained with RCSB.
Figure 5 shows example explanations obtained with RCSB, greatly highlighting the importance of
synthesizing RVCEs instead of standard VCEs. Our region extraction approach is able to precisely
localize semantic concepts responsible for the model’s decision. For example, in the Guacamole →
Cabbage task, RCSB detects the guacamole bowl in the background and, guided by the classifier,
infills it with cabbage while leaving the rest of the image unchanged. RCSB is capable of performing
a wide range of editing tasks with various levels of difficulty, beginning with textural and color-based
edits (e.g., Tench → Goldfish, Mashed Potato → Cauliflower) to partially changing the object’s
structure (e.g., Limpkin → Flamingo) to infilling the region with new, realistically looking concepts
(e.g., Cougar → Lynx, Green Mamba → Indian Cobra, Cougar → Lynx). Most importantly, thanks
to the region constraint, our RVCEs allow for greatly limiting the potential factors that influenced
the model’s decision, making the explanations much more interpretable.
RCSB allows for causal inference about the model’s reasoning. Drawing definite conclusions
about the model’s reasoning from an unconstrained VCE is not possible, as one cannot be certain that
modifying potentially irrelevant factors did not in fact influence the prediction. RVCEs overcome
this limitation when constrained on the region connected with the sole factor of interest, e.g., the
body of an animal in a species prediction task. To adapt RCSB to such scenario, we replace the
automated region extraction method with a foundation text-to-object-segmentation model 1 . Using
the class name from a given task as the text prompt allows us to obtain highly precise segmentation
masks of the relevant objects, enabling the identification of the cause behind the model’s prediction
change based solely on factors related to the object of interest.
We first quantitatively assess that RCSB is capable of utilizing regions provided by a generic object
detector at scale. Table 2(A) shows the results of this evaluation together with the used text prompt.
Here, the metrics are computed by first discarding images with a mask that covers area larger than

   1
     Language Segment Anything (LangSAM) combines Segment Anything Model (Kirillov et al., 2023) with
GroundingDINO (Liu et al., 2023b) to allow object segmentation from text prompts.


                                                   7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


  Metric     FID    sFID   S3     COUT      FR     FID     sFID     S3    COUT       FR      FID       sFID    S3    COUT        FR
  Task                Zebra – Sorrel                        Cheetah – Cougar                        Egyptian Cat – Persian Cat
  A                   Exact regions obtained with LangSAM and prompts: zebra / horse, cheetah / cougar, cat respectively
  Values     32.8   41.5   0.87   0.74     98.9    37.2    50.6    0.91     0.84     99.4    52.0      82.8   0.81    0.84       99.2
  B                                  Regions based on freeform masks with the area in the indicated range
  10 − 20%   6.7    15.0   0.85   0.85     87.6    9.0     19.1    0.89     0.72     96.6    12.4      29.6   0.80    0.73       96.9
  20 − 30%   7.8    15.8   0.84   0.53     92.2    11.6    21.3    0.88     0.71     99.6    17.7      34.0   0.78    0.74       99.3
  C                                      Ablation study with adaptations of other inpainting algorithms
  RePaint    63.8   76.0   0.55   0.77     99.3   129.3    144.2   0.50     0.77    99.0     148.7    175.2   0.38    0.76    99.5
  MCG        43.2   55.6   0.73   0.45     96.0    76.6     91.4   0.74     0.64    100.0     93.7    117.5   0.62    0.65   99.9
  DDRM       42.5   49.4   0.69   0.72     99.6    60.5     68.4   0.72     0.76    100.0     59.2     73.0   0.63    0.76   100.0


Table 2: Quantitative results from various experiments. A: regions extracted from LangSAM with
text prompt connected to the initial class name. B: regions based on freeform masks that cover the
fraction of the total area from the indicated range. C: automatically extracted regions used with
adaptations of other inpainting algorithms.


40%. Despite I2 SB being trained on masks covering at most 30% of the image area, we observed that
it generalizes well beyond this threshold with 40% starting to pose a challenge. Crucially, despite
the regions being classifier-agnostic and hence not necessarily focused on the most influential pixels,
Table 2(A) indicates that RCSB is versatile enough to maintain most of the performance from the
automated approach. The efficiency, sparsity and representation similarity of the obtained RVCEs
remain very close to the values achieved by the closest configuration (in terms of hyperparameters)
from Table 1, as the region area is often close to or exceeds 30%. The slight increase in FID and
sFID stems mainly from the regions covering complex objects, whose modification may naturally
move RVCEs further from original data at a distribution level, and a lower number of images used
for these metrics’ computation (as both are sensitive to sample size) due to the rejection of samples
from the area constraint.
Regions that contain exactly the objects of interest provide novel insights about the model’s reason-
ing. For example, consider the Lemon → Orange task from Fig. 6, where the lemons were correctly
identified by the ResNet50 model. One would require the VCE for this task to indicate the sole
determining factor of ’why lemons and not oranges’. However, with unconstrained VCEs, this iden-
tification process quickly becomes incomprehensible due to small changes added to each object in
the image, such as other fruits. By constraining VCEs to the region occupied by the lemons, the
reasoning process can be disentangled and simplified, as one can now look for this factor in the
modifications of the lemons only. In this case, RCSB is guided by the classifier to change the image
in a way that is consistent with human intuition.
RVCEs also allow for clarifying the model’s decision-making when its reasoning is not initially
understandable. In the Volcano → Seashore task, the image shows both objects, while the model
predicts it as the former. Applying RCSB to the exact region of the seashore results in a RVCE that
changes the model’s decision when the water’s color becomes more light blue and structures like
stones start to appear. Hence, one is able to better understand what the model actually identifies as a
seashore. In other examples, the method introduces class-specific characteristics when the changes
are constrained precisely and exclusively to the object of interest, ensuring the receiver about the
general cause of the model’s decision change. Such cases are also especially relevant when the
generative model used to synthesize explanations is prone to systematic errors like, e.g., SGMs
struggling with correctly generating hands. In the Night Snake → Kingsnake task, this error can be
bypassed with the region constraint by not allowing the generative model to affect anything other
than the animal, hence alleviating the evaluation of the classifier on out-of-manifold samples.
Discovering complex patterns with interactive RVCEs. Despite the impressive capabilities of
deep models in object localization, the receiver of the explanation may be interested in testing the
model for highly abstract and complex concepts that cannot be localized automatically and must
be provided manually by the user. We begin with verifying the capability of RCSB in generating
RVCEs based on user-defined regions by simulating such scenario at scale. Specifically, we ran-
domly match images from the main tasks with regions given by the 10% − 20% and 20% − 30%
freeform masks from the I2 SB training data (Saharia et al., 2022). We argue that this serves as a very


                                                               8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 6: Qualitative examples obtained with RCSB using exact regions extracted from LangSAM
using text prompt of the predicted class. For each task of the form predicted class → target class,
a factual image together with the used region and the resulting RVCE are shown. The used text
prompts are emphasized.


challenging benchmark, since the algorithm’s access to the most influential pixels (for the classifier)
might often be very restricted.
Despite the task’s difficulty, quantitative results from Table 2(B) highlight the versatility of RCSB,
which is able to effectively utilize the restricted resources to influence the classifier’s prediction.
While S3 , COUT and FR are not significantly different from previous results, we observe a decrease
in FID and sFID, indicating higher realism and closeness to the data distribution. This is largely
due to the fact that freeform masks are often not connected to entire complex objects and do not
contain the pixels most important to the classifier. Hence, RCSB may often leave large portions of
the regions unchanged, which boosts the realism evaluation.
To allow for true interaction of the user with the explanatory process, we implement a simple inter-
face that allows for manual image segmentation using a brush-like cursor. Figure 7 shows example
results, where we manually predefine the regions on different images. This exploration gives impor-
tant insights about the added value provided by RVCEs. In the Cat → Tiger task, we discover that
the classifier’s decision can be flipped by independently modifying either the cat’s paws or snout,
in both cases introducing a tiger’s coloration. Similarly in the Arctic Fox → Red Fox task, choos-
ing either the ears and muzzle or paws and stomach area allows for changing the model’s decision
with the features of a red fox. User-defined regions also allow to discover unusual reasoning pat-
terns of the model. In the Cucumber → Zucchini task, the model’s decision can be influenced by
modifying only one of the cucumbers to zucchini, leaving the other unchanged. This observation
connects with recent positions on the topic of contextual and spatial understanding of predictive
models (Tomaszewska & Biecek, 2024), providing new rationale in further exploring how image
classifiers actually reason.
Ablating RCSB’s components. We empirically verified that combining our novel guidance mecha-
nism with the I2 SB prior leads to highly effective RVCEs. To better understand the benefits provided
by each component of our framework, we perform an ablation study, where we adapt the proposed
improvements to SGM-based inpainters, aiming to assess the influence of the guidance scheme and
I2 SB in isolation. Specifically, we pick RePaint (Lugmayr et al., 2022), one of the first adaptations
of SGMs to inpainting, MCG (Chung et al., 2022) and DDRM (Kawar et al., 2022), two different
adaptations of SGMs to linear inverse problems, which also include inpainting. We manually tune
our guidance scheme to each method on a small subset of images and repeat the same evaluation
protocol with the automated region extraction method (see Appendix for details of each adaptation).


                                                  9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 7: Qualitative examples obtained with RCSB from user-defined regions. For each task of the
form predicted class → target class, a factual image together with the provided regions are shown.
Arrows point to RVCEs obtained by modifying only the indicated region.
As these methods are much less compute-efficient, we cap their computational budget on each task
to 24 A100 GPU hours.
Table 2(C) shows the results of the ablation study. Despite the fact that the used methods were never
explicitly trained for inpainting, combining them with our guidance mechanism and region extrac-
tion allows for matching or even exceeding previous SOTA. For example, all adaptations achieve
very high sparsity, almost always flip the classifier’s decision and keep the explanation close to the
original. This indicates the benefits of utilizing only the pixels from the extracted region and a proper
utilization of the classifier’s gradients without biasing them with additional components like LPIPS
or l2 loss. RCSB differentiates itself from the adaptations with a much higher realism of the obtained
RVCEs (significantly lower FID and sFID), more balanced results and much smaller computational
burden, e.g. 24× less NFEs than RePaint. These benefits stem from the I2 SB prior, which is trained
to map corrupted images directly to clean samples and the resulting trajectory being much closer to
the data manifold, allowing the classifier to more effectively influence the inpainting process.

5   D ISCUSSION & L IMITATIONS
RVCEs offer a new perspective on the concept of VCEs, with RCSB effectively demonstrating their
versatility in various scenarios that have not been explored in previous work. In view of this, enforc-
ing a hard region constraint—potentially chosen independently of the predictive model—introduces
novel challenges and raises important questions. For instance, the explanations do not reveal changes
in the interactions between different objects in the image that influence the model’s decision. Fur-
thermore, due to the absence of ground truth, verifying the actual reasoning of a model based on the
explanation remains difficult, even if RVCEs appear intuitive. Additionally, the evaluation process
of RVCEs may be skewed by the preservation of a large portion of the original pixels (e.g., FID).
We address several of these issues in the Appendix, including two user studies on the general useful-
ness of RVCEs, the possibility of interacting with the explanatory process, and their informativeness
regarding model misclassifications. We also present extended qualitative and quantitative results for
other classifiers, datasets, and attribution methods, empirical demonstrations of some of RCSB’s
capabilities (e.g., shape changes), and other key aspects. We believe that the limitations of RVCEs
and RCSB offer valuable directions for future research.


                                                   10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

This work was financially supported by the Polish National Centre for Research and Development
(NCBiR, xLungs grant no. INFOSTRATEG-I/0022/2021-00). The computational resources were
provided by the Laboratory of Bioinformatics and Computational Genomics and the High Perfor-
mance Computing Center of the Faculty of Mathematics and Information Science, Warsaw Univer-
sity of Technology.

R EFERENCES
Brian DO Anderson. Reverse-time diffusion equation models, volume 12. Stochastic Processes and
  their Applications, Elsevier, 1982.

Maximilian Augustin, Valentyn Boreiko, Francesco Croce, and Matthias Hein. Diffusion visual
 counterfactual explanations. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2022.

Maximilian Augustin, Yannic Neuhaus, and Matthias Hein. Analyzing and explaining image clas-
 sifiers via diffusion guidance. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision
 and Pattern Recognition, 2024.

Sebastian Bach, Alexander Binder, Grégoire Montavon, Frederick Klauschen, Klaus-Robert Müller,
  and Wojciech Samek. On pixel-wise explanations for non-linear classifier decisions by layer-wise
  relevance propagation. In PloS one, 2015.

Przemyslaw Biecek and Wojciech Samek. Position: Explain to question not to justify. In Proceed-
  ings of the 41st International Conference on Machine Learning, volume 235, pp. 3996–4006,
  21–27 Jul 2024.

Valentyn Boreiko, Maximilian Augustin, Francesco Croce, Philipp Berens, and Matthias Hein.
  Sparse visual counterfactual explanations in image space. In DAGM German Conference on
  Pattern Recognition, pp. 133–148. Springer, 2022.

Qiong Cao, Li Shen, Weidi Xie, Omkar M Parkhi, and Andrew Zisserman. Vggface2: A dataset for
  recognising faces across pose and age. In 2018 13th IEEE international conference on automatic
  face & gesture recognition (FG 2018), pp. 67–74. IEEE, 2018.

Chun-Hao Chang, Elliot Creager, Anna Goldenberg, and David Duvenaud. Explaining image clas-
  sifiers by counterfactual generation. In International Conference on Learning Representations,
  2019.

Xinlei Chen and Kaiming He. Exploring simple siamese representation learning. In Proceedings of
  the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, pp. 15750–15758, 2021.

Hyungjin Chung, Byeongsu Sim, Dohoon Ryu, and Jong Chul Ye. Improving diffusion models
  for inverse problems using manifold constraints. In Advances in Neural Information Processing
  Systems, 2022.

Hyungjin Chung, Jeongsol Kim, Michael Thompson Mccann, Marc Louis Klasky, and Jong Chul
  Ye. Diffusion posterior sampling for general noisy inverse problems. In The Eleventh Interna-
  tional Conference on Learning Representations, 2023a.

Hyungjin Chung, Jeongsol Kim, and Jong Chul Ye. Direct diffusion bridge using data consistency
  for inverse problems. In Thirty-seventh Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems,
  2023b.

Jia Deng, Wei Dong, Richard Socher, Li-Jia Li, Kai Li, and Li Fei-Fei. Imagenet: A large-scale hi-
   erarchical image database. In 2009 IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition,
   pp. 248–255. IEEE, 2009.

Li Deng. The mnist database of handwritten digit images for machine learning research. In IEEE
  Signal Processing Magazine, 2012.


                                               11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Prafulla Dhariwal and Alex Nichol. Diffusion models beat gans on image synthesis. In Advances in
  neural information processing systems, 2021.
Alexey Dosovitskiy, Lucas Beyer, Alexander Kolesnikov, Dirk Weissenborn, Xiaohua Zhai, Thomas
  Unterthiner, Mostafa Dehghani, Matthias Minderer, Georg Heigold, Sylvain Gelly, Jakob Uszko-
  reit, and Neil Houlsby. An image is worth 16x16 words: Transformers for image recognition at
  scale. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2021.
Logan Engstrom, Andrew Ilyas, Hadi Salman, Shibani Santurkar, and Dimitris Tsipras. Robustness
  (python library). In https://github.com/MadryLab/robustness, 2019.
Karim Farid, Simon Schrodi, Max Argus, and Thomas Brox. Latent diffusion counterfactual expla-
  nations. In arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.06668, 2023.
Yash Goyal, Ziyan Wu, Jan Ernst, Dhruv Batra, Devi Parikh, and Stefan Lee. Counterfactual visual
  explanations. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 2376–2384. PMLR, 2019.
Kaiming He, Xiangyu Zhang, Shaoqing Ren, and Jian Sun. Deep residual learning for image recog-
  nition. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, pp.
  770–778, 2016.
Martin Heusel, Hubert Ramsauer, Thomas Unterthiner, Bernhard Nessler, and Sepp Hochreiter.
 Gans trained by a two time-scale update rule converge to a local nash equilibrium. In Advances
 in neural information processing systems, 2017.
Jonathan Ho, Ajay Jain, and Pieter Abbeel. Denoising diffusion probabilistic models. In Advances
  in neural information processing systems, 2020.
Andreas Holzinger, Anna Saranti, Christoph Molnar, Przemyslaw Biecek, and Wojciech Samek.
  Explainable AI methods-a brief overview. In International workshop on extending explainable
  AI beyond deep models and classifiers, pp. 13–38. Springer, 2022.
Gao Huang, Zhuang Liu, Laurens Van Der Maaten, and Kilian Q Weinberger. Densely connected
  convolutional networks. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern
  recognition, pp. 4700–4708, 2017.

Paul Jacob, Éloi Zablocki, Hedi Ben-Younes, Mickaël Chen, Patrick Pérez, and Matthieu Cord.
  Steex: steering counterfactual explanations with semantics. In European Conference on Computer
  Vision, pp. 387–403. Springer, 2022.
Guillaume Jeanneret, Loı̈c Simon, and Frédéric Jurie. Diffusion models for counterfactual explana-
  tions. In Proceedings of the Asian Conference on Computer Vision, pp. 858–876, 2022.
Guillaume Jeanneret, Loı̈c Simon, and Frédéric Jurie. Adversarial counterfactual visual explana-
  tions. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition,
  pp. 16425–16435, 2023.
Guillaume Jeanneret, Loı̈c Simon, and Frédéric Jurie. Text-to-image models for counterfactual
  explanations: a black-box approach. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Winter Conference on
  Applications of Computer Vision, pp. 4757–4767, 2024.
Tero Karras, Timo Aila, Samuli Laine, and Jaakko Lehtinen. Progressive growing of GANs for im-
  proved quality, stability, and variation. In International Conference on Learning Representations,
  2018.
Bahjat Kawar, Michael Elad, Stefano Ermon, and Jiaming Song. Denoising diffusion restoration
  models. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2022.
Saeed Khorram and Li Fuxin. Cycle-consistent counterfactuals by latent transformations. In Pro-
  ceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 10203–
  10212, 2022.
Ba Jimmy Kingma, Diederik P. Adam: A method for stochastic optimization. In International
  Conference on Learning Representations, 2019.


                                                12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Alexander Kirillov, Eric Mintun, Nikhila Ravi, Hanzi Mao, Chloe Rolland, Laura Gustafson, Tete
  Xiao, Spencer Whitehead, Alexander C Berg, Wan-Yen Lo, et al. Segment anything. In Proceed-
  ings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision, pp. 4015–4026, 2023.

Andreas Kirsch. An introduction to the mathematical theory of inverse problems. Applied mathe-
  matical sciences. Springer, New York, 2nd ed edition, 2011.

Narine Kokhlikyan, Vivek Miglani, Miguel Martin, Edward Wang, Bilal Alsallakh, Jonathan
  Reynolds, Alexander Melnikov, Natalia Kliushkina, Carlos Araya, Siqi Yan, et al. Captum: A uni-
  fied and generic model interpretability library for pytorch. In arXiv preprint arXiv:2009.07896,
  2020.

Oran Lang, Yossi Gandelsman, Michal Yarom, Yoav Wald, Gal Elidan, Avinatan Hassidim,
  William T Freeman, Phillip Isola, Amir Globerson, Michal Irani, et al. Explaining in style:
  Training a gan to explain a classifier in stylespace. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International
  Conference on Computer Vision, pp. 693–702, 2021.

Y. Lecun, L. Bottou, Y. Bengio, and P. Haffner. Gradient-based learning applied to document recog-
   nition. In Proceedings of the IEEE, 1998.

Guan-Horng Liu, Arash Vahdat, De-An Huang, Evangelos Theodorou, Weili Nie, and Anima
  Anandkumar. I2SB: Image-to-Image Schrödinger Bridge. In International Conference on Ma-
  chine Learning, pp. 22042–22062. PMLR, 2023a.

Shilong Liu, Zhaoyang Zeng, Tianhe Ren, Feng Li, Hao Zhang, Jie Yang, Chunyuan Li, Jianwei
  Yang, Hang Su, Jun Zhu, et al. Grounding dino: Marrying dino with grounded pre-training for
  open-set object detection. In arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.05499, 2023b.

Ze Liu, Yutong Lin, Yue Cao, Han Hu, Yixuan Wei, Zheng Zhang, Stephen Lin, and Baining Guo.
  Swin transformer: Hierarchical vision transformer using shifted windows. In Proceedings of the
  IEEE/CVF international conference on computer vision, pp. 10012–10022, 2021.

Zhuang Liu, Hanzi Mao, Chao-Yuan Wu, Christoph Feichtenhofer, Trevor Darrell, and Saining Xie.
  A convnet for the 2020s. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and
  pattern recognition, pp. 11976–11986, 2022.

Ziwei Liu, Ping Luo, Xiaogang Wang, and Xiaoou Tang. Deep learning face attributes in the wild.
  In Proceedings of International Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV), December 2015.

Andreas Lugmayr, Martin Danelljan, Andres Romero, Fisher Yu, Radu Timofte, and Luc Van Gool.
  Repaint: Inpainting using denoising diffusion probabilistic models. In Proceedings of the
  IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, pp. 11461–11471, 2022.

Scott M. Lundberg and Su-In Lee. A unified approach to interpreting model predictions. In Pro-
  ceedings of the 31st International Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems, 2017.

Robert J. McCann. A convexity principle for interacting gases. In Advances in Mathematics, 1997.

Franz Motzkus, Christian Hellert, and Ute Schmid. Cola-dce–concept-guided latent diffusion coun-
  terfactual explanations. In arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.01649, 2024.

Adam Paszke, Sam Gross, Francisco Massa, Adam Lerer, James Bradbury, Gregory Chanan, Trevor
  Killeen, Zeming Lin, Natalia Gimelshein, Luca Antiga, et al. Pytorch: An imperative style, high-
  performance deep learning library. In Advances in neural information processing systems, 2019.

Gabriel Peyré and Marco Cuturi. Computational optimal transport: With applications to data sci-
  ence. Foundations and Trends in Machine Learning, 11(5–6):355–607, 2019.

Konpat Preechakul, Nattanat Chatthee, Suttisak Wizadwongsa, and Supasorn Suwajanakorn. Dif-
  fusion autoencoders: Toward a meaningful and decodable representation. In Proceedings of the
  IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, pp. 10619–10629, 2022.


                                                13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Alec Radford, Jong Wook Kim, Chris Hallacy, Aditya Ramesh, Gabriel Goh, Sandhini Agarwal,
  Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, Pamela Mishkin, Jack Clark, et al. Learning transferable visual
  models from natural language supervision. In International conference on machine learning, pp.
  8748–8763. PMLR, 2021.

Marco Tulio Ribeiro, Sameer Singh, and Carlos Guestrin. ”Why should I trust you?” Explaining the
 predictions of any classifier. In Proceedings of the 22nd ACM SIGKDD international conference
 on knowledge discovery and data mining, pp. 1135–1144, 2016.

Herbert E Robbins. An empirical Bayes approach to statistics. In Breakthroughs in Statistics:
  Foundations and basic theory, 1992.

Pau Rodrı́guez, Massimo Caccia, Alexandre Lacoste, Lee Zamparo, Issam Laradji, Laurent Char-
  lin, and David Vazquez. Beyond trivial counterfactual explanations with diverse valuable ex-
  planations. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision, pp.
  1056–1065, 2021.

Robin Rombach, Andreas Blattmann, Dominik Lorenz, Patrick Esser, and Björn Ommer. High-
  resolution image synthesis with latent diffusion models. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF confer-
  ence on computer vision and pattern recognition, pp. 10684–10695, 2022.

Olaf Ronneberger, Philipp Fischer, and Thomas Brox. U-net: Convolutional networks for biomed-
  ical image segmentation. In Medical image computing and computer-assisted intervention–
  MICCAI 2015: 18th international conference, Munich, Germany, October 5-9, 2015, proceed-
  ings, part III 18, pp. 234–241. Springer, 2015.

Chitwan Saharia, William Chan, Huiwen Chang, Chris Lee, Jonathan Ho, Tim Salimans, David
  Fleet, and Mohammad Norouzi. Palette: Image-to-image diffusion models. In ACM SIGGRAPH
  2022 conference proceedings, pp. 1–10, 2022.

Jonathan Scarlett, Reinhard Heckel, Miguel RD Rodrigues, Paul Hand, and Yonina C Eldar. Theo-
  retical perspectives on deep learning methods in inverse problems. In IEEE journal on selected
  areas in information theory, 2022.

Erwin Schrödinger. Sur la théorie relativiste de l’électron et l’interprétation de la mécanique quan-
  tique. In Annales de l’institut Henri Poincaré, volume 2, pp. 269–310, 1932.

Christoph Schuhmann, Romain Beaumont, Richard Vencu, Cade Gordon, Ross Wightman, Mehdi
  Cherti, Theo Coombes, Aarush Katta, Clayton Mullis, Mitchell Wortsman, et al. Laion-5b: An
  open large-scale dataset for training next generation image-text models. In Advances in Neural
  Information Processing Systems, 2022.

Lisa Schut, Oscar Key, Rory Mc Grath, Luca Costabello, Bogdan Sacaleanu, Yarin Gal, et al. Gener-
  ating interpretable counterfactual explanations by implicit minimisation of epistemic and aleatoric
  uncertainties. In International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics, pp. 1756–1764.
  PMLR, 2021.

Ramprasaath R Selvaraju, Michael Cogswell, Abhishek Das, Ramakrishna Vedantam, Devi Parikh,
  and Dhruv Batra. Grad-cam: visual explanations from deep networks via gradient-based local-
  ization. In International journal of computer vision, 2020.

Sheng-Min Shih, Pin-Ju Tien, and Zohar Karnin. Ganmex: One-vs-one attributions using gan-based
  model explainability. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 9592–9602. PMLR,
  2021.

Avanti Shrikumar, Peyton Greenside, and Anshul Kundaje. Learning important features through
  propagating activation differences. In International conference on machine learning, pp. 3145–
  3153. PMLR, 2017.

Karen Simonyan and Andrew Zisserman. Very deep convolutional networks for large-scale image
  recognition. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2015.


                                                   14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Karen Simonyan, Andrea Vedaldi, and Andrew Zisserman. Deep inside convolutional networks:
  Visualising image classification models and saliency maps. In 2nd International Conference on
  Learning Representations, Workshop Track Proceedings, 2014.
Sumedha Singla, Brian Pollack, Junxiang Chen, and Kayhan Batmanghelich. Explanation by pro-
  gressive exaggeration. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2020.
Bartlomiej Sobieski and Przemysław Biecek. Global counterfactual directions. In European Con-
  ference on Computer Vision, 2024.
Yang Song, Jascha Sohl-Dickstein, Diederik P Kingma, Abhishek Kumar, Stefano Ermon, and Ben
  Poole. Score-based generative modeling through stochastic differential equations. In Interna-
  tional Conference on Learning Representations, 2021.
Jost Tobias Springenberg, Alexey Dosovitskiy, Thomas Brox, and Martin Riedmiller. Striving for
  simplicity: The all convolutional net. In International Conference on Learning Representations,
  Workshop Track Proceedings, 2015.
Mukund Sundararajan, Ankur Taly, and Qiqi Yan. Axiomatic attribution for deep networks. In
 International conference on machine learning, pp. 3319–3328. PMLR, 2017.
Christian Szegedy, Vincent Vanhoucke, Sergey Ioffe, Jon Shlens, and Zbigniew Wojna. Rethink-
  ing the inception architecture for computer vision. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on
  computer vision and pattern recognition, pp. 2818–2826, 2016.
Jayaraman Thiagarajan, Vivek Sivaraman Narayanaswamy, Deepta Rajan, Jia Liang, Akshay
  Chaudhari, and Andreas Spanias. Designing counterfactual generators using deep model inver-
  sion. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2021.
Rui Tian, Zuxuan Wu, Qi Dai, Han Hu, and Yu-Gang Jiang. Deeper insights into the robustness of
  vits towards common corruptions. In arXiv preprint arXiv:2204.12143, 2022.
Paulina Tomaszewska and Przemysław Biecek. Position paper: Do not explain (vision models)
  without context. In International Conference on Machine Learning, 2024.
Philipp Vaeth, Alexander M Fruehwald, Benjamin Paassen, and Magda Gregorova. Gradcheck:
  Analyzing classifier guidance gradients for conditional diffusion sampling. In arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2406.17399, 2024.
Arnaud Van Looveren and Janis Klaise. Interpretable counterfactual explanations guided by pro-
  totypes. In Joint European Conference on Machine Learning and Knowledge Discovery in
  Databases, pp. 650–665. Springer, 2021.
Nina Weng, Paraskevas Pegios, Aasa Feragen, Eike Petersen, and Siavash Bigdeli. Fast diffusion-
  based counterfactuals for shortcut removal and generation. In European Conference on Computer
  Vision, 2024.
Matthew D Zeiler and Rob Fergus. Visualizing and understanding convolutional networks. In
 Computer Vision–ECCV 2014: 13th European Conference, Zurich, Switzerland, September 6-12,
 2014, Proceedings, Part I 13, pp. 818–833. Springer, 2014.

Mehdi Zemni, Mickaël Chen, Éloi Zablocki, Hédi Ben-Younes, Patrick Pérez, and Matthieu Cord.
 Octet: Object-aware counterfactual explanations. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on
 computer vision and pattern recognition, pp. 15062–15071, 2023.
Richard Zhang, Phillip Isola, Alexei A Efros, Eli Shechtman, and Oliver Wang. The unreasonable
  effectiveness of deep features as a perceptual metric. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on
  computer vision and pattern recognition, pp. 586–595, 2018.
Zhengli Zhao, Dheeru Dua, and Sameer Singh. Generating natural adversarial examples. In Inter-
  national Conference on Learning Representations, 2018.


                                               15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


C ONTENTS

1 Introduction                                                                                       1

2 Background & Related Work                                                                          2

3 Method                                                                                            3

4 Experiments                                                                                        6

5 Discussion & Limitations                                                                          10

A Pseudocode                                                                                        18

B Limitations                                                                                       19

C Extended Background & Related Work                                                                20

D Comparison to previous works                                                                      21

E Extended Method                                                                                   22
   E.1 Additional figures . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     22
   E.2 Incorporating the classifier’s signal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    22
   E.3 Analytic posterior and OT-ODE . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .          23

F Extended Experiments                                                                              23
   F.1   Details of individual experiments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    24
   F.2   Metrics description . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    24
   F.3   Adaptation of other inpainting algorithms . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      25
         F.3.1   Manifold Constrained Gradient (MCG, Chung et al. (2022)) . . . . . . . .           25
         F.3.2   Denosing Diffusion Restoration Models (DDRM, Kawar et al. (2022)) . . .            25
         F.3.3   RePaint (Lugmayr et al., 2022) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     26
   F.4   Schedulers for guidance scale . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    26
   F.5   Quantitative evaluation of other attribution methods . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     26
   F.6   Diversity assessment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     27
   F.7   Computational efficiency assessment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      27
   F.8   Additional quantitative results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    28
   F.9   Freeform masks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     28
   F.10 Unintuitive classes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     28
   F.11 Shape modification . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      29
   F.12 Lower-level attributions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    29
   F.13 Other classifiers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   30
   F.14 Other benchmarks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      30


                                                 16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


G User studies                                                                                         32
    G.1 I: Usefulness and interaction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .        32
    G.2 II: Understanding model’s failures . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .         32

H Qualitative examples                                                                                 33


The Appendix is structured as follows. Appendix A shows pseudocode for both I2 SB (stochastic
and deterministic version) and our RCSB. Appendix B delves deeper into the possible limitations
of RVCEs and RCSB. Appendix C includes additional background knowledge connected with I2 SB
and an extensive literature review regarding topics connected with our work. Appendix D compares
our approach to prior methods for VCE generation in detail. Appendix E shows additional figures
from the method’s description, considerations regarding the incorporation of the classifier’s signal
into I2 SB and more detailed derivation of the OT-ODE version. Appendix F extends our experimen-
tal evaluation with details about the setup, additional results regarding, e.g., efficiency and diversity,
other datasets and classifiers, and concludes with details about the adaptation of different inpainting
algorithms. Appendix G provides details about the conducted user studies. Appendix H provides
qualitative examples for 7 additional classifiers, showing the versatility of RCSB, together with more
RVCEs for the ResNet50 model.


                                                   17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A    P SEUDOCODE

Algorithm 1 Standard I2 SB Generation
 1: Input: xN ∼ p1 (xN ), trained sψ (·, ·)
 2: for n = N to 1 do
 3:   Predict x̂0 (xn ) using sψ (xn , tn )
 4:   xn−1 ∼ p(xn−1 | x̂0 , xn ) according to DDPM
 5: end for
 6: return x0



Algorithm 2 OT-ODE I2 SB Generation
 1: Input: xN ∼ p1 (xN ), trained sψ (·, ·)
 2: for n = N to 1 do
 3:   Predict x̂0 (xt ) using sψ (xn , tn )
 4:   xn−1 = µn−1 x̂0 + µ̄n−1 xn
 5: end for
 6: return x0



Algorithm 3 RCSB
 1: Input: Number of steps N , binary region mask R, trajectory truncation τ , classifier scale s,
    input image x∗ , trained sψ (·, ·), trained classifier f (y | ·), target class y
 2: x1 = (1 − R) ⊙ x∗ + R ⊙ z, where z ∼ N (z; 0, I)
 3: Discretize truncated timeline 0 = t0 < t1 < · · · < tN = τ
 4: xN ∼ q(xN |x0 , x1 )                                 # sample from analytic posterior (Eq. (15))
 5: for n = N to 1 do
 6:   Predict x̂0 (xn ) using sψ (xn , tn )
 7:   gn = ∇xn log f (y | x̂0 )
 8:   ḡn = ADAM(gn )
 9:   if n == N then
         g = ∥ḡN ∥2                                                   # register norm of the first gradient
10:   end if
11:   x̄n = xn + s ḡgn
12:   xn−1 = µn−1 x̂0 + µ̄n−1 x̄n
13: end for
14: return x0



Algorithm 4 ADAM Update Rule
 1: Input: Gradient at step n gn , hyperparameters α, ϵ, β1 , β2 (set to PyTorch (Paszke et al., 2019)
    defaults)
 2: mn = β1 mn−1 + (1 − β1 )gn                                     # update biased first moment estimate
                             2
 3: vn = β2 vn−1 + (1 − β2 )gn                                  # update biased second moment estimate
 4: m̂n = mn /(1 − β1n )                                          # compute bias-corrected first moment
                    n
 5: v̂n = vn /(1 −
                 √β2 )                                         # compute bias-corrected second moment
 6: ḡn = αm̂n /( v̂n + ϵ)                                                               # update gradient
 7: return ḡn                                                                 # return updated gradient


                                                     18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 8: Visual difference between xt and its corresponding Tweedie’s estimate x̂0 (xt ) across
different timesteps.


                 `


Figure 9: Influence of manipulating τ on the final RVCE obtained with the region shown in Fig. 3.


B    L IMITATIONS


Despite setting new quantitative records, our approach comes with natural limitations that must be
mentioned. From the user perspective, RVCEs generated with RCSB, especially when the region
is visually appealing and extracted independently from the classifier, may lead to overconfidence
about the model’s decision-making process. As an example, consider the bird’s image from Fig. 1
and the RVCE based on the region of its head. Because our approach allows for changing the
model’s decision by using solely the area of the head, one could interpret that the new features
are explicitly and exclusively responsible for the new prediction. However, the situation may be
much more complex. For example, the appearance of some specific features of the head, e.g., a red
eye, may influence the model conditionally on some other features which were already present in
the image. Since no ground truth to a counterfactual explanation exists (at least in non-synthetic
scenarios), the exact relationships between different aspects of the image remain unknown. Hence,
one must be careful when interpreting any kind of counterfactual explanation, especially RVCEs, to
not draw incorrect and misleading conclusions.
Moreover, modifying a given image to a counterfactual explanation, in particular to an RVCE, does
not mean that the model is not relying on some unintuitive shortcuts or spurious correlations which
were not modified in the process. Hence, one has to remember that VCEs aim at identifying the
minimal semantic change required to change the model’s decision, and are not guaranteed to modify
every feature that the model relies on. These aspects highlight the importance and need of principled
evaluation measures for this kind of sample-based explanations. While attribution methods have
been heavily addressed in this context in recent years, the evaluation of VCEs remains a very difficult
challenge.
In terms of practical limitations, our experiments are based on an I2SB model trained for an inpaint-
ing task based on freeform masks with coverage of 20%-30% of the total area. While the model
generalizes well to larger fractions of the total image area on the order of 40%-45%, its performance
deteriorates above this threshold. From a theoretical point of view, the I2SB algorithm is not limited
to any particular upper bound on the total area, but demonstrating that it is possible to obtain good
performance over a total area of the order of, e.g., 90%, remains an open research question that has
important implications for our work. We believe this to be an interesting direction for future research
with many possible extensions.


                                                  19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


C    E XTENDED BACKGROUND & R ELATED W ORK
Visual counterfactual explanations. In recent years, increasing attention is being paid to syn-
thesizing VCEs for image classifiers (Goyal et al., 2019; Schut et al., 2021). These explanations
aim at elucidating the model’s reasoning by modifying the input image in a semantically minimal
and meaningful way while flipping its prediction. Utilizing generative models for this task has his-
torically proven to be very effective (Chang et al., 2019; Singla et al., 2020; Lang et al., 2021).
Non-SGM-based methods include works like Thiagarajan et al. (2021) which builds on the concept
of deep inversion, OCTET from Zemni et al. (2023) focusing on VCEs for complex scenes and more
examples built on top of generative models (Rodrı́guez et al., 2021; Jacob et al., 2022; Shih et al.,
2021; Zhao et al., 2018; Van Looveren & Klaise, 2021).
While offering impressive results (Farid et al., 2023; Jeanneret et al., 2024; Augustin et al., 2024;
Motzkus et al., 2024), we argue that utilizing general foundation models like SD in the VCE gen-
eration task may cause misleading conclusions, since the explained classifiers are trained on much
smaller datasets than the generative model. For example, about 1 million images from ImageNet
(Deng et al., 2009) are used to train the classifier, while SD is trained on 5 billion images from
LAION-5B (Schuhmann et al., 2022). This discrepancy may naturally lead to SD synthesizing re-
alistically looking variations of a given image that flip the classifier’s decision but simultaneously
include semantic attributes never observed by the predictive model during training. Therefore, one
may question the counterfactual nature of the explanation, as the classifier should not be expected
to correctly treat attributes that it was never close to observing. Hence, in this work, we focus on
generative models trained on the same data as the classifier of interest. This way, we can study the
behavior of predictive models in a faithfull manner, which is an open challenge for XAI community
Biecek & Samek (2024).
Inverse problems. Inverse problems (Kirsch, 2011) are defined as the task of recovering an un-
known signal x based on a measurement y related via a measurement model H through y = H(x),
where H is not necessarily required to be linear or bijective. Hence, for a given measurement y,
there may exist a probability distribution over possible solutions p(x | y = H(x)). One special
case of an inverse problem is image inpainting, where the missing area of an image, indicated by
the mask M, must be infilled using the available context. The measurement model is then defined
as H(x) = M ⊙ x, where ⊙ denotes an element-wise product and M is a binary mask.
In recent years, deep learning methods have proven to be very effective at solving various kinds of
inverse problems (Scarlett et al., 2022). Recently, utilizing generative methods, especially SGMs,
established itself as the new SOTA approach in the image domain. One way of adapting SGMs
to inverse problems is through conditional generation, where the conditional score can be derived
with the measurement model. Many additional techniques, such as data consistency (Chung et al.,
2023b), manifold constraint (Chung et al., 2022; 2023a) and others (Kawar et al., 2022), are further
utilized to improve this adaptation.
Image-to-Image Schrödinger Bridges. A much harder but possibly also much more effective ap-
proach is to learn direct mappings between the distribution of signals x ∼ p0 and measurements
y ∼ p1 instead of adapting pretrained models. In this line of research, Liu et al. (2023a) propose to
learn such mappings by constructing a tractable subclass of Schrödinger bridges (SBs, Schrödinger
(1932)), termed Image-to-Image Schrödinger Bridges (I2 SBs). The SB is an entropy-regularized op-
timal transport model, which, resembling the framework of SGMs, considers the following forward
and backward SDEs:
                                                                    p
                        dxt = (Ft (xt ) + βt ∇xt log Ψ(xt , t))dt + βt dw,                       (4a)
                                                                    p
                                                     b t , t))dt + βt dw̄,
                        dxt = (Ft (xt ) − βt ∇x log Ψ(x                                          (4b)
                                                t


Similarly to SGMs, the marginal densities of Eqs. (4a) and (4b) are equivalent. The functions
Ψ, Ψb ∈ C 2,1 (Rd , [0, 1]) represent time-varying energy potentials and are additionally constrained
to solve the following partial differential equations
                                       ( Ψ(x ,t)
                                             t
                                            ∂t   = −∇Ψ⊤ F − 12 β∆Ψ
                                         b t ,t)                                                 (5a)
                                         Ψ(x             b
                                                 = −∇ · (ΨF)  + 1 β∆Ψ  b
                                         ∂t                      2
                                     b
                       s.t. Ψ(x0 , 0)Ψ(x,                   b
                                          0)=p0 (x), Ψ(x, 1)Ψ(x, 1)=p1 (x)                       (5b)


                                                    20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


 In general, numerically solving Eqs. (4a) and (4b) is much more difficult compared to SGMs due to
nonlinear terms Ψ, Ψ   b being coupled via Eq. (5b). However, with Theorem 3.1, Liu et al. (2023a)
show an important connection between the frameworks of SBs and SGMs. We repeat it here explic-
itly for later reference.

Theorem 1 (Reformulating SB drifts as score functions (Liu et al., 2023a)) If Ψ,     b Ψ fulfill the
                                           b
constraints given by Eq. (5), then ∇xt log Ψ(xt , t), ∇xt log Ψ(xt , t) are the score functions of the
following linear SDEs, respectively
                                             p
                           dxt = Ft (xt )dt + βt dw, x0 ∼ Ψ(·,   b 0),                             (6)
                                             p
                           dxt = Ft (xt )dt + βt dw̄, x1 ∼ Ψ(·, 1).                                (7)


Crucially, Theorem 1 states that, while Ψ,  b Ψ are not in general assumed to be valid probability
                                     b
distributions, it is true that ∇ log Ψ = ∇ log p6 and ∇ log Ψ = ∇ log p7 for p6 , p7 representing the
densities of the respective SDEs. Following this theoretical result, Liu et al. (2023a) also show a
principled approach for approximating ∇xt log Ψ(x b t , t) with a neural network sψ . In essence, these
results allow to train direct inverse problem solvers with the use of paired data, where p0 represents a
clean data distribution and p1 the distribution of its corrupted measurements. Additionally, Liu et al.
(2023a) show how I2 SB connects with flow-based optimal transport (OT) (Peyré & Cuturi, 2019;
McCann, 1997), where assuming that βt → 0 leads to an ordinary differential equation (ODE)
dxt = vt (xt | x0 )dt that provides a deterministic mapping with the use of sψ estimate. In practive,
this is achieved by eliminating the noise from the intermediate sampling steps (see Algorithm 2).
Visual attribution methods. The very first works in the current era of Explainable Artificial In-
telligence (XAI) were concerned with providing explanations of the model’s decision through vi-
sual heatmaps, which highlighted pixels considered important to the its prediction. One of the
first approaches by Simonyan et al. (2014) proposed simple backpropagation of the model’s out-
put w.r.t. the input, indicating the direction of its greatest ascent in the pixel space, often termed
as Saliency. More sophisticated approaches emerged in the following years, where techniques like
Layer-wise Relevance Propagation (LRP, Bach et al. (2015)), Integrated Gradients (IG, Sundarara-
jan et al. (2017)), DeepLift and Input × Gradient (Shrikumar et al., 2017), Guided Backpropagation
(GuidedBackprop, Springenberg et al. (2015)), GradCAM (Selvaraju et al., 2020), Deconvolution
(Zeiler & Fergus, 2014) and others that utilize the gradient of the neural network promised to indi-
cate more semantically meaningful concepts in a less ’noisy’ manner. Concurrent line of research
about perturbation-based methods assumed a more general black-box scenario, where explanations
could be provided for a broader class of models. There, methods like Occlusion (Zeiler & Fergus,
2014), Local Interpretable Model-agnostic Explanations (LIME, Ribeiro et al. (2016)), SHapley Ad-
ditive exPlanations (SHAP, Lundberg & Lee (2017)) and its variations quickly advanced the state-
of-the-art. In this work, we utilize their unified implementations provided by the Captum package
(Kokhlikyan et al., 2020).

D    C OMPARISON TO PREVIOUS WORKS
Due to space limits, we only briefly mention the previous diffusion-based approaches to VCE gen-
eration in Section 2. In the following, we provide more details about their theoretical formulations
and how they relate to our approach.
Most of the previously published diffusion-based approaches to VCEs rely on the conditional re-
verse process obtained by replacing the unconditional score ∇xt log p(xt , t) in Eq. (1b) with the
conditional variant of the form ∇xt log p(xt , t) + ∇xt log p(y | xt , t). This formulation allows one
to incorporate the classifier-based conditioning in various forms. Jeanneret et al. (2022) (DiME) pro-
pose to approximate the likelihood score ∇xt log p(y | xt , t) by fully denoising the image at step t
and using it to obtain the classifier’s gradient leading to quadratic complexity with respect to the total
number of timesteps. The work of Augustin et al. (2022) (DVCE) instead propose to regularize the
gradients of the explained classifier with the one coming from a robustly trained classification net-
work. Specifically, the gradient of the former is projected onto a cone around the direction indicated
by the gradient of the latter with some predetermined angle. The follow-up work of Jeanneret et al.


                                                   21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


(2023) (ACE) proposes to split the explanation generation into two distinct phases, with the first
one responsible for generating the pre-explanation, and the second one performing post-processing.
The former combines standard diffusion denoising with a PGD attack performed with the use of
the classifier on xt for each t. Then, the latter phase computes the absolute difference between the
original image and the pre-explanation, and extracts a binary mask by thresholding this difference.
Next, it uses the RePaint (Lugmayr et al., 2022) algorithm to unconditionally inpaint the masked
region beginning from some intermediate timestep. To address the low efficiency of DiME, Weng
et al. (2024) (FastDiME) propose to improve the conditioning process by utilizing at each timestep
t the gradient of the classifier with respect to the Tweedie’s estimate. By default, their approach
performs dynamic masking throughout the generation process which indicates the region modified
at each timestep. Moreover, the authors propose two 2-step extensions of their approach, namely
FastDiME-2 and FastDiME-2+, that first perform either standard FastDiME or FastDiME without
dynamic masking, then extract the most differing regions and utilize the binary mask resulting from
the largest changes to conditionally inpaint it with the use of the classifier.
Importantly, ACE and FastDiME bear resemblence to our approach in terms of performing some
variant of conditional inpainting. Specifically, ACE first combines the classifier with diffusion de-
noising to extract a region important to the predictive model, but inpaints it unconditionally. Fast-
DiME (and its variants) also find a region that is regarded as important to the classifier, but inpaint
it conditionally. Our approach solves a more general problem by synthesizing RVCEs which do
not assume any dependence of the predetermined region to the classifier of interest, which we show
through a large array of experiments with regions coming from sources like automated segmenta-
tion or user interaction. Moreover, while all of the previously mentioned works are concerned with
adapting standard SGMs to either guided generation or inptainting, we show how a more general
class of models (tractable Schrödinger Bridges) can be adapted to the problem of conditional in-
painting with the use of a classifier. Additionally, we propose a series of improvements that better
align its gradients with the generative trajectory that were not previously present in this line of re-
search connected to XAI, such as ADAM stabilization or adaptive normalization. Finally, to the
best of our knowledge, our approach is the first one to show that guidance can be performed with the
signal coming solely from the classifier of interest, omitting the usage of additional proxy measures
(like l2 loss or LPIPS) that maintain similarity to the original image. It it also important to higlight
that, while very simple, our automated region extraction approach was also not present in this line
of research and, through experimental evaluation, was shown to provide highly interpretable and
intuitive regions.


E     E XTENDED M ETHOD

E.1   A DDITIONAL FIGURES

We provide illustrative examples for the visual differences between xt and the Tweedie’s estimate
x̂0 (xt ) in Fig. 8. For the effect of manipulating the τ hyperparameter, see Fig. 9

E.2   I NCORPORATING THE CLASSIFIER ’ S SIGNAL

In the following, we explicitly define the DDPM (Ho et al., 2020) sampler mentioned in Algorithm 1
and elaborate on the exact way of incorporating the classifier’s gradients into the generation process
of I2 SB.
Denote by {ti }i∈{0,...,N } the discrete sequence of timesteps of length N such that 0 = t0 < t1 <
                              Rt                    R1
· · · < tN = 1. By σn2 = 0 n βτ dτ and σ̄n2 = tn βτ dτ , we denote the variances accumulated
                                       2
                                              R tn
from each side. Additionally, let αn−1      = tn−1  βτ dτ be the variance accumulated between two
consecutive timesteps. For ease of notation, we define µn−1 and µ̄n−1 as
                                                      2
                                                    αn−1
                                       µn−1 =     2      2   ,                                      (8)
                                                 αn−1 + σn−1
                                                      2
                                                    σn−1
                                       µ̄n−1 =    2      2   .                                      (9)
                                                 αn−1 + σn−1


                                                  22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


With that, we can define the DDPM posterior sampler as
                        xn−1 ∼ p(xn−1 |x̂0 , xn ),                                                   (10)
                                                         2   2
                                                       αn−1 σn−1
                        xn−1 ∼ N µn−1 x̂0 + µ̄n−1 xn , 2       2  I ,                                (11)
                                                      αn−1 + σn−1
where x̂0 = x̂0 (xn ) denotes the Tweedie’s estimate obtained with sψ , i.e., a trained I2 SB.
When using the OT-ODE version of I2 SB, we replace sampling from the posterior with a determin-
istic version by following the mean, which yields the update rule
                                     xn−1 = µn−1 x̂0 + µ̄n−1 xn .                                    (12)
By converting the Tweedie’s estimate to the conditional score using Eq. (3) and applying Bayes’
Theorem, we are left with

       xn−1 = µn−1 xn + σn2 ∇xn log p(xn , n | y) + µ̄n−1 xn
                                                                                           (13)
              = µn−1 xn + σn2 ∇xn log p(xn , n) + σn2 ∇xn log p(y | xn , n) + µ̄n−1 xn ,
where ∇xn log p(xn , n) can be approximated by a standard I2 SB network trained on the task of
inpainting. By manipulating Eq. (13) further, one can arrive at the following update rule

  xn−1 = µn−1 xn + σn2 ∇xn log p(xn , n) + µn−1 σn2 ∇xn log p(y | xn , n) + µ̄n−1 xn

                                                        µn−1 σn2
        = µn−1 xn + σn2 ∇xn log p(xn , n) + µ̄n−1                 ∇xn log p(y | xn , n) + xn   (14)
                                                          µ̄n−1

        = µn−1 xn + σn2 ∇xn log p(xn , n) + µ̄n−1 (cn ∇xn log p(y | xn , n) + xn ) .
Here, we explicitly define the time-dependent coefficient cn . While plugging ∇xn log f (y | xn ) in
place of ∇xn log p(y | xn , n) in Eq. (13) is the most intuitive, we empirically verified that replac-
ing cn ∇xn log p(y | xn , n) with ∇xn log f (y | xn ) leads to more semantically meaningful results.
Practically, this can be explained by µn−1 achieving its highest values at the end of the generation
process, effectively incorporating the classifier’s signal to the highest extent in the final steps of the
generation. Since we are interested in influencing the generative trajectory with the classifier f along
the entire process (and possibly decreasing its influence to the greatest possible extent in the final
timesteps to avoid adversarial changes), it seems intuitive that incorporating f into Eq. (14) allows
for obtaining more meaningful RVCEs. This is due to µ̄n = 1 − µn , meaning that the classifier’s
signal is amplified in the beginning of the generation and decreased in the final steps. This interven-
tion also explains the effectiveness of the introduced improvements, as they break the independence
of the classifier’s signal between consecutive steps, practically incorporating the time-dependent
coefficient cn into the gradient alignment.

E.3   A NALYTIC POSTERIOR AND OT-ODE

Following the original work of Liu et al. (2023a) (I2 SB), the analytic posterior from the forward
stochastic process, which governs the mapping between a given boundary pair (x0 , x1 ), is defined
as
             q(xt |x0 , x1 ) = N µ(x0 , x1 , t) = x0 + t(x1 − x0 ), Σt = αt(1 − t)I ,         (15)
where by default α = 1. To arrive at the OT-ODE version of I2 SB, one must use α → 0, effectively
reducing q to a Dirac delta distribution centered at µ(x0 , x1 , t).

F     E XTENDED E XPERIMENTS
We follow the evaluation protocol from previous works for VCEs on Imagenet, which, for a given
task, uses all images from the training subset correctly predicted by the evaluated model. For
ResNet50, this results in around 2000 images per task. We extract the results of other methods
from the work of Farid et al. (2023), except the DVCE method (Augustin et al., 2022), which eval-
utes with a protocol that we were not able to fully reproduce. Hence, to ensure fair comparison, we
adapted the implementation of DVCE to our evaluation. Specifically, we utilize the multiple-norm


                                                   23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


robust ResNet50 from the work of Boreiko et al. (2022), which the authors of DVCE propose as
default, to achieve VCEs for the ResNet50 model. In terms of hyperparameters, we fine-tuned them
with grid search on a subset of Zebra–Sorrel task and used s = 18.0 as the guidance scale for the
non-robust ResNet50, since it performed the best.
For I2 SB, we utilize the original checkpoint from Liu et al. (2023a) trained on 20 − 30% freeform
masks from Saharia et al. (2022). While the checkpoint trained on the 10 − 20% variant is also
available and verified to work within our framework, we discovered that the former generalizes well
to smaller area values. Hence, for the sake of simplicity, we utilize the 20 − 30% version only. By
default, we use NFE=100, which we explored the most, but lower NFE regimes provided promising
initial results. For the automated region extraction, we use IG by default, but evaluate 10 other
attribution methods in Appendix F.5.

F.1   D ETAILS OF INDIVIDUAL EXPERIMENTS

Fig. 3: Each improvement, together with the naive approach, is evaluated on the zebra-sorrel task
with around 2000 images from ImageNet training set (following the protocol from the main exper-
imental evaluation). Each image is initially predicted as either zebra or sorrel by the ResNet50 (He
et al., 2016) model and the decision must be flipped to the opposite class. FID is computed between
the obtained explanations and original images. The hyperparameter values used for all improve-
ments are: a = 0.3, s = 1.0 (except ADAM stabilization with s = 1e − 2), c = 16, τ = 1.0 (except
trajectory truncation, where τ = 0.6).
Table 2: A: For all tasks, we use s = 1.5 and τ = 0.4 (to better preserve the original content).
As we cannot control the area of masks provided by LangSAM, hyperparameters a and c are not
applicable in this scenario. Images with masks covering area greater than 40% of the total image are
discarded from the evaluation to ensure that we only use meaningful RVCEs. B: Across all tasks,
the 10% − 20% experiment uses configuration B from Table 1, while the 20% − 30% experiment
uses configuration C. Hyperparameters a and c are not applicable, since masks are provided auto-
matically from the mentioned dataset. C: Each inpainting algorithm is given a 24 A100 GPU hours
time budget, resulting in around 2000 images for DDRM, 800 images for MCG and 400 images for
RePaint on each task. Details of their adaptations are provided separately in Appendix F.3.

F.2   M ETRICS DESCRIPTION

In the following, we provide detailed description of each metric used in the quantitative evaluation.
FID and sFID (realism). Following works on image synthesis, measuring the realism of the ob-
tained explanations at a distribution level is often done with FID and sFID (Heusel et al., 2017).
Specifically, FID compares a set of real (r) and generated (g, in this case, the explanations) images
by first extracting their corresponding features from the InceptionV3 network (Szegedy et al., 2016)
and then computing

                                                                         1/2
                        FID = ||µr − µg ||2 + Tr Σr + Σg − 2 (Σr Σg )          ,                 (16)
where µr , µg are the mean vectors and Σr , Σg are the covariance matrices of the respective distri-
butions in the feature space. As comparing original images with their edited versions (e.g., expla-
nations) may bias the metric with original pixels mostly unchanged, artificially boosting the realism
evaluation, sFID first divides the sets into folds and averages FID over the independent counterparts.
S3 (representation similarity).
Explanations should also resemble original images from a representation respective. Here, follow-
ing the work of Jeanneret et al. (2023), we compute average SimSiam Similarity (S3 ) over a set
of original images and the resulting counterfactuals. Specifically, S3 utilizes a SimSiam network
(Chen & He, 2021), which encodes both the factual and counterfactual images into their respective
representations rf , rcf and computes the cosine similarity as
                                                  rf · rcf
                                       S3 =                       .                           (17)
                                             ||rf ||2 · ||rcf ||2
COUT (sparsity). In the context of VCEs, sparsity is understood as perturbing a minimal number of
pixels to flip the model’s decision. To quantify this criterion, the COUnterfactual Transition (COUT)


                                                 24
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


metric computes
                           COUT =AUPCy − AUPCy∗ ,
                                           M −1
                                        1 X 1                                                              (18)
                          AUPCk =               (f (k | x(m) ) − f (k | x(m+1) ))
                                        M m=0 2

where x(0) is the factual image, x(M ) the resulting VCE, and y ∗ , y are the class labels predicted by f
for x(0) , x(M ) respectively. In practice, COUT measures how fast the classifier’s decision changes
when interpolating between the original and the explanation, but the interpolation is defined as
inserting pixels to the original image according to the extent (absolute value) of change observed in
the VCE through M steps. COUT is typically reported as an average over a set of samples.
Flip Rate (efficiency). A major criterion for a VCE method is its efficiency, understood as the ability
to effectively flip the model’s decision. For a set of triplets {x∗i , xi , yi }Ii=1 , where x∗i is the original
image and xi is the resulting VCE targeted to flip f ’s decision to yi , Flip Rate (FR) is defined as the
fraction of cases which correctly flipped the decision to the target class, i.e.,
                                            I
                                     1X
                                FR =       1(arg max f (y ′ | xi ) = yi ).                                 (19)
                                     I i=1      y′


F.3     A DAPTATION OF OTHER INPAINTING ALGORITHMS

In this subsection, we describe the adaptation of each inpainting algorithm from our ablation study.
For each method, we follow the notation from its corresponding original work to make the descrip-
tion easier to follow.

F.3.1    M ANIFOLD C ONSTRAINED G RADIENT (MCG, C HUNG ET AL . (2022))
MCG iteratively denoises (inpaints) the missing parts with the following two-step update (Equations
14 and 15, Chung et al. (2022)):


                                         ∂
               x′t−1 = f (xi , sθ ) −       ∥W(y − Hx̂0 (xt )∥22 + g(xt )z,       z ∼ N (0, I)             (20)
                                        ∂xt
                xi−t = Ax′ t−1 + b                                                                         (21)

where Eq. (20) is a manifold constraint update and Eq. (21) is a data consistency step. As described
by the authors, both steps are crucial to ensure that the gradient of the measurement term stays on
the manifold and to deal with the potential deviation from the measurement consistency.
Since f (xt , sθ ) implicitly predicts the mean µt and variance σt at each step t, related to the under-
lying SDE dynamics, we apply our guidance scheme by modifying the original

                                   f (xi , sθ ) = µt + σt z,      z ∼ N (0, I)                             (22)

by adding properly scaled (according to the relationship between the likelihood score and mean)
conditioning:

                                                      ḡn
                           f ′ (xi , sθ ) = µt + σt z + s · σt2
                                                          ,             z ∼ N (0, I)                       (23)
                                                       g
where gn and g are obtained as described in Algorithm 3.

F.3.2    D ENOSING D IFFUSION R ESTORATION M ODELS (DDRM, K AWAR ET AL . (2022))
DDRM considers the SVD decomposition of the measurement model matrix H in the linear noisy
inverse problem
                            y = Hx + σy z, z ∼ N (0, I),                              (24)


                                                       25
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


where σy is the standard divination of the measurement noise. For the task of inpaiting, the H matrix
is a diagonal matrix with either 0 or 1 on the diagonal indicating available and missing pixels. Hence,
its SVD decomposition simplifies to using identity matrices in place of U and V.
The main contribution of DDRM is that it provides a way to include the information from that de-
composition and observation y into the generative process, which the authors summarize in Equa-
tions 7 and 8 in the original work. The method uses a trained denoising network to obtain a prediction
of x0 at timestep t, denoted as xθ,t . In order to include the additional information from the classifier
into the DDRM framework, we modify that prediction to include the model’s gradients by replacing
the update rule
                                               x̄θ,t = V T xθ,t                                     (25)
with
                                                                ḡ
                                         x̄θ,t = V T (xθ,t + s ),                                   (26)
                                                                g
where ḡ and g are obtained as described in Algorithm 3.

F.3.3    R E PAINT (L UGMAYR ET AL ., 2022)
RePaint performs the task of inpainting by modifying the standard denoising process, where, at each
timestep t, the network’s input is composed of noised pixels known from the original input sampled
directly from q and the unknown noisy pixels predicted by the network in the previous timestep.
Additionally, to harmonize the two parts of the image, RePaint samples xt directly from q(xt |xt−1 )
and repeats the forward procedure. By default, this resampling scheme is repeated 20 times for each
of the standard diffusion steps.
In order to incorporate the information from the classifier, we modify the unconditional mean of the
posterior pθ in the denosing step to conditional one, effectively replacing the mean predictor
                                               εθ (Xt , t)                                          (27)
shown in the 7-th step of Algorithm 1 from the original work (Lugmayr et al., 2022) with
                                                              ḡ
                                        εθ (Xt , t) + s · σt2                                       (28)
                                                              g
where ḡ and g are obtained as described in Algorithm 3.

F.4     S CHEDULERS FOR GUIDANCE SCALE

Figure 10 visualizes example schedulers used throughout the development of our method. Our
adaptive normalization technique empirically outperformed all tested schedulers.


             (a) Interval scheduler     (b) Exponential scheduler     (c) Gaussian scheduler

Figure 10: Visualization of more complex schedulers used throughout the development of our
method.


F.5     Q UANTITATIVE EVALUATION OF OTHER ATTRIBUTION METHODS

To pick a default attribution method for RCSB, we evaluated it on the Zebra–Sorrel using the
RCSBB hyperparameter configuration for 11 different attribution methods shown in Table 3. Based
on these results, we chose Integrated Gradients (Sundararajan et al., 2017) as the default, since it
provides the most balanced performance.


                                                   26
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                  Zebra – Sorrel
                         Attribution method     FID      sFID       S3       COUT       FR
                                 LRP            7.5     15.5       0.87       0.62     93.6
                           InputXGradient        9.0     16.8      0.87       0.73     97.8
                               DeepLift          9.2     17.0      0.87       0.73     97.9
                         Integrated Gradients    9.5     17.4      0.86       0.72     97.4
                             GradientShap       10.5     18.5      0.87       0.74     97.4
                                LIME            12.9     20.7      0.85       0.55     88.4
                           GuidedBackprop       13.8    21.49      0.86       0.72     96.5
                              Occlusion         13.9     21.7      0.86       0.50     86.0
                              GradCAM           14.1    22.15      0.85       0.52     87.1
                          GuidedGradCAM         15.1     22.5      0.86       0.71     96.1
                               Saliency         15.2     23.0      0.86       0.75     98.4


Table 3: Quantitative evaluation of 11 attribution methods (described in Appendix C) on the Zebra–
Sorrel task following our evaluation protocol.


F.6   D IVERSITY ASSESSMENT

RCSB utilizes the OT-ODE version of the I2 SB, which provides a deterministic mapping between
the noisy image and the resulting RVCE. The source of randomness comes from the Gaussian noise
inserted into the image in the place of missing pixels at the beginning of the inpainting process.
In order to examine the diversity of the generated RVCEs, we followed the evaluation procedure
from the work of Jeanneret et al. (2023). In essence, we compute the mean pair-wise LPIPS metric
between two runs with different seeds (used in generation of the Gaussian noise) for our three main
configurations of hyperparameters RCSBA , RCSBB and RCSBC . For each run, 256 RVCEs were
generated. Results are shown in Table 4. Naturally, decreasing the area hyperparameter limits the
extent of possible changes, leading to a decrease in diversity. Picking a = 0.3 results in diversity
comparable to values reported by previous works, e.g., Jeanneret et al. (2023).


                              Zebra – Sorrel    Cheetah – Cougar         Egyptian Cat – Persian Cat
                    RCSBA          0.067               0.060                       0.065
                    RCSBB          0.092               0.096                       0.095
                    RCSBC          0.129               0.140                       0.137


   Table 4: Diversity evaluation using 256 images for each task from our experimental protocol.


F.7   C OMPUTATIONAL EFFICIENCY ASSESSMENT

What connects previous SOTA SGM-based methods with our work is the use of large U-Net (Ron-
neberger et al., 2015) checkpoints for the denoising network with the number of hyperparameters
far exceeding (e.g., 10×) the size of the utilized classifier, effectively dominating the computational
burden. Hence, to ensure fair comparison, Table 5 shows the number of Neural Function Evalua-
tions (NFEs) used by each method to produce a single explanation, divided into a. model (U-Net,
classifier and other) b. and forward / backward passes, where the backward pass is around 2× more
computationally demanding than the forward pass. Importantly, this comparison eliminates the dif-
ferences stemming from the utilized hardware and optimality of the implementation, and is fair as
each method consumes virtually the same amount of GPU memory. One exception to the use of the
standard U-Net model is the LDCE method of Farid et al. (2023), which applies it in the latent space
of an autoencoder. However, as each latent U-Net step also requires decoding the image with the
decoder, the computational demand stays similar to the standard approach.
As indicated by Table 5, RCSB is the most efficient approach, both in terms of balancing the use
of the U-Net and the classifier, and the number of forward/backward passes. Importantly, the other
category shows non-zero numbers only for the DVCE method, which additionaly uses the gradients
of a robust classifier in the generation process. The high number of forward/backward passes through
the classifiers in DVCE stems from applying them to a set of 16 augmented versions of xt at each
timestep.


                                                        27
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                              NFE
                                               U-Net                   Classifier                    Other
                 Inpainting method
                                       forward     backward     forward       backward     forward        backward
                      RCSB               100            100          100        100          0                 0
                      LDCE               191            191          191        191          0                 0
                      DVCE               200            200         1600       1600         1600             1600
                       ACE               520            500          25         25           0                 0
                      DDRM               200            200          200        200          0                 0
                       MCG              1000           1000         1000       1000          0                 0
                      RePaint           2410           2410         2410       2410          0                 0


Table 5: Number of NFEs for each respective method with details about the model type and for-
ward/backward passes.


F.8    A DDITIONAL QUANTITATIVE RESULTS

For most visually appealing results, we found a ≈ 0.1 − 0.15, c ≈ 8 − 16, τ ≈ 0.3 − 0.6 and
s ≈ 2 − 3 to perform the best. These hyperparameters were used to create RVCEs for Fig. 5. To
assess that the performance of these configurations does not deviate from best configurations of
Table 1, we followed the same evaluation protocol on the most challenging Zebra–Sorrel task and
include the results in Table 6. Crucially, the performance stays virtually the same when comparing
with Table 1.

        Area a   Cell size c    Guidance scale s    Trajectory truncation τ         FID   sFID       S3        COUT   FR
                                                              0.2               10.1      18.4     0.92        0.79   95.8
                                      3.0                     0.3               10.7      19.0     0.91        0.76   95.0
                                                              0.4               10.8      18.9     0.90        0.74   94.3

         0.1         16                                       0.2               11.0      19.2     0.91        0.81   97.0
                                      3.5                     0.4               11.4      19.4     0.89        0.77   96.0
                                                              0.3               11.6      19.7     0.90        0.79   96.2
                                                              0.2               11.7      19.8     0.91        0.83   97.2
                                      4.0                     0.4               12.3      20.2     0.88        0.79   96.7
                                                              0.3               12.4      20.4     0.89        0.80   96.2
                                                              0.4               11.2      19.2     0.89        0.77   97.7
                                      2.0                     0.5               12.1      20.0     0.88        0.74   96.5
                                                              0.6               12.7      20.4     0.86        0.70   94.8

        0.15         16                                       0.4               13.5      21.3     0.87        0.82   99.5
                                      3.0                     0.5               13.9      21.7     0.86        0.80   99.2
                                                              0.6               14.2      21.7     0.85        0.78   98.6
                                                              0.4               15.3      22.9     0.86        0.84   99.6
                                      4.0                     0.5               15.5      23.1     0.85        0.82   99.7
                                                              0.6               15.8      23.5     0.83        0.81   99.4


Table 6: Quantitative results for hyperparameters that provide the most visually appealing results.


F.9    F REEFORM MASKS

Figure 11 presents example RVCEs for the sorrel → zebra task from the experiments based on
freeform masks with quantitative results in Table 2(B). We observe that RCSB focuses on modifying
the intersection of the randomly assigned mask with features that should intuitively be important to
the classifier, while leaving the unimportant parts, like background and sky, mostly unchanged. This
provides additional justification for high performance of RCSB despite not exclusively focusing on
the most important regions.

F.10    U NINTUITIVE CLASSES

Figure 12 shows RVCEs obtained for unintuitive class pairings. Interestingly, RCSB is able to
largely preserve the realism of the explanations, while providing unusual compositions of objects,
e.g. placing a maltese dog in place of cauliflower.


                                                              28
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


F.11       S HAPE MODIFICATION

While VCEs, and RVCEs in particular, are focused on providing the minimal semantic change
that modifies the classifier’s decision, one may be interested in obtaining new content that deviates
further from the original. Figure 13 shows example RVCEs focused on modifying the original image
to a larger extent, leading to shape and contour changes. By increasing the area (a) of the region
constraint and the trajectory truncation (τ ), RCSB allows for weaker preservation of the original
content, leading to more visible changes. Modifying the shape of the original objects is possible
in various scenarios. For example, in the white stork → black stork task, despite the fact that the
bird’s color is the dominant differentiating feature, guiding RCSB with the classifier of interest
can also lead to large shape changes. This is also visible in the vulture → flamingo task, where
the bird’s legs appear thinner and longer, while its modified head points to an opposite direction.
Moreover, ImageNet contains task that are mostly characterized by shape differences rather than
color or texture changes. Figure 13 shows that the primary characteristic of a pretzel can be easily
modified to change the model’s decision to bagel. The same can be seen when changing the decision
from hatchet to hammer, where the latter’s back part becomes longer than the original. Moreover,
objects like paperknife and spoon can be easily modified with RCSB to be predicted as spoon and
ladle respectively through realistic shape changes.
To assess the effectiveness of RCSB in tasks, where the classifier’s decision should mostly depend on
the objects shape rather than texture or color, we evaluate it on another three tasks: pretzel→bagel,
hatchet→hammer and paperknife→wooden spoon. To compare with previous SOTA on ImageNet,
we evaluate DVCE in the same scenario. The hyperparameters of both methods and experimental
details follow those from the main evaluation protocol in Table 1. Results from Table 7 show that,
despite the different nature of the considered tasks, RCSB preserves its performance and advantage
over DVCE from Table 1.

                       Pretzel → Bagel                    Hatchet → Hammer                   Paperknife → Wooden spoon

  Method     FID    sFID    S3     COUT    FR     FID    sFID    S3     COUT   FR     FID      sFID    S3     COUT       FR

  DVCE       34.3   43.9   0.59     0.37   77.4   31.2   39.8    0.66   0.43   92.8   29.1     35.4    0.69    0.41      88.2
  RCSBA      11.4   22.9   0.86     0.84   97.2    9.8   15.4    0.91   0.89   97.8   9.9      18.2    0.86    0.88      98.9


Table 7: Quantitative results for tasks focused on characteristics connected to shape instead of tex-
ture or color. RCSB is compared to DVCE, which is regarded as current SOTA on ImageNet.


We also address the topic of shape modification further in Appendix F.14, where RCSB is evaluated
on the MNIST dataset. In grayscale handwritten digits, individual classes are primarily identified
based on the shape of samples, hence serving as a proper proof-of-concept benchmark for evaluating
the understanding of shapes by the method.

F.12       L OWER - LEVEL ATTRIBUTIONS

To verify whether RCSB is able to effectively synthesize RVCEs based on pixels that are considered
less important to the classifier, we extract the regions using our automated approach by first zeroing
out the absolute attributions above some quantile q before converting it to a binary mask with the
approach mentioned at the end of Section 3.
Table 9 shows the results of this experiment performed on the three main tasks from Ima-
geNet, where we follow the default protocol from the main part of this paper and use the
RCSBA hyperparameter configuration from Table 1. We evaluate the RVCEs resulting from
q ∈ {0.3, 0.4, 0.5, 0.6, 0.7, 0.8, 0.9}, where the extracted region covers 10% of total image area.
Crucially, the presented results showcase that RCSB’s is largely preserved despite using pixels
which should influence the classifier much more weakly. FID and sFID both decrease monoton-
ically with respect to q, which indicates that an increasing number of pixels from the background
gets modified, resulting in a smaller number of changed data characteristics. S3 remains mostly
unchanged, meaning that the representational similarity is not influenced by varying q. Intuitively,
both COUT and FR also decrease when picking smaller q. This is because RCSB is not able to
utilize the most influential pixels for the classifier, which makes the task harder, thus lowering both
the sparsity (changing most influential pixels) and efficiency of flipping the model’s decision.


                                                            29
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


  q                       Zebra – Sorrel                            Cheetah – Cougar                         Egyptian Cat – Persian Cat

  Metric    FID    sFID       S3        COUT      FR     FID     sFID        S3       COUT     FR     FID     sFID     S3      COUT       FR

  0.9        5.2   13.8       0.87       0.62     91.6   6.1     17.1        0.92     0.88     99.8   13.5    31.4     0.86     0.89      99.9
  0.8        4.6   13.3       0.87       0.53     88.0   4.4     15.7        0.91     0.80     99.1   11.0    28.6     0.85     0.84      99.3
  0.7        3.9   12.7       0.88       0.48     85.7   3.5     15.1        0.91     0.74     97.4   9.2     26.9     0.85     0.79      98.5
  0.6        3.6   12.4       0.89       0.45     82.4   2.9     14.6        0.92     0.68     94.3   7.8     25.5     0.85     0.73      96.1
  0.5        3.6   12.4       0.89       0.40     78.5   2.7     14.5        0.92     0.65     93.1   6.9     24.7     0.86     0.69      94.6
  0.4        3.7   12.3       0.89       0.38     77.7   2.8     14.6        0.92     0.65     93.4   6.6     24.5     0.87     0.65      93.1
  0.3        3.9   12.6       0.89       0.40     79.2   3.1     14.9        0.92     0.69     95.7   7.5     25.3     0.86     0.67      94.2


Table 8: Quantitative results for lower-level attributions on three main tasks from ImageNet. Here, q
denotes the value of the quantile above which absolute attributions are zeroed out before extracting
a region with 10% area coverage.


F.13       OTHER CLASSIFIERS

In Table 9, we provide quantitative results for other classifiers mentioned at the end of the experi-
mental evaluation. The experimental setting follows the same protocol as the one from Table 1 and
we use the RCSBA configuration. Note that the results are consistent with those for ResNet50 in
Table 1 for all classifiers except the robust Madry ResNet50. Since we use a single hyperparameter
configuration, this is probably due to the different nature of the model, and the results could be easily
improved by tuning a specific configuration for it.

                                                                    Zebra – Sorrel
                                     Classifier          FID        sFID            S3       COUT       FR
                                     ClipZeroShot         4.13     12.76            0.90     0.93     100.0
                                     ConvNeXtBase        15.69     23.55            0.82     0.84      99.8
                                     MadryResNet50       47.49     55.22            0.65     −0.19     36.2
                                     RBDeiT              10.00     17.76            0.83     0.70      94.0
                                     RBXCiT              16.04     23.45            0.79     0.46      83.6
                                     SwinB                3.20     12.19            0.94     0.50      88.0
                                     VGG16                7.29     15.39            0.88     0.84      98.0
                                     VGG16 BN             5.44     13.53            0.91     0.87      99.9
                                     ViTB16               8.60     16.84            0.86     0.80      98.9


Table 9: Quantitative results for other classifiers evaluated on the most challenging (out of the three
considered) zebra – sorrel task from ImageNet.


F.14       OTHER BENCHMARKS

We extend the evaluation of RCSB with three additional datasets: CelebA-HQ (Karras et al., 2018)
with 30 000 samples of 256 × 256 resolution face images, CelebA (Liu et al., 2015) with around 200
000 samples of 128 × 128 resolution face images, and MNIST (Deng, 2012) with 70 000 samples of
32 × 32 resolution images of handwritten digits. The first two datasets are chosen to compare with
all previously published diffusion-based approaches that did not evaluate on ImageNet, effectively
complementing our experimental results. While both of these datasets contain face images, they
pose unique challenges, since CelebA-HQ contains much less samples (∼ 6×) which are also of
higher resolution, making the predictive tasks very different. The MNIST dataset was chosen to
provide additional proof of the versatility of RCSB. While this dataset is no longer in active use as
an evaluation benchmark, we include it here to show that even on the data of much different nature
and resolution, RCSB is still able to provide meaningful and informative RVCEs that must focus on
modifying the shape of a digit, since there is no notion of ‘texture‘ present in the data.
For both CelebA and CelebA-HQ, we follow previous works and provide explanations for the
DenseNet121 (Huang et al., 2017) model trained in a multilabel scenario consisting of 40 distinct
attributes. We consider two tasks evaluated in prior works, i.e., flipping the smile and age classes
to the opposite prediction. For MNIST, we train LeNet (Lecun et al., 1998) from scratch using the
default training and validation splits. We note that, for each considered dataset, I2SB must be trained
independently for the task of inpainting (on 20% − 30% freeform masks). We start its training using
a pretrained diffusion checkpoint a. from Lugmayr et al. (2022) for CelebA-HQ with default train-
ing hyperparameters from Liu et al. (2023a) and 40 000 iterations, b. from Jeanneret et al. (2022)


                                                                        30
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


for CelebA with default training hyperparameters from Liu et al. (2023a) and 100 000 iterations and
c. from scratch on MNIST.
To provide a more comprehensive comparison, we also adapt the implementation of DiME (Jean-
neret et al., 2022) to ImageNet and FastDiME to both CelebA-HQ and ImageNet. We first tune the
hyperparameters of both methods with a large grid search on a small subset of images, and then eval-
uate the best configuration using the standard protocol for ImageNet (i.e., the same as our method)
and 2048 samples from CelebA-HQ. Both DiME and FastDiME are implemented with the use of the
same checkpoints that the training of I2SB starts from, i.e. from the work of Lugmayr et al. (2022)
for CelebA-HQ and Dhariwal & Nichol (2021) for ImageNet.

                                        Method              FID         sFID               S3       COUT            FR
                                                                      Zebra – Sorrel
                                      DiME               222.85        243.16              0.19     −0.31           0.0
                                    FastDiME              96.48        103.45              0.22     −0.44          14.0
                                     RCSBA                 8.0          16.2               0.88      0.74          94.7
                                                                     Cheetah – Cougar
                                      DiME               268.22        291.99              0.11     −0.16           0.0
                                    FastDiME             133.01        141.12              0.12     −0.11          18.0
                                     RCSBA                17.2          26.6               0.92      0.92          100.0
                                                             Egyptian Cat – Persian Cat
                                      DiME               322.79        352.08              0.44     −0.05           0.0
                                    FastDiME             193.63        207.12              0.10      0.01          20.0
                                     RCSBA                23.0          40.0               0.87      0.92          100.0


           Table 10: Quantitative results on the ImageNet dataset for DiME and FastDiME.


In terms of evaluation measures, we follow previous works (Jeanneret et al., 2022; 2023; Weng et al.,
2024) and utilize FVA, FS (Cao et al., 2018), MNAC (Rodrı́guez et al., 2021) and CD (Jeanneret
et al., 2022) in addition to metrics used on ImageNet.
Tables 11 and 12 show the quantitative results achieved by all considered methods on CelebA and
CelebA-HQ. Importantly, RCSB is able to outperform the current SOTA in many cases. For exam-
ple, it provides new records for COUT, MNAC and FR on all considered (dataset, class) pairs. While
high COUT and FR are expected based on the method’s performance on ImageNet, where it is able
to efficiently generate very sparse RVCEs (with respect to the classifier), low MNAC additionaly
shows that RCSB focuses on a small subset of face attributes and leaves others mostly unmodified.
Our approach is also able to obtain very low FID and sFID values, often performing worse than ACE
only, which indicates that the obtained explanations preserve the realism of the original samples. We
include example RVCEs obtained with RCSB on CelebA-HQ in Fig. 14.

                                                 Smile                                                                      Age

      Method      FID    sFID   FVA       FS        MNAC      CD       COUT         FR       FID    sFID    FVA       FS     MNAC    CD     COUT   FR

       DiVE       29.4    -     97.3       -           -        -        -           -       33.8    -      98.1      -       4.58    -      -      -
     DiVE100      36.8    -     73.4       -         4.63     2.34       -           -       39.9    -      52.2      -       4.27    -      -      -
      STEEX       10.2    -     96.9       -         4.11       -        -           -       11.8    -      97.5      -       3.44    -      -      -

       ACE ℓ1     1.27   3.97    99.9     0.87       2.94     1.73      0.78        97.6     1.45   4.12    99.6     0.78     3.20   2.94   0.72   96.2
       ACE ℓ2     1.90   4.56    99.9     0.87       2.77     1.56      0.62        84.3     2.08   4.62    99.6     0.80     2.94   2.82   0.56   77.5
        DiME      3.17   4.89    98.3     0.73       3.72     2.30      0.53        97.0     4.15   5.89    95.3     0.67     3.13   3.27   0.44   99.0
      FastDiME    4.18   6.13    99.8     0.76       3.12     1.91      0.44        99.0     4.82   6.76    99.2     0.74     2.65   3.80   0.36   98.6
     FastDiME-2   3.33   5.49    99.9     0.77       3.06     1.89      0.44        99.4     4.04   6.01    99.6     0.75     2.63   3.80   0.37   99.3
    FastDiME-2+   3.24   5.23    99.9     0.79       2.91     2.02      0.41        98.9     3.60   5.59    99.7     0.77     2.44   3.76   0.32   98.7
        RCSB      2.98   4.79   100.0     0.91       2.24     2.78      0.87        99.8     2.94   4.94    99.9     0.88     2.14   3.63   0.81   99.3



Table 11: Quantitative results on the CelebA dataset. We extract the results of other methods
(Rodrı́guez et al., 2021; Jacob et al., 2022; Jeanneret et al., 2022; 2023) from the work of Weng
et al. (2024).

Regarding the MNIST dataset, we provide example RVCEs obtained with RCSB using the auto-
mated region extraction for various tasks in Fig. 15. Crucially, the presented samples show that,
despite the complexity of the detected regions, RCSB is able to properly modify the shape of the ini-
tial digit to change the classifier’s decision. As can be observed, this is performed through a hybrid


                                                                               31
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                Smile                                                              Age

      Method      FID     sFID   FVA     FS        MNAC    CD     COUT        FR     FID     sFID   FVA     FS       MNAC       CD     COUT   FR

       DiVE       107.0    -     35.7     -         7.41    -      -           -     107.5    -     32.3     -           6.76    -      -      -
      STEEX       21.9     -     97.6     -         5.27    -      -           -      26.8    -     96.0     -           5.63    -      -      -

        DiME      18.1    27.7    96.7   0.67       2.63   1.82   0.65        97.0   18.7    27.8    95.0   0.66         2.10   4.29   0.56   97.0
      ACE ℓ1      3.21    20.2   100.0   0.89       1.56   2.61   0.55        95.0   5.31    21.7    99.6   0.81         1.53    5.4   0.40   95.0
      ACE ℓ2      6.93    22.0   100.0   0.84       1.87   2.21   0.60        95.0   16.4    28.2    99.6   0.77         1.92   4.21   0.53   95.0
       LDCE       13.6    25.8    99.1   0.76       2.44   1.68   0.34         -     14.2    25.6    98.0   0.73         2.12   4.02   0.33    -
    FastDiME-2+   16.51   31.4    99.9   0.87       1.43   4.16   0.28        87.1   26.0    40.3    99.6   0.81         3.15   4.36   0.31   92.6
       RCSB       3.04    20.0   100.0   0.93       1.22   3.22   0.83        98.9   4.92    27.3   100.0   0.96         1.47   5.16   0.80   99.4



Table 12: Quantitative results on the CelebA-HQ dataset. We extract the results of other methods
from the work of Farid et al. (2023) and Jeanneret et al. (2023) except FastDiME which we imple-
ment and evaluate ourselves.


approach, where some parts of the initial digit remain the same, while new parts appear to either
combine the existing elements of the digit or create entirely new ones.

G     U SER STUDIES

The main goal of VCEs, and RVCEs in particular, is to explain the model’s reasoning to humans.
This capability can be evaluated from various perspectives. In the following, we provide a detailed
analysis of two independently conducted user studies, with the first one focused on the general
usefulness of RVCEs in understanding the model’s decision-making and the potential benefits stem-
ming from a possible interaction of humans with the explanation creation process, and the second
one concerned with a specific use-case, where RVCEs are used to inform the user about the causes
of model’s misclassification and what must be changed in a given image for it to predict correctly.
For both studies, the model of interest is the ResNet50 used in main experimental evaluation and the
samples are extracted from ImageNet.

G.1     I: U SEFULNESS AND INTERACTION

In this study, 15 participants with background knowledge in machine learning (at the level of MSc
studies, not aware of the research conducted for this paper) were presented with comparisons of
VCEs and RVCEs for the same factual images, together with absolute differences between the orig-
inal and the explanation. An example of such comparison is included in Fig. 16. The participants
were asked about which type of explanation is more useful in understanding the model’s decision-
making. Here, 86.6% answered in favor of RVCEs. Moreover, each user was asked to provide the
reasons for their judgement. The answers generally focused on the semantic change being more
localized, easier to interpret and better aligned with human intuition.
The second part of this study focused on evaluating the added value provided by the possibility
of interacting with the explanation creation process through manual region specification. First, the
participants were shown a default interaction with VCEs, i.e., the original image and its VCE were
presented to users with no possibility of interacting with it. Then, the participants were presented
with the process of manual region specification for which an RVCE was generated, and offered the
possibility to provide the region themselves. After that, each participant was asked whether the in-
teractive process may be helpful and more useful in obtaining a better understanding of the model’s
reasoning than the standard scenario. There, 93.3% of participants answered in favor of the inter-
active process. They were also asked to justify their choice, and the answers generally focused on
the possibility of verifying regions that align with human understanding and incorporating domain
experts that would be able to more thoroughly analyze the model.
In both parts, RVCEs were extracted from the figures in the main part of the manuscript and DVCE
was used to generate standard VCEs, since this method provided the best quantitative results prior
to our work.

G.2     II: U NDERSTANDING MODEL’ S FAILURES

In this study, a different group of 11 participants with background knowledge in machine learning
at a similar level took part in evaluating whether RVCEs help in identifying the reasons for model’s


                                                                         32
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


misclassifications. The study consisted of a general introduction to the problem of explaining deep
classifiers with VCEs, the concept of RVCEs and the two-fold goal of the study: to understand why
a given model misclassifies the image and to identify the minimal semantic change required to cor-
rect the prediction. Then, the participants took part in 5 variations of the same experiment, where
in each case a different misclassification was shown. The experiment began with a presentation of
the factual image, the initially predicted class, the correct class and two sets of images, each rep-
resenting instances of one of the two classes taken randomly from the web (see Fig. 17(left) for an
example introduction to the experiment). Then, each participant observed the original image, the
region constraint from our automated approach and the resulting series of RVCEs (see Fig. 17(right)
for an example). After each of the 5 variants of this experiment, the participants were asked whether
they were able to identify the semantic features that the model lacked in its initial prediction and
that lead to correcting the decision once they appeared on the image. The response was, on average,
positive in 80.02% of the cases with 14.56% standard deviation. In each case, they were also asked
to describe these features. Here, the answers almost always aligned with what the RVCEs were
introducing to the image. After all experiments, the participants were asked if RVCEs are able to
indicate the semantic features that were missing in the beginning for the model to predict correctly
(90.9% positive answers), whether they better understood the initial misclassification (90.9% pos-
itive answers) and if they judge RVCE as a useful tool in explaining the model’s decision-making
(100% positive answers).
The conducted user studies highlight that the concept of RVCEs and the application of RCSB to their
generation is preferred by the users in comparison to standard VCEs. Our explanations are found to
be more useful and helpful in explaining the model’s decision-making. The possibility of interacting
with the explanation creation is also enjoyed and recognized to improve the explanatory process by
almost all participants. Moreover, our method helped the users in obtaining a better understanding
of the classifier’s failure cases and its potential causes.

H    Q UALITATIVE EXAMPLES
We provide additional qualitative examples for different scenarios. Results for other classifiers,
obtained with the automated region extraction, are depicted in Fig. 21 (VGG16, Simonyan & Zis-
serman (2015)), Fig. 22 (VGG16 with Batch Normalization (BN), Simonyan & Zisserman (2015)),
Fig. 23 (ConvNeXt Base, Liu et al. (2022)), Fig. 24 (ViT-B/16, Dosovitskiy et al. (2021)), Fig. 25
(SwinB, Liu et al. (2021)) , Fig. 26 (robust Madry ResNet50, Engstrom et al. (2019)), Fig. 27 (ro-
bust Tian DeiT, Tian et al. (2022)), Fig. 28 (zero-shot CLIP classifier, Radford et al. (2021)). We
used a = 0.2, τ = 0.7, c = 16, s = 1.5 universally across all additional classifiers, showcasing the
versatility of RCSB. Additional examples for ResNet50 are shown in Figs. 29 to 32 (automated re-
gion extraction with different hyperparameters), Fig. 33 (exact regions from LangSAM) and Fig. 34
(user-defined regions).


                                                 33
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 11: Example RVCEs obtained in the sorrel → zebra task from the experiments based on
freeform masks with quantitative results in Table 2(B). The columns show the factual image, the
region to which changes are constrained and the resulting RVCE.


Figure 12: RVCEs for unusual class pairings. Each task of the form initial class → target class
depicts the factual image, the region constraint and the resulting explanation respectively.



                                               34
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 13: RVCEs focused on modifying the shape of objects within the region constraint obtained
with the automated extraction approach. By picking larger area (a) and trajectory truncation (τ ), the
preservation of the original content can be reduced, leading to more diverse infills that change the
classifier’s decision.


                                                 35
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 14: Qualitative examples of RVCEs obtained with RCSB in smiling↔not smiling and
young→old tasks on CelebA-HQ.


Figure 15: Qualitative examples of RVCEs obtained with RCSB in various digit-flipping tasksk on
the MNIST dataset.


                                               36
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                       Type A                                                   Type B

      Image           Explanation        Difference            Image           Explanation        Difference


  Prediction: jay   Prediction: bulbul                     Prediction: jay   Prediction: bulbul

                                         Difference                                               Difference


   Prediction:         Prediction:                          Prediction:         Prediction:
   guacamole            cabbage                             guacamole            cabbage


Figure 16: An example comparison of VCEs and RVCEs presented to participants of the I user
study.


Figure 17: An example introduction (left) and evaluation (right) from one of the experiments con-
ducted in the II user study.


                                                      37
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 18: Qualitative comparison to other VCE generation methods: DiME (Jeanneret et al., 2022),
FastDiME (Weng et al., 2024), LDCE (Farid et al., 2023), DVCE (Augustin et al., 2022) and ACE
(Jeanneret et al., 2023). For each explanation, the absolute difference between the factual image is
additionaly provided.


                                                38
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 19: Qualitative comparison to other VCE generation methods: DiME (Jeanneret et al., 2022),
FastDiME (Weng et al., 2024), LDCE (Farid et al., 2023), DVCE (Augustin et al., 2022) and ACE
(Jeanneret et al., 2023). For each explanation, the absolute difference between the factual image is
additionaly provided.


                                                39
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 20: Qualitative comparison to other VCE generation methods: DiME (Jeanneret et al., 2022),
FastDiME (Weng et al., 2024), LDCE (Farid et al., 2023), DVCE (Augustin et al., 2022) and ACE
(Jeanneret et al., 2023). For each explanation, the absolute difference between the factual image is
additionaly provided.


                                                40
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 21: Extended qualitative evaluation of automated region extraction for VGG16 (Simonyan &
Zisserman, 2015) classifier. For each task, factual image is shown on the left with the used region in
the middle and the generated RVCE on the right.


Figure 22: Extended qualitative evaluation of automated region extraction for VGG16BN (Simonyan
& Zisserman, 2015) classifier. For each task, factual image is shown on the left with the used region
in the middle and the generated RVCE on the right.



                                                 41
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 23: Extended qualitative evaluation of automated region extraction for ConvNeXt Base (Liu
et al., 2022) classifier. For each task, factual image is shown on the left with the used region in the
middle and the generated RVCE on the right.


Figure 24: Extended qualitative evaluation of automated region extraction for ViTB16 (Dosovitskiy
et al., 2021) classifier. For each task, factual image is shown on the left with the used region in the
middle and the generated RVCE on the right.



                                                  42
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 25: Extended qualitative evaluation of automated region extraction for SwinB (Liu et al.,
2021) classifier. For each task, factual image is shown on the left with the used region in the middle
and the generated RVCE on the right.


Figure 26: Extended qualitative evaluation of automated region extraction for Madry ResNet50
(Engstrom et al., 2019) l2 -norm robust classifier. For each task, factual image is shown on the left
with the used region in the middle and the generated RVCE on the right.



                                                 43
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 27: Extended qualitative evaluation of automated region extraction for Tian DeiT (Tian et al.,
2022) corruption robust classifier. For each task, factual image is shown on the left with the used
region in the middle and the generated RVCE(s) on the right.


Figure 28: Extended qualitative evaluation of automated region extraction for CLIP ViT-B/32 (Rad-
ford et al., 2021) zero-shot classifier. For each task, factual image is shown on the left with the used
region in the middle and the generated RVCE on the right.



                                                  44
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 29: Extended qualitative evaluation of automated region extraction with c = 4, a = 0.1 for
the ResNet50 classifier. For each task, factual image is shown on the left with the used region in the
middle and the generated RVCE on the right.


Figure 30: Extended qualitative evaluation of automated region extraction with c = 4, a = 0.3 for
the ResNet50 classifier. For each task, factual image is shown on the left with the used region in the
middle and the generated RVCE on the right.


                                                 45
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 31: Extended qualitative evaluation of automated region extraction with c = 4, a = 0.2 for
the ResNet50 classifier. For each task, factual image is shown on the left with the used region in the
middle and the generated RVCE on the right.


                                                 46
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 32: Extended qualitative evaluation of automated region extraction with c = 8, a = 0.2 for
the ResNet50 classifier. For each task, factual image is shown on the left with the used region in the
middle and the generated RVCE(s) on the right.


                                                 47
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 33: Extended qualitative evaluation of exact regions obtained with LangSAM for the
ResNet50 classifier. For each task, factual image is shown on the left with the used region in the
middle and the generated RVCE(s) on the right.


Figure 34: Extended qualitative evaluation of user-defined regions for the ResNet50 classifier. For
each task, factual image is shown on the left with the used region in the middle and the generated
RVCE(s) on the right.


                                                48
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


R EFERENCES
Brian DO Anderson. Reverse-time diffusion equation models, volume 12. Stochastic Processes and
  their Applications, Elsevier, 1982.
Maximilian Augustin, Valentyn Boreiko, Francesco Croce, and Matthias Hein. Diffusion visual
 counterfactual explanations. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2022.
Maximilian Augustin, Yannic Neuhaus, and Matthias Hein. Analyzing and explaining image clas-
 sifiers via diffusion guidance. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision
 and Pattern Recognition, 2024.
Sebastian Bach, Alexander Binder, Grégoire Montavon, Frederick Klauschen, Klaus-Robert Müller,
  and Wojciech Samek. On pixel-wise explanations for non-linear classifier decisions by layer-wise
  relevance propagation. In PloS one, 2015.
Przemyslaw Biecek and Wojciech Samek. Position: Explain to question not to justify. In Proceed-
  ings of the 41st International Conference on Machine Learning, volume 235, pp. 3996–4006,
  21–27 Jul 2024.
Valentyn Boreiko, Maximilian Augustin, Francesco Croce, Philipp Berens, and Matthias Hein.
  Sparse visual counterfactual explanations in image space. In DAGM German Conference on
  Pattern Recognition, pp. 133–148. Springer, 2022.
Qiong Cao, Li Shen, Weidi Xie, Omkar M Parkhi, and Andrew Zisserman. Vggface2: A dataset for
  recognising faces across pose and age. In 2018 13th IEEE international conference on automatic
  face & gesture recognition (FG 2018), pp. 67–74. IEEE, 2018.
Chun-Hao Chang, Elliot Creager, Anna Goldenberg, and David Duvenaud. Explaining image clas-
  sifiers by counterfactual generation. In International Conference on Learning Representations,
  2019.
Xinlei Chen and Kaiming He. Exploring simple siamese representation learning. In Proceedings of
  the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, pp. 15750–15758, 2021.
Hyungjin Chung, Byeongsu Sim, Dohoon Ryu, and Jong Chul Ye. Improving diffusion models
  for inverse problems using manifold constraints. In Advances in Neural Information Processing
  Systems, 2022.
Hyungjin Chung, Jeongsol Kim, Michael Thompson Mccann, Marc Louis Klasky, and Jong Chul
  Ye. Diffusion posterior sampling for general noisy inverse problems. In The Eleventh Interna-
  tional Conference on Learning Representations, 2023a.
Hyungjin Chung, Jeongsol Kim, and Jong Chul Ye. Direct diffusion bridge using data consistency
  for inverse problems. In Thirty-seventh Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems,
  2023b.
Jia Deng, Wei Dong, Richard Socher, Li-Jia Li, Kai Li, and Li Fei-Fei. Imagenet: A large-scale hi-
   erarchical image database. In 2009 IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition,
   pp. 248–255. IEEE, 2009.
Li Deng. The mnist database of handwritten digit images for machine learning research. In IEEE
  Signal Processing Magazine, 2012.
Prafulla Dhariwal and Alex Nichol. Diffusion models beat gans on image synthesis. In Advances in
  neural information processing systems, 2021.
Alexey Dosovitskiy, Lucas Beyer, Alexander Kolesnikov, Dirk Weissenborn, Xiaohua Zhai, Thomas
  Unterthiner, Mostafa Dehghani, Matthias Minderer, Georg Heigold, Sylvain Gelly, Jakob Uszko-
  reit, and Neil Houlsby. An image is worth 16x16 words: Transformers for image recognition at
  scale. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2021.
Logan Engstrom, Andrew Ilyas, Hadi Salman, Shibani Santurkar, and Dimitris Tsipras. Robustness
  (python library). In https://github.com/MadryLab/robustness, 2019.


                                               49
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Karim Farid, Simon Schrodi, Max Argus, and Thomas Brox. Latent diffusion counterfactual expla-
  nations. In arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.06668, 2023.
Yash Goyal, Ziyan Wu, Jan Ernst, Dhruv Batra, Devi Parikh, and Stefan Lee. Counterfactual visual
  explanations. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 2376–2384. PMLR, 2019.
Kaiming He, Xiangyu Zhang, Shaoqing Ren, and Jian Sun. Deep residual learning for image recog-
  nition. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, pp.
  770–778, 2016.
Martin Heusel, Hubert Ramsauer, Thomas Unterthiner, Bernhard Nessler, and Sepp Hochreiter.
 Gans trained by a two time-scale update rule converge to a local nash equilibrium. In Advances
 in neural information processing systems, 2017.
Jonathan Ho, Ajay Jain, and Pieter Abbeel. Denoising diffusion probabilistic models. In Advances
  in neural information processing systems, 2020.
Andreas Holzinger, Anna Saranti, Christoph Molnar, Przemyslaw Biecek, and Wojciech Samek.
  Explainable AI methods-a brief overview. In International workshop on extending explainable
  AI beyond deep models and classifiers, pp. 13–38. Springer, 2022.
Gao Huang, Zhuang Liu, Laurens Van Der Maaten, and Kilian Q Weinberger. Densely connected
  convolutional networks. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern
  recognition, pp. 4700–4708, 2017.
Paul Jacob, Éloi Zablocki, Hedi Ben-Younes, Mickaël Chen, Patrick Pérez, and Matthieu Cord.
  Steex: steering counterfactual explanations with semantics. In European Conference on Computer
  Vision, pp. 387–403. Springer, 2022.
Guillaume Jeanneret, Loı̈c Simon, and Frédéric Jurie. Diffusion models for counterfactual explana-
  tions. In Proceedings of the Asian Conference on Computer Vision, pp. 858–876, 2022.
Guillaume Jeanneret, Loı̈c Simon, and Frédéric Jurie. Adversarial counterfactual visual explana-
  tions. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition,
  pp. 16425–16435, 2023.
Guillaume Jeanneret, Loı̈c Simon, and Frédéric Jurie. Text-to-image models for counterfactual
  explanations: a black-box approach. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Winter Conference on
  Applications of Computer Vision, pp. 4757–4767, 2024.
Tero Karras, Timo Aila, Samuli Laine, and Jaakko Lehtinen. Progressive growing of GANs for im-
  proved quality, stability, and variation. In International Conference on Learning Representations,
  2018.
Bahjat Kawar, Michael Elad, Stefano Ermon, and Jiaming Song. Denoising diffusion restoration
  models. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2022.
Saeed Khorram and Li Fuxin. Cycle-consistent counterfactuals by latent transformations. In Pro-
  ceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 10203–
  10212, 2022.
Ba Jimmy Kingma, Diederik P. Adam: A method for stochastic optimization. In International
  Conference on Learning Representations, 2019.
Alexander Kirillov, Eric Mintun, Nikhila Ravi, Hanzi Mao, Chloe Rolland, Laura Gustafson, Tete
  Xiao, Spencer Whitehead, Alexander C Berg, Wan-Yen Lo, et al. Segment anything. In Proceed-
  ings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision, pp. 4015–4026, 2023.
Andreas Kirsch. An introduction to the mathematical theory of inverse problems. Applied mathe-
  matical sciences. Springer, New York, 2nd ed edition, 2011.
Narine Kokhlikyan, Vivek Miglani, Miguel Martin, Edward Wang, Bilal Alsallakh, Jonathan
  Reynolds, Alexander Melnikov, Natalia Kliushkina, Carlos Araya, Siqi Yan, et al. Captum: A uni-
  fied and generic model interpretability library for pytorch. In arXiv preprint arXiv:2009.07896,
  2020.

                                                50
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Oran Lang, Yossi Gandelsman, Michal Yarom, Yoav Wald, Gal Elidan, Avinatan Hassidim,
  William T Freeman, Phillip Isola, Amir Globerson, Michal Irani, et al. Explaining in style:
  Training a gan to explain a classifier in stylespace. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International
  Conference on Computer Vision, pp. 693–702, 2021.

Y. Lecun, L. Bottou, Y. Bengio, and P. Haffner. Gradient-based learning applied to document recog-
   nition. In Proceedings of the IEEE, 1998.

Guan-Horng Liu, Arash Vahdat, De-An Huang, Evangelos Theodorou, Weili Nie, and Anima
  Anandkumar. I2SB: Image-to-Image Schrödinger Bridge. In International Conference on Ma-
  chine Learning, pp. 22042–22062. PMLR, 2023a.

Shilong Liu, Zhaoyang Zeng, Tianhe Ren, Feng Li, Hao Zhang, Jie Yang, Chunyuan Li, Jianwei
  Yang, Hang Su, Jun Zhu, et al. Grounding dino: Marrying dino with grounded pre-training for
  open-set object detection. In arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.05499, 2023b.

Ze Liu, Yutong Lin, Yue Cao, Han Hu, Yixuan Wei, Zheng Zhang, Stephen Lin, and Baining Guo.
  Swin transformer: Hierarchical vision transformer using shifted windows. In Proceedings of the
  IEEE/CVF international conference on computer vision, pp. 10012–10022, 2021.

Zhuang Liu, Hanzi Mao, Chao-Yuan Wu, Christoph Feichtenhofer, Trevor Darrell, and Saining Xie.
  A convnet for the 2020s. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and
  pattern recognition, pp. 11976–11986, 2022.

Ziwei Liu, Ping Luo, Xiaogang Wang, and Xiaoou Tang. Deep learning face attributes in the wild.
  In Proceedings of International Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV), December 2015.

Andreas Lugmayr, Martin Danelljan, Andres Romero, Fisher Yu, Radu Timofte, and Luc Van Gool.
  Repaint: Inpainting using denoising diffusion probabilistic models. In Proceedings of the
  IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, pp. 11461–11471, 2022.

Scott M. Lundberg and Su-In Lee. A unified approach to interpreting model predictions. In Pro-
  ceedings of the 31st International Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems, 2017.

Robert J. McCann. A convexity principle for interacting gases. In Advances in Mathematics, 1997.

Franz Motzkus, Christian Hellert, and Ute Schmid. Cola-dce–concept-guided latent diffusion coun-
  terfactual explanations. In arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.01649, 2024.

Adam Paszke, Sam Gross, Francisco Massa, Adam Lerer, James Bradbury, Gregory Chanan, Trevor
  Killeen, Zeming Lin, Natalia Gimelshein, Luca Antiga, et al. Pytorch: An imperative style, high-
  performance deep learning library. In Advances in neural information processing systems, 2019.

Gabriel Peyré and Marco Cuturi. Computational optimal transport: With applications to data sci-
  ence. Foundations and Trends in Machine Learning, 11(5–6):355–607, 2019.

Konpat Preechakul, Nattanat Chatthee, Suttisak Wizadwongsa, and Supasorn Suwajanakorn. Dif-
  fusion autoencoders: Toward a meaningful and decodable representation. In Proceedings of the
  IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, pp. 10619–10629, 2022.

Alec Radford, Jong Wook Kim, Chris Hallacy, Aditya Ramesh, Gabriel Goh, Sandhini Agarwal,
  Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, Pamela Mishkin, Jack Clark, et al. Learning transferable visual
  models from natural language supervision. In International conference on machine learning, pp.
  8748–8763. PMLR, 2021.

Marco Tulio Ribeiro, Sameer Singh, and Carlos Guestrin. ”Why should I trust you?” Explaining the
 predictions of any classifier. In Proceedings of the 22nd ACM SIGKDD international conference
 on knowledge discovery and data mining, pp. 1135–1144, 2016.

Herbert E Robbins. An empirical Bayes approach to statistics. In Breakthroughs in Statistics:
  Foundations and basic theory, 1992.


                                                51
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Pau Rodrı́guez, Massimo Caccia, Alexandre Lacoste, Lee Zamparo, Issam Laradji, Laurent Char-
  lin, and David Vazquez. Beyond trivial counterfactual explanations with diverse valuable ex-
  planations. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision, pp.
  1056–1065, 2021.
Robin Rombach, Andreas Blattmann, Dominik Lorenz, Patrick Esser, and Björn Ommer. High-
  resolution image synthesis with latent diffusion models. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF confer-
  ence on computer vision and pattern recognition, pp. 10684–10695, 2022.
Olaf Ronneberger, Philipp Fischer, and Thomas Brox. U-net: Convolutional networks for biomed-
  ical image segmentation. In Medical image computing and computer-assisted intervention–
  MICCAI 2015: 18th international conference, Munich, Germany, October 5-9, 2015, proceed-
  ings, part III 18, pp. 234–241. Springer, 2015.
Chitwan Saharia, William Chan, Huiwen Chang, Chris Lee, Jonathan Ho, Tim Salimans, David
  Fleet, and Mohammad Norouzi. Palette: Image-to-image diffusion models. In ACM SIGGRAPH
  2022 conference proceedings, pp. 1–10, 2022.
Jonathan Scarlett, Reinhard Heckel, Miguel RD Rodrigues, Paul Hand, and Yonina C Eldar. Theo-
  retical perspectives on deep learning methods in inverse problems. In IEEE journal on selected
  areas in information theory, 2022.
Erwin Schrödinger. Sur la théorie relativiste de l’électron et l’interprétation de la mécanique quan-
  tique. In Annales de l’institut Henri Poincaré, volume 2, pp. 269–310, 1932.
Christoph Schuhmann, Romain Beaumont, Richard Vencu, Cade Gordon, Ross Wightman, Mehdi
  Cherti, Theo Coombes, Aarush Katta, Clayton Mullis, Mitchell Wortsman, et al. Laion-5b: An
  open large-scale dataset for training next generation image-text models. In Advances in Neural
  Information Processing Systems, 2022.
Lisa Schut, Oscar Key, Rory Mc Grath, Luca Costabello, Bogdan Sacaleanu, Yarin Gal, et al. Gener-
  ating interpretable counterfactual explanations by implicit minimisation of epistemic and aleatoric
  uncertainties. In International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics, pp. 1756–1764.
  PMLR, 2021.
Ramprasaath R Selvaraju, Michael Cogswell, Abhishek Das, Ramakrishna Vedantam, Devi Parikh,
  and Dhruv Batra. Grad-cam: visual explanations from deep networks via gradient-based local-
  ization. In International journal of computer vision, 2020.
Sheng-Min Shih, Pin-Ju Tien, and Zohar Karnin. Ganmex: One-vs-one attributions using gan-based
  model explainability. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 9592–9602. PMLR,
  2021.
Avanti Shrikumar, Peyton Greenside, and Anshul Kundaje. Learning important features through
  propagating activation differences. In International conference on machine learning, pp. 3145–
  3153. PMLR, 2017.
Karen Simonyan and Andrew Zisserman. Very deep convolutional networks for large-scale image
  recognition. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2015.
Karen Simonyan, Andrea Vedaldi, and Andrew Zisserman. Deep inside convolutional networks:
  Visualising image classification models and saliency maps. In 2nd International Conference on
  Learning Representations, Workshop Track Proceedings, 2014.
Sumedha Singla, Brian Pollack, Junxiang Chen, and Kayhan Batmanghelich. Explanation by pro-
  gressive exaggeration. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2020.
Bartlomiej Sobieski and Przemysław Biecek. Global counterfactual directions. In European Con-
  ference on Computer Vision, 2024.
Yang Song, Jascha Sohl-Dickstein, Diederik P Kingma, Abhishek Kumar, Stefano Ermon, and Ben
  Poole. Score-based generative modeling through stochastic differential equations. In Interna-
  tional Conference on Learning Representations, 2021.


                                                   52
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Jost Tobias Springenberg, Alexey Dosovitskiy, Thomas Brox, and Martin Riedmiller. Striving for
  simplicity: The all convolutional net. In International Conference on Learning Representations,
  Workshop Track Proceedings, 2015.
Mukund Sundararajan, Ankur Taly, and Qiqi Yan. Axiomatic attribution for deep networks. In
 International conference on machine learning, pp. 3319–3328. PMLR, 2017.
Christian Szegedy, Vincent Vanhoucke, Sergey Ioffe, Jon Shlens, and Zbigniew Wojna. Rethink-
  ing the inception architecture for computer vision. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on
  computer vision and pattern recognition, pp. 2818–2826, 2016.
Jayaraman Thiagarajan, Vivek Sivaraman Narayanaswamy, Deepta Rajan, Jia Liang, Akshay
  Chaudhari, and Andreas Spanias. Designing counterfactual generators using deep model inver-
  sion. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2021.
Rui Tian, Zuxuan Wu, Qi Dai, Han Hu, and Yu-Gang Jiang. Deeper insights into the robustness of
  vits towards common corruptions. In arXiv preprint arXiv:2204.12143, 2022.
Paulina Tomaszewska and Przemysław Biecek. Position paper: Do not explain (vision models)
  without context. In International Conference on Machine Learning, 2024.
Philipp Vaeth, Alexander M Fruehwald, Benjamin Paassen, and Magda Gregorova. Gradcheck:
  Analyzing classifier guidance gradients for conditional diffusion sampling. In arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2406.17399, 2024.
Arnaud Van Looveren and Janis Klaise. Interpretable counterfactual explanations guided by pro-
  totypes. In Joint European Conference on Machine Learning and Knowledge Discovery in
  Databases, pp. 650–665. Springer, 2021.
Nina Weng, Paraskevas Pegios, Aasa Feragen, Eike Petersen, and Siavash Bigdeli. Fast diffusion-
  based counterfactuals for shortcut removal and generation. In European Conference on Computer
  Vision, 2024.
Matthew D Zeiler and Rob Fergus. Visualizing and understanding convolutional networks. In
 Computer Vision–ECCV 2014: 13th European Conference, Zurich, Switzerland, September 6-12,
 2014, Proceedings, Part I 13, pp. 818–833. Springer, 2014.

Mehdi Zemni, Mickaël Chen, Éloi Zablocki, Hédi Ben-Younes, Patrick Pérez, and Matthieu Cord.
 Octet: Object-aware counterfactual explanations. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on
 computer vision and pattern recognition, pp. 15062–15071, 2023.
Richard Zhang, Phillip Isola, Alexei A Efros, Eli Shechtman, and Oliver Wang. The unreasonable
  effectiveness of deep features as a perceptual metric. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on
  computer vision and pattern recognition, pp. 586–595, 2018.
Zhengli Zhao, Dheeru Dua, and Sameer Singh. Generating natural adversarial examples. In Inter-
  national Conference on Learning Representations, 2018.


                                               53
