Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


W EAKLY S UPERVISED V IDEO S CENE G RAPH
G ENERATION VIA NATURAL L ANGUAGE S UPERVISION
 Kibum Kim1 Kanghoon Yoon1 Yeonjun In1 Jaehyeong Jeon1 Jinyoung Moon2
 Donghyun Kim3 Chanyoung Park1∗
 1
   KAIST 2 ETRI 3 Korea University
 {kb.kim,ykhoon08,yeonjun.in,wogud405,cy.park}@kaist.ac.kr
 jymoon@etri.re.kr d kim@korea.ac.kr



                                               A BSTRACT
            Existing Video Scene Graph Generation (VidSGG) studies are trained in a fully
            supervised manner, which requires all frames in a video to be annotated, thereby
            incurring high annotation cost compared to Image Scene Graph Generation
            (ImgSGG). Although the annotation cost of VidSGG can be alleviated by adopt-
            ing a weakly supervised approach commonly used for ImgSGG (WS-ImgSGG)
            that uses image captions, there are two key reasons that hinder such a naive adop-
            tion: 1) Temporality within video captions, i.e., unlike image captions, video cap-
            tions include temporal markers (e.g., before, while, then, after) that indicate time-
            related details, and 2) Variability in action duration, i.e., unlike human actions
            in image captions, human actions in video captions unfold over varying dura-
            tion. To address these issues, we propose a Natural Language-based Video Scene
            Graph Generation (NL-VSGG) framework that only utilizes the readily available
            video captions for training a VidSGG model. NL-VSGG consists of two key mod-
            ules: Temporality-aware Caption Segmentation (TCS) module and Action Dura-
            tion Variability-aware caption-frame alignment (ADV) module. Specifically, TCS
            segments the video captions into multiple sentences in a temporal order based on
            a Large Language Model (LLM), and ADV aligns each segmented sentence with
            appropriate frames considering the variability in action duration. Our approach
            leads to a significant enhancement in performance compared to simply applying
            the WS-ImgSGG pipeline to VidSGG on the Action Genome dataset. As a fur-
            ther benefit of utilizing the video captions as weak supervision, we show that the
            VidSGG model trained by NL-VSGG is able to predict a broader range of action
            classes that are not included in the training data, which makes our framework prac-
            tical in reality. Our code is available at https://github.com/rlqja1107/NL-VSGG.


1       I NTRODUCTION
Scene graph is a visually-grounded structured graph in which objects are represented as nodes and
the relationships between them as directed edges. A scene graph bridges computer vision and natural
language with high-level information, facilitating its usage on various downstream tasks, such as
question answering (Ghosh et al., 2019), captioning (Yang et al., 2019), and retrieval (Schroeder &
Tripathi, 2020).
In general, studies for scene graph generation (SGG) (Kim et al., 2024a; Yoon et al., 2023; Jeon et al.,
2024; Yoon et al., 2024) have been conducted in the realm of images, referred to as ImgSGG. These
studies primarily excel at predicting static relationships (e.g., standing on) within a single image,
while struggling to predict dynamic relationships (e.g., running) that may exist over consecutive
images, since ImgSGG models are unable to capture dynamic visual relations (Chen et al., 2023).
In this regard, Video scene graph generation (Cong et al., 2021; Feng et al., 2023; Teng et al.,
2021), dubbed as VidSGG, has emerged to capture temporal context across video frames and predict
dynamic relationships, extending its scope beyond merely predicting static relationships within a
single image.
Existing VidSGG studies (Cong et al., 2021; Nag et al., 2023; Xu et al., 2022; Wang et al., 2022a)
follow a fully supervised approach, indicating a heavy reliance on costly annotation involving class
    ∗
        Corresponding Author


                                                     1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                Time


                                                                                                                                                                                              SGG Training
                                                                                                                                                                  eating


                                                                                                      Image
        Video
                                  …                                  …
                                                                                                                                                                             food
                                                                                                                                                        man


                                       Localized Scene Graphs
                                                                                                                                                              Grounding
                                                                                                              Input: Image + Image Caption


                                                                                                                                               Parser
                                               sitting on                                                                                                       eating
                                   person                     sofa                                        A man with glasses is eating food.             man                food


                                (a) Fully Supervised VidSGG                                                           (b) Pipeline of Weakly Supervised ImgSGG

                Time                                                                                                                                                                 Parser+
                                                                                                                 Temporal Alignment
                                                                                                                                                                                    Grounding
                                                                                                                                                               Sentence 1
        Video


                                                                                                                                                               Sentence 2

                                                                                                                                                                              person              sofa
                                                                                                                                               Not aligned
                                                                                                  Sentence 1               Sentence 2            Frames                              sitting on
                                                                                             Sentence 1. A person is carrying a cup towards a sofa.                                Pseudo-Localized
                                  Input: Video + Video Caption                                                                                                                       Scene Graph
                                                                                             Sentence 2. A person is sitting on a sofa.
                       Before sitting on a sofa, a person is carrying a cup     Temporal
                       towards a sofa.                                        Segmentation                                                                                    VidSGG Training

                                                                (c) Pipeline of Weakly Supervised VidSGG (Ours)


Figure 1: (a) The fully supervised VidSGG requires costly localized scene graphs across all frames.
(b) The pipeline of WS-ImgSGG. (c) The pipeline of WS-VidSGG needs to consider the tempo-
rality within the caption addressed by temporal segmentation and the variability of action duration
addressed by temporal alignment.

information (i.e., entity and relation) alongside bounding boxes for entities across all frames in a
video (See Fig. 1(a)). This indicates that VidSGG requires greater annotation costs compared to
ImgSGG, which only requires annotations for a single image. Despite recent weakly supervised
ImgSGG (i.e., WS-ImgSGG) approaches (Zhong et al., 2021; Zhang et al., 2023; Ye & Kovashka,
2021; Kim et al., 2024b; Li et al., 2022a) that address the annotation cost in ImgSGG, weakly
supervised approach for VidSGG (i.e., WS-VidSGG), where annotation costs are more demanding,
remains unexplored. Although PLA (Chen et al., 2023), the first WS-VidSGG study, proposes a
framework for training an VidSGG model based on a ground-truth unlocalized scene graph of the
middle frame, we argue that the assumption of a ground-truth scene graph existing in the middle
frame, among other frames, is not only unrealistic but also still requires manual human annotation,
thus continuing to impose substantial annotation costs.
In this work, we are interested in training an VidSGG model without any human-annotated scene
graphs, and there can be two different strategies. The first strategy would be to apply a pre-
trained ImgSGG model, preferably the one with a strong zero-shot predictive ability for relations
(e.g., RLIP (Yuan et al., 2022) and RLIPv2 (Yuan et al., 2023)), to every frame of the video
to obtain pseudo-labeled scene graphs in each frame. However, since such a model is trained
based on static visual relationships in images, they are not capable of predicting dynamic visual
relationships1 . The second strategy would be to leverage language supervision from video cap-
tions and follow the conventional WS-ImgSGG pipeline (Zhong et al., 2021; Zhang et al., 2023;
Ye & Kovashka, 2021; Kim et al., 2024b; Li et al., 2022a) as depicted in Fig. 1(b). Specifi-
cally, we could first parse a video caption to extract triplets, align them with consecutive frames,
and ground the aligned triplets within each frame. However, such a simple approach of adopt-
ing the WS-ImgSGG pipeline to VidSGG is limited2 due to the following two key reasons:

• Temporality within Video Captions. Contrary to image captions shown
  in Fig. 1(b), video captions often contain temporal markers (e.g., before,
  while, then, after) representing time-related details. Without considering
  them, applying the above simple approach may erroneously supervise the
  model. For example, in Fig. 1(c), if we overlook the temporal marker be-
  fore in the caption, and use <person, sitting on, sofa> to annotate earlier
  frames rather than later frames, the model would be mistakenly supervised,
  resulting in the performance degradation. As temporal markers account for Figure 2: Ratio of
  around 65% of the Action Genome (AG) dataset used for VidSGG, while temporal markers.
  they account for only 2% in the Visual Genome (VG) (Krishna et al., 2017b) dataset used for
  ImgSGG (See Fig. 2), considering temporality is especially crucial in video captions.
   1
     In Table 1, we show that the performance of RLIP and RLIPv2 is subpar in the Action Genome (Ji et al.,
2020) dataset under the zero-shot setting.
   2
     In Table 1, we show that the simple approach performs poorly on the Action Genome dataset.


                                                                                              2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


• Variability in Action Duration. Human actions unfold over varying duration in a video. For
  example, in Fig. 1(c), Sentence 1 occurs within two frames, while Sentence 2 extends across a
  longer span of four frames. However, if we overlook such variability in the action duration and
  naively align the first segmented sentence with the first four consecutive frames and the second
  sentence with the latter four consecutive frames (i.e., 8 frames ÷ 2 sentences), the 3rd and 4th
  frames would end up being annotated with <person, carrying, cup>, while the last two frames
  would end up being annotated with <person, sitting on, sofa>, both of which are undesired.

To this end, we propose a simple yet effective weakly-supervised VidSGG framework, called Natural
Language-based Video Scene Graph Generation (NL-VSGG), that only utilizes the readily available
video captions for training a VidSGG model. Our proposed framework consists of two key modules:
Temporality-aware Caption Segmentation (TCS) module, and Action Duration Variability-aware
Caption-Frame Alignment (ADV) module. More precisely, TCS segments the video caption into
multiple sentences while also considering the temporality within the video caption based on a Large
Language Model (LLM). Then, ADV aligns the temporally segmented sentences with corresponding
consecutive frames in the video considering the variability in action duration. The main idea is to
perform K-means clustering on the frames, and assign each segmented sentence to the frames within
a cluster based on its similarity with the cluster centroids.
Through our extensive experiments, we demonstrate the superiority of NL-VSGG over the simple
adoption of 1) a pre-trained ImgSGG model, and 2) the WS-ImgSGG pipeline to VidSGG. It is
worth noting that for the first time, we show the capability of training a VidSGG by only utilizing
the readily available video captions, i.e., language supervision. As a further benefit of utilizing the
video captions as weak supervision, we show that the VidSGG model trained by NL-VSGG is able
to predict a broader range of action classes that are not included in the training data, which makes
our framework practical in reality. Our contributions are summarized as follows:
• We identify two key reasons for why a simple adoption of the WS-ImgSGG pipeline to VidSGG
  fails, i.e., temporality within video captions and variability of action duration.
• We propose a simple yet effective weakly supervised VidSGG framework, called NL-VSGG, that
  only utilizes the readily available video captions for training. To the best of our knowledge, we
  are the first to enable the training of VidSGG model with language supervision without manual
  annotation.
• Our extensive experiments on the Action Genome dataset demonstrate the superiority of NL-
  VSGG. Our proposed method is practical in that utilizing the video captions as weak supervision
  allows the VidSGG model to be able to predict action classes that are not included in the training
  data.

2       WS-V ID SGG WITH NATURAL L ANGUAGE S UPERVISION
In this section, we describe the pipeline of NL-VSGG for training a VidSGG model based on natural
language supervision of video captions. We start by outlining the problem formulation of WS-
VidSGG (Section 2.1). Subsequently, we describe Temporality-aware Caption Segmentation (TCS)
module that segments a video caption in a temporal order via an LLM (Section 2.2), followed by
Action Duration Variability-aware Caption-Frame Alignment (ADV) module that aligns each of the
segmented sentence with appropriate frames (Section 2.3). Then, we parse the aligned segmented
sentences to extract triplets, ground them within each frame, and train the VidSGG model with
pseudo-localized scene graphs (Section 2.4). Finally, we describe a novel pseudo-labeling strategy
that leverages negative action classes using motion cues within unaligned frames (Section 2.5). The
overall framework is shown in Fig. 3.
2.1       P ROBLEM F ORMULATION
In this work, given a video V = {I 1 , I 2 , ..., I T } and its paired video caption S, where I t is the
t-th frame of the video V and T is the number of video frames in the video V , our goal is to
                                                t
generate a scene graph Gt = {stj , ptj , otj }N                    t          t
                                              j=1 for each frame I , where N is the number of triplets
in I t . Moreover, stj /otj denote the subject/object, whose entity classes are stj,c /otj,c ∈ C e , and their
bounding boxes are given by stj,b /otj,b . ptj denotes the action of stj 3 interacting with otj , and its
class is denoted by ptj,c ∈ C a , where C e and C a are predefined entity classes and action classes,
    3
        In the Action Genome dataset, the subject is always a person.


                                                         3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                                                             (b) Sec. 2.3: Action Duration Variability-aware                              (c) Sec. 2.4: Generation of Pseudo-Localized SG
                               Input: Video + Video Caption
                                                                                                    Caption-Frame Alignment (ADV)
                                                                                                                                                                          ※ Aligned Frames                     Sentence 1 (𝑺෠ 𝟏)
                                                                                                                                                                         (Case of Sentence 2)                              Parsing
                                                                                                                       Sim.                                 Sentence 1
                                                                                                                                                               (𝑡1ǁ )                                  person                      sofa
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  sitting on
                                                                                             Short Duration                                                 …                                                              Grounding
                                                                                                                              𝒄𝟏 𝒄𝟐 𝒄𝟑 𝒄𝟒                   … 𝒄𝑲
                                                                                                                                                 𝟐
                                                                                                                        Aligned Frames 𝑰
                𝐼1      𝐼2      𝐼3        𝐼4        𝐼5        𝐼6        𝐼7       𝐼8
           Before sitting on a sofa, a person is carrying a cup towards a sofa.                                                                             Sentence 2      Frames with
                                                                                                                       Sim.
                                                                                                                                                               (𝑡2ǁ )     detected objects
                                                                                             Long Duration                                                  …              (𝑰𝟑 , 𝑰𝟒 , 𝑰𝟓 , 𝑰𝟔 )       person
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 sitting on        sofa
           (a) Sec. 2.2:Temporality-aware Caption Segmentation (TCS)                                                          𝒄𝟏 𝒄𝟐 𝒄𝟑            𝒄𝟒        …    𝒄𝑲
                                                                                                                        Aligned Frames: 𝑰𝟏 , 𝑰𝟑 , 𝑰𝟒 , 𝑰𝟓 , 𝑰𝟔
                      In this task, you are given a video caption.                                                      : Frame with violated order                                                    (e) VidSGG Training
                      Considering the words that indicate the order of events                                                                                             (d) Sec.2.5: PLM
                      (e.g., then, while, …), your job is to split the given video           𝐼1 , 𝐼 2 … , 𝐼 8                              : Centroid of cluster
                                                                                                                              𝒄𝑲
                      caption into multiple compositional sentences, and arrange                 Visual                                    : VL Similarity                ※ Unaligned Frames
                      them in chronological order.                                                                                                                             ( 𝐼7 , 𝐼8)
                                                                                                Encoder


                                                                                                                   …
                                                                                                                                      ෥𝟔
                                                                                                                                      𝒗
                      Note that you should specify the objects for the pronouns                                ෥𝟏
                                                                                                               𝒗
                      used in each of these sentences.                                                                                           𝒄𝟒              ෥𝟒
                                                                                                                                                                 𝒗                                    person              sofa
                                                                                                    Clustering                                        ෥𝟓
                                                                                                                                                      𝒗
                      {In-context examples}
                                                                                                                                                                                                           not looking at
                                                                                                                                           𝒕෤𝟐                   𝒄𝟑
                      Input (VIDEO CAPTION): Before sitting on a sofa, …                                                                                    ෥𝟑
                                                                                                                                                            𝒗
                                                                                                        𝒕෤𝟏
                                                                                                  Text   𝒕෤𝟐
                                                                                                                              ෥𝟏 𝒄𝟏
                                Sentence 1 (𝑺෠ 𝟏)                                                                                                                                                                   𝐆𝒆 − 𝐆𝒔 = −𝟎. 𝟓
                                                A person is carrying a cup towards a sofa.      Encoder                       𝒗
                      LLM                                                                                                                             𝒕෤𝟏    ෥𝟐 𝒄𝟐
                                                                                                                                                             𝒗               GIoU: -0.2           GIoU: -0.7
                                Sentence 2 (𝑺෠ 𝟐)                                              Sentence 2 (𝑺෠ 𝟐)
                                                A person is sitting on a sofa.
                                                                                             Sentence 1 (𝑺෠ 𝟏)                                                                  (𝑰𝟕 )                (𝑰𝟖 )


Figure 3: The overall framework of NL-VSGG. With an input video and its caption, (a) we em-
ploy the TCS module to segment the input video caption into sentences based on temporality. (b)
In the ADV module, each segmented sentence is aligned with appropriate frames considering the
variability in action duration. (c) The segmented sentences are then parsed and grounded to generate
pseudo-localized scene graphs. (d) Furthermore, we assign negative classes based on the motion
cues within unaligned frames. (e) Utilizing the pseudo-localized scene graphs and pseudo-labeled
negative classes, we then train a VidSGG model.
respectively. Given a scene graph Gt across all frames along the time axis (i.e., t ∈ {1, 2, ...T }), the
scene graph for video V is represented by G = {G1 , G2 , ..., GT }.
Difference with existing fully/weakly supervised approaches. Note that a fully supervised ap-
proach (Cong et al., 2021; Nag et al., 2023) relies on a localized video scene graph G for train-
ing the model. On the other hand, a recently proposed weakly supervised approach (i.e., PLA
(Chen et al., 2023)) relies on a ground-truth unlocalized scene graph of the middle frame, i.e.,
   ′      ′    ′     ′   t′
                                    ′                                t′    t′
Gt = {stj , ptj , otj }N
                       j=1 , where t is T /2 and the bounding boxes sj,b /oj,b are not provided. Both
fully/weakly supervised approaches require structured scene graphs that demand costly human labor,
while NL-VSGG only necessitates a readily available video caption S.

2.2   T EMPORALITY- AWARE C APTION S EGMENTATION (TCS)
In this module, we segment the video caption S considering the temporal order of events to clearly
understand the sequence of actions. To this end, we employ an LLM based on a prompt that is
designed to be aware of temporality within video captions. Our newly designed prompt is described
as follows. First, the initial instruction to inform the LLM about the task at hand while enforcing it
to consider the temporality of events occuring in the video caption is designed as: Your job is to split
the given video caption into multiple compositional sentences and arrange them in chronological
order. Moreover, video captions often require coreference resolution (Peng et al., 2019) caused by a
pronoun referring to the same object over time, which may hinder an accurate extraction of triplets.
To this end, we provide an additional prompt: Note that you should specify the objects for the
pronouns used in each of these sentences. Following the above prompts, we provide a few examples
related to the task at hand (i.e., in-context few-shot learning (Brown et al., 2020)) to further engage
the LLM. Finally, we instruct the LLM to segment the video caption S in a temporal order, which
in turn yields segmented sentences {Ŝ 1 , Ŝ 2 , .., Ŝ m , ..., Ŝ M }, where M is the number of segmented
sentences and M < T . For example, in Fig. 3, Sentence 1 and Sentence 2 correspond to Ŝ 1 and
Ŝ 2 , respectively, with M being 2. In summary, we design prompts tailored to the WS-VidSGG
task particularly focusing on capturing the temporality within the video caption and addressing the
coreference issue. Please refer to Appendix A regarding the details of the prompt, and Appendix B
regarding the impact of the prompt addressing the coreference resolution.

2.3   ACTION D URATION VARIABILITY- AWARE C APTION -F RAME A LIGNMENT (ADV)
Having obtained the segmented sentences {Ŝ 1 , Ŝ 2 , .., Ŝ m , ..., Ŝ M } from the video caption S, we
need to align each segmented caption Ŝ m with frames that visually correspond to the scene being
described therein. However, this alignment process requires careful attention to ensure effective
supervision of the model, taking into account the variability in action duration, as discussed in
Section 1. In doing so, it is crucial to estimate how the visual semantic of each frame I 1 , I 2 , ..., I T


                                                                                                                          4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


is relevant to the textual semantic of each segmented sentence Ŝ m . Hence, we employ a vision-
language model4 that captures the joint space of visual and textual semantics. More precisely, we
feed I 1 , I 2 , ..., I T into a visual encoder fvis to extract visual features (i.e., ṽt = fvis (I t )) and Ŝ m
into a text encoder ftext to extract textual features (i.e., t̃m = ftext (Ŝ m )), followed by K-Means
clustering algorithm on {ṽ1 , ṽ2 , ..., ṽT } to generate K proposals with which the textual features
can be aligned. The most straightforward approach to align t̃m with corresponding video frames
would be to compute the similarity scores between t̃m and the centroids {c1 , c2 , ..., cK }, and select
the frames near the most similar centroid. However, this approach cannot effectively capture the
variability of action duration, especially in long action duration cases, e.g., Sentence 2 in Fig. 3. To
this end, we propose a simple yet effective method of leveraging the variation in similarity scores.
Clustering-based Caption-Frame Alignment. For a sentence with long action duration, its cor-
responding frames would span across multiple clusters, exhibiting relatively high similarity scores
with multiple cluster centroids. On the other hand, a sentence with short action duration would rep-
resent a confidently sharpened similarity score mainly focusing on a single cluster. Hence, for the
representation t̂m of each segmented sentence Ŝ m , we arrange its similarity scores with K centroids
in descending order, and determine the point where the scores show the steepest decline. Note that
this steepest decline point will determine the varying durations of actions by isolating the relevant
multiple clusters, regardless of how long the action lasts. Then, we choose all the clusters preceding
this point, and align the frames in those clusters with t̂m . For example, for Sentence 2 in Fig. 3, we
sort the cluster based on the similarity scores (i.e., c4 , c3 , c1 , c2 ,...) and determine the point where
the score shows a steepest decline (i.e., c1 → c2 ). Then, we choose frames in clusters c4 , c3 , and c1
to align with Sentence 2. In this manner, we can adaptively choose clusters according to the vari-
ability of action duration. Regarding the K, our aim is to adapt the number of clusters depending on
the length of the video. Thus, we set K as |Vβ | , where β is a hyperparameter.
Removing Unrealistic Caption-Frame Alignments. It is worth noting that we remove unrealistic
alignments that violates the temporal order. For example, if Ŝ 1 is aligned with I 2 , and Ŝ 2 is aligned
with I 1 , I 3 , I 4 , I 5 , I 6 , we remove I 1 from Ŝ 2 since I 2 is already aligned with Ŝ 1 , which precedes
Ŝ 2 (See Fig. 3). Finally, each segmented sentence Ŝ m is aligned with a sequence of consecutive
                                                        m
frames within V = {I 1 , I 2 , ..., I T }, i.e., [I]Ŝ .

2.4   G ENERATION OF P SEUDO -L OCALIZED S CENE G RAPHS
                            m
Based on the {(Ŝ m , [I]Ŝ )}M
                              m=1 obtained from ADV, we construct pseudo-localized scene graphs
for training the model, which can be described as follows:
Scene graph parsing. We begin by converting each segmented sentence Ŝ m into a triplet
<sm , pm , om >5 using either a rule-based parser (Schuster et al., 2015) or an LLM-based parser
(Kim et al., 2024b). Note that the bounding boxes sm,b , om,b are not defined, and the classes
sm,c , om,c , pm,c are not necessarily included in C e and C a . To ensure sm,c , om,c ∈ C e and
pm,c ∈ C a , we map them to the classes of our interest (i.e., entity/action classes in the Action
Genome dataset) by either using synsets’ lemmas and hypernyms in WordNet (Miller, 1995) or
LLM-based alignment (Kim et al., 2024b). In this process, we obtain pseudo-unlocalized scene
graphs. Note that we can also omit the class mapping process to let the model be able to predict a
broader range of action classes that are not included in the entity/action classes of Action Genome,
as will be shown in Section 3.6.
Scene graph grounding. To define the bounding boxes sm,b and om,b , we follow a prior study
(Chen et al., 2023) that leverages the information of a pretrained object detector. Specifically, we
ground sm to a detected bounding box whose entity class corresponds to sm,c , while om is grounded
in a similar manner. After grounding sm and om , we assign pm between sm and om .

The above processes of scene graph parsing and scene graph grounding are adopted to each pair
                 m
in {(Ŝ m , [I]Ŝ )}M
                    m=1 , where the scene graph grounding process is applied across aligned frames
     m
[I]Ŝ , after which pseudo-localized video scene graphs G can be obtained.
   4
     For the vision-language model, we used DAC (Doveh et al., 2024), a variant of CLIP Radford et al. (2021),
due to its compositional reasoning ability. Moreover, the vision-language model can be replaced with a video-
language model (Refer to Appendix D for experiments that replaces DAC with InternVideo).
   5
     Although each segmented caption can be converted into more than one triplet, we assume here that it is
converted to only one triplet for simplicity of explanation.


                                                        5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


2.5     O PTIONAL : D EALING WITH N EGATIVE ACTION C LASSES IN ACTION G ENOME
It is important to note that while the Action Genome
dataset contains negative action classes (e.g., not look-
ing at and not contacting), video captions usually do
not contain negations6 . For this reason, a VidSGG model
trained in a weakly supervised manner based on video
captions as in our study would fail to generate a scene                                GIoU=0.3                  GIoU=-0.5

graph containing negative action classes in the Action A person is sitting on the sofa          Unaligned Frames


Genome dataset. To address this issue, we propose a novel        Figure 4: Example of motion cue.
Pseudo-Labeling strategy based on Motion cues (PLM) that assigns negative action classes between
subject-object pairs. The core idea is to make use of the fact that a person usually does not look
at (or contact) an object when moving apart from it. Specifically, we adopt the generalized IoU
(Rezatofighi et al., 2019; Gao et al., 2023) (GIoU) as a metric to measure how close two objects are
from each other. Note that for a given subject and an object, a small GIoU in the end frame (i.e.,
Ge ) and a large GIoU in the start frame (i.e., Gs ) indicates that they are getting farther from each
other over time. For example, as a person is moving farther from a sofa from the 3rd frame to the
last frame, the GIoU gets smaller (See Figure 4). In other words, as Ge − Gs gets smaller, the
subject and the object are getting farther from each other over time. With this motion cue, we assign
negative action classes, i.e., not looking at and not contacting.
However, as considering all the frames in a video for pseudo-labeling of negative action classes is
costly, we utilize frames that are not aligned with any of the segmented sentences for pseudo-labeling
negative action classes. More precisely, for all the unaligned frames across the entire videos given in
the dataset, we compute Ge − Gs between the same subject-object pair. Then, we sort the computed
GIoUs in the ascending order, and assign pseudo-labels (i.e., not looking at and not contacting)
to top-α% aiming at assigning labels to more confident subject-object pairs. More precisely, we
restrict the assignment of not looking at to the start and end frames within unaligned frames, and
not contacting only to the end frames. Please refer to Appendix E regarding the different selection
strategies for pseudo-label assignment. Since considering all subject-object pairs included in the
training data is not only time-consuming but also prone to noise, we only select objects appearing
in the pseudo-localized video scene graph G obtained from the aligned frames in each video.
It is important to note that the proposed PLM is an optional module that can be only applied when
the dataset contains negative classes as in the Action Genome dataset. While we show its effec-
tiveness on the original Action Genome dataset with negative classes, we also provide results for
datasets without negative classes, namely the AG dataset without negative classes See Table 10 in
Appendix I) and VidHOI dataset (Chiou et al., 2021) (See Table 6 in Appendix C).
Model Training. Lastly, having obtained the pseudo-localized video scene graph G and pseudo-
labeled negative classes within unaligned frames, we then follow the training protocol of existing
VidSGG models, i.e., STTran (Cong et al., 2021) and DSG-DETR (Feng et al., 2023).
3       E XPERIMENT
3.1 E XPERIMENTAL S ETTING
Datasets. To train a VidSGG model without ground-truth localized video scene graphs7 , we use
three video caption datasets: the Action Genome (Ji et al., 2020) (AG) caption, the MSVD (Chen
& Dolan, 2011) caption, and the ActivityNet caption (Krishna et al., 2017a) datasets. For the AG
caption dataset, we use 7,454 videos consisting of 166,785 frames, following previous studies (Chen
et al., 2023; Cong et al., 2021; Ji et al., 2020). The duration of each video is on average 29.9 seconds.
To show a more practical setting, which is to use external caption datasets, other than a benchmark
VidSGG dataset containing video captions (i.e., AG dataset), as weak supervision, we use the MSVD
and ActivityNet caption datasets, each of which contains 1,970 videos consisting of 40,863 frames
with 2 FPS and 4,640 videos consisting of 569,836 frames with 1 FPS, respectively. The duration of
each video for the MSVD and ActivityNet datasets is on average 9.5 and 117.3 seconds, respectively.
Note that we mainly use the AG caption dataset for analysis throughout this paper while the MSVD
and ActivityNet caption datasets are only used in Section 3.4 and 3.5. To evaluate our proposed
NL-VSGG framework, we use the AG dataset containing ground-truth localized video scene graphs
with 36 object classes (i.e., C e ) and 25 action classes (i.e., C a ), whose categories are divided into
    6
    Only 0.09% (11/11,593) among all captions in Action Genome contain negation.
    7
    The ground-truth localized video scene graphs are utilized for model training in a fully-supervised ap-
proach while we do not use them for weakly supervised approach.


                                                            6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


three types, i.e., 3 attention classes, 6 spatial classes, and 16 contacting classes. Following previous
studies (Chen et al., 2023; Cong et al., 2021), we use 1,747 videos with 54,429 frames. Furthermore,
to validate the generalization on other datasets, we train and evaluate our proposed framework using
the VidHOI (Chiou et al., 2021) dataset, which is detailed in Appendix C.
Evaluation Metrics. We use the widely adopted Recall@K (R@K) with “With Constraint” and
“No Constraint” strategies, following previous studies (Cong et al., 2021; Chen et al., 2023; Feng
et al., 2023). “With Constraint” allows only one action prediction with the highest score between
subject and object, while “No Constraint” reflects the multi-label prediction capability in evaluation
metric as the AG dataset follows a multi-label task. For example, if multiple high action scores
are associated with a single subject-object pair, all of them are allowed in the top-K. Regarding the
evaluation task, we adopt the Scene Graph Generation (SGDet) task, which is commonly used for
WS-ImgSGG (Kim et al., 2024b; Zhong et al., 2021; Zhang et al., 2023; Ye & Kovashka, 2021). In
this task, the ground-truth (GT) bounding boxes and entity class information are not provided during
evaluation, and the predicted triplet is considered valid only if the predicted bounding box overlaps
with the GT bounding box with an IoU>0.5.
Baselines. To evaluate our proposed framework, we compare it with models each of which cor-
responds to one of the four types of supervision: Zero-shot supervision8 (No supervision), Full
supervision, Weak supervision of GT Unlocalized scene graph (SG), and Weaker supervision of
Natural Language, i.e., utilization of readily available video captions. Specifically, zero-shot su-
pervision indicates that without any training process, each frame is considered as a static image and
inferred with ImgSGG models equipped with strong zero-shot predictive ability for relations. For
this purpose, we employ RLIP (Yuan et al., 2022) and RLIPv2 (Yuan et al., 2023). Full supervision,
which we consider as the upper bound of our model, involves training the model with ground-truth
localized video scene graphs, and we leverage STTran (Cong et al., 2021) and DSG-DETR (Feng
et al., 2023) for VidSGG models. Weak supervision of GT unlocalized SG is to utilize a GT unlo-
calized scene graph in the middle frame, which is proposed by PLA (Chen et al., 2023). Moreover,
we also compare with PLAsimp. , a simplified version of PLA trained using only unlocalized SG
from the middle frame without any component of PLA. This baseline is included to demonstrate
the heavy reliance of PLA on the annotated GT unlocalized scene graph, which is costly. Finally,
the natural language supervision is based on the readily available video captions. It includes two
approaches: straightforward approach of the WS-ImgSGG method discussed in Section 1 (i.e., +
WS-ImgSGG) and our proposed framework (i.e., + NL-VSGG). In addition to those approaches,
we add a new baseline adapted from PLA (i.e, + PLAcap ), where the GT unlocalized scene graph of
the middle frame are replaced with pseudo-unlocalized scene graphs obtained from video captions.
It is important to note that video captions provides a weaker supervision signal to the VidSGG model
compared with the GT unlocalized SG (hence we name it “Weaker”).
Implementation Details. For the pretrained object detector, we follow PLA (Chen et al., 2023),
which employs VinVL (Zhang et al., 2021) with backbone ResNeXt-152 C4. This object detector
only leaves bounding boxes for objects with a confidence score of 0.2 or higher. In the TCS module,
we use gpt-3.5-turbo in ChatGPT (OpenAI, 2023) for an LLM. In the ADV module, DAC (Doveh
et al., 2024) is adopted for a vision-language model. Please refer to Appendix D regarding the
experiment with an open-source smaller language model (Jiang et al., 2023) and another vision-
language model (Wang et al., 2022c). Additionally, β used to determine the number of clusters K
is set to 4, and α used in the pseudo-labeling strategy is set to 15%. Please refer to Appendix J
regarding the sensitivity of hyperparameter β and α. Regarding the triplet extraction in Section 2.4,
we adopt an LLM-based approach (Kim et al., 2024b). Please refer to Appendix F regarding the
result of different triplet extraction processes. For the experimental environment, we implemented
NL-VSGG on both an NVIDIA GeForce A6000 48GB and an Intel Gaudi-v2.
3.2 Q UANTITATIVE R ESULTS
Table 1 shows the performance comparisons across four types of supervision, utilizing STTran
(Cong et al., 2021) and DSG-DETR (Feng et al., 2023) as backbones for full and weak/weaker
supervision. We have the following observations: 1) Models with zero-shot predictive ability for
relation, such as RLIP (Yuan et al., 2022) and RLIPv2 (Yuan et al., 2023), show inferior perfor-
mance, especially in With Constraint setting. This suggests that they struggle to predict key re-
lationships between subject-object pairs, highlighting the limitation of simply applying ImgSGG
models to the VidSGG task, as these models fail to account for dynamic relationships. Please refer
to Appendix G for experiments regarding the incorporation of dynamic relationships into the RLIP.
   8
       We use the term zero-shot setting interchangeably with zero-shot supervision.


                                                     7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


2) PLAsimp. , which solely        Table 1: Results of four types of supervision on the AG dataset.
                                                                                 With Constraint No Constraint
relies on a GT unlocal-          Backbone    Method           Supervision
                                                                                  R@20 R@50      R@20 R@50
ized SG of the middle              RLIP                                            7.93    9.16   9.70   13.80
frame without any com-                       ImgSGG            Zero-shot
                                  RLIPv2                                           8.37   10.05  14.60   21.42
ponents proposed in PLA,                      Vanilla            Full             33.98   36.93  36.20   48.88
shows competitive perfor-                  +PLA
                                                       Weak (GT Unlocalized SG)
                                                                                  20.94   25.79  22.34   31.69
                                           +PLAsimp.                              20.42   25.43  21.72   30.87
mance with the vanilla            STTran
                                           +WS-ImgSGG                             10.01   12.83   9.02   14.05
PLA (Chen et al., 2023),                   +PLAcap     Weaker (Natural Language)  10.40   13.26  10.64   15.13
while significantly surpass-               +NL-VSGG                               15.61   19.60  15.92   22.56

ing the performance of                        Vanilla            Full             34.80   36.10  40.90   48.30
                                           +PLA                                   21.30   25.90  22.70   31.90
RLIP/RLIPv2, which are                     +PLAsimp.
                                                       Weak (GT Unlocalized SG)
                                                                                  20.78   25.79  22.31   31.69
                                 DSG-DETR
trained on a large num-                    +WS-ImgSGG                             10.05   12.96  10.29   14.77
ber of images with complex                 +PLAcap
                                           +NL-VSGG
                                                       Weaker (Natural Language)  10.36   13.53
                                                                                  15.75 20.40
                                                                                                 10.57
                                                                                                 16.11
                                                                                                         15.41
                                                                                                         23.21
models. This suggests that
incorporating even a few ground-truth unlocalized video scene graphs is essential for strong perfor-
mance in the VidSGG task, while also revealing PLA’s heavy reliance on annotated GT unlocalized
scene graphs, which are expensive to obtain. This is further verified by the significant performance
drop when the GT unlocalized scene graph of the middle frame is replaced with a pseudo-unlocalized
scene graph obtained from the video caption (PLA vs. PLAcap ). Moreover, we argue the assump-
tion of a GT scene graph existing in the middle frame among other frames is not only unrealistic but
also still requires manual human annotation, which makes these methods impractical in reality. 3)
Given the natural language supervision from video captions, which further relieves the annotation
cost of PLA, NL-VSGG exhibits notably superior performance compared with a simple adoption
of the WS-ImgSGG pipeline to VidSGG and PLAcap , both of which disregard the two key factors
discussed in Section 1, i.e., temporality within video captions and variability in action duration.
3.3 A BLATION S TUDIES
In Table 2, we conduct ablation stud-      Table 2: Ablation studies on each module of NL-VSGG.
                                                                With Constraint No Constraint     Mean
                                           Row TCS ADV PLM
ies on the AG dataset to verify the                              R@20 R@50      R@20 R@50     R@20 R@50
effectiveness of each module in NL-         (a)                  10.01   12.83   9.02   14.05  9.52  13.44
                                            (b) ✓                11.09   14.66  11.34   16.70 11.22  15.68
VSGG. For the ablation studies, we          (c) ✓    ✓           11.98   15.58  11.93   17.36 11.96  16.47
use STTran (Cong et al., 2021) as the       (d) ✓    ✓     ✓     15.61   19.60  15.92   22.56 15.77  21.08

backbone. The variant of not using
any module (row (a)) corresponds to a simple approach of adopting the WS-ImgSGG pipeline to the
VidSGG task. We have the following observations: 1. Effect of TCS: We observe that the adoption
of the TCS module to capture the temporality within the video captions enhances the performance
compared with a simple approach (row (a) vs. (b)). Note that we apply the TCS module to the sim-
ple approach by considering each triplet as a segmented sentence. The performance enhancement
demonstrates the effectiveness of the TCS module in capturing the temporality, leading to accurate
supervision for the model. 2. Effect of ADV: We observe that the incorporation of the ADV module
responsible for capturing the variability in action duration further enhances the performance (row
(b) vs. row (c)), which demonstrates the importance of considering the variability of human actions.
Regarding a qualitative analysis of the ADV module, please refer to Appendix H. 3. Effect of PLM:
Our proposed pseudo-labeling strategy with motion cues significantly improves the performance
(row (c) vs. (d)), demonstrating the effectiveness of pseudo-labeling negative action classes. We
recognize that the PLM module contributes the most to the the final performance, since the negative
action classes, i.e., not looking at and not contacting, belong to head predicate classes, accounting
for 16.5% and 8.7% of the predicates in the test set, respectively. Recall that PLM is an optional
module that can be only applied when the dataset contains negative classes. Thus, to more precisely
validate the effectiveness of the TCS and ADV modules, we intentionally removed negative classes
from both training and test sets in the AG dataset, and show the results in Appendix I.

3.4   E XPLORING THE P OTENTIAL OF UTILIZING EXTERNAL V IDEO -T EXT DATASET
Note that our proposed framework is not only limited to Table 3: Performance when an external
a benchmark dataset, i.e., Action Genome (Ji et al., 2020) video-text dataset is utilized for training.
(AG). In this section, we explore the potential of utilizing  Training Dataset  With Constraint No Constraint
                                                             (Tested on the AG)  R@20 R@50      R@20 R@50
an external video-text paired dataset, i.e., MSVD (Chen              AG          15.61   19.60  15.92   22.56
& Dolan, 2011), for training. For this experiment, we              MSVD           9.05   11.31  10.22   16.60
                                                                AG+MSVD          15.71   20.00  16.07   23.21
use STTran as the backbone. In Table 3, we observe that
the performance based on sole utilization of the MSVD caption dataset for training shows inferior
performance compared to that of AG caption.


                                                      8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


This is expected since the video domains of these datasets are very different (i.e., indoor scenes in
AG and outdoor scenes in MSVD). However, we observe that the combination of AG and MSVD
caption datasets performs the best, implying that collecting a large pool of video-text pair regardless
of the domains is helpful. In this regard, we believe this study paves the way of enhancing the
inherent limited VidSGG datasets.
3.5 A NALYSIS OF PERFORMANCE ON LONGER VIDEO DATASET
To explore the impact of video length, Table 4: Performance over various video length. We use
we conducted experiments using the backbone as STTran.
ActivityNet (Krishna et al., 2017a) cap- Training    Dataset
                                               (Caption)
                                                               Method  Avg. Video Length
                                                                                         With Constraint No Constraint
                                                                                         R@20 R@50 R@20 R@50
                                                                                                                       Mean

tion dataset (average length: 117.3 sec-     Action Genome
                                                             WS-ImgSGG
                                                                          29.9 seconds
                                                                                         10.01   12.83    9.02   14.05 11.48
                                                             NL-VSGG
onds), which is approximately 4 times                        WS-ImgSGG
                                                                                         15.61
                                                                                          6.22
                                                                                                 19.60
                                                                                                  8.03
                                                                                                         15.92
                                                                                                         7.69
                                                                                                                 22.56
                                                                                                                 12.31
                                                                                                                       18.42
                                                                                                                       8.56
longer than the Action Genome caption            MSVD
                                                             NL-VSGG
                                                                           9.5 seconds
                                                                                          9.05   11.31   10.22   16.60 11.80

dataset (average length: 29.9 seconds)        ActivityNet
                                                             WS-ImgSGG
                                                             NL-VSGG
                                                                         117.3 seconds
                                                                                         10.86
                                                                                         13.46
                                                                                                 14.47
                                                                                                 17.58
                                                                                                         10.07
                                                                                                         13.94
                                                                                                                 15.80
                                                                                                                 21.41
                                                                                                                       12.80
                                                                                                                       16.60
and 12 times longer than the MSVD
dataset (average length: 9.5 seconds). As shown in Table 4, we made the following two observations:
1) Regardless of video length, our proposed method consistently outperformed the naive approach
(i.e., WS-ImgSGG). This indicates that our proposed method remains effective across videos of var-
ious lengths. 2) When comparing the performance between the MSVD and ActivityNet datasets,
aside from the benchmark dataset (i.e., Action Genome), we observed that both WS-ImgSGG and
NL-VSGG achieved better performance on the longer ActivityNet dataset compared to the shorter
MSVD dataset. We attribute it to the fact that longer videos allow the model to learn more diverse
video content, thereby improving generalization, and provide more supervision as the duration of
actions increases. In this context, despite the shorter video length of the Action Genome dataset
compared to the ActivityNet dataset, our proposed method performs better on the Action Genome
dataset. This is because the video distribution in the Action Genome dataset is more closely aligned
with the test set, which is derived from Action Genome.
3.6 Q UALITATIVE R ESULTS FOR E XPANSION OF ACTION C LASSES
Recall that we can allow                           Constrained Action Class
                                                            standing on
                                                                                         Constrained Action Class
                                                                                                 standing on
                                                                                                                               Constrained Action Class
                                                                                                                                        standing on

a VidSGG model trained                             floor
                                                              not contacting
                                                                            person       floor
                                                                                                         holding
                                                                                                                 person        floor
                                                                                                                                                 holding
                                                                                                                                                        person



by NL-VSGG to be able                                                     refrigerator                         refrigerator                           refrigerator



to predict a broader range (a)                       Expanded Action Class
                                                   floor
                                                             walk into
                                                                            person
                                                                                          Expanded Action Class
                                                                                         floor
                                                                                                  walk into
                                                                                                                 person
                                                                                                                                Expanded Action Class
                                                                                                                               floor
                                                                                                                                         walk into
                                                                                                                                                        person

of action classes that are                                          look into
                                                                          refrigerator
                                                                                                        look into
                                                                                                               refrigerator
                                                                                                                                                      open
                                                                                                                                                      refrigerator

not included in the train-
                                                    Constrained Action Class             Constrained Action Class              Constrained Action Class
ing data (i.e., AG dataset),                        floor
                                                            standing on
                                                                            person       floor
                                                                                                 standing on
                                                                                                                  person        floor
                                                                                                                                         standing on
                                                                                                                                                         person

as our framework utilizes                                           touching
                                                                          refrigerator
                                                                                                              holding
                                                                                                                refrigerator
                                                                                                                                                     holding
                                                                                                                                                       refrigerator

the video captions as weak (b)                       Expanded Action Class
                                                              stand in
                                                                                            Expanded Action Class
                                                                                                   stand in
                                                                                                                                 Expanded Action Class
                                                                                                                                          stand in
                                                                                         floor                    person
supervision. To validate                            floor                   person
                                                                    look into                                  close
                                                                                                                                floor                    person
                                                                                                                                                      close
                                                                                                                refrigerator
this, we perform qualitative                                              refrigerator                                                                 refrigerator


                                          1st frame                2nd frame              3rd frame
analysis with STTran back-
bone on the AG test set. Figure 5: Qualitative results of NL-VSGG for broader range of action
Fig. 5 shows qualitative re- classes. The red-colored texts indicate predicates with novel meanings
sults for scene graphs gen- that are not present in the AG dataset.
erated under the following two conditions: an VidSGG model trained on 1) constrained action
classes9 that are obtained through the class mapping process described in Section 2.4, and 2) ex-
panded action classes (i.e., 500 classes in total10 ) that are obtained without the class mapping pro-
cess. In Fig. 5(a), we observe that the expansion of action classes enhances the temporal coher-
ence of video scene graphs in that in the 3rd frame, the prediction of walking into/open under ex-
panded action classes carries a stronger temporal implication compared to the prediction of standing
on/holding under constrained classes. Furthermore, we observe that in Fig. 5(b), the expansion of
action classes allows for predicting close, which presents the opposite meaning to open in Fig. 5(a),
while the VidSGG model trained on the constrained classes still generate holding. This indicates
that the expansion of action classes with temporal implication significantly benefits VidSGG mod-
els, which are capable of capturing temporal context, thereby generating video scene graphs with
enhanced temporal coherence. In this vein, we believe that our proposed framework facilitates the
training of VidSGG models with temporal coherence.
   9
     Among the three types of action classes (i.e., attention, spatial and contacting), we generate scene graphs
with the contacting class type, which conveys more descriptive information than the other two types.
  10
     To filter out noisy classes, we select the top 500 most frequent action classes from 2,325 action classes.
Refer to Appendix K regarding for more information on 500 action classes.


                                                                            9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


4     R ELATED W ORK
4.1   V IDEO S CENE G RAPH G ENERATION (V ID SGG)
Video Scene Graph Generation (VidSGG) aims to learn the spatio-temporal dependencies of a video
to predict the dynamic relationships between all object pairs. Existing VidSGG models are cate-
gorized into two settings based on the granularity of the generated video scene graph: video-level
VidSGG (Shang et al., 2017; Tsai et al., 2019; Shang et al., 2021; Wei et al., 2024) and frame-level
VidSGG (Cong et al., 2021; Feng et al., 2023; Teng et al., 2021; Li et al., 2022b). Video-level
VidSGG models generate a global scene graph for a video clip, while frame-level VidSGG mod-
els generate a scene graph for each frame in a video clip. Note that our work follows the frame-
level VidSGG setting. Following the release of the Action Genome dataset (Ji et al., 2020), frame-
level VidSGG models have been actively researched. Specifically, STTran (Cong et al., 2021) em-
ploys two separate transformers to capture spatio-temporal dependencies of objects and frames, and
TRACE (Teng et al., 2021) proposes a hierarchical relation tree method to enhance spatial-temporal
reasoning. DSG-DETR (Feng et al., 2023) mitigates the complexity issue arising from the fully-
connected graph between frames, enabling the capture of long-term temporal context. Recently,
TEMPURA (Nag et al., 2023) and FloCoDe (Khandelwal, 2024) aim to alleviate the long-tailed
predicate issue through memory-guided learning and label correlation loss, respectively. However,
as these methods heavily rely on costly annotations on all frames, we propose a weakly supervised
approach for VidSGG, which utilizes the readily available video captions, i.e., language supervision,
for the first time.

4.2   W EAKLY S UPERVISED S CENE G RAPH G ENERATION
Weakly Supervised ImgSGG (WS-ImgSGG). To relax a heavy reliance on the costly annotation
of a fully supervised approach, ImgSGG utilizes two types of weak supervision. 1) Unlocalized
scene graph: It uses ground-truth scene graphs represented in text format, which have not yet been
grounded to bounding boxes. In this regard, related studies (Ye & Kovashka, 2021; Shi et al., 2021;
Zareian et al., 2020; Li et al., 2022a) have focused on aligning these text-based scene graphs with
suitable bounding boxes. LSWS (Ye & Kovashka, 2021) utilizes the linguistic structure within
triplets for grounding, while another study (Shi et al., 2021) proposes a graph-matching module
based on contrastive learning to further improve the grounding performance. 2) Language super-
vision: In order to further relax the annotation costs associated with unlocalized scene graphs, the
natural language description (i.e., image caption) is used for training the model (Zhong et al., 2021;
Kim et al., 2024b; Zhang et al., 2023). SGNLS (Zhong et al., 2021) is the first to enable model train-
ing with image captions. LLM4SGG (Kim et al., 2024b) addresses semantic over-simplification and
low-density scene graph issues arising from the triplet generation process.

Weakly Supervised VidSGG (WS-VidSGG). As the first WS-VidSGG approach, PLA (Chen
et al., 2023) utilizes an unlocalized scene graph of the middle frame in a video clip as weak super-
vision to train a VidSGG model. However, the assumption of a ground-truth scene graph existing in
the middle frame among other frames is not only unrealistic but also still requires manual human an-
notation. On the other hand, our proposed NL-VSGG framework only relies on the readily available
video captions to train a VidSGG model, which further reduces annotation costs.

5     C ONCLUSION
In this work, we propose a weakly supervised VidSGG with Natural Language Supervision (NL-
VSGG) that relieve annotation costs for VidSGG, which is the first time to enable training a VidSGG
model with readily available video captions. We identify two key reasons for why a simple adoption
of the WS-ImgSGG pipeline to VidSGG fails, i.e., temporality within video captions and variability
of action duration. Our Temporality-aware Caption Segmentation (TCS) module captures the tempo-
rality within the video captions, while Action Duration Variability-aware Caption-Frame Alignment
(ADV) module addresses the variability in the action duration. Furthermore, we propose a novel
pseudo-labeling strategy based on motion cues (PLM) to deal with negative action classes in the
Action Genome dataset. Our extensive experiments on the Action Genome dataset demonstrate the
superiority of NL-VSGG over the simple adoption of WS-ImgSGG pipeline to VidSGG. As a fur-
ther appeal of NL-VSGG, it allows the VidSGG models to predict a broader range of action classes
that are not included in the training data, which makes our proposed framework practical in reality.
However, NL-VSGG has a limitation regarding untrimmed, long-duration videos. For detailed in-
formation related to this and the future work addressing it, please refer to the Appendix. R.


                                                 10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
This work was supported by Institute of Information & communications Technology Planning &
Evaluation (IITP) grant funded by the Korea government(MSIT) (RS-2022-II220077, Reasoning,
and Inference from Heterogeneous Data), as well as another IITP grant funded by the Korea govern-
ment(MSIT) (No.2020-0-00004). Furthermore, this research was supported in part by the NAVER-
Intel Co-Lab. The work was conducted by KAIST and reviewed by both NAVER and Intel.

R EFERENCES
Tom Brown, Benjamin Mann, Nick Ryder, Melanie Subbiah, Jared D Kaplan, Prafulla Dhariwal,
  Arvind Neelakantan, Pranav Shyam, Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, et al. Language models are
  few-shot learners. Advances in neural information processing systems, 33:1877–1901, 2020.
David Chen and William B Dolan. Collecting highly parallel data for paraphrase evaluation. In
  Proceedings of the 49th annual meeting of the association for computational linguistics: human
  language technologies, pp. 190–200, 2011.
Siqi Chen, Jun Xiao, and Long Chen. Video scene graph generation from single-frame weak super-
  vision. In The Eleventh International Conference on Learning Representations, 2023.
Meng-Jiun Chiou, Chun-Yu Liao, Li-Wei Wang, Roger Zimmermann, and Jiashi Feng. St-hoi: A
 spatial-temporal baseline for human-object interaction detection in videos. In Proceedings of the
 2021 ACM Workshop on Intelligent Cross-Data Analysis and Retrieval, pp. 9–17, 2021.
Yuren Cong, Wentong Liao, Hanno Ackermann, Bodo Rosenhahn, and Michael Ying Yang. Spatial-
  temporal transformer for dynamic scene graph generation. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF
  international conference on computer vision, pp. 16372–16382, 2021.
Sivan Doveh, Assaf Arbelle, Sivan Harary, Roei Herzig, Donghyun Kim, Paola Cascante-Bonilla,
  Amit Alfassy, Rameswar Panda, Raja Giryes, Rogerio Feris, et al. Dense and aligned captions
  (dac) promote compositional reasoning in vl models. Advances in Neural Information Processing
  Systems, 36, 2024.
Shengyu Feng, Hesham Mostafa, Marcel Nassar, Somdeb Majumdar, and Subarna Tripathi. Ex-
  ploiting long-term dependencies for generating dynamic scene graphs. In Proceedings of the
  IEEE/CVF Winter Conference on Applications of Computer Vision, pp. 5130–5139, 2023.
Jessica Ficler and Yoav Goldberg. Controlling linguistic style aspects in neural language generation.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:1707.02633, 2017.
Kaifeng Gao, Long Chen, Hanwang Zhang, Jun Xiao, and Qianru Sun. Compositional prompt tuning
  with motion cues for open-vocabulary video relation detection. arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.00268,
  2023.
Shalini Ghosh, Giedrius Burachas, Arijit Ray, and Avi Ziskind. Generating natural language ex-
  planations for visual question answering using scene graphs and visual attention. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1902.05715, 2019.
Linjiang Huang, Liang Wang, and Hongsheng Li. Weakly supervised temporal action localization
  via representative snippet knowledge propagation. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference
  on computer vision and pattern recognition, pp. 3272–3281, 2022.
Jaehyeong Jeon, Kibum Kim, Kanghoon Yoon, and Chanyoung Park. Semantic diversity-aware
  prototype-based learning for unbiased scene graph generation. In European Conference on Com-
  puter Vision, pp. 379–395. Springer, 2024.
Jingwei Ji, Ranjay Krishna, Li Fei-Fei, and Juan Carlos Niebles. Action genome: Actions as com-
   positions of spatio-temporal scene graphs. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Com-
   puter Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 10236–10247, 2020.
Albert Q Jiang, Alexandre Sablayrolles, Arthur Mensch, Chris Bamford, Devendra Singh Chaplot,
  Diego de las Casas, Florian Bressand, Gianna Lengyel, Guillaume Lample, Lucile Saulnier, et al.
  Mistral 7b. arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.06825, 2023.


                                                 11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Anant Khandelwal. Flocode: Unbiased dynamic scene graph generation with temporal consistency
  and correlation debiasing. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and
  Pattern Recognition, pp. 2516–2526, 2024.
Kibum Kim, Kanghoon Yoon, Yeonjun In, Jinyoung Moon, Donghyun Kim, and Chanyoung Park.
  Adaptive self-training framework for fine-grained scene graph generation. In The Twelfth Inter-
  national Conference on Learning Representations, 2024a.
Kibum Kim, Kanghoon Yoon, Jaehyeong Jeon, Yeonjun In, Jinyoung Moon, Donghyun Kim, and
  Chanyoung Park. Llm4sgg: Large language models for weakly supervised scene graph genera-
  tion. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition,
  pp. 28306–28316, 2024b.
Ranjay Krishna, Kenji Hata, Frederic Ren, Li Fei-Fei, and Juan Carlos Niebles. Dense-captioning
  events in videos. In Proceedings of the IEEE international conference on computer vision, pp.
  706–715, 2017a.
Ranjay Krishna, Yuke Zhu, Oliver Groth, Justin Johnson, Kenji Hata, Joshua Kravitz, Stephanie
  Chen, Yannis Kalantidis, Li-Jia Li, David A Shamma, et al. Visual genome: Connecting lan-
  guage and vision using crowdsourced dense image annotations. International journal of computer
  vision, 123:32–73, 2017b.
KunChang Li, Yinan He, Yi Wang, Yizhuo Li, Wenhai Wang, Ping Luo, Yali Wang, Limin Wang,
  and Yu Qiao. Videochat: Chat-centric video understanding. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.06355,
  2023a.
Lin Li, Jun Xiao, Guikun Chen, Jian Shao, Yueting Zhuang, and Long Chen. Zero-shot visual
  relation detection via composite visual cues from large language models. Advances in Neural
  Information Processing Systems, 36, 2024.
Mengze Li, Han Wang, Wenqiao Zhang, Jiaxu Miao, Zhou Zhao, Shengyu Zhang, Wei Ji, and Fei
 Wu. Winner: Weakly-supervised hierarchical decomposition and alignment for spatio-temporal
 video grounding. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
 Recognition, pp. 23090–23099, 2023b.
Xingchen Li, Long Chen, Wenbo Ma, Yi Yang, and Jun Xiao. Integrating object-aware and
  interaction-aware knowledge for weakly supervised scene graph generation. In Proceedings of
  the 30th ACM International Conference on Multimedia, pp. 4204–4213, 2022a.
Yiming Li, Xiaoshan Yang, and Changsheng Xu. Dynamic scene graph generation via anticipa-
  tory pre-training. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
  Recognition, pp. 13874–13883, 2022b.
Huaishao Luo, Lei Ji, Ming Zhong, Yang Chen, Wen Lei, Nan Duan, and Tianrui Li. Clip4clip: An
  empirical study of clip for end to end video clip retrieval and captioning. Neurocomputing, 508:
  293–304, 2022.
George A Miller. Wordnet: a lexical database for english. Communications of the ACM, 38(11):
  39–41, 1995.
Sayak Nag, Kyle Min, Subarna Tripathi, and Amit K Roy-Chowdhury. Unbiased scene graph gen-
  eration in videos. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
  Recognition, pp. 22803–22813, 2023.
Zhifan Ni, Esteve Valls Mascaró, Hyemin Ahn, and Dongheui Lee. Human–object interaction
  prediction in videos through gaze following. Computer Vision and Image Understanding, 233:
  103741, 2023.
OpenAI. Chatgpt. https://openai.com/blog/chatgpt, 2023.
Haoruo Peng, Daniel Khashabi, and Dan Roth. Solving hard coreference problems. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1907.05524, 2019.
Alec Radford, Jeffrey Wu, Rewon Child, David Luan, Dario Amodei, Ilya Sutskever, et al. Language
  models are unsupervised multitask learners. OpenAI blog, 1(8):9, 2019.


                                               12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Alec Radford, Jong Wook Kim, Chris Hallacy, Aditya Ramesh, Gabriel Goh, Sandhini Agarwal,
  Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, Pamela Mishkin, Jack Clark, et al. Learning transferable visual
  models from natural language supervision. In International conference on machine learning, pp.
  8748–8763. PMLR, 2021.
Hamid Rezatofighi, Nathan Tsoi, JunYoung Gwak, Amir Sadeghian, Ian Reid, and Silvio Savarese.
  Generalized intersection over union: A metric and a loss for bounding box regression. In Pro-
  ceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, pp. 658–666,
  2019.
Brigit Schroeder and Subarna Tripathi. Structured query-based image retrieval using scene graphs.
  CVPR Workshops, pp. 178–179, 2020.
Sebastian Schuster, Ranjay Krishna, Angel Chang, Li Fei-Fei, and Christopher D Manning. Gen-
  erating semantically precise scene graphs from textual descriptions for improved image retrieval.
  In Proceedings of the fourth workshop on vision and language, pp. 70–80, 2015.
Xindi Shang, Tongwei Ren, Jingfan Guo, Hanwang Zhang, and Tat-Seng Chua. Video visual relation
  detection. In Proceedings of the 25th ACM international conference on Multimedia, pp. 1300–
  1308, 2017.
Xindi Shang, Yicong Li, Junbin Xiao, Wei Ji, and Tat-Seng Chua. Video visual relation detection
  via iterative inference. In Proceedings of the 29th ACM international conference on Multimedia,
  pp. 3654–3663, 2021.
Jing Shi, Yiwu Zhong, Ning Xu, Yin Li, and Chenliang Xu. A simple baseline for weakly-supervised
   scene graph generation. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer
   Vision, pp. 16393–16402, 2021.
Yao Teng, Limin Wang, Zhifeng Li, and Gangshan Wu. Target adaptive context aggregation for
  video scene graph generation. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on
  Computer Vision, pp. 13688–13697, 2021.
Yao-Hung Hubert Tsai, Santosh Divvala, Louis-Philippe Morency, Ruslan Salakhutdinov, and Ali
  Farhadi. Video relationship reasoning using gated spatio-temporal energy graph. In Proceedings
  of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 10424–10433,
  2019.
Lan Wang, Gaurav Mittal, Sandra Sajeev, Ye Yu, Matthew Hall, Vishnu Naresh Boddeti, and Mei
  Chen. Protege: Untrimmed pretraining for video temporal grounding by video temporal ground-
  ing. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition,
  pp. 6575–6585, 2023.
Shuang Wang, Lianli Gao, Xinyu Lyu, Yuyu Guo, Pengpeng Zeng, and Jingkuan Song. Dynamic
  scene graph generation via temporal prior inference. In Proceedings of the 30th ACM Interna-
  tional Conference on Multimedia, pp. 5793–5801, 2022a.
Xuezhi Wang, Jason Wei, Dale Schuurmans, Quoc Le, Ed Chi, Sharan Narang, Aakanksha Chowdh-
  ery, and Denny Zhou. Self-consistency improves chain of thought reasoning in language models.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2203.11171, 2022b.
Yi Wang, Kunchang Li, Yizhuo Li, Yinan He, Bingkun Huang, Zhiyu Zhao, Hongjie Zhang, Jilan
  Xu, Yi Liu, Zun Wang, et al. Internvideo: General video foundation models via generative and
  discriminative learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2212.03191, 2022c.
Meng Wei, Long Chen, Wei Ji, Xiaoyu Yue, and Roger Zimmermann. In defense of clip-based video
 relation detection. IEEE Transactions on Image Processing, 2024.
Li Xu, Haoxuan Qu, Jason Kuen, Jiuxiang Gu, and Jun Liu. Meta spatio-temporal debiasing
  for video scene graph generation. In European Conference on Computer Vision, pp. 374–390.
  Springer, 2022.
Shen Yan, Xuehan Xiong, Arsha Nagrani, Anurag Arnab, Zhonghao Wang, Weina Ge, David Ross,
  and Cordelia Schmid. Unloc: A unified framework for video localization tasks. In Proceedings
  of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision, pp. 13623–13633, 2023.


                                                13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Xu Yang, Kaihua Tang, Hanwang Zhang, and Jianfei Cai. Auto-encoding scene graphs for image
  captioning. CVPR, pp. 10685–10694, 2019.
Keren Ye and Adriana Kovashka. Linguistic structures as weak supervision for visual scene graph
  generation. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recog-
  nition, pp. 8289–8299, 2021.
Kanghoon Yoon, Kibum Kim, Jinyoung Moon, and Chanyoung Park. Unbiased heterogeneous
  scene graph generation with relation-aware message passing neural network. In Proceedings of
  the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, volume 37, pp. 3285–3294, 2023.
Kanghoon Yoon, Kibum Kim, Jaehyung Jeon, Yeonjun In, Donghyun Kim, and Chanyoung Park.
  Ra-sgg: Retrieval-augmented scene graph generation framework via multi-prototype learning.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2412.12788, 2024.
Hangjie Yuan, Jianwen Jiang, Samuel Albanie, Tao Feng, Ziyuan Huang, Dong Ni, and Mingqian
  Tang. Rlip: Relational language-image pre-training for human-object interaction detection. Ad-
  vances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 35:37416–37431, 2022.
Hangjie Yuan, Shiwei Zhang, Xiang Wang, Samuel Albanie, Yining Pan, Tao Feng, Jianwen Jiang,
  Dong Ni, Yingya Zhang, and Deli Zhao. Rlipv2: Fast scaling of relational language-image pre-
  training. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision, pp.
  21649–21661, 2023.
Alireza Zareian, Svebor Karaman, and Shih-Fu Chang. Weakly supervised visual semantic parsing.
  In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp.
  3736–3745, 2020.
Pengchuan Zhang, Xiujun Li, Xiaowei Hu, Jianwei Yang, Lei Zhang, Lijuan Wang, Yejin Choi, and
  Jianfeng Gao. Vinvl: Revisiting visual representations in vision-language models. In Proceedings
  of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, pp. 5579–5588, 2021.
Yong Zhang, Yingwei Pan, Ting Yao, Rui Huang, Tao Mei, and Chang-Wen Chen. Learning to
  generate language-supervised and open-vocabulary scene graph using pre-trained visual-semantic
  space. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition,
  pp. 2915–2924, 2023.
Shu Zhao and Huijuan Xu. Less is more: Toward zero-shot local scene graph generation via foun-
  dation models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.01356, 2023.
Minghang Zheng, Yanjie Huang, Qingchao Chen, Yuxin Peng, and Yang Liu. Weakly supervised
 temporal sentence grounding with gaussian-based contrastive proposal learning. In Proceedings
 of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 15555–15564,
 2022.
Yiwu Zhong, Jing Shi, Jianwei Yang, Chenliang Xu, and Yin Li. Learning to generate scene graph
  from natural language supervision. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on
  Computer Vision, pp. 1823–1834, 2021.


                                               14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                       Supplementary Material
               - Weakly Supervised Video Scene Graph Generation via
                          Natural Language Supervision -



A Details of Prompt                                                                       16

B Ablation Study of Prompt Designed for Coreference Resolution                            16

C Experiment on the VidHOI dataset                                                        16

D Replacing ChatGPT and DAC with other models                                             17

E Experiment for Selection Strategy of Pseudo-Labeling                                    17

F Experiment for Different Scene Graph Parsing Approach                                   18

G Experiment for Integration of Dynamic Relationships into RLIP                           18

H Qualitative analysis of the ADV module                                                  18

I   Ablation Studies on the AG dataset without negative classes                           19

J   Hyperparameter Sensitivity                                                            19

K Details of Expanded Action Classes                                                      19

L Cost for Utilization of a Large Language Model                                          20

M Experiment for Different Clustering in the ADV module                                   20

N Experiment Combining weakly supervised and fully supervised datasets                    20

O Discussion of Improvement for Parsing and Grounding                                     20

P Discussion of the Steepest Decline in the ADV module                                    21

Q Additional Related Work                                                                 22
    Q.1 Large Language Model-based Scene Graph Generation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   22

R Future Work                                                                             22


                                               15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


    TASK DESCRIPTION
    In this task, you are given a video caption. Considering the words that indicate the order of events (e.g., then, while, before, and after), your job is to split the given video caption
    into multiple compositional sentences, and arrange them in chronological order. Note that you should specify the objects for the pronouns used in each of these sentences.

    IN-CONTEXT EXAMPLES
    Input: The person is turning on the stove. He then begins to stir some food and after that he picks up a camera and look at it.
    Output: The person is turning on the stove. → The person stirs some food. → The person picks up a camera. → The person looks at a camera.
    Input: A person is sitting in bed and texting on a phone while holding a blanket. The person puts the phone down and pulls the blanket up.
    Output: A person is sitting in a bed. → A person is texting on a phone while holding a blanket. → The person puts the phone down. → The person pulls the blanket up.
    Input: A person picks up a phone and enters the bathroom through a doorway while talking on the phone. Before walking out of the room, the person puts on shoes and picks up
    clothes while laughing and dresses them.
    Output: A person picks up a phone. → A person enters the bathroom through a doorway while talking on the phone. → The person puts on shoes. → The person picks up clothes
    while laughing. → The person dresses clothes.→ The person walks out of the room.
    Input: A person is sitting on a toilet, picks up a phone and battery that are on the ground, puts the battery into the phone, takes off a jacket, then stands and takes selfies against
    the bathroom door.
    Output: A person is sitting on a toilet. → A person picks up a phone and battery that are on the ground. → A person takes off a jacket. → A person stands and takes selfies against
    the bathroom door.
    Input: Before taking a drink, a person is undressing, picks up a towel and cleans some glasses.
    Output: A person is undressing. → A person picks up a towel. → A person cleans some glasses. → A person takes a drink some glasses.
    Input: Person pulls out phone and begins playing with it then sets it down and pulls the blanket further up.
    Output: Person pulls out phone. → Person plays with the phone. → Person sets the phone down. → Person pulls the blanket further up.
    Input: A person watching television and eating a sandwich while laying on the floor and reading book, after a while the person gets up to grab a box.
    Output: A person watches television and eats a sandwich while laying on the floor. → A person reads a book. → A person gets up to grab a box.
    Input: A person walks to a pantry, takes out some clothes from it, tosses one on the floor, and puts on another after taking it off again.
    Output: A person walks to a pantry. → A person takes out some clothes from a pantry. → A person tosses a cloth on the floor. → A person takes a cloth off. → A person puts on a
    cloth.

    QUESTION OF OUR INTEREST
    Input:


        Figure 6: Prompt used in the Temporality-aware Caption Segmentation (TCS) module.

A      D ETAILS OF P ROMPT
In Fig. 6, we provide the complete prompt used in the TCS module, which is discussed in Section
2.2 of the main paper.

B     A BLATION S TUDY OF P ROMPT D ESIGNED FOR C OREFERENCE
      R ESOLUTION
In this section, we conduct an experiment to validate Table 5: Impact of the prompt designed for
the impact of the prompt introduced to address corefer- coreference resolution.
ence resolution, which aids in specifying the pronouns               Method
                                                                                        With Constraint No Constraint
                                                                                         R@20 R@50      R@20 R@50
and extracting accurate triplets. That is, we remove Complete Prompt                     15.61   19.60  15.92   22.56
the following sentence in task description of Fig. 6:       +w/o Coreference Resolution  15.48   19.09  15.80   21.76

Note that you should specify the objects for the pro-
nouns used in each of these sentences., and evaluate NL-VSGG without it. As shown in Table 5,
the performance with the prompt designed for coreference resolution (i.e., Complete Prompt) is su-
perior compared to the performance without that prompt (i.e., w/o Coreference Resolution). It is
attributed to the increase in the number of triplets from 58K to 82K (i.e., 40% increase) when using
the Complete Prompt, resulting in the alleviation of lack of supervision Kim et al. (2024b). This
demonstrates the effectiveness of our prompt design for coreference resolution.

C     E XPERIMENT ON THE V ID HOI DATASET
Dataset. The VidHOI (Chiou et al., 2021) dataset consists of real-life videos capturing daily human
activities without a scripted narrative. This dataset includes manually annotated scene graphs on
based on keyframes sampled at 1 FPS. Following the processing step of prior studies (Ni et al.,
2023; Chiou et al., 2021), we obtain the training and test sets contain 6,366 and 756 videos along
with 193,911 and 22,976 frames, respectively. There are 78 object classes and 50 predicate classes,
which are divided into 8 spatial classes and 42 action classes. Note that since the VidHOI dataset
does not include video captions, we employ a video captioning model (i.e., VideoChat (Li et al.,
2023a)) to generate video captions.
Results. Table 6 shows performance comparisons             Table 6: Results on VidHOI dataset.
                                                                                                                                                             With Constraint       No Constraint
                                                                                                           Backbone          Method          Supervision
under natural language supervision between a sim-                           R@20 R@50 R@20 R@50

ple adoption of WS-ImgSGG pipeline (i.e., WS-      STTran
                                                          Vanilla     Full  19.48 20.30 25.63 28.05
                                                          +WS-ImgSGG         7.56  7.95 21.16 26.55
ImgSGG) and our proposed framework (i.e., NL-             +NL-VSGG
                                                                     Weaker
                                                                            10.41 10.96 21.44 27.16
VSGG) on the VidHOI dataset. Beyond the com-
parisons made within the Action Genome dataset in the main paper, we also observe that in the


                                                                                              16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


VidHOI dataset, NL-VSGG continues to outperform the WS-ImgSGG method, further validating
the effectiveness of our proposed framework.


D    R EPLACING C HAT GPT AND DAC WITH OTHER MODELS
In this section, we replace the LLM used in the TCS module       Table 7: Performance with other
(i.e., ChatGPT) and the vision-language model used in ADV        models.
(i.e., DAC) with alternative models, and use the same prompts     Row
                                                                          TCS
                                                                                Module
                                                                                         ADV
                                                                                                 With Constraint
                                                                                                  R@20 R@50
                                                                                                                   No Constraint
                                                                                                                   R@20 R@50

shown in Fig. 6 to evaluate the performance. Table 7 shows        (a)
                                                                  (b)
                                                                              WS-ImgSGG
                                                                        ChatGPT        DAC
                                                                                                  10.01
                                                                                                  15.61
                                                                                                          12.83
                                                                                                          19.60
                                                                                                                    9.02
                                                                                                                   15.92
                                                                                                                           14.05
                                                                                                                           22.56
the results, where Row (a) is the performance of the baseline     (c)
                                                                  (d)
                                                                        Mistral-7B
                                                                        ChatGPT
                                                                                       DAC
                                                                                   InternVideo
                                                                                                  14.58
                                                                                                  15.58
                                                                                                          18.74
                                                                                                          19.66
                                                                                                                   14.93
                                                                                                                   15.92
                                                                                                                           21.95
                                                                                                                           22.38
WS-ImgSGG model, and Row (b) is the performance of the
original NL-VSGG reported in the main paper.

Replacing an LLM (i.e., ChatGPT) with a smaller LM (i.e., Mistral-7B) in TCS module. Row
(c) shows the performance of replacing ChatGPT-175B OpenAI (2023) with a smaller Mistral-7B
Jiang et al. (2023). We observe that although the performance based on the smaller LM is inferior
to that of ChatGPT as expected, it still outperforms WS-ImgSGG baseline shown in Row (a). This
demonstrates the effectiveness of our proposed NL-VSGG framework.

Replacing a vision-language model (i.e., DAC) with a video-language model (i.e., InternVideo)
in ADV module. Within the ADV module, we raise the question: is it sufficient to use a vision-
language model, which is trained on image-text pair datasets, for aligning segmented sentences with
frames while capturing the temporal context between frames? To explore it, we conduct experi-
ments by replacing the image-based vision-language model (i.e., DAC Doveh et al. (2024)) with a
video-language model (i.e., InternVideo Wang et al. (2022c)). Specifically, to explicitly reflect tem-
poral context using InternVideo, we group two consecutive frames without overlap and encode each
grouped frame to obtain a visual representation, followed by performing Clustering-based Caption-
Frame Alignment, as discussed in Section 2.3 of the main paper.
As shown in Table 7, we observe that the performance based on the InternVideo (Row (d)) is com-
petitive with that based on the DAC (Row (b)). It demonstrates that it is sufficient to use a vision-
language model for aligning segmented sentences with frames while capturing the temporal context
by simply averaging the frames, i.e., centroid in a cluster. This result is consistent with a prior
research, i.e., CLIP4CLIP Luo et al. (2022), which demonstrates that simply averaging frame vi-
sual representations yields competitive results compared to an advanced model reflecting temporal
context between frames.


E    E XPERIMENT FOR S ELECTION S TRATEGY OF P SEUDO -L ABELING
Here, we conduct experiments over various selection strategies for
assigning pseudo-labels of negative classes (i.e., not looking at and
not contacting) within unaligned frames, which is mainly addressed
in Section 2.2 of the main paper. Specifically, these strategies involve
assigning negative classes to the start (S), end (E), or both start and
end (SE) frames for each negative class. The experiment results are
shown in Fig. 7 reported with R@50 in With Constraint setting. For
not looking at, we observe that the performance of assigning it on the
end frame is inferior compared to the performance of the start frame Figure 7: Performance over
(2rd vs. 3rd row), while the performance of start+end frames is best diverse selection strategies.
(1rd row). It indicates that the start frame for assigning not looking at provides more confident
supervision than assignment on the end frame, and assignment on both frames is most beneficial.
For not contacting, in contrast to not looking at, we observe that the performance of assigning
it on the start frame is inferior compared to the performance of the end frame (1rd vs 2rd column),
while the performance of start+end frames is best (3rd column), except when not looking at is
exclusively labeled on the end frame (2rd row with 3rd column). It indicates that the end frame
rather provides more confident supervision than the start frame, while assignment on both frames is
generally confident. We attribute the exceptional case to the noisy supervision, where not looking
at is only assigned on the end frame.


                                                 17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                                                     (%)                       (%)
                   𝛽                        𝛽                              𝛼                         𝛼
Figure 8: Hyperparameter sensitivity of β. WC Figure 9: Hyperparameter sensitivity of α. WC
and NC stand for With Constraint and No Con- and NC stand for With Constraint and No Con-
straint setting, respectively.                straint setting, respectively.


F        E XPERIMENT FOR D IFFERENT S CENE G RAPH PARSING A PPROACH
In this section, we conduct experiments regarding the dif- Table 8: Performance over diverse
ferent approaches for scene graph parsing discussed in scene graph parsing approaches.
Section 2.4 of the main paper. Specifically, there are two       Scene graph parsing
                                                                                     With Constraint No Constraint
                                                                                     R@20 R@50       R@20 R@50
approaches to scene graph parsing: one involves extract- LLM-based approach           15.61   19.60  15.92   22.56
ing triplets and aligning classes with those of our interest SG Parser + KB approach 11.08 14.34 11.26 16.51
based on an LLM Kim et al. (2024b) (LLM-based ap-
proach11 ), while the other relies on a rule-based scene graph parser Schuster et al. (2015) with
knowledge base-based Miller (1995) alignment (SG parser+KB approach). Note that for the scene
graph parsing, these two approaches are widely adopted in the realm of WS-ImgSGG Kim et al.
(2024b); Zhong et al. (2021); Zhang et al. (2023); Ye & Kovashka (2021). In Table 8, we observe
that the performance of the SG Parser+KB approach is inferior compared to the LLM-based ap-
proach. It indicates that the heuristic rule-based parser for triplet extraction from video captions is
ineffective, and knowledge base-based alignment struggles to accurately map the classes with com-
plicated action classes (e.g., drinking from, in front of) in VidSGG. In this regard, we demonstrate
that the LLM-based approach is particularly effective at WS-VidSGG due to the complex structure
of video captions and complicated action classes. To further facilitate research in the WS-VidSGG,
we make the triplets extracted based on the LLM publicly available.

G         E XPERIMENT FOR I NTEGRATION OF DYNAMIC R ELATIONSHIPS INTO
          RLIP
In Table 1 of the main paper, we observe that RLIP Table 9: Performance of RLIP Yuan et al.
Yuan et al. (2022) exhibits subpar performance un- (2022) trained with dynamic relationships.
der the zero-shot setting due to its inability to pre-      Model  Supervision
                                                                                   With Constraint No Constraint
                                                                                   R@20 R@50       R@20 R@50
dict dynamic relationships. To explore potential
                                                         STTran         Full        33.98   36.93  36.20   48.88
performance enhancement achievable by integrat- RLIP                                31.89   36.26  34.54   41.00
                                                                  Full (Fine-tune)
ing dynamic relationships into RLIP, we conduct RLIP+STTran                         34.02   40.04  35.10   42.72
experiments by fine-tuning a pre-trained RLIP on         RLIP        Zero-shot       7.93    9.16   9.70   13.80

the Action Genome dataset. Furthermore, we ap-
pend the STTran Cong et al. (2021) module to RLIP in order to facilitate capturing temporal context.
As shown in Table 9, we observe that RLIP trained with dynamic relationship substantially boosts
performance. Moreover, RLIP with the STTran module further enhances performance by capturing
temporal context. It indicates that the incorporation of dynamic relationships is crucial in VidSGG.
In summary, we demonstrate the importance of incorporating dynamic relationships and reflecting
temporal context in VidSGG.

H         Q UALITATIVE ANALYSIS OF THE ADV MODULE
To qualitatively evaluate the effectiveness of the ADV module, we visualize the results of clustering
video frames in the visual space using T-SNE, and show the distribution of their visual-language
(VL) scores, i.e., the similarity scores between each segmented sentence and the cluster centroids.
In Figure 10, we observe that in the case where a cluster is clearly separated (See A), the VL score
distribution is concentrated within that cluster, resulting in the selection of a single cluster. On the
    11
         In the main paper, we use an LLM-based approach for scene graph parsing.


                                                        18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                                A person is eating a sandwich            VL Score Distribution
                                                                                                                Selected!


                   (A)


                                    Start ~ End Frame
                                                        The person is taking some clothes out of a box

                                                                                                                       Selected!

                                   (B)

                         Visual Space

                          Figure 10: Qualitative analysis of the ADV module.


other hand, in the case where visual features are concentrated but distributed across multiple clusters
(See B), the ADV module adaptively selects multiple clusters. This indicates that the ADV module
reflects the variability in action duration, allowing it to supervise the model accurately and thereby
improve performance.

I   A BLATION S TUDIES ON THE AG DATASET WITHOUT NEGATIVE CLASSES
In Section 3.3 of the main paper, we observed a rel- Table 10: Ablation studies where negative
atively significant performance improvement in the classes are excluded from the AG dataset.
PLM module due to the dominance of the negative       TCS ADV
                                                               With Constraint No Constraint     Mean
                                                               R@20 R@50 R@20 R@50 R@20 R@50
class in the dataset. Therefore, to further clarify
                                                               12.98   17.10   13.28   19.38 13.13  18.24
the effectiveness of the TCS and ADV modules, we       ✓       15.34   20.24   15.47   21.72 15.41  20.98
perform ablation studies in which negative classes     ✓   ✓   15.95   20.74   16.19   23.04 16.07  21.89
are excluded from both training and test sets in the
Action Genome (AG) dataset. As shown in Table 10, we observe that even in a dataset where the
PLM module cannot be applied, TCS and ADV modules still show superiority, proving their effec-
tiveness.

J   H YPERPARAMETER S ENSITIVITY
In NL-VSGG, two hyperparameters are used: β for defining K (i.e., |Vβ | ) in ADV module (Section
2.3), and α for assigning negative classes within unaligned frames in PLM module (Section 2.5).
We analyze the sensitivity of these hyperparameters.
Hyperparameter β for ADV module. In Fig. 8, we conduct experiments over various βs. We ob-
serve that the performance decreases with large β which reduces the cluster number K. It indicates
that large β (i.e., small K) cannot capture the fine-grained variability of action duration, resulting in
deteriorating performance. On the other hand, small β (i.e., large K) helps to capture fine-grained
variability of action duration, leading to increasing performance. However, rather small β (i.e., 3)
decreases performance in No Constraint setting. We attribute it to the fact that rather small β divides
the frames into overly fine-grained clusters, making it difficult for the vision-language model to dis-
tinguish highly discriminative clusters in terms of similarity scores. In this regard, it is beneficial to
appropriately set β as 4 to capture the variability of action duration.
Hyperparameter α for PLM module. In Fig. 9, we conduct experiment over various αs. We
observe that the performance consistently increases up to 5%, followed by fluctuation beyond 5%. It
is worthwhile noting that the pseudo-labels with smaller α would provide more confident supervision
to models since their associated subject and object are distinctly getting farther over time. It suggests
that up to 5%, clear supervision is provided for negative classes within unaligned frames, but beyond
that ratio, noisy supervision is included. Hence, setting α at around 5% is preferable. However, we
opt for a value of α at 15% as it marginally enhances performance under the With Constraint setting.

K    D ETAILS OF E XPANDED ACTION C LASSES
In Table. 14, we enumerate all the expanded action classes sorted by frequency in descending order.


                                                              19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                               Table 11: Summarization of cost for an LLM.
                   Module       Num. Output/Input tokens per video             Cost per video
                     TCS                     0.045k / 0.68k                       $0.00041


L    C OST FOR U TILIZATION OF A L ARGE L ANGUAGE M ODEL
For the TCS module, the cost of using ChatGPT OpenAI (2023) is summarized in Table 11. Given
that the cost of input tokens and output tokens is $0.5 and $1.5 per 1M tokens, respectively, the cost
per video is computed by (680/1M) × 0.5 + (45/1M) × 1.5.

M     E XPERIMENT FOR D IFFERENT C LUSTERING IN THE ADV MODULE
To investigate the impact of differ-      Table 12: Performance over various clustering strategies.
ent clustering strategies within the                           With Constraint No Constraint
                                          Clustering Algorithm                                Mean
ADV module, we conducted exper-                                R@20 R@50 R@20 R@50
iments where we replaced the K-
means clustering strategy with Ag-        K-Means              15.61   19.60    15.92   22.56 18.24
                                          Agglormerative       15.78   19.69    16.12   23.01 18.65
glomerative clustering and Gaussian       GMM                  15.31   19.80    15.85   23.93 18.72
Mixture Model (GMM) clustering
strategies. As shown in Table 12, we observed that other clustering strategies exhibit competi-
tive performance compared to that of the K-means clustering strategy, indicating that our proposed
framework is robust to other clustering strategies. Another observation is that the performance with
the GMM clustering strategy is relatively better on average. This result aligns with previous stud-
ies (Huang et al., 2022; Zheng et al., 2022) that assume proposal distributions as Gaussian in the
temporal grounding task in that GMM also assumes the same thing, resulting in effective clustering
within the ADV module.

N     E XPERIMENT C OMBINING WEAKLY SUPERVISED AND FULLY SUPERVISED
      DATASETS

In this section, we investigate a scenario where Table 13: Performance for a combination of
our proposed approach meets with the fully su- weakly supervised and fully supervised data.
pervised approach. To this end, we attempted to             Training dataset
                                                                                 With Constraint No Constraint
                                                                                                               Mean
fine-tune a model, which was initially trained on a                              R@20 R@50 R@20 R@50

weakly supervised dataset (i.e., pseudo-localized AG    (Full)                   33.98
                                                      AG+MSVD (Weak) → AG (Full) 34.84
                                                                                         36.93
                                                                                         37.64
                                                                                                 36.20
                                                                                                 38.40
                                                                                                         48.88
                                                                                                         49.55
                                                                                                               39.00
                                                                                                               40.11
scene graphs in Section 2.5), to the fully super-
vised dataset, i.e., ground-truth localized scene graphs. In this process, we assumed that a model
trained on a larger dataset would provide more effective weight initialization, leading us to leverage
the model trained on both the AG caption and MSVD caption datasets, as detailed in Section 3.6 of
the main paper. Interestingly, as shown in Table 13, we observed that the performance of the model
fine-tuned to the AG dataset significantly outperformed that of the model initially trained on the AG
dataset, implying that our proposed framework can synergize with the fully supervised approach.

O     D ISCUSSION OF I MPROVEMENT FOR PARSING AND G ROUNDING
For future work, we discuss the techniques developed for scene graph parsing and grounding, de-
tailed in Section 2.4 of the main paper.
Improvement for Scene Graph Parsing. We may employ the ensemble approach (Wang et al.,
2022b) to extract more high-quality scene graphs. Specifically, for an LLM-based parser, we can
utilize temperature sampling or top-k sampling to extract diverse triplets for each segmented sen-
tence, followed by taking a majority vote over diverse triplets to extract the most consistent triplet.
With this technique, we can further develop the scene graph parsing over the state-of-the-art method.
Improvement for Scene Graph Grounding. We may improve the grounding accuracy. Basically,
a triplet is grounded to a bounding box when the bounding box’s class matches the object class of
the triplet parsed from the caption. However, inherent challenges in videos such as motion blur, fast


                                                        20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                         (K)
Figure 11: The gap in the similarity score at the Figure 12: Performance across various fixed
point of the steepest decline over the number of thresholds in the ADV module, conducted under
total clusters (i.e., K), which is proportional to the With Constraint setting.
the frames.



movement, and occlusion often hinder accurate object class classification within the bounding box,
resulting in grounding failures. To address it, we can utilize adjacent frames successfully grounded.
Specifically, in the case where the object class of the bounding box in the target frame is ambiguous
so that grounding fails, we can ensure grounding by selecting a bounding box with high IoU and
visual similarity to a bounding box of an object that is grounded in an adjacent frame. This technique
could compensate for the failures in the target frame, ensuring more reliable grounding.



P    D ISCUSSION OF THE S TEEPEST D ECLINE IN THE ADV MODULE

In the ADV module, detailed in the Section 2.3 of the main paper, we originally determined the
relevant clusters depending on the steepest decline in the vision-language similarity score. Here, we
explore the sensitivity of the steepest decline criterion to noise in the similarity score. To this end,
we analyze the gap in the similarity score at the point of steepest decline12 over the total number of
clusters (i.e., K), which is proportional to the video frames. As shown in Figure 11, we observe that
the gap in the steepest decline decreases as the number of total clusters increases (from the left to
the right on the x-axis). This is because the similarity score is distributed across a greater number of
clusters, thereby reducing the gap. However, it is important to note that from eight clusters onward,
the gap converges to 0.2, demonstrating that even with noise in the similarity score, the steepest
decline approach still reliably selects relevant clusters using this relatively large 0.2 gap.
In this regard, we raise a question: Why not determine the relevant clusters through a point where
the gap in the decline exceeds 0.2 instead of using the steepest decline? Specifically, we could sort
the similarity scores in descending order, find the first point where the gap exceeds 0.2, starting
from the highest score, and select all the clusters preceding this point. Therefore, we conducted
additional experiments where we set the threshold as a hyperparameter, ranging from 0.2 to 0.8, to
determine the relevant clusters through a point where the gap in the decline exceeds this threshold.
As shown in Figure 12, we had two observations: 1) Setting the threshold at 0.2 shows competitive
performance with the steepest decline, aligning with an aforementioned discussion that a 0.2 gap
is robust to determine the relevant clusters. 2) As the threshold increases, we observe a decrease
in performance. This is because more irrelevant clusters are assigned as the threshold increases,
thereby introducing noise.
However, we argue that this thresholding approach requires meticulous analysis of the gap in the
steepest decline for each dataset to set the threshold, whereas the steepest decline approach has the
advantage of adaptively capturing relevant clusters without needing to analysis each dataset.



  12
     For example, in Figure 10 of the Appendix, the gap in the similarity score at the point of the steepest
decline is C1-C2 for (A), and C4-C2 for (B).


                                                    21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Q     A DDITIONAL R ELATED W ORK
Q.1   L ARGE L ANGUAGE M ODEL - BASED S CENE G RAPH G ENERATION
As Large Language Models (LLMs) got a surge of interest from various domains, LLMs have also
been applied to the SGG task to leverage the rich semantic knowledge. RECODE (Li et al., 2024)
utilizes LLMs to generate an informative description for a predicate, enabling it to capture the fine-
grained visual cues. For zero-shot scene graph generation task, ELEGANT (Zhao & Xu, 2023)
extracts the candidate relationships generated by the LLMs, which have profound reasoning and
commonsense knowledge. For weakly supervised SGG, LLM4SGG (Kim et al., 2024b) alleviates
the long-tailed predicate issue and scarcity of datasets via the LLMs. In this work, we leverage the
LLMs to understand the temporality within video captions for the WS-VidSGG task.

R     F UTURE W ORK
A potential limitation of our work is that NL-VSGG is mainly designed for handling relatively
short-length videos (∼120 seconds). As future work, we plan to generalize NL-VSGG to longer
untrimmed videos. One possible direction would be to perform untrimmed video temporal local-
ization (Wang et al., 2023; Yan et al., 2023; Li et al., 2023b) tasks in computer vision, wherein
short-length clips are extracted from longer videos, and apply NL-VSGG to each clip for training
a VidSGG model. This approach would enable the training of the VidSGG model with untrimmed
longer videos.
Another direction for future work is to explore the possibility of using Multimodal Large Language
Models (MLLMs) to extend open-set or multi-label prediction in the VidSGG task. Specifically, for
open-set prediction, we can query the temporal relationship between a subject and an object to the
MLLMs by inserting the union box and previous frames’ caption for temporal context. For multi-
label prediction, temperature (Ficler & Goldberg, 2017) or top-k sampling (Radford et al., 2019),
commonly used in the NLP for generating diverse answers, can be used to generate various temporal
relationships.


                                                 22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                          Table 14: Enumeration of all expanded action classes.
    put, pick up, open, take, hold, sit on, eat, grab, close, look at, throw, take off, drink,
    walk into, sit in, place, on, sit at, watch, with, put on, pour, walk to, read, set,
    drink from, in, clean, carry, walk over to, stand in, walk through, turn on, fold,
    work on, take out, look out, sit, remove, play with, use, get, look in, lie on,
    sweep, talk on, from, wash, fix, sit down on, tidy up, enter, walk out of, leave, into,
    move, turn off, lay on, walk in, go to, out of, look into, walk down, at, vacuum, play on,
    sit down, stand in front of, cook, turn, look through, off, stand on, wipe, run into,
    have, snuggle with, drop, walk up, make, lay down on, stand at, in front of, tidy,
    walk around, opening, check, do, pull out, toss, adjust, of, put down, pull, stand by,
    walk out, sit down at, shut, touch, open up, get up from, sit down in, pick, lie in,
    walk, hug, snuggle, lay in, onto, type on, look, walk across, drink out of, set down,
    sleep on, to, come into, flip through, write in, laugh at, walk up to, go through,
    stand, lay, lie down on, sneeze into, put away, talk to, wrap in, stir, sneeze, dry, wear,
    start, write, wrap, down on, reach for, stand next to, next to, hang, play, go into,
    stare at, retrieve, get out of, straighten, eat from, through, run through, run, grasps,
    walk towards, off of, smile at, under, look inside, answer, cook on, clean up, go over to,
    exit, fill, run out of, laugh, wipe off, stand near, look out of, reach into, walk over,
    smile, lean against, keep, cover with, tie, sweep with, rearrange, write on, stand hold,
    back on, sit in front of, mess with, wipe down, hold onto, hang up, organize, grasp,
    examine, prepare, run down, go out, wave, go back to, find, shake, walk in with,
    cover, bring, inspect, come in, undress, arrange, down, inside, awaken on, run to,
    push, dust, cover in, empty, lean on, sip from, by, stack, texte on, straighten up,
    walk with, interact with, walk away with, on the floor, bend down, lay down, flip,
    kick off, cuddle with, stand up, stand up from, clean off, get dress, on top of,
    leave through, walk away from, lock, fiddle with, reach, take out of, hold up, dump,
    go up, hand, fold up, point at, run around, change, cuddle, run in, kick, fluff,
    walk away, stand behind, knock, pour out, over, come through, swing, rub,
    enter through, get up out of, walk in through, unfold, unlock, sneeze on, scrub,
    take picture of, bend over, button up, walk past, type, consume, look for, continue,
    take a bite of, lie down, see, button, getting dress, near, smell, hit, get up off,
    lay down with, sit down to, take picture with, move to, get out, zips up, lift, turn out,
    dress in, walk toward, talk, give, rinse, look up at, read from, sit with, run up, get into,
    stop at, wrap up in, get off, sleep in, show, cover up with, twirl, wrap around, gather,
    lie down in, proceed to, be, around, check out, view, tidy up with, spray,
    undress out of, walk in hold, come in through, eat out of, hold on to, approach,
    appear to be in, swallow, fall on, sit next to, kneel on, dusting, stand nearby, walk by,
    search for, snuggle in, get on, stop, leave with, get up, for, search through, sniff,
    sit down in front of, on the ground, sweep up, undress from, back in, sit down with,
    asleep on, walk from, lean, look around, fidget with, look over, reach over, run out,
    cook at, rummage through, back into, polish, dress, come out of, dig through, return to,
    wake up from, swinge, comb, brush, sort, return, talk with, do work on, ball up,
    move towards, climb up, smile into, sit up, walk in front of, awaken, pace in, seize,
    undress in front of, climb into, roll up, finish, wet, pull up, place on, do something on,
    stand up with, spread, admire, out, wrap themselves in, untie, seat at, spill, wake up on,
    stand with, tap on, go in, go, juggle, behind, awaken from, work at, turn to,
    dance around, shine, turn away from, up to, pat, flick, zips, clean with, pack, reach over to,
    turn back to, walk back to, knock over, exit through, return with, walk back out of,
    vacuum around, run across, walk back down, full of, walk around with, follow, go out of,
    plug in, stand watch, away from, bite, switch, dump out, rock in, sprinkle, stick,
    sip out of, sit back down on, prop, underneath, seat on, cook with, do something with,
    recline on, flip on, lie, seat in, wake up, replace, continue up, reach in, kneel down,
    unbutton, text on, clothe, come to, appear to be tidy up, tie up, fill up, climb,
    reach up on, climb on, lay down in, down onto, on the back of, face, move from, unpack,
    on their lap, walk out with, go and sit on, walk back into, get to, look down at, drape,
    sleep at, straighten out, rifle through, move around, appear, shake out, proceed to eat, sit by,
    take from, pace back and forth, walk back, film, shuffle, come back in, up on, back onto,
    enjoy, their, exercise, eat in, tap, sit down to watch, on the shelf, dust off, walk back across


                                                  23
