Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


DATA S HAPLEY IN O NE T RAINING RUN
 Jiachen T. Wang               Prateek Mittal                Dawn Song             Ruoxi Jia
 Princeton University          Princeton University          UC Berkeley           Virginia Tech



                                             A BSTRACT

         Data Shapley offers a principled framework for attributing the contribution of
         data within machine learning contexts. However, the traditional notion of Data
         Shapley requires re-training models on various data subsets, which becomes com-
         putationally infeasible for large-scale models. Additionally, this retraining-based
         definition cannot evaluate the contribution of data for a specific model training
         run, which may often be of interest in practice. This paper introduces a novel
         concept, In-Run Data Shapley, which eliminates the need for model retraining
         and is specifically designed for assessing data contribution for a particular model
         of interest. In-Run Data Shapley calculates the Shapley value for each gradient
         update iteration and accumulates these values throughout the training process. We
         present several techniques that allow the efficient scaling of In-Run Data Shapley to
         the size of foundation models. In its most optimized implementation, our method
         adds negligible runtime overhead compared to standard model training. This dra-
         matic efficiency improvement makes it possible to perform data attribution for
         the foundation model pretraining stage. We present several case studies that offer
         fresh insights into pretraining data’s contribution and discuss their implications for
         copyright in generative AI and pretraining data curation.



1    I NTRODUCTION
In today’s data-driven world, understanding the contribution of each data point is crucial, especially
with the advent of foundation models that rely on vast amounts of training data from various sources.
The lack of reliable data attribution mechanisms can lead to significant legal and societal issues,
resulting in a growing backlash against the broader use of data for model training (Heikkilä, 2023).
For instance, there is a risk of violating intellectual property rights, failing to fairly compensate
data creators, and disincentivizing them from producing new, high-quality content (Henderson et al.,
2023). This has already resulted in legal disputes, such as the New York Times’ lawsuit against
Microsoft/OpenAI (Grynbaum & Mac, 2023). Moreover, foundation models are often trained on
massive datasets scraped from the internet, which can include low-quality and harmful content (Gao
et al., 2020; Raffel et al., 2020; Touvron et al., 2023). Problematic data not only wastes computational
resources but also skews model outputs, potentially leading to biased or inaccurate results. By
understanding the contribution of each data source, we can identify and mitigate the influence of
low-quality data, thereby improving the efficiency and quality of model training.
Since the training data of foundation models comes from multiple stakeholders, it is essential to
have an algorithm that can fairly attribute data contributions. In recent years, significant progress has
been made in understanding what it means to fairly quantify and attribute data source contributions,
with the Shapley value (Shapley, 1953) emerging as a widely adopted framework (Ghorbani & Zou,
2019; Jia et al., 2019b). Originating from cooperative game theory, the Shapley value uniquely
satisfies several desirable properties: (1) It assigns equal scores to equally impactful data points,
ensuring fairness; (2) the sum of contribution scores equals the total utility, meaning the scores always
represent a share of the total utility; (3) it supports additive decomposition across multiple utility
functions, allowing for the calculation of contributions to the entire test set by summing the scores
of individual test points. As the Shapley value uniquely satisfies these properties, it eliminates the
uncertainty and ambiguity surrounding which attribution frameworks should be used conceptually.
While there are other non-Shapley data attribution frameworks, such as Datamodels (Park et al.,
2023; Ilyas et al., 2022) and influence functions (Koh & Liang, 2017), they lack the clear theoretical
foundation and uniqueness provided by the Shapley value.


                                                   1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Original Data Shapley definition faces computational & conceptual limitation. However, Data
Shapley, i.e., the application of the Shapley value in data attribution, has been limited to very small-
scale models. Existing methods (Ghorbani & Zou, 2019) to estimate the Shapley value require
retraining the model numerous times using different subsets of data to evaluate the contribution of
each data source, making them computationally infeasible for foundation models. On the other hand,
retraining-based methods suffer from a conceptual issue often overlooked in the literature: they
assess data contribution for a general learning algorithm rather than a particular model. While
one might interpret the former as an approximation of the latter, these two quantities can be quite
different in practice, especially when the learning algorithm is randomized and sensitive to factors
like random initialization and training data order. In many real-life scenarios, however, the primary
interest lies in understanding data contribution to the specific model being trained and deployed.
This paper introduces In-Run Data Shapley, a novel approach that makes fair data attribution
applicable to large-scale foundation models. Unlike retraining-based Data Shapley, In-Run Data
Shapley quantifies the contribution of each data source to the specific target model of interest.
Technical contributions. Our key insight is that ML models are trained using iterative algorithms,
where the model performance change in one iteration is sufficiently small to be accurately ap-
proximated by first- or second-order Taylor expansions. We show that the Shapley value for the
approximated one-step model performance change can be derived analytically via gradient dot-
products or gradient-Hessian-gradient products between training and validation data. Hence, we can
compute the Data Shapley scores for each model update step, and accumulate the scores throughout
the training process. However, the per-sample gradient vectors required for computing the Shapley
value in each training iteration introduce significant overhead due to per-sample gradient calculation.
To address this challenge, we develop a series of technical tools that enable the exact calculation
of gradient dot-products and gradient-Hessian-gradient products in one and two backward passes,
respectively, without the need to instantiate any additional gradient vectors or Hessian matrices.
Collectively, these tools allow for the efficient computation of In-Run Data Shapley. In particular,
with sufficient GPU memory, its most efficient implementation is as fast as regular training.
Empirical implications. Given the efficient algorithms developed in this paper, for the first time, one
can perform data attribution on the scale of foundation model pretraining. While in this paper, we
focus on GPT2 and Pythia-410M as a pilot study, our approach is applicable to larger-scale industrial
models with sufficient computing resources. We performed various case studies that provide fresh
insights into training data’s contribution to the foundation model pretraining.
(1) There is considerable room for improvement in data curation for pretraining (Section 5.3.1).
Even well-curated pretraining corpora contain data points that negatively impact the training process.
We demonstrate the effectiveness of In-Run Data Shapley in identifying these low-quality data
points. By computing In-Run Data Shapley values during training and removing negatively valued
data points, we show that the cleaned dataset leads to significantly faster model convergence and
improved performance compared to the original dataset. Interestingly, despite the Pile dataset (Gao
et al., 2020) already undergoing multiple layers of curation, In-Run Data Shapley assigns negative
values to approximately 16% of the data. We found a significant amount of noisy data among them,
highlighting the need for improved data curation for foundation model training.
(2) Data’s contribution is stage-dependent (Section 5.3.2). In-Run Data Shapley can capture the
dynamics of contribution through the course of training, a fine-grained aspect that cannot be captured
by prior works. In-Run Data Shapley shows that in the early stages of training, general corpora tend
to have a relatively large contribution regardless of the downstream tasks. This is because general
corpora help the model learn basic language patterns, grammar, and common knowledge. However,
in the later stages of training, the contribution from domain-specific corpora becomes dominant, and
the contribution of the general corpus phases out.
(3) Rethinking copyright in generative AI: contribution beyond memorization (Section 5.3.3).
We studied training data’s contribution to validation points of varying similarity levels. We found
that even when the validation data is a complete rewrite of the training data while maintaining the
topic, the training data still contributes significantly. This finding has implications for the current
dialogue around what constitutes a copyright violation in generative AI (Mulligan & Li, 2024). While
the unfair use of copyrighted content is generally only considered when the generated data is an
almost verbatim replication of the training data, our contribution analysis shows that some data
owners should receive a certain royalty share for generated content, even if the output does not closely
resemble the copyrighted material.


                                                   2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


2    BACKGROUND OF DATA S HAPLEY
In this section, we formalize the setup of data attribution for ML and revisit Data Shapley’s definition.
Setup & Goal. Given a dataset Dtr := {zi }N    i=1 , data attribution or valuation aims to assign a score to
each training data point zi , reflecting its importance for the trained ML model’s performance on a
certain task. Formally, we seek a score vector (ϕzi )N   i=1 where each ϕzi ∈ R reflects the value of zi .
The Shapley value (SV) (Shapley, 1953), originating from game theory, stands out as a distinguished
method for equitably distributing total profit among all participating players. Before diving into its
definition, we first discuss a fundamental concept: the utility function.
Utility function. A utility function maps an input dataset to a score indicating the utility of the dataset
for model training. In most of the existing literature (Ghorbani & Zou, 2019; Jia et al., 2019b), the
utility function U is chosen as the performance (e.g., accuracy or loss) of the trained models on a
hold-out validation set. That is, given a training set S, the utility function U (S) := Perf(A(S)),
where A represents a learning algorithm that trains a model on dataset S, and Perf(·) is a function
assessing the model’s performance. For example, Perf(·) can be the accuracy for a classification
task or the perplexity for a language completion task, evaluated on a (set of) hold-out validation data.
Definition 1 (Shapley value (Shapley, 1953)). Let U (·) denote a utility function and D represent a
training set of N data points. The Shapley value, ϕz (U ), assigned to a data point z ∈ D is defined
                 PN       −1 −1 P
as ϕz (U ) := N1 k=1 N

                         k−1        S⊆D−z ,|S|=k−1 [U (S ∪ {z}) − U (S)] where D−z = D \ {z}.

In simple terms, the Shapley value is a weighted average of the marginal contribution U (S ∪ {z}) −
U (S), i.e., the utility change when the point z is added to different Ss. For simplicity, we often
write ϕz when the utility function is clear from the context. The popularity of the Shapley value
is attributable to the fact that it is the unique data value notion satisfying four axioms: Null player,
Symmetry, Linearity, and Efficiency. The mathematical definitions of these axioms are deferred to
Appendix A.1. Here, we introduce the linearity axiom which will be used later.
Theorem 2 (Linearity of the Shapley value (Shapley, 1953)). For any of two utility functions U1 , U2
and any α1 , α2 ∈ R, we have ϕz (α1 U1 + α2 U2 ) = α1 ϕz (U1 ) + α2 ϕz (U2 ).
Retraining-based Data Shapley. The convention of defining the utility function for Data Shapley as
U (S) = Perf(A(S)) was introduced in Ghorbani & Zou (2019), where A is a learning algorithm
such as a neural network trained by stochastic gradient descent (SGD) or its variants. With this choice
of utility function, the precise calculation of the Shapley value requires retraining models on various
subsets of the data. This is because the marginal contribution of a data point, U (S ∪ {z}) − U (S),
can only be obtained by training models on both S and S ∪ {z} and comparing their performance.
As a result, we refer to this method as "Retraining-based Data Shapley".
Limitations beyond efficiency (detailed in Appendix B.1): In addition to the high computational
costs, we emphasize that retraining-based Data Shapley also suffers from the following limitations:
(1) Highly unstable value scores: When stochastic learning algorithms such as SGD are used,
the resulting value scores can be highly unstable (Wang & Jia, 2023a). This instability may lead
to unreliable results and potential violations of Shapley value’s fairness axioms. (2) Conceptual
limitations: Retraining-based Data Shapley measures the average data contribution to the learning
process itself, across many retrainings on different data subsets. As a result, it produces attribution
scores that apply broadly to the algorithm but fail to reflect the data contribution to a specific training
run. On the other hand, providing insights into how individual data points contribute to the deployed
model enables more targeted analysis and debugging, thereby improving model interpretability.

3    I N -RUN DATA S HAPLEY
To address the issues associated with Retraining-based Data Shapley such as high computational
costs, value instability, and the inability to assess the contribution towards a specific trained model,
we propose a novel data attribution method specifically tailored for a single training run. Our
key idea is to leverage the iterative nature of model training and employ a "divide and conquer"
approach: breaking down the problem of valuing data contributions for the entire training process
into subproblems of valuing data contributions for individual iterations.
Utility function for a single gradient update. Traditionally, the utility function U (S) =
Perf(A(S)) encapsulates the overall impact of a training set S across the complete training process.


                                                     3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Here, we instead consider a "local utility function" that evaluates the impact of data subsets within a
single iteration. Specifically, given a training dataset Dtr = {zi }N   i=1 , a deep learning model is usually
                                                  PN
being trained to minimize the training loss i=1 ℓ(w, zi ) via an iterative optimization procedure
such as SGD. The performance of the model is typically being measured through a set of validation
points {z (val) }. During an iteration t, a batch Bt ⊆ Dtr of    Pthe training points is used to update the
model parameters from wt to wt+1 with wt+1 := wt − ηt z∈Bt ∇ℓ(wt , z), where ηt is the learning
rate at iteration t.1 A complete run of neural network training thus consists of model checkpoints
{w0 , w1 , . . . , wT }. For a given validation data point z (val) , we can define the "local utility function”
at a single iteration t as

                          U (t) (S; z (val) ) := ℓ(w
                                                   et+1 (S), z (val) ) − ℓ(wt , z (val) )            (1)
                                P
where w et+1 (S) := wt − ηt z∈S ∇ℓ(wt , z) and S ⊆ Bt is a subset of the batch being selected in
t-th iteration in the original training. Interpretation: The local utility function U (t) represents the
loss change at iteration t when only the subset S is used for the gradient update. This approach
incorporates the realization of random batch selection at t-th iteration into the utility function. It
can also encode other forms of training randomness (e.g., dropout) at iteration t. By accounting for
the specific realization of training randomness, we obtain a deterministic utility function for each
iteration, effectively enabling the targeted attribution to the specific training run.
Data Shapley for a single gradient update. While the utility U (t) is defined over Bt instead of the
full training set Dtr , it is easy toPaugment it to Dtr . More formally, in the augmented utility function
we have w  et+1 (S) := wt − ηt z∈S∩Bt ∇ℓ(wt , z), S ⊆ Dtr . The Shapley value ϕz (U (t) ) will be
exactly the same as the Shapley value corresponds to the augmented utility function for any z ∈ Bt ,
and ϕz (U (t) ) = 0 for any z ∈ Dtr \ Bt (see Theorem 5 in Wang & Jia (2023b)). Therefore, for a
clean presentation, we slightly abuse the notation where U (t) ’s meaning depends on the context.
Data Shapley for the entire training run. Building on the concept of a "local" utility function for a
single gradient update iteration, we naturally extend this to a "global" utility function for the entire
                                              PT −1
training process, defined as U (S) = t=0 U (t) (S). Interpretation: This global utility function can
be interpreted as the cumulative loss change of the entire training run, but under the counterfactual
scenario where only a subset of the training data S is used. In other words, it aggregates the total
impact of the subset S on the model’s performance throughout the entire training process. Due to the
                                                                                            PT −1
linearity property of the Shapley value (Theorem 2), we have ϕz (U ) = t=0 ϕz (U (t) ). This new
Data Shapley value, which we call In-Run Data Shapley, represents the cumulative contribution of
the data point z across all gradient update iterations within a single training run. This approach breaks
down the broader utility into more manageable, step-by-step assessments that capture the immediate
effects of data points on model updates, and provide a more fine-grained view of how individual data
points contribute to the model’s performance at each step of the training process. Notably, the sum of
individual data points’ Shapley values equals the overall loss reduction achieved by the model during
the entire training run due to the Shapley value’s efficiency axiom (see Appendix A.1). This provides
a meaningful and interpretable measure of data importance. In Appendix B, we give an in-depth
comparison between Retraining-based and In-Run Data Shapley.
Remark 1 (Multiple validation points). In practice, the model performance is often being
assessed based on a validation set D(val) = {z (val) }. After computing ϕz U (·; z (val) ) for
each z (val) ∈ D(val) , one can compute theP            Shapley value corresponding to the utility function
on the full validation set U (S; D(val) ) :=               z (val) ∈D (val) U (S; z
                                                                                    (val)
                                                                                          ) by simply taking the sum
             (val)
                          P                              (val)
ϕz U (·; D         ) =                        ϕ
                              z (val) ∈D (val) z U (·; z       )    due   to the  linearity   property of the Shapley
value (Theorem 2). Hence, for a clean presentation, we consider only a single z (val) in this paper.
However, all the techniques we developed can be extended to multiple validation points.


4    E FFICIENT C OMPUTATION OF I N -RUN DATA S HAPLEY
The newly proposed In-Run Data Shapley does not require retraining models from scratch on different
data subsets. However, calculating ϕz (U (t) ) for each training iteration remains computationally
   1
     Note that in practice, we take the gradient average for the update, but here we incorporate the normalization
term |Bt | into the learning rate ηt for a clean presentation.


                                                         4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


intensive, as it involves evaluating the performance impact of all possible combinations within the
sampled data batch. In this section, we introduce an efficient method for approximating In-Run Data
Shapley scores during a specific training run. Our approach, distinct from Monte Carlo methods, is
deterministic and optimized to minimize additional runtime to regular training. In particular, in its
most efficient implementation, our approximation technique incurs negligible extra runtime beyond
what is required for standard model training, making it highly practical for real-world applications.

4.1     A PPROXIMATING U (t) WITH TAYLOR E XPANSION
To derive a more tractable structure for the local utility function U (t) , we propose using first and
second-order Taylor approximations. The advantage of this approach is that the approximated utility
function exhibits a form where closed-form Data Shapley formulas can be derived. The second-order
Taylor approximation to the local utility function is as follows:
U (t) (S) = ℓ(w
              et+1 (S), z (val) ) − ℓ(wt , z (val) )
                                                  1                   (z (val) )
          = ∇ℓ(wt , z (val) ) · (w                  et+1 (S) − wt )⊺ Ht
                                 et+1 (S) − wt ) + (w                             et+1 (S) − wt ) + higher order terms
                                                                                 (w
            |                 {z              } 2|                     {z                      }
                             (t)                                            (t)
                            U(1) (S)                                       U(2) (S)

                                       (z (val) )                                                              (t)
where the Hessian matrix Ht                          := ∇2 ℓ(wt , z (val) ). We label the first-order term as U(1) (S)
                                                    (t)
and the second-order term as U(2) (S). Note that the gradient update w             et+1 (S) − wt =
    P
−ηt z∈S ∇ℓ(wt , z). Given that the learning rate ηt in model training is typically small, a lower-
order Taylor expansion often provides an accurate approximation for the change in loss during a
single gradient update, with approximation errors of O(ηt2 ) and O(ηt3 ) for first and second-order
approximations, respectively. In Appendix E.2.2, we empirically investigate the errors of first- and
second-order approximations to U (t) on GPT2. In particular, the first-order approximation can already
achieve a great performance with Spearman correlation > 0.94.
                                                                                                 (t)
First-order In-Run Data Shapley. Using the first-order approximation U (t) ≈ U(1) , and substituting
                                         (t)
the gradient update expression, we have U(1) (S) = −ηt z∈S ∇ℓ(wt , z (val) )·∇ℓ(wt , z). This shows
                                                      P
        (t)
that U(1) is an additive utility function with a closed-form Shapley calculation as follows:
Theorem 3. In-Run Data Shapley considering the first-order approximation has closed-form
                                           T −1
                                                       (t)
                                           X
                                 ϕz (U ) ≈      ϕz U(1)
                                                                t=0
where
                          (t)
                      ϕz U(1) = −ηt ∇ℓ(wt , z (val) ) · ∇ℓ(wt , z), t = 0, . . . , T − 1


Thus, the first-order approximation of In-Run Data Shapley for a training point accumulates its
gradient dot products with the validation data point each time the training point is sampled in the
training batch. The gradient dot product between the training point zi and the validation point
z (val) represents the direct influence of zi on the validation loss at the current model parameters wt ,
which essentially
                     measures
                               the alignment between the two gradient vectors in the parameter space.
                  (t)
Notably, ϕz U(1) is equivalent to the TracIN-Ideal score proposed by (Pruthi et al., 2020). That
is, the TracIN-Ideal score can be interpreted as the Shapley value when we use first-order Taylor
approximation for U (t) . However, TracIN-Ideal has been described as "computationally infeasible,"
and our approach completely overcomes this problem. In Appendix A.3, we provide a detailed
discussion of the differences between this work and (Pruthi et al., 2020).
Second-order In-Run Data Shapley. We further improve the approximation of U (t) using a second-
                                           (t)       (t)
order Taylor expansion, i.e., U (t) ≈ U(1) + 12 U(2) . Fortunately, the approximated utility function
maintains a tractable structure that allows a closed-form Shapley value calculation.
Theorem 4. In-Run Data Shapley considering the second-order approximation has closed-form
                                         T −1                 1
                                                        (t)            (t)
                                         X
                               ϕz (U ) ≈        ϕz U(1) + ϕz U(2)                                    (2)
                                         t=0
                                                              2


                                                                 5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


where
                                                                                                                        

                (t)
                           1   (t)                     (val)                      ηt2   ⊺ (z
                                                                                             (val)
                                                                                                   )
                                                                                                      X
      ϕz       U(1)       + ϕz U(2) = −ηt ∇ℓ(wt , z          ) · ∇ℓ(wt , z) + ∇ℓ(wt , z) Ht                  ∇ℓ(wt , zj )
                           2          |                 {z                      } 2                                                   (3)
                                                                                                     zj ∈B t
                                        1 influence of z on the loss of z (val)   |              {z                      }
                                                                                  2 interaction between z and other training points


for any t = 0, . . . , T − 1.
Compared to the first-order variant, the second-order In-Run Data Shapley includes an additional
gradient-Hessian-gradient product term that captures the interaction between the training point of
interest z and the rest of the training set. The Hessian matrix represents the curvature of the validation
loss function at the current model parameters wt . This interaction term measures the alignment
between the gradient of z and the gradients of the other points in the training batch, adjusted by the
Hessian. If this term is large, it indicates that the presence of other points in the batch significantly
impacts the value attributed to z. For example, if there are many identical or similar copies of z in
the training set, the contribution of z will decrease, as the interaction term will be large, effectively
distributing the value among the similar points. By incorporating this interaction term, the second-
order In-Run Data Shapley provides a more fine-grained contribution measure that takes into account
both the relevance of a data point towards a validation set and its uniqueness within the population.

4.2     E FFICIENT C OMPUTATION OF G RADIENT D OT- PRODUCT AND
        G RADIENT-H ESSIAN -G RADIENT P RODUCT

Although we have derived closed-form formulas for In-Run Data Shapley using first- or second-order
Taylor approximation of the local utility functions, efficiently computing these values remains a
challenge. Specifically, for the first-order In-Run Data Shapley, it requires computing 1 the pairwise
gradient dot products between each z ∈ Bt and the validation point. For the second-order In-Run
Data Shapley, it additionally requires computing 2 the gradient-Hessian-gradient products for each
z ∈ Bt . A direct implementation to compute 1 involves calculating the individual gradient for
each data point in Bt , which cannot benefit from fast batch processing in GPUs and necessitates
running backpropagation |Bt | times with a mini-batch size of 1. Consequently, this approach would
be at least |Bt | times slower than regular training, making it computationally prohibitive for practical
applications. Furthermore, computing 2 requires either computing each individual gradient again or
storing all individual gradients, which incurs significant time or memory overhead.
Computing pair-wise gradient dot-products in 1 backpropagation. Our technique for efficiently
computing pairwise gradient dot products is inspired by the "ghost clipping" technique from the
differential privacy (DP) literature (Lee & Kifer, 2021). "Ghost clipping" enables computing all of
the per-sample gradient norms within one backpropagation without explicitly forming any individual
gradient vectors, which enhances the efficiency of DP model training. Here, we propose a "ghost
dot-product" technique that shares the idea of exploiting the computation that has been done in
the backpropagation. Specifically, denote a sample batch as Bt = {z1 , . . . , zB }. We demonstrate
this technique using a simple linear layer s = aW, where W ∈ Rd1 ×d2 is the weight matrix,
a = (a(1) , . . . , a(B) )⊺ is the mini-batch input, and s = (s(1) , . . . , s(B) )⊺ is the output (i.e., the
pre-activation tensor). For (non-sequential) data, a ∈ RB×d1 , s ∈ RB×d2 . By applying the chain rule,
we can express the gradient of an individual loss ℓ(i) := ℓ(w, zi ) with respect to W as
                                       ∂ℓ(i)  ∂ℓ(i)  ∂s(i)  ∂ℓ(i)         ∂ℓ
                                             = (i) ⊗       = (i) ⊗ a(i) = (i) ⊗ a(i)                                                  (4)
                                       ∂W     ∂s     ∂W     ∂s           ∂s
                   (j)
                      PB
where ℓ :=    j=1 ℓ    is the aggregated loss, and the last step is because other data points’ losses
                                                                         (i)
have no dependency on si . Note that the individual’s output gradient ∂ℓ
                                                                      ∂s(i)
                                                                             = ∂s∂ℓ(i) is readily available
during the backpropagation pass in terms of ℓ. Suppose we are interested in computing the gradient
               (1)
                    ∂ℓ(2)
dot-product ∂ℓ
             ∂W ⊙ ∂W between two data points z1 , z2 in the same batch in the backpropagation.
                                                                                 (i)
For non-sequential data, we have each a(i) ∈ Rd1 ×1 and ∂ℓ
                                                        ∂s(i)
                                                              ∈ R1×d2 . By (4), we have
                                                                                        ∂ℓ(1)  ⊺   ∂ℓ(2)
                                                                                                          !
      ∂ℓ(1)   ∂ℓ(2)                            ∂ℓ(1)               ∂ℓ(2)
                                                                               ⊺
            ⊙       =                 a(1) ⊗               ⊙ a(2) ⊗ (2) = a(1) a(2)                                                   (5)
      ∂W      ∂W                               ∂s(1)               ∂s                   ∂s(1)      ∂s(2)


                                                                      6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Hence, we can first take the two inner products, and then multiply the results together. All of the
                           (1)     (2)
quantities a(1) , a(2) , ∂ℓ    , ∂ℓ in (5) that are required for computation are all already available in the
                         ∂s(1) ∂s(2)
backpropagation. Hence, within a single backpropagation, we can efficiently compute the gradient
dot-product between every pair of zi , zj ∈ Bt . Since we are interested in computing the gradient
                                                                                                        (val)
dot-product between z (val) and z for all z ∈ Bt , we can backpropagate on z∈Bt ℓ(i) + ℓ(z )
                                                                                      P

to save another backpropagation for z (val) . We call this technique the "ghost dot-product", as no
gradient vectors are instantiated during the computation. Overall, we only need one backpropagation
to compute 1 for all data points in Bt , a significant improvement over the direct method requiring
≥ |Bt | backpropagations. Additional details for this technique are in Appendix D.
Remark 2. While we illustrate our "ghost dot-product" technique using linear layers, it can be
extended to other types of layers by leveraging similar decompositions as in Equation (4) that have
been developed in differential privacy literature (Rochette et al., 2020; Bu et al., 2022; Li et al., 2021;
Bu et al., 2023; Kong & Munoz Medina, 2024).

Computing gradient-Hessian-gradient products in 2 backpropagations (Appendix D.2). For
second-order In-Run Data Shapley, an outstanding challenge is how to efficiently compute the pairwise
interaction term among training points. In Appendix D.2, we develop a "ghost gradient-Hessian-
gradient product" technique for computing the desired quantity through one extra backpropagation
pass, without materializing any gradient-sized vectors. This technique leverages several properties of
neural network gradients across different layers, and its derivation is complex.
Further improvement of runtime and memory requirements (Appendix D.3). With the "ghost"
techniques developed, the computation of first- and second-order In-Run Data Shapley requires one
and two backpropagations in each gradient update
                                              P     iteration respectively. Although we still need to
compute the gradient of the aggregated loss zi ∈Bt ℓi for the training batch to perform parameter
updates, we do not need an additional backpropagation. By reusing the activations and output
                                                                   (val)
gradients from the previous backpropagation on z∈Bt ℓ(i) + ℓ(z ) , we can easily compute this
                                                  P
quantity without incurring the cost of an extra backpropagation pass. Consequently, training while
computing first-order In-Run Data Shapley will have minimal additional runtime overhead, as it still
requires only one backpropagation per iteration. The second-order In-Run Data Shapley necessitates
one extra backpropagation per iteration. Nevertheless, both methods provide significant advantages
over the direct approach of instantiating per-sample gradients and Hessian-vector products.


5     E XPERIMENTS

In this section, we evaluate In-Run Data Shapley in terms of its efficiency (Section 5.1), fidelity
(Section 5.2), and its applications in data attribution for language model pretraining (Section 5.3). In
Appendix E.6, we compare a variety of existing data attribution methods in small-scale settings.

5.1   RUNTIME E VALUATION
We empirically assess the computational efficiency of In-Run Data Shapley with "ghost
dot-product" and "ghost vector-Hessian-vector product" techniques developed in Section 4.2.
We compare this to the direct implementation of In-Run
Data Shapley, which requires computing per-sample gra-                                              Throughput
dients, as well as to regular training without Data Shapley            Regular Training                 76.2
computations. The experiment is conducted by training First-order Data Shapley (ghost)                  70.5
GPT2-Small on a single 80GB A100 GPU. As illustrated Second-order Data Shapley (ghost)                  34.4
                                                              First-order Data Shapley (direct)         4.2
in Table 1, the runtime of first-order In-Run Data Shapley Second-order Data Shapley (direct)           1.8
is close to that of regular training when using the ghost
dot-product algorithms developed in Section 4.2. The         Table   1:  Efficiency     comparison       of dif-
second-order In-Run Data Shapley is approximately 2×         ferent   implementations       of  In-Run    Data
slower than regular training due to the additional backprop- Shapley.    We  use  throughput,     i.e., # train-
agation. However, both the first- and second-order In-Run ing data points being processed per sec-
Data Shapley are significantly faster (> 30×) compared ond as the efficiency metric.
to the naive implementation. These results showcase the substantial improvements achieved by our
techniques, making In-Run Data Shapley computationally feasible for practical applications.

                                                       7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


5.2     F IDELITY E VALUATION
In this section, we directly assess the approxima-
tion accuracy of first- and second-order In-Run
Data Shapley. In Appendix E.6, we further com-
pare the performance of In-Run Data Shapley
with existing (less scalable) data attribution tech-
niques on standard benchmarks (e.g., mislabeled
data detection) as an additional sanity check.
Given that computing the exact In-Run Data Figure 1: Comparison between the Monte Carlo-
Shapley value is computationally prohibitive, estimated In-Run Data Shapley and First/Second-
we compare their performance against Monte order In-Run Data Shapley.
Carlo estimates of the Shapley value using a
large number of samples. The experiment is conducted on GPT2 model at the 3500th training
iteration on Pile, where the batch size 16 and learning rate 3 × 10−4 . We use 1000 permutations to
approximate the groundtruth In-Run Shapley value. Figure 1 shows that with just first-order In-Run
Data Shapley, the root mean squared error (RMSE) is only around 0.0003. In Appendix E.2.1, we
provide additional results with different learning rates.

5.3     C ASE S TUDY: DATA ATTRIBUTION ON P ILE DATASET
In this section, we present a case study to demonstrate the use cases of In-Run Data Shapley by
pretraining on the well-known Pile dataset (Gao et al., 2020). We explore its application in data
curation, examine data contribution across different training stages, and investigate relevant corpus
detection. Due to computational resource constraints, most of our experiments focus on the GPT-2 and
Pythia-410M models, but this is not a limitation of the algorithm itself. With adequate computational
resources, our approach can easily be applied to larger-scale models.

5.3.1    I S W ELL - CURATED DATASET ACTUALLY C LEAN ?
Carefully curated pretraining corpora still contain data points that can adversely affect the training
process. Identifying and removing these data points can accelerate model convergence and enhance
overall performance, thereby saving computational resources. In this experiment, we demonstrate
the effectiveness of In-Run Data Shapley in assessing the data quality of a subset of the Pile dataset.
We uniformly select a random subset of Pile with around 10B tokens and train a GPT2 model on
this subset. We compute the data attribution results with Pile’s validation set. By filtering out all
negatively valued corpora and retraining the model on the cleaned subset, we observe significant
improvement in model convergence. For both first- and second-order In-Run Data Shapely, we can
achieve around 25% fewer training iterations to reach a test loss of 3.75. Surprisingly, our analysis
reveals that around 16% of the training corpora had negative second-order In-Run Data Shapley
values. While some of the negatively valued corpora may be attributed to the significant domain shift
compared to the validation corpora, we still find many low-quality corpora from Pile, a pretraining
dataset that has undergone several layers of data curation (Gao et al., 2020). Examples of low-quality
corpora identified can be found in Appendix E.3.
Figure 2 shows a performance comparison between the original
training run and the model trained on the cleaned subsets for
GPT2, and additional results on Pythia-410M are available
in Appendix E.3.1. We also compare with influence function
(Koh & Liang, 2017), which approximates the change in the
model’s loss on the test example when the training example
is removed from the training set (i.e., the leave-one-out score).
We omit TRAK (Park et al., 2023) and other techniques such
as datamodel (Ilyas et al., 2022) as they are not scalable to
our setting. As we can see, influence function can also filter
out low-quality data that can accelerate training convergence. Figure 2: Test loss comparison be-
However, the performance is slightly worse than In-Run Data tween the original training run and
Shapley as the influence function only uses information from the model trained on the cleaned
the final trained models, which can result in highly noisy value subset according to different data
scores since the removal of one training data point might have a attribution techniques.
negligible effect on the final model performance. The results demonstrate that removing lower-quality


                                                  8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


  Original Wikipedia Corpus                                       Synthetic "Similar topic" Corpus
 In 2012, Radhi recruited new ’musicians’ for                     ### Instruction: Write a short story about a classical
 OAG, who were selected from among the stu-                       violinist who decides to explore jazz music, detailing
 dents of Akademi Seni Budaya dan Warisan Ke-                     her first encounter with a jazz band. ### Answer:
 bangsaan (). The new line-up consists of Qi Razali               Elena, a classically trained violinist known for her
 (drums/backing vocals - original drummer ...                     precise and emotive performances ...
  Similarity Category      In-Run Data Shapley (1st order)   In-Run Data Shapley (2nd order)     Influence Function   BM25
Partial exactly the same                 1                                  1                            1               1
      Paraphrase                         1                                  1                            1               1
Significant paraphrase                  32.3                               32                           39.3            1.6
     Similar topic                     145.6                              141.6                         292           20917.3
Table 2: Top: (left) An original training corpus from Wikipedia. (right) A synthetic corpus falls in the
category of "Similar topic" to the Wikipedia corpus on the left (prompt in Appendix E.5). Bottom:
the (average) value rank of the original corpus among all training corpora for validation corpora that
are of varying similarity to the original corpus. The rank is out of ≈320k data points.
                                                                                  Validation Corpus
                                                                                  In several applications, the matrix coef-
                                                                                  ficients of the nonlinear valued function
                                                                                  G(λ) in are usually of low rank ...

                                                                               (+) High-valued Corpus
                                                                                  The Lagrangian Lg3 ,g4 ,g5 ,g6 describes
                                                                                  (axial-)vector meson interactions, see
                                                                                  Appendix of Ref. [@Gallas]. After ...

                                                                               (−) Low-valued Corpus
                                                                                  Coronavirus Testing in San Diego
                                                                                  County\n How San Diego Is Getting
                                                                                  Ready for Self-Driving Cars ...
Figure 3: Left: Domain value composition for a corpus of math text. Right: The math corpus we use
as the validation data for attribution, and examples of high- and low-valued training corpus for it.

data leads to a significantly faster drop in test loss compared to the original training run. This implies
that there is still huge room for data curation for well-curated datasets such as Pile.

5.3.2     H OW D O DATA VALUES C HANGE DURING T RAINING ?
As In-Run Data Shapley tracks the cumulative data values across different training steps, we can
assess the contribution of training points at various stages of training, providing a more fine-grained
perspective on data attribution. We evaluate the data attribution results for a math-related validation
data using second-order In-Run Data Shapley. In Figure 3, we present the value composition of
training corpora by their domains over the first 10,000 training iterations, summing the values of
all corpora from the same domain. We then calculate the percentage of the total value attributed
to each domain, excluding domains with a total value < 0. As illustrated in the figure, the corpora
from ArXiv achieve a significantly higher value compared to other domain corpora, far exceeding
its size proportion within the full Pile dataset. This is expected, as ArXiv papers predominantly
cover fields like Math, Computer Science, and Physics, which contain extensive math-related content.
Furthermore, the value composition changes rapidly at the beginning of training and stabilizes as
training progresses. We hypothesize that this initial fluctuation is due to the presence of relevant
paragraphs in corpora from other domains. The stable value proportion observed in later stages likely
reflects the relative abundance of math content in each domain. Interestingly, we observe that Pile-CC
domain, which contains general website crawls, initially shows positive contributions during the
first few iterations. However, its value quickly drops to negative and eventually converges to zero.
This implies that general corpora tend to have a large contribution in the beginning of training,
as they help the model learn the basics of languages, such as grammar and common knowledge.
However, as training progresses and the model focuses on more specialized topics, the relevance of
general domains diminishes. An additional figure for the average domain values is in Appendix E.4.

                                                              9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


5.3.3   D OES C ONTRIBUTION R EQUIRE M EMORIZATION ?
In this experiment, we evaluate the robustness of different data attribution techniques in identifying
relevant individual corpora that have been paraphrased. We start by selecting a data point from the
training set and creating several paraphrased versions using GPT-4, with varying levels of paraphrasing
(see Appendix E.5 for the prompt). These paraphrased versions form our validation set. We then
calculate the average value rank of the original training data for each of its paraphrased versions.
In addition to In-Run Data Shapley and influence function, we include the ranking result based on
BM25 distance. BM25 (Robertson et al., 2009) featurizes examples by their word frequency statistics
(i.e., TF-IDF) to rank the training instances. We use BM25 distance as an oracle for assessing the
verbatim or lexical similarity between the validation data (query) and the training data, as opposed to
semantic similarity.
As shown in Table 2, even for a validation data that is a complete rewrite (with a low BM25 distance)
but covers relevant topics, the original training data still ranks very high according to both In-Run
Data Shapley and influence function. Influence function ranks the original training data lower than
In-Run Data Shapley, which may be attributed to the inherent noisy nature of the leave-one-out error
estimation. The results of this experiment have important implications for the ongoing discussion
about the copyright of generative AI. Specifically, the table presents a compelling example where the
original Wikipedia training corpus related to a musician’s experience can significantly contribute to
generating a story about a musician, even when the generated story shares no token-wise resemblance
to the original training data. This finding supports that training data profoundly influences the
capabilities of generative AI models and should be compensated accordingly (Deng & Ma, 2023;
Wang et al., 2024b), even when the output does not closely resemble the original copyrighted material
or when the model applies output filters to avoid generating verbatim replicates of the training data.
This discovery expands the conventional focus on copyright violations, which typically addresses
instances of near-verbatim replication, as seen in the dispute between New York Times and OpenAI,
to also include cases where the generated content is significantly influenced by copyrighted material
without directly replicating it.

6    C ONCLUSION AND L IMITATIONS
In this work, we introduce In-Run Data Shapley, a novel data attribution technique that addresses the
limitations of Retraining-based Data Shapley. Extensive experiments demonstrate the effectiveness of
In-Run Data Shapley in various applications. Here, we discuss the potential limitations of this work.
Availability of validation data before training. One potential limitation of In-Run Data Shapley is
that it requires the validation data to be available before training, as the data attribution scores are
computed during the training process. However, there are many scenarios where validation data is
naturally available before training, such as when using publicly available benchmark datasets, partici-
pating in machine learning competitions, or adhering to regulatory requirements. For scenarios where
validation data arrives after the model has been trained, a potential solution is to save checkpoints of
intermediate models during training and approximate In-Run Data Shapley using these checkpoints,
in the same spirit of TracIN-CP described in Pruthi et al. (2020). However, the choice of checkpoints
can significantly impact performance, and it is unclear which checkpoints to pick.
Extension to other optimization algorithms. Extending the "ghost" family techniques developed in
this work to support Adam and similar optimizers remains an exciting direction for future research.
We stress that extending the formulation of In-Run Data Shapley from SGD to Adam is feasible, but
the actual challenge lies in computing it efficiently without instantiating each individual gradient
vector, which cannot be solved by simple extensions described in Xia et al. (2024).
Handling memory constraints. In scenarios where GPU memory constraints prevent large batch
sizes, the "ghost" techniques can be extended by using gradient accumulation. This approach accom-
modates larger training batch sizes by dividing the batch into smaller sub-batches and accumulating
gradients over multiple iterations. While this method may increase runtime due to additional back-
propagation steps, it maintains the feasibility of the techniques under memory constraints. Improving
computational efficiency for large batch sizes remains an important direction for future research.


                                                  10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


ACKNOWLEDGMENT

This work is supported in part by the National Science Foundation under grants IIS-2312794, IIS-
2313130, OAC-2239622, Amazon-Virginia Tech Initiative in Efficient and Robust Machine Learning,
and the Commonwealth Cyber Initiative.
We thank Meng Ding, Chong Xiang, Chendi Wang for their helpful feedback on the preliminary
version of this work.

R EFERENCES
Jordan T Ash, Chicheng Zhang, Akshay Krishnamurthy, John Langford, and Alekh Agarwal. Deep
  batch active learning by diverse, uncertain gradient lower bounds. In International Conference on
  Learning Representations, 2019.

Juhan Bae, Nathan Ng, Alston Lo, Marzyeh Ghassemi, and Roger B Grosse. If influence functions
  are the answer, then what is the question? Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
  35:17953–17967, 2022.

S Basu, P Pope, and S Feizi. Influence functions in deep learning are fragile. In International
  Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR), 2021.

Stella Biderman, Hailey Schoelkopf, Quentin Gregory Anthony, Herbie Bradley, Kyle O’Brien, Eric
  Hallahan, Mohammad Aflah Khan, Shivanshu Purohit, USVSN Sai Prashanth, Edward Raff, et al.
  Pythia: A suite for analyzing large language models across training and scaling. In International
  Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 2397–2430. PMLR, 2023.

Zhiqi Bu, Jialin Mao, and Shiyun Xu. Scalable and efficient training of large convolutional neural
  networks with differential privacy. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 35:
  38305–38318, 2022.

Zhiqi Bu, Yu-Xiang Wang, Sheng Zha, and George Karypis. Differentially private optimization on
  large model at small cost. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 3192–3218.
  PMLR, 2023.

Mark Alexander Burgess and Archie C Chapman. Approximating the shapley value using stratified
 empirical bernstein sampling. In IJCAI, pp. 73–81, 2021.

Sang Keun Choe, Hwijeen Ahn, Juhan Bae, Kewen Zhao, Minsoo Kang, Youngseog Chung, Adithya
  Pratapa, Willie Neiswanger, Emma Strubell, Teruko Mitamura, et al. What is your data worth to
  gpt? llm-scale data valuation with influence functions. arXiv preprint arXiv:2405.13954, 2024.

R Dennis Cook and Sanford Weisberg. Characterizations of an empirical influence function for
  detecting influential cases in regression. Technometrics, 22(4):495–508, 1980.

Ian Covert, Chanwoo Kim, Su-In Lee, James Zou, and Tatsunori Hashimoto. Stochastic amortization:
  A unified approach to accelerate feature and data attribution. arXiv preprint arXiv:2401.15866,
  2024.

Junwei Deng and Jiaqi Ma. Computational copyright: Towards a royalty model for ai music generation
  platforms. arXiv preprint arXiv:2312.06646, 2023.

Jasjeet Dhaliwal and Saurabh Shintre. Gradient similarity: An explainable approach to detect
  adversarial attacks against deep learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1806.10707, 2018.

Vitaly Feldman and Chiyuan Zhang. What neural networks memorize and why: Discovering the long
  tail via influence estimation. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 33:2881–2891,
  2020.

Stanislav Fort and Surya Ganguli. Emergent properties of the local geometry of neural loss landscapes.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:1910.05929, 2019.


                                                 11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Leo Gao, Stella Biderman, Sid Black, Laurence Golding, Travis Hoppe, Charles Foster, Jason Phang,
  Horace He, Anish Thite, Noa Nabeshima, et al. The pile: An 800gb dataset of diverse text for
  language modeling. arXiv preprint arXiv:2101.00027, 2020.
Amirata Ghorbani and James Zou. Data shapley: Equitable valuation of data for machine learning.
 In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 2242–2251. PMLR, 2019.
Amirata Ghorbani, Michael Kim, and James Zou. A distributional framework for data valuation. In
 International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 3535–3544. PMLR, 2020.
Roger Grosse, Juhan Bae, Cem Anil, Nelson Elhage, Alex Tamkin, Amirhossein Tajdini, Benoit
  Steiner, Dustin Li, Esin Durmus, Ethan Perez, et al. Studying large language model generalization
  with influence functions. arXiv preprint arXiv:2308.03296, 2023.
Michael M Grynbaum and Ryan Mac. The times sues openai and microsoft. The New York Times, pp.
 B1–B1, 2023.
Melissa Heikkilä.  This new tool could give artists an edge                               over    ai.
 https://www.technologyreview.com/2023/10/24/1082247/
 this-new-tool-could-give-artists-an-edge-over-ai/, 2023.
Peter Henderson, Xuechen Li, Dan Jurafsky, Tatsunori Hashimoto, Mark A Lemley, and Percy Liang.
  Foundation models and fair use. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.15715, 2023.
Ferenc Illés and Péter Kerényi. Estimation of the shapley value by ergodic sampling. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1906.05224, 2019.
Andrew Ilyas, Sung Min Park, Logan Engstrom, Guillaume Leclerc, and Aleksander Madry. Data-
  models: Predicting predictions from training data. arXiv preprint arXiv:2202.00622, 2022.
Ruoxi Jia, David Dao, Boxin Wang, Frances Ann Hubis, Nezihe Merve Gurel, Bo Li, Ce Zhang,
  Costas J Spanos, and Dawn Song. Efficient task-specific data valuation for nearest neighbor
  algorithms. Proceedings of the VLDB Endowment, 2019a.
Ruoxi Jia, David Dao, Boxin Wang, Frances Ann Hubis, Nick Hynes, Nezihe Merve Gürel, Bo Li,
  Ce Zhang, Dawn Song, and Costas J Spanos. Towards efficient data valuation based on the
  shapley value. In The 22nd International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics, pp.
 1167–1176. PMLR, 2019b.
Pang Wei Koh and Percy Liang. Understanding black-box predictions via influence functions. In
  International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 1885–1894. PMLR, 2017.
Weiwei Kong and Andres Munoz Medina. A unified fast gradient clipping framework for dp-sgd.
 Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 36, 2024.
Yongchan Kwon and James Zou. Beta shapley: a unified and noise-reduced data valuation framework
  for machine learning. In International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics, pp.
  8780–8802. PMLR, 2022.
Yongchan Kwon, Manuel A Rivas, and James Zou. Efficient computation and analysis of distributional
  shapley values. In International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics, pp. 793–801.
  PMLR, 2021.
Jaewoo Lee and Daniel Kifer. Scaling up differentially private deep learning with fast per-example
  gradient clipping. Proceedings on Privacy Enhancing Technologies, 2021.
Weida Li and Yaoliang Yu. Faster approximation of probabilistic and distributional values via least
 squares. In The Twelfth International Conference on Learning Representations, 2023.
Weida Li and Yaoliang Yu. Robust data valuation with weighted banzhaf values. Advances in Neural
 Information Processing Systems, 36, 2024.
Xuechen Li, Florian Tramer, Percy Liang, and Tatsunori Hashimoto. Large language models can be
  strong differentially private learners. In International Conference on Learning Representations,
  2021.


                                                12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Jinkun Lin, Anqi Zhang, Mathias Lécuyer, Jinyang Li, Aurojit Panda, and Siddhartha Sen. Measuring
   the effect of training data on deep learning predictions via randomized experiments. In International
   Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 13468–13504. PMLR, 2022.
Rory Mitchell, Joshua Cooper, Eibe Frank, and Geoffrey Holmes. Sampling permutations for shapley
  value estimation. 2022.
Caitlin Mulligan and James Li.   Generative ai’s end run around copy-
  right.    AI Snake Oil, 2024. URL https://www.aisnakeoil.com/p/
  generative-ais-end-run-around-copyright.
Elisa Nguyen, Minjoon Seo, and Seong Joon Oh. A bayesian approach to analysing training data
  attribution in deep learning. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 36, 2023.
Ramin Okhrati and Aldo Lipani. A multilinear sampling algorithm to estimate shapley values. In
  2020 25th International Conference on Pattern Recognition (ICPR), pp. 7992–7999. IEEE, 2021.
Sung Min Park, Kristian Georgiev, Andrew Ilyas, Guillaume Leclerc, and Aleksander Madry. Trak:
  attributing model behavior at scale. In Proceedings of the 40th International Conference on
  Machine Learning, pp. 27074–27113, 2023.
Garima Pruthi, Frederick Liu, Satyen Kale, and Mukund Sundararajan. Estimating training data
  influence by tracing gradient descent. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 33:
 19920–19930, 2020.
Alec Radford, Jeff Wu, Rewon Child, David Luan, Dario Amodei, and Ilya Sutskever. Language
  models are unsupervised multitask learners. 2019.
Colin Raffel, Noam Shazeer, Adam Roberts, Katherine Lee, Sharan Narang, Michael Matena, Yanqi
  Zhou, Wei Li, and Peter J Liu. Exploring the limits of transfer learning with a unified text-to-text
  transformer. Journal of machine learning research, 21(140):1–67, 2020.
Stephen Robertson, Hugo Zaragoza, et al. The probabilistic relevance framework: Bm25 and beyond.
  Foundations and Trends® in Information Retrieval, 3(4):333–389, 2009.
Gaspar Rochette, Andre Manoel, and Eric W Tramel. Efficient per-example gradient computations
  in convolutional neural networks. In Workshop on Theory and Practice of Differential Privacy
 (TPDP), 2020.
Andrea Schioppa. Gradient sketches for training data attribution and studying the loss landscape.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.03994, 2024.
Lloyd S Shapley. A value for n-person games. Contributions to the Theory of Games, 2(28):307–317,
  1953.
Anders Søgaard et al. Revisiting methods for finding influential examples.              arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2111.04683, 2021.
Hugo Touvron, Thibaut Lavril, Gautier Izacard, Xavier Martinet, Marie-Anne Lachaux, Timothée
  Lacroix, Baptiste Rozière, Naman Goyal, Eric Hambro, Faisal Azhar, et al. Llama: Open and
  efficient foundation language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.13971, 2023.
Jiachen T Wang and Ruoxi Jia. Data banzhaf: A robust data valuation framework for machine
   learning. In International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics, pp. 6388–6421.
   PMLR, 2023a.
Jiachen T Wang and Ruoxi Jia. A note on" towards efficient data valuation based on the shapley
   value”. arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.11431, 2023b.
Jiachen T Wang and Ruoxi Jia. A note on" efficient task-specific data valuation for nearest neighbor
   algorithms". arXiv preprint arXiv:2304.04258, 2023c.
Jiachen T Wang, Yuqing Zhu, Yu-Xiang Wang, Ruoxi Jia, and Prateek Mittal. Threshold knn-shapley:
   A linear-time and privacy-friendly approach to data valuation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2308.15709,
   2023.


                                                  13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Jiachen T Wang, Zhun Deng, Hiroaki Chiba-Okabe, Boaz Barak, and Weijie J Su. An economic
   solution to copyright challenges of generative ai. Technical report, 2024a.
Jiachen T Wang, Zhun Deng, Hiroaki Chiba-Okabe, Boaz Barak, Weijie J Su, et al. An economic
   solution to copyright challenges of generative ai. arXiv preprint arXiv:2404.13964, 2024b.
Jiachen T Wang, Prateek Mittal, and Ruoxi Jia. Efficient data shapley for weighted nearest neighbor
   algorithms. arXiv preprint arXiv:2401.11103, 2024c.
Jiachen T Wang, Tianji Yang, James Zou, Yongchan Kwon, and Ruoxi Jia. Rethinking data shapley
   for data selection tasks: Misleads and merits. arXiv preprint arXiv:2405.03875, 2024d.
Tianhao Wang, Johannes Rausch, Ce Zhang, Ruoxi Jia, and Dawn Song. A principled approach to
  data valuation for federated learning. In Federated Learning, pp. 153–167. Springer, 2020.
Mengzhou Xia, Sadhika Malladi, Suchin Gururangan, Sanjeev Arora, and Danqi Chen. Less:
 Selecting influential data for targeted instruction tuning. In Forty-first International Conference on
 Machine Learning, 2024.
Ziao Yang, Han Yue, Jian Chen, and Hongfu Liu. On the inflation of knn-shapley value. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2405.17489, 2024.
Chih-Kuan Yeh, Ankur Taly, Mukund Sundararajan, Frederick Liu, and Pradeep Ravikumar. First is
  better than last for training data influence. arXiv preprint arXiv:2202.11844, 2022.
Tianhe Yu, Saurabh Kumar, Abhishek Gupta, Sergey Levine, Karol Hausman, and Chelsea Finn.
  Gradient surgery for multi-task learning. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 33:
  5824–5836, 2020.


                                                 14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A     E XTENDED R ELATED W ORKS
A.1    DATA S HAPLEY A XIOMS

Data Shapley is one of the first principled approaches to data attribution being proposed Ghorbani &
Zou (2019); Jia et al. (2019b). Data Shapley is based on the famous Shapley value (Shapley, 1953).
In almost all of the literature, the Shapley value is being justified as the unique value notion satisfying
the following four axioms:

    1. Null player: if U (S ∪ {zi }) = U (S) for all S ⊆ D \ {zi }, then ϕzi (U ) = 0.
    2. Symmetry: if U (S ∪ {zi }) = U (S ∪ {zj }) for all S ⊆ D \ {zi , zj }, then ϕzi (U ) = ϕzj (U ).
    3. Linearity: For utility functions U1 , U2 and any α1 , α2 ∈ R, ϕzi (α1 U1 + α2 U2 ) =
       α1 ϕzi (U1 ) + α2 ϕzi (U2 ).
                                  P
    4. Efficiency: for every U, zi ∈D ϕzi (U ) = U (D).

In plain words, null player axiom means the Shapley value will assign zero score to data points with
no contribution. Symmetry axiom requires equal scores assigned to equally impactful data points,
ensuring fairness. Efficiency axiom requires the sum of contribution scores equal to the total utility,
meaning the scores always represent a share of the total utility. Linearity axiom means the Shapley
value supports additive decomposition across multiple utility functions, allowing for the calculation
of contributions to the entire test set by summing the scores of individual test points.

A.2    DATA S HAPLEY AND F RIENDS

Since its introduction in 2019 (Ghorbani & Zou, 2019; Jia et al., 2019b), Data Shapley has rapidly
gained popularity as a principled solution for data attribution. Due to the computationally expensive
nature of retraining-based Data Shapley, various Monte Carlo-based approximation algorithms have
been developed (Jia et al., 2019b; Illés & Kerényi, 2019; Okhrati & Lipani, 2021; Burgess & Chapman,
2021; Mitchell et al., 2022; Lin et al., 2022; Wang & Jia, 2023b; Li & Yu, 2023; Covert et al., 2024),
these methods still necessitate extensive computational resources due to repeated model retraining,
which is clearly impractical for modern-sized ML models. Many of its variants have been proposed.
Kwon & Zou (2022) argues that the efficiency axiom is not necessary for many machine learning
applications, and the framework of semivalue is derived by relaxing the efficiency axiom. Lin et al.
(2022) provide an alternative justification for semivalue based on causal inference and randomized
experiments. Based on the framework of semivalue, Kwon & Zou (2022) propose Beta Shapley,
which is a collection of semivalues that enjoy certain mathematical convenience. Wang & Jia (2023a)
propose Data Banzhaf, and show that the Banzhaf value, another famous solution concept from
cooperative game theory, achieves more stable valuation results under stochastic learning algorithms.
Li & Yu (2024) further improves the valuation stability by considering value notions outside the
scope of semivalue.
The classic leave-one-out error is also a semivalue, where the influence function (Cook & Weisberg,
1980; Koh & Liang, 2017; Grosse et al., 2023) is generally considered as its approximation. A
concurrent work (Choe et al., 2024) leverages a similar gradient decomposition technique as our
paper to speed up influence function calculation. However, several works have pointed out the
fragility of influence function for deep learning models (Basu et al., 2021; Søgaard et al., 2021; Bae
et al., 2022), due to the strong assumptions of training convergence and strongly convexity of the
loss function. Nguyen et al. (2023) takes a Bayesian view of data attribution and is able to evaluate
the variance of LOO. Unlike Nguyen et al. (2023), our work explicitly incorporates specific training
randomness (e.g., model initialization, batch ordering) into the utility function definition, providing
attribution scores that reflect contributions to the exact training trajectory.
Another line of works focuses on improving the computational efficiency of Data Shapley by
considering K nearest neighbor (KNN) as the surrogate learning algorithm for the original, potentially
complicated deep learning models (Jia et al., 2019a; Wang & Jia, 2023c; Wang et al., 2023; 2024c;
Yang et al., 2024). Ghorbani et al. (2020); Kwon et al. (2021); Li & Yu (2023) consider Distributional
Shapley, a generalization of Data Shapley to data distribution. In federated learning setting, Wang
et al. (2020) proposes a similar idea of computing the Shapley value for each federated learning
round.


                                                   15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Remark 3. Randomized Monte Carlo estimators can be inefficient and may produce unstable
valuation results, potentially violating fairness axioms of the Shapley value (e.g., the Symmetry
axiom) due to inherent approximation errors. In contrast, In-Run Data Shapley does not rely on
Monte Carlo estimators. Instead, it computes the exact Shapley value for an approximated utility
function via Taylor expansion. This approach adheres to the fairness axioms while ensuring the
reliability and consistency of the data valuation results.

A.3   C OMPARISON WITH T RAC IN (P RUTHI ET AL ., 2020)

The form of first-order In-Run Data Shapley from Section 4.1 coincides with the TracIN-Ideal in
Pruthi et al. (2020). This provides a new understanding of TracIN-Ideal as an approximation to
In-Run Data Shapley. Both works face the technical challenge of requiring per-sample gradient
computations during a single training run. Pruthi et al. (2020) proposes TracIN-CP, which mitigates
the computational burden by examining only a subset of intermediate checkpoints during training.
At each checkpoint, the individual gradients for the entire training set are computed, rather than for
a sampled batch, under the assumption that each training example is visited exactly once between
checkpoints. A recent work (Xia et al., 2024) leverages TracIN-CP, an approximation algorithm
for TracIN-Ideal, for instruction-following data selection. This approach, however, may deviate
significantly from the original TracIN-Ideal, with the final valuation results heavily dependent on the
selected checkpoints. Furthermore, Pruthi et al. (2020)’s implementation is limited to the parameters
of the last linear layer due to memory constraints, potentially biasing the measurement of data
contribution. For instance, Yeh et al. (2022) suggests that the last layer of a neural network might
exhibit a strong "cancellation effect," where the data influence of different examples have large,
contradictory magnitudes. Additionally, Schioppa (2024) demonstrates that selecting different layers
can distort data attribution scores. In contrast, this work introduces the "ghost dot-product" technique
to efficiently compute the first-order In-Run Data Shapley (i.e., TracIN-Ideal) directly and accurately,
without additional approximations.


                                                  16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


B    A DDITIONAL D ISCUSSION

In this section, we provide additional discussion about In-Run Data Shapley as well as its comparison
with Retraining-based Data Shapley. Figure 4 gives a more detailed overview of our algorithm, and
Figure 5 provides a visualized comparison between Retraining-based and In-Run Data Shapley.


Figure 4: The core idea and algorithm overview of In-Run Data Shapley. Rather than evaluating
data contribution across the entire training process (top), we decompose it into individual gradient
update steps (bottom). For each iteration t, we compute the Shapley value ϕz (U (t) ) with respect
to a "local utility function" U (t) that measures how the batch Bt contributes to reducing validation
loss. A data point’s finalP contribution score is the sum of its Shapley values across all iterations
where it appears: ϕz = t:z∈Bt ϕz (U (t) ). This decomposition approach maintains the Shapley value
properties through the linearity axiom while making computation tractable.


Figure 5: Comparison between Retraining-based and In-Run Data Shapley. Retraining-based Data
Shapley requires training a model from scratch on all possible subsets of the full training set, which
is computationally inefficient and raises concerns about interpretability and stability. In contrast,
In-Run Data Shapley acts as a "contribution accountant", efficiently tracking and attributing data
value scores to each training example across gradient update steps during a single training run.



                                                 17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


B.1    W HEN IS I N -RUN DATA S HAPLEY D ESIRABLE FOR DATA ATTRIBUTION ?

While Retraining-based Data Shapley has been widely adopted in the literature, it suffers from several
critical issues that limit its practicality and effectiveness. In this section, we discuss these problems
from four key aspects: computational efficiency, alignment with the purpose of data valuation,
stability of the valuation results, and the choice of training hyperparameters.
(1) Computational burden. Retraining-based Data Shapley calculation is often computationally
prohibitive, as it requires retraining the model on every possible subset of the original dataset, leading
to a computational complexity that grows exponentially with the size of the dataset. Despite the
development of various Monte Carlo-based approximation algorithms (Jia et al., 2019b; Illés &
Kerényi, 2019; Okhrati & Lipani, 2021; Burgess & Chapman, 2021; Mitchell et al., 2022; Lin et al.,
2022; Wang & Jia, 2023b; Li & Yu, 2023; Covert et al., 2024), these methods still necessitate
extensive computational resources due to repeated model retraining, which is clearly impractical for
modern-sized ML models. Another line of work attempts to use efficient proxy learning algorithms,
such as K-nearest neighbors (KNN) (Jia et al., 2019a; Wang & Jia, 2023c; Wang et al., 2023; 2024c;
Yang et al., 2024), to accelerate Data Shapley computation. However, it remains unclear how closely
these cheaper proxy models approximate the original learning algorithm, and it is also uncertain how
to interpret the derived Data Shapley scores in this context.
(2) Retraining-based Data Shapley is unable to assess data contribution to a specific model.
Crucially, Retraining-based Data Shapley is not designed to value data contribution towards a specific
model. It attempts to quantify the average contribution of each training data point to models trained
on different subsets of the data, rather than its contribution to the specific model trained on the full
dataset. While one might interpret the former as an approximation of the latter, these two quantities
can be quite different in practice, especially when the learning algorithm is randomized and sensitive
to factors like random initialization and the order of the data points during training. More importantly,
in most real-life scenarios, the primary interest lies in understanding the contribution of each data
point to the specific model being trained and deployed.
(3) Retraining-based Data Shapley produces unstable valuation results for stochastic training
algorithms. Furthermore, when the training algorithm involves randomness, such as in the case
of SGD with random mini-batch selection, the corresponding utility function becomes randomized.
Prior work (Wang & Jia, 2023a) suggests that this randomness can introduce substantial noise into the
estimated Shapley values, rendering them unreliable and unstable. This instability poses significant
challenges for interpreting and using the resulting data valuations, as the scores may vary considerably
across different runs of the algorithm, even on the same dataset. Consequently, this limits the practical
applicability of Retraining-based Data Shapley when working with stochastic training algorithms,
which are prevalent in modern machine learning. We note that similar vulnerabilities to learning
stochasticity have been observed for LOO-based data influence scores (e.g., influence function (Koh
& Liang, 2017)) in several works (Basu et al., 2021; Søgaard et al., 2021; Nguyen et al., 2023).
(4) Training hyperparameter choices in Retraining-based Data Shapley are unclear. In machine
learning, training hyperparameters (e.g., learning rate and batch size) typically need to be adjusted
based on the size of the training dataset. This creates a fundamental ambiguity when computing Data
Shapley values: when evaluating the utility U (S) for different data subsets S, should we use the
same hyperparameters as those optimized for the full dataset, or should we adjust them based on the
subset size? This choice can significantly impact the calculated values.
In-Run Data Shapley addresses all these issues, making it more desirable for specific scenarios. Firstly,
it is computationally efficient as it computes data values during the training run, avoiding the need for
multiple retraining iterations. This makes it feasible for modern large-scale ML models. Secondly, it
aligns better with the purpose of data valuation by assessing the contribution of each data point to the
specific model being trained, providing more relevant insights for real-world applications. Lastly,
In-Run Data Shapley offers deterministic valuation results even with stochastic training algorithms, as
it incorporates the specific sequence and randomness of the training process into the utility function.
Therefore, for scenarios where computational efficiency, model-specific contributions, and result
stability are critical, In-Run Data Shapley is a more suitable choice.


                                                   18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Remark 4 (In-run Data Shapley is a model-specific data attribution technique.). In the original Data
Shapley literature, U (S) typically defines utility as the final performance (e.g., accuracy, loss) of a
model trained on a data subset S. However, things become more complicated in the context of deep
learning. A specific deep learning training run is an iterative process. Defining utility U (S) for a
particular run makes it a sequence function rather than the pure set function required by the standard
Shapley value framework. Extending Shapley axioms to sequence functions is not straightforward.
Previous works often define U (S) as "expected model utility across all possible training runs" to
circumvent this conceptual issue. In this work, we initiate the study of model-specific data attribution,
which is crucial for applications like model diagnosis and behavior interpretation where we focus on
a specific training run rather than expected utility across all possible runs.
Data attribution should consider specific application scenario. From a broader perspective, the
"optimal data attribution" notion heavily depends on the intended application. In the literature, data
attribution techniques are being used for various purposes such as data quality assessment, data
valuation, and interpreting model predictions. For data quality assessment, we require "algorithm-
level data attribution" that measures a data point’s general influence on the learning algorithm,
independent of specific training random seeds. On the other hand, when interpreting model decisions,
we need model-specific data attribution focused on the particular checkpoint we train. Systematically
mapping which data attribution approaches best suit specific application scenarios remains an
important direction for future research.

B.2   W HEN IS R ETRAINING - BASED DATA S HAPLEY D ESIRABLE FOR DATA ATTRIBUTION ?

Retraining-based Data Shapley is still desirable in several scenarios. Firstly, it is more general and
applicable to all learning algorithms, whereas In-Run Data Shapley is only applicable to iterative
training algorithms. Secondly, retraining-based Shapley is useful when the goal is to understand the
contribution of data points to the general learning process rather than to a specific model. Thirdly,
because Retraining-based Data Shapley does not require modifying the internal code of the training
algorithm, its estimation algorithm, typically Monte Carlo-based, is straightforward and clean to
implement.

B.3   P OTENTIAL E XTENSIONS OF I N -RUN DATA S HAPLEY TO OTHER D OMAINS

While this work focuses on data attribution for SGD-trained machine learning models, we believe the
core idea of In-Run Data Shapley—decomposing contribution analysis into per-iteration assessments—
can potentially be extended to other contexts and applications. Here, we discuss some directions.
Data attribution for iterative learning algorithms that do not use gradient descent. Our frame-
work could potentially extend to iterative learning algorithms that don’t use gradient descent, such
as k-means clustering or decision tree learning. Though these algorithms update models differently,
they still proceed iteratively (e.g., k-means alternates between assignment and update steps; decision
trees are built through recursive partitioning). For such algorithms, we could analyze how each data
point influences these discrete update steps and aggregate these influences across iterations, similar
to our approach with gradient-based training.
Hyperparameter importance. The framework could potentially be adapted to evaluate hyperparam-
eter contributions during training. One possibility is to set a "baseline" hyperparameter value and
assess how choosing a different value impacts each training iteration compared to this baseline. For
instance, when evaluating learning rate choices, we could measure how using a specific learning rate
value affects model updates compared to using a baseline learning rate. For differentiable hyperpa-
rameters, we could leverage Taylor expansion to approximate this difference; for non-differentiable
ones, zero-order methods could potentially be used. By accumulating these contributions across
training iterations, we could understand hyperparameter impact without requiring multiple complete
training runs. At a high level, this view unifies our treatment of training data and hyperparameters
- both can be seen as choices that influence each training iteration, where we aim to quantify their
impact against baseline scenarios. While technical challenges remain in adapting our method, this
direction presents an interesting opportunity for future research.
Feature attribution (e.g., context-attribution for language models). Another possible extension we
envision is feature attribution for machine learning models. Feature attribution aims at understanding


                                                  19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


how each part of the input (like individual words in a sentence or pixels in an image) influences a
model’s final prediction. When a model makes a prediction, the input features are processed through
multiple layers, with each layer transforming the information before passing it to the next layer.
Feature attribution aims to track how this information flows and transforms through the network
to determine each input feature’s contribution to the final output. We envision a unified theoretical
framework connecting training data attribution and feature attribution, drawing parallels between how
information flows during training (through gradient updates) and during prediction (through layer
operations). This could lead to more efficient methods for explaining model behavior, particularly for
complex architectures like transformers.


                                                 20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


C    M ISSING P ROOFS
Theorem 5 (Restate of Theorem 3). In-Run Data Shapley considering the first-order approximation
has closed-form
                                                      T −1
                                                                 (t)
                                                      X
                                      ϕz (U ) ≈              ϕz U(1)
                                                      t=0

where

                      (t)
                  ϕz U(1) = −ηt ∇ℓ(wt , z (val) ) · ∇ℓ(wt , z), t = 0, . . . , T − 1

Proof. For notation simplicity, let xj := ∇ℓ(wt , zj ). Given the utility function
                           (t)
                                          X
                        U(1) (S) = −ηt        ∇ℓ(wt , z (val) ) · ∇ℓ(wt , zj ),
                                              zj ∈S

the marginal contribution of z for any S ⊆ Bt \ z is
                        (t)             (t)
                      U(2) (S ∪ z) − U(2) (S) = −ηt ∇ℓ(wt , z (val) ) · ∇ℓ(wt , z)
Plugging in the expression to the Shapley value’s definition immediately gives the result.


                                                       21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Theorem 6 (Restate of Theorem 4). In-Run Data Shapley considering the second-order approxima-
tion has closed-form
                                   T −1             1
                                              (t)            (t)
                                   X
                         ϕz (U ) ≈        ϕz U(1) + ϕz U(2)                               (6)
                                   t=0
                                                     2

where
                                                                                                                                             

    (t)  1
              (t)

                                                                      (z            ηt2                     (val)
                                                                                                                    )
                                                                                                                         X
ϕz U(1) + ϕz U(2) = −ηt ∇ℓ(wt , z (val) ) · ∇ℓ(wt , z) + ∇ℓ(wt , z)⊺ Ht                                                        ∇ℓ(wt , zj )
         2          |                 {z                      } 2
                                                                                                                      zj ∈Bt
                      1 influence of z on the loss of z (val)   |                                               {z                            }
                                                                                          2 interaction between z and other training points
                                                                                                                                  (7)
for any t = 0, . . . , T − 1.

Proof. We show that
                                                                                                    
                                                                   (val)

                                  (t)                         (z           )
                                                                                X
                           ϕz U(2) = ηt2 ∇ℓ(wt , z)Ht                                ∇ℓ(wt , zj ) .
                                                                            zj ∈Bt


For notation simplicity, let xj := ∇ℓ(wt , zj ), and x̃ := ∇ℓ(wt , z). Furthermore, let nt := |Bt | the
batch size in t-th iteration. For any S ⊆ Bt \ z, the marginal contribution of z is
                                                                                        
                                                      (val)                      (val)
                (t)             (t)                (z       )                 (z       )
                                                                X
              U(2) (S ∪ z) − U(2) (S) = ηt2 2x̃Ht               xj  + x̃⊺ Ht          x̃ .
                                                                            zj ∈S


Plug the above expression into the Shapley value’s formula, we have
                                                                                                              
                                              nt              −1

       (t)

                         (z (val)
                                  )       2  X       nt − 1              X                      (val)
                                                                                       x̃⊺ Ht(z )
                                                                                                       X
ϕz U(2) = ηt2 x̃⊺ Ht               x̃ +                                                                     xj 
                                         nt           k−1
                                             k=1                 S⊆Bt \{z}, |S|=k−1                    zj ∈S
                                                                                                               
                                                              nt            −1
                         (z (val)
                                  )           (z (val)
                                                       ) 2  X     n t − 1               X                 X
             = ηt2 x̃⊺ Ht          x̃ + x̃⊺ Ht                                                               xj 
                                                          nt       k−1
                                                             k=1                S⊆Bt \{z}, |S|=k−1 zj ∈S
                                                                                                            
                                                              nt            −1
                         (z (val)
                                  )           (z (val)
                                                       ) 2  X     n t − 1        n t − 2          X
             = ηt2 x̃⊺ Ht          x̃ + x̃⊺ Ht                                                            xj 
                                                          nt       k−1             k−2
                                                             k=2                               zj ∈Bt \{z}
                                                                                        
                                                              nt
                         (z (val)
                                  )           (z (val)
                                                       ) 2  X   k  −  1        X
             = ηt2 x̃⊺ Ht          x̃ + x̃⊺ Ht                                        xj 
                                                          nt     nt − 1
                                                             k=2            zj ∈Bt \{z}
                                                                     
                            (val)                (val)
                         (z       )           (z       )
                                                             X
             = ηt2 x̃⊺ Ht          x̃ + x̃⊺ Ht                     xj 
                                                             zj ∈Bt \{z}
                                                    
                            (z (val) ) 
                                             X
              = ηt2 x̃⊺ Ht                          xj 
                                            zj ∈Bt


                                                             22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


D     T ECHNICAL D ETAILS

Notation review. Consider a linear layer s = aW, where W ∈ Rd1 ×d2 is the weight matrix,
a = (a(1) , . . . , a(B) )⊺ is the mini-batch input, and s = (s(1) , . . . , s(B) )⊺ is the output (i.e., the
pre-activation tensor). For non-sequential data, a ∈ RB×d1 , s ∈ RB×d2 . For sequential data with
sequence length T , a ∈ RB×d1 ×T , s ∈ RB×d2 ×T . Let ℓ(i) := ℓ(w, zi ) denote the current model’s
                                                                             (i)
individual loss on zi . For notation convenience, we denote b(i) := ∂ℓ∂s .

D.1    G HOST D OT-P RODUCT

By applying the chain rule, we can express the gradient of an individual loss ℓ(i) := ℓ(w, zi ) with
respect to W as

                      ∂ℓ(i)  ∂ℓ(i) ∂s(i)  ∂ℓ(i)       ∂ℓ
                            = (i)        = (i) a(i) = (i) a(i) = a(i) ⊗ b(i)                                        (8)
                      ∂W     ∂s ∂W        ∂s         ∂s
             PB                                                                                  (i)
where ℓ := j=1 ℓ(j) is the aggregated loss. Note that the individual’s output gradient b(i) = ∂ℓ
                                                                                              ∂s(i)
                                                                                                     =
 ∂ℓ
∂s(i)
      is readily available during the backpropagation pass.
                                                                                       (1)       (2)
Suppose we are interested in computing the gradient dot-product ∂ℓ            ∂ℓ
                                                                      ∂W ⊙ ∂W between two data
points z1 , z2 in the same batch in the backpropagation. We first discuss the case for non-sequential
data and then extend it to sequential data.
Non-sequential data. For non-sequential data, we have each a(i) ∈ Rd1 ×1 and b(i) ∈ R1×d2 . By
(8), we have
      ∂ℓ(1)   ∂ℓ(2)                                     ⊺                  ⊺
            ⊙       = a(1) ⊗ b(1) ⊙ a(2) ⊗ b(2) = b(1)      b(2)      a(1) a(2)
      ∂W      ∂W
                                                         (1)               (2)
Hence, we can compute the dot-product between ∂ℓ          ∂ℓ
                                                 ∂W and ∂W without     actually instantiating the
                  (1)    (2)
                                                                       ⊺                   ⊺
                                                                  (1)
                ∂ℓ    ∂ℓ
gradient vector ∂W or ∂W . We can take the dot products between b          b(2) and a(1) a(2) ,
and then multiply the results together. Moreover, all of the materials a(1) , a(2) , b(1) , b(2) that are
required for computation are all already available in one backpropagation. Hence, with a single
backpropagation, we can efficiently compute the gradient dot-product between every pair of data
points within the batch.
Sequential data. For sequential data, we have each a(i) ∈ Rd1 ×T and b(i) ∈ RT ×d2 . By (8), we
have

    ∂ℓ(1)   ∂ℓ(2)                              dX
                                                1 ,d2
          ⊙       = a(1) ⊗ b(1) ⊙ a(2) ⊗ b(2) =        a(1) ⊗ b(1)      a(2) ⊗ b(2)
    ∂W      ∂W                                                      j,k               j,k
                                                               j,k=1
                                                               dX
                                                                1 ,d2
                                                                            (1) (1)        (2) (2)
                                                          =                aj bk          aj bk
                                                               j,k=1
                                                               dX
                                                                1 ,d2      T
                                                                                             !     T
                                                                                                                !
                                                                              (1) (1)                 (2) (2)
                                                                           X                       X
                                                          =                  ajt btk                 ajt btk
                                                               j,k=1        t=1                    t=1
                                                                                         
                                                                 T,T         d1             d2
                                                                                                         !
                                                                                 (1)  (2)       (1)  (2)
                                                                 X          X               X
                                                          =                    ajt1 ajt2     akt1 akt2
                                                               t1 ,t2 =1         j=1                   k=1
                                                                 T,T
                                                                        (1) (2)      (1) (2)
                                                                 X
                                                          =            a·,t1 a·,t2 b·,t1 b·,t2
                                                               t1 ,t2 =1
                                                                            ⊺         ⊺
                                                          =      b(1) b(2)     ⊙ a(1) a(2)


                                                    23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Hence, comparing with directly computing     per-sample
                                                         ⊺gradients, if 2T 2 < d1 d2 , it is more memory-
                                             (1)    (2)           (1) ⊺ (2)

efficient to first multiply the matrices of b      b       and a         a , then take the inner product
between the two T × T matrices. If 2T 2 ≥ d1 d2 , then we can first take the outer products a(1) ⊗ b(1)
and a(2) ⊗ b(2) , then take their inner product. In either case, we only need a single backpropagation
to compute the gradient dot product between every pair of data points within the batch, similar to the
case of non-sequential data.
Remark 5 (Applications of "Ghost" Technique Beyond Data Attribution). The techniques developed
in this work for efficiently computing gradient dot products may be of independent interest, as this
operation arises in various machine learning algorithms and applications beyond data attribution.
For instance, the "ghost dot-product" technique can be used in calculating the cosine similarity
between individual gradients (together with the "ghost clipping" technique), which is frequently
being employed to analyze training dynamics (Fort & Ganguli, 2019) and detect adversarial attacks
(Dhaliwal & Shintre, 2018). Additionally, gradient similarity is used in active learning to select the
most informative data points for labeling (Ash et al., 2019) and in multitask learning to balance the
contributions of different tasks (Yu et al., 2020).


                                                  24
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


D.2    G HOST G RADIENT-H ESSIAN -G RADIENT P RODUCT

We denote L as the number of layers in a neural network, and we denote Wi , i = 1, . . . , L as the
                                                              (z (val) )                                                (val)
weight parameters of each layer. We denote HWi                             as the Hessian matrix of ℓ(z                         )
                                                                                                                                    on layer Wi .
                                                                                              (1)         (z (val) )    (2)
Suppose we are interested in computing the gradient dot product ∇ℓ                                  H                  ∇ℓ     .


                                                L,L                              (val)
                                                                                         !
                          (val)                 X   ∂ℓ(1)            ∂ (2) ℓ(z )            ∂ℓ(2)
              ∇ℓ(1) H(z           )
                                      ∇ℓ(2) =
                                                i,j=1
                                                        ∂Wi           ∂Wi ∂Wj               ∂Wj
                                                L,L                                        (val)
                                                                                                 !
                                                X         (1)        (1)         ∂ (2) ℓ(z )                (2)         (2)
                                           =            (ai     ⊗ bi )                                (aj ⊗ bj )
                                                i,j=1
                                                                                  ∂Wi ∂Wj



We first look at the Hessian-vector product.


                      (val)
                              !                                      "          (val)
                                                                                                             #
               ∂ (2) ℓ(z )              (2)  (2)               ∂         ∂ℓ(z ) (2)   (2)
                                      (aj ⊗ bj ) =                             (aj ⊗ bj )
                ∂Wi ∂Wj                                       ∂Wi         ∂Wj
                                                             ∂ h (z(val) )     (z (val) )    (2)  (2)
                                                                                                      i
                                                        =         (aj      ⊗ bj           )(aj ⊗ bj )
                                                          ∂Wi
                                                             ∂ h (z(val) ) (2) (z(val) ) (2) i
                                                        =         (aj      aj )(bj           bj )
                                                          ∂Wi
                                                             ∂
                                                        =       [cj dj ]
                                                          ∂Wi
                                                              ∂dj        ∂cj
                                                        = cj       + dj
                                                             ∂Wi         ∂Wi


                           (z (val) ) (2)          (z (val) ) (2)
where we denote cj := aj             aj and dj := bj         bj .
                                                                                              (val)                     PL
We run the second backpropagation on the gradient dot product ∇ℓ(z                 j=1 cj dj . Note
                                                                                                      )
                                                                                                          ∇ℓ(2) =
           (2)  (2)                         ∂cj
that here aj , bj are constant vectors. For ∂Wi , we have the similar decomposition


                                  ∂cj    ∂   (z(val) ) (2)
                                      =       a       aj
                                  ∂Wi   ∂Wi j
                                            ∂      (val)
                                                   (z    ) (2)

                                                                    (z (val) )
                                      = (z(val) ) aj       aj    ⊗ ai
                                        ∂si



      ∂d                                                                 (z (val) )
For ∂Wji , the derivative is more complicated as the bj                               also depends on the output from deeper
layers. When j ≥ i, we still have


                                  ∂dj     ∂        (val)
                                                   (z    ) (2)

                                                                    (z (val) )
                                      = (z(val) ) bj      bj     ⊗ ai
                                  ∂Wi  ∂s        i



                                                                25
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


When j < i, we have
                                     (z (val) ) (2)
                     ∂dj   ∂bj         bj
                         =
                     ∂Wi        ∂Wi
                            ∂   (z(val) ) (2)
                         =         b           bj
                           ∂Wi j
                                                                                                              
                                           (val)        (z (val) )       (z (val) )            (z (val) )
                            ∂  ∂ℓ(z ) ∂si                          ∂ai                   ∂aj              (2) 
                         =                                                          . . . (z(val) ) bj
                           ∂Wi ∂s(z(val) ) ∂a(z(val) ) ∂s(z(val) )                        ∂sj
                                        i               i                i−1
                                                                                                     
                                           (val)             (z (val) )             (z (val) )
                            ∂  ∂ℓ(z )                    ∂ai                   ∂aj              (2) 
                         =                         Wi (z(val) ) . . . (z(val) ) bj
                           ∂Wi ∂s(z(val) )                ∂si−1                 ∂sj
                                        i
                                                                                                           
                                               (z (val) )            (z (val) )            (z (val) )
                               ∂           ∂ℓ                   ∂a   i
                                                                                       ∂a  j            (2)           (z (val) )
                         = (z(val) )  (z(val) ) Wi (z                 (val) )
                                                                                . . . (z(val) ) bj  ⊗ ai
                           ∂si             ∂si                  ∂si−1                  ∂sj
                                                                                            
                                 (val)               (z (val) )             (z (val) )
                            ∂ℓ(z )  ∂ai                               ∂aj               (2) 
                          + (z(val) ) ⊗              (z (val) )
                                                                 . . . (z(val) ) bj
                            ∂si                  ∂si−1                 ∂sj
                                                                                                            (z (val) )
                                                                                                                              !
                               ∂          (z (val) ) (2)            (z (val) )        (z (val) )          ∂ai             (2)
                         = (z(val) ) (bj            bj ) ⊗ ai                   + bi             ⊗                     b
                                                                                                            (z (val) ) j
                           ∂si                                                                            ∂sj

Overall,
            ∂dj    ∂      (z (val) ) (2)
                =       (bj         bj )
            ∂Wi   ∂W
                   i            (val)
                                                        (z (val) )

                        ∂           (z       ) (2)
                  
                   ∂s(z(val) ) j
                                b            bj     ⊗ ai                                                j≥i
                      i
                =
                                                                                       (z (val) )

                                    (z (val) ) (2)      (z (val) )    (z (val) )

                        ∂                                                            ∂ai           (2)
                   (z(val) ) bj
                  
                                             bj     ⊗ ai          + bi          ⊗     (z (val) )
                                                                                                  bj     j<i
                              ∂si                                                                        ∂sj


Hence, we have
              (val)
∇ℓ(1) H(z             )
                          ∇ℓ(2)
    L,L
    X          (1)        (1)    ∂dj      ∂cj
=          (ai        ⊗ b i ) cj     + dj
    i,j=1
                                 ∂Wi      ∂Wi
    L,L                                                                              L,L                                              (z (val) )
                                                                            !                                                                         !!
    X    (1)  (1)                         ∂                   (z (val) )
                                                                                     X         (1)  (1)         (z (val) )         ∂ai          (2)
=      (ai ⊗ bi )                      (z (val) )
                                                  (cj dj ) ⊗ ai                  +           (ai ⊗ bi )        bi          ⊗                   b
                                                                                                                                     (z (val) ) j
  i,j=1                              ∂si                                             i>j                                           ∂sj
    |                                    {z                                  }       |                              {z                                 }
                                         1                                                                          2

For the first part, we have
                                                                                                       
                                      L                                            L
                                      X   (1)  (1)                      ∂         X             (z (val)
                                                                                                         )
                                  1 =   (ai ⊗ bi )                   (z   (val)
                                                                                 
                                                                                 )
                                                                                     cj dj  ⊗ ai
                                       i=1                        ∂si                    j=1
                                                                                                       
                                      L                                                           L
                                      X    (1) (z (val) )  (1) 
                                                                                         ∂       X
                                    =     ai ai            bi                        (z   (val))
                                                                                                   cj dj 
                                       i=1                                       ∂si               j=1
                            P
               ∂              L
where       (z (val) )        j=1 cj dj        , i = 1, . . . , L is readily available from the second backpropagation.
        ∂si


                                                                        26
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


For the second part, we have
                                    L,L                                                     (z (val) )
                                                                                                                 !!
                                    X       (1)  (1)             (z (val) )             ∂ai          (2)
                             2 =          (ai ⊗ bi )            bi          ⊗                       b
                                                                                          (z (val) ) j
                                    i>j                                                 ∂sj
                                    L,L                    (z (val) )
                                                                         !!
                                    X       (1)      ∂ai           (2)

                                                                                          (1) (z (val) )

                                =          ai                    b
                                                       (z (val) ) j
                                                                                        bi bi
                                    i>j              ∂sj

                                                                                        (z (val) )
                                                                          (1) ∂ai                     (2)
The remaining question is how to compute f (i, j) := ai                               (z (val) )
                                                                                                     bj . Observe that
                                                                                    ∂sj

                         (z (val) )            (z (val) )   (z (val) )        (z (val) ) (z (val) )
                   (1) ∂ai           (2) (1) ∂ai          ∂si−1             ∂sj+1 ∂aj+1             (2)
                  ai                b = ai
                         (z (val) ) j          (z (val) )   (z (val) )
                                                                       . . . (z(val) ) (z(val) ) bj
                       ∂sj                   ∂si−1        ∂ai−1             ∂aj+1 ∂sj
                                                   (z (val) )                  (z (val) )
                                             (1) ∂ai                         ∂aj+1        (2)
                                          = ai     (z (val) )
                                                              Wi−1 . . . Wj+1 (z(val) ) bj
                                                 ∂si−1                       ∂sj


               (z (val) )
            ∂aj+1                                                                                                  (z (val) )            (z (val) )
Moreover,     (z (val) )
                            is easy to compute as the only operation between aj+1                                               and sj                  is an
            ∂sj
                                                                                                                                           (z (val) )
                                                                                                                                        ∂aj+1
element-wise activation function. For example, if the activation function is ReLU, then                                                    (z (val) )
                                                                                                                                                         will
                                                                                                                                        ∂sj
                                                                                                                                                  (z (val) )
simply be a matrix that contains elements in {0, 1}, depending on the sign of the position in sj                                                               .
To efficiently compute f (i, j) for all i > j, for each j = 1, . . . , L, we can maintain the quantity
                                                  (z (val) )                                  (z (val) )
                                             ∂ai                                         ∂aj+1               (2)
                               g(i, j) :=      (z (val) )
                                                               Wi−1 . . . Wj+1             (z (val) )
                                                                                                            bj
                                             ∂si−1                                       ∂sj
                                                                                                                                  (z (val) )
                              (1)                                                                                               ∂ai+1
and we have f (i, j) = ai g(i, j). To compute f (i + 1, j), note that g(i + 1, j) =                                               (z (val) )
                                                                                                                                               Wi g(i, j).
                                                                                                                                ∂si
Moreover, we note that in our scenario, we are interested in the gradient dot-product
                                                     B
                                                                !
                                     (1) (z (val) )
                                                    X
                                                            (m)
                                  ∇ℓ H                  ∇ℓ
                                                                        m=1
                                                   (val)
                                                                P
                                                                   B
where the Hessian-vector product H(z                       )
                                                                   m=1 ∇ℓ
                                                                         (m)
                                                                                           is fixed for any training point corre-
            (1)
sponds to ℓ . Therefore, the second backpropagation only needs to be taken once as the gradient
vector on the right-hand side is always fixed.

D.3    M ERGING BATCH S ELECTION AND G RADIENT U PDATE IN O NE BACKPROPAGATION

By utilizing the ghost Dot-Product technique developed in this paper, we can calculate or approximate
all importance scores and correction terms in a single backpropagation pass, without materializing any
model-sized vectors. To compute the gradient dot-product between each training point zi ∈ Bt and
the validation data z (val) , we propose including z (val) in the backpropagation along with the training
                                                                                      (val)
                                                                           (i)
                                                                                 + ℓ(z ) . After computing
                                                                P
batch. Specifically, we can backpropagate with respect to          zi ∈Bt ℓ
the In-Run DataPShapley scores for the current iteration, it may seem necessary to backpropagate
with respect to zi ∈Bt ℓ(i) to compute the gradient for the parameter update. However, this is not
                                                                              (i)
required. We can simply reuse the output gradient ∂ℓ     ∂s(i)
                                                               from the original backpropagation and
aggregate the gradients for all selected data points. This technique is adapted from the "book-keeping
trick" proposed in Bu et al. (2023).


                                                                   27
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


E     E VALUATION

E.1     DATA P REPROCESSING & T RAINING S ETTINGS & I MPLEMENTATION D ETAILS

We conduct the pretraining experiment using the GPT2 (124M) model (Radford et al., 2019) and
Pythia-410M (Biderman et al., 2023) on the Pile dataset. Our codebase is adapted from https:
//github.com/karpathy/nanoGPT/tree/master. We first tokenize and split the entire
dataset into chunks, and store them in the disk in numpy array format, which significantly speeds up
data loading. The maximum sequence length is set to 1024. The learning rate is set at a maximum of
0.0006, with a minimum learning rate of 0.00006. We use AdamW as the optimizer with a weight
decay of 0.1, and beta values set to 0.9 and 0.95. Gradients are clipped at a maximum value of 1.0 to
maintain stability during training. The batch size is set to 16, with a learning rate warmup of 2000
iterations. Due to the shortage of computation resources, we stop the training at 500,000 iterations.
Methods for comparison. In Section 5, we compare In-Run Data Shapley with the influence function
(Koh & Liang, 2017), which approximates the change in the model’s loss on the test example when
the training example is removed from the training set (i.e., the leave-one-out score). BM25 (Robertson
et al., 2009) featurizes examples by their word frequency statistics to rank the training instances.
We measure the similarity between the query examples and the training corpus, using the similarity
scores as the value scores for the training corpus. we set the hyperparameters to k1 = 1.5, b = 0.75,
which are commonly used values that balance the term frequency scaling and document length
normalization.
Remark 6. We do not compare with TRAK (Park et al., 2023) as it generally requires aggregating the
estimator across multiple trained models for a reasonable performance, and the original codebase
is not applicable to Huggingface models. In their original paper, the largest scale experiment is
fine-tuning BERT-base.


E.2     A DDITIONAL F IDELITY E VALUATION

E.2.1    A PPROXIMATION E RROR FOR I N -RUN DATA S HAPLEY WITH LARGER LEARNING RATES

To further investigate the impact of learning rate on the approximation quality of In-Run Data
Shapley, we conducted additional experiments to Section 5.2 with larger learning rates of 6 × 10−4
and 5 × 10−3 , where the latter being significantly higher than typical learning rates used in foundation
model pretraining. Figure 6 shows the comparison between Monte Carlo-estimated In-Run Data
Shapley and our approximations with learning rate η = 6 × 10−4 . Both first- and second-order
approximations achieve remarkably high accuracy with RMSE = 0.0012 and Spearman correlation
= 0.99. Even with an extremely large learning rate of η = 5 × 10−3 (Figure 7), our approximations
maintain reasonable accuracy with RMSE ≈ 0.0017 and Spearman correlation = 0.79. The strong
rank correlation, particularly at learning rates typical for model pretraining (η ≤ 10−3 ), suggests that
our approximations effectively preserve the relative importance of training data points. This property
is crucial for practical applications such as identifying low-quality data or selecting valuable training
examples, where relative rankings are more important than absolute values.


Figure 6: Comparison between the Monte Carlo-estimated In-Run Data Shapley and First/Second-
order In-Run Data Shapley (learning rate = 6 × 10−4 ).


                                                   28
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 7: Comparison between the Monte Carlo-estimated In-Run Data Shapley and First/Second-
order In-Run Data Shapley (learning rate = 5 × 10−3 ).

E.2.2    A PPROXIMATION E RROR FOR U TILITY F UNCTION

In this experiment, we empirically investigate the errors of the first- and second-order approximations
to U (t) on GPT2, as proposed in Section 4.1. The correlations are shown in Figure 8. As we can see,
even the first-order approximation achieves a high approximation accuracy, and the inclusion of the
second-order interaction term does not provide a notable improvement in accuracy.


Figure 8: (a) We show the correlation between the ground-truth model validation loss change in
one gradient update iteration U (t) (S; z (val) ) := ℓ(w
                                                       et+1 (S), z (val) ) − ℓ(wt , z (val) ) and the first-order
Taylor approximation. (b) We show the correlation between U (t) (S; z (val) ) and the second-order
approximation.
Remark 7 (Difficulty in Extending to Adam). The techniques developed in this section are specifically
tailored for SGD. It is not directly extendable to other popular optimizers like Adam due to their
normalization terms. Nonetheless, using SGD as a proxy for Adam allows for efficient data attribution,
which is the approach we adopted in practice and has proved to be effective in our experiment. This
provides a practical and effective solution for the current scope of our work. Extending these
techniques to support Adam and similar optimizers remains an exciting direction for future research.

E.3     D ETAILS ABOUT S ECTION 5.3.1

In this experiment, we first conduct one training run for 20,000 iterations. Among all the corpus
that has been used in the training, we compute their In-Run Data Shapley and filter out all corpus
among this subset that has negative contributions to model training. After filtering out the 16%
negative valued corpus, we train another model on the remaining dataset for 10,000 iterations with all
hyperparameters staying the same.
Despite the Pile dataset undergoing multiple layers of data curation (Gao et al., 2020), we still
find a significant amount of poor-quality corpus through In-Run Data Shapley. For example, we
discovered a large amount of corpora in the PubMed Central domain that are simply empty spaces.
Figure 9 provides two examples of the corpus that received the lowest In-Run Data Shapley scores.
Additionally, we found several corpora with negative values that appear normal, which is likely due to


                                                       29
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


a distribution shift with the validation corpus. Crafting a representative validation set is an important
direction for future work.


 Corpus with meaningless numbers
 ,2,3,3,1,3,0,3,0,2,0,0,     0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,2,0...
 3,3,3,3,3,3,3,3,1,3,3,...     0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,2,...
 3,3,3,3,3,3,3,3,3,0,3,...     1,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,2,...
 3,3,3,3,3,3,3,2,3,3,1,...     0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,3,...
 3,3,3,3,3,1,3,3,3,3,3,... 0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,1,...


Figure 9: Examples of low-quality corpus in Pile found by In-Run Data Shapley. Left: a corpus with
meaningless numbers. Right: a corpus with meaningless symbols (likely due to errors from web
crawling.)


E.3.1    DATA SELECTION PERFORMANCE ON P YTHIA 410M
Figure 10 shows a performance comparison between the original training run and the model trained
on the cleaned subsets on Pythia-410M. Similar to the results on GPT2, we can see that removing
lower-quality data leads to a significantly faster drop in test loss compared to the original training run,
highlighting the effectiveness of In-Run Data Shapley across different architectures.


Figure 10: Test loss comparison between the original training run and model trained on the cleaned
subset according to different data attribution techniques for Pythia-410M.


E.4     A DDITIONAL R ESULTS FOR S ECTION 5.3.2

In addition to Figure 3, we also plot the average value scores of corpora from each domain, averaged
across all corpora within the same domain that has been used in gradient updates, over the first 10,000
gradient update iterations. As training progresses, the magnitude of data value scores converges
towards zero, which aligns with the diminishing returns property of neural network training. This
indicates that the contribution of data points depends on the order in which they are used during
training, an aspect that Retraining-based Data Shapley methods cannot capture. Data points introduced
in later stages of training contribute less to model performance improvement.


                                                           30
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 11: The change of average contribution for data points from each domain to a corpus of math
text (same setting as Figure 3).


E.5   D ETAILS ABOUT S ECTION 5.3.3

In Section 5.3.3, we use GPT-4 to generate varying levels of paraphrased versions of an original
corpus from the training set, categorized as "Partial exactly the same," "Paraphrase," "Significant
paraphrase," and "Similar topic." For "Partial exactly the same," the corpus is used as the answer in a
creative writing instruction-answer pair. The specific prompt for prompting GPT-4 with examples
of the full dialogue are shown in Figure 13, 14, 15. We generate 3 sets of corpus groups, and
the experiment results are taken as the average. Figure 12 shows the distribution of calculated
In-Run Data Shapley. As we can see, most corpora’s values are around 0, but certain corpora have
significantly higher values than the other, which means their contributions are higher for the target
validation corpus.


               Figure 12: The distribution of calculated In-Run Data Shapley values.


                                                  31
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                    Dialogue with GPT4 for generating corpus of varying levels of similarity (Original corpus
                    from Wikipedia)
                     ▶[Generate "Partial exactly the same"] <Human> Instruction: [INSERT]
                    Answer: In 2012, Radhi recruited new ’musicians’ for OAG, who were selected from among the students of
                    Akademi Seni Budaya dan Warisan Kebangsaan (). The new line-up consists ofe Qi Razali (drums/backing
                    vocals - original drummer back to the drum position), Muhamad Nizam (guitar - since 2005), Nazrin Zabidi
                    (bass guitar/backing vocals), and Izmer Khasbullah (keyboard/backing vocals). Radhi defines OAG’s new
                    music as aslinatif, a combination of muzik asli or traditional music and alternative. Shortly after their reunion,
                    they released the soundtrack and theme song to the TV series, Friday I’m in Love. Few other singles like Si
                    Pengasih Muda, Di Bawah Tanah Ayer and Ambisi” are set to be released soon and also a full studio album
                    coming afterwards.
                    Please help filling in [INSERT] as the instruction for a creative writing task.

                    <GPT4> Write a short story about Radhi and his band OAG as they recruit new members and blend
                    traditional music with alternative sounds. Describe their creative challenges and successes leading up to their
                    new releases.

                     ▶[Generate "Paraphrase"] <Human> Could you paraphrase the paragraph start from "In 2012, Radhi
                    recruited ..."?

                    <GPT4> In 2012, Radhi assembled new ’musicians’ for OAG, choosing from students at the Akademi Seni
                    Budaya dan Warisan Kebangsaan. The updated lineup includes Qi Razali on drums and backing vocals,
                    returning to his original role, along with Muhamad Nizam on guitar (since 2005), Nazrin Zabidi playing bass
                    and providing backing vocals, and Izmer Khasbullah on keyboards and backing vocals. Radhi describes
                    OAG’s revamped sound as ’aslinatif,’ a fusion of traditional (muzik asli) and alternative music. Following
                    their reformation, they quickly launched the soundtrack and theme for the TV series "Friday I’m in Love."
                    Upcoming releases include singles like "Si Pengasih Muda," "Di Bawah Tanah Ayer," and "Ambisi," along
                    with a new studio album.

                     ▶[Generate "Significant paraphrase"] <Human> Could you make it less look like the original paragraph?
                    Feel free to modify the sentences.

                    <GPT4> In 2012, Radhi selected a new set of musicians from the students of Akademi Seni Budaya dan
                    Warisan Kebangsaan to join OAG. The band’s updated composition includes Qi Razali, who returned to his
                    original role on drums and backing vocals, alongside Muhamad Nizam who has been on guitar since 2005,
                    Nazrin Zabidi on bass with backing vocals, and Izmer Khasbullah playing the keyboard and adding backing
                    vocals. Radhi has termed the band’s evolved musical expression as ’aslinatif,’ a blend of traditional and
                    alternative sounds. Following their comeback, their first major project was producing the soundtrack and
                    theme for the TV series "Friday I’m in Love." The band is also planning to launch several singles such as "Si
                    Pengasih Muda," "Di Bawah Tanah Ayer," and "Ambisi," and is working towards a new full-length album.

                     ▶[Generate "Similar topic"] <Human> (COPY PREVIOUS INSTRUCTION-ANSWER PAIR) ... The
                    above is an example of instruction-answer pair of creative writing. Could you write an instruction-answer
                    pair regarding a less similar but not completely irrelevant topic?

                    <GPT4> ### Instruction: Write a short story about a classical violinist who decides to explore jazz music,
                    detailing her first encounter with a jazz band. ### Answer: Elena, a classically trained violinist known for
                    her precise and emotive performances, felt something was missing in her musical life. Curiosity led her
                    to a dimly lit jazz club downtown, where the improvised rhythms and melodies captivated her. Hesitantly,
                    she approached the band after their set, violin in hand. They invited her to join them for a jam session
                    the following week. As she stepped onto the stage, her traditional techniques blended unexpectedly with
                    the saxophonist’s smooth runs and the drummer’s rhythmic beats. The fusion of classical precision and
                    jazz spontaneity created a thrilling new sound. Elena found herself reinvigorated, her violin singing with a
                    freedom she had never before experienced.



Figure 13: Our dialogue with GPT4 for generating corpus of varying levels of similarity for the
original corpus from Wikipedia.


                                                                          32
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                    Example Dialogue with GPT4 for generating corpus of varying levels of similarity (Original
                    corpus from CNN)
                     ▶[Generate "Partial exactly the same"] <Human> Instruction: [INSERT]
                    Answer: The morning after Obama’s win, The New York Times declared "Racial Barrier Falls in Decisive
                    Victory." The Los Angeles Times asserted that "for the first time in human history, a largely white nation has
                    elected a black man to be its paramount leader." Some black commentators openly wept on election night,
                    thrilled with witnessing the election of our first black president. Even Sen. John McCain, conceding defeat,
                    pointed to the greatness of the American promise fulfilled in the election of his opponent. Obama’s victory
                    offered the possibility that the scars of America’s racial legacy were healed or, at least, that they were less
                    raw.
                    Please help filling in [INSERT] as the instruction for a creative writing task.

                    <GPT4> Write a reflective essay on the significance of Barack Obama’s 2008 presidential election victory,
                    focusing on its impact on race relations in the United States and the emotional responses it elicited from
                    different communities.

                     ▶[Generate "Paraphrase"] <Human> Could you paraphrase the paragraph?

                    <GPT4> The morning after Obama’s victory, The New York Times proclaimed "Racial Barrier Falls
                    in Decisive Victory," while The Los Angeles Times noted that "for the first time in human history, a
                    predominantly white nation has elected a black man as its paramount leader." Some black commentators
                    wept openly on election night, overjoyed at witnessing the election of the first black president. Even Sen.
                    John McCain, in his concession speech, highlighted the fulfillment of the American promise through his
                    opponent’s win. Obama’s triumph suggested the possibility that the deep wounds of America’s racial history
                    were healing or, at the very least, becoming less acute.

                     ▶[Generate "Significant paraphrase"] <Human> Could you make it less look like the original paragraph?
                    Feel free to modify the sentences.

                    <GPT4> The morning after Obama’s victory, headlines captured the historic moment: The New York Times
                    announced "Racial Barrier Falls in Decisive Victory," and The Los Angeles Times highlighted that "for the
                    first time, a predominantly white nation has chosen a black man as its leader." On election night, many black
                    commentators shed tears of joy, moved by the milestone of electing the first black president. Even Sen. John
                    McCain, in his concession speech, acknowledged the realization of the American promise in his opponent’s
                    success. Obama’s win signaled a potential healing of America’s racial wounds or at least a step toward
                    easing their pain.

                     ▶[Generate "Similar topic"] <Human> (COPY PREVIOUS INSTRUCTION-ANSWER PAIR) ... The
                    above is an example of instruction-answer pair of creative writing. Could you write an instruction-answer
                    pair regarding a less similar but not completely irrelevant topic?

                    <GPT4> ### Instruction: Write a reflective essay on the significance of the Supreme Court’s 2015 decision
                    to legalize same-sex marriage nationwide, focusing on its impact on LGBTQ+ rights in the United States and
                    the emotional responses it elicited from different communities.
                    ### Answer: The morning after the Supreme Court’s landmark decision, The New York Times declared
                    "Equal Dignity in the Eyes of the Law." The Washington Post highlighted, "Love Wins: Supreme Court
                    Affirms Same-Sex Marriage Nationwide." Many in the LGBTQ+ community celebrated with tears of joy,
                    feeling validated and recognized. Even some of the justices who dissented acknowledged the profound impact
                    of the decision on American society. The ruling represented a major milestone in the fight for LGBTQ+
                    rights, symbolizing a shift toward greater acceptance and equality.



Figure 14: Our dialogue with GPT4 for generating corpus of varying levels of similarity for the
original corpus from a CNN news.


                                                                        33
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                    Example Dialogue with GPT4 for generating corpus of varying levels of similarity (Original
                    corpus from princeton.edu)
                     ▶[Generate "Partial exactly the same"] <Human> Instruction: [INSERT]
                    Answer: The process was purchased by the German chemical company BASF (a coal tar dye supplier),
                    which assigned Carl Bosch the difficult task of scaling up Haber’s tabletop machine to industrial-level
                    production.Haber and Bosch were later awarded Nobel prizes, in 1918 and 1931 respectively, for their work
                    in overcoming the chemical and engineering problems posed by the use of large-scale, continuous-flow,
                    high-pressure technology.
                    Please help filling in [INSERT] as the instruction for a creative writing task.

                    <GPT4> Write a short story or essay about Carl Bosch’s efforts to scale up Haber’s tabletop machine to
                    industrial production. Highlight the scientific and engineering challenges he faced, the solutions he found,
                    and the impact of his work on society. Include historical context and personal anecdotes.

                     ▶[Generate "Paraphrase"] <Human> Could you paraphrase the paragraph?

                    <GPT4> The German chemical company BASF, known for supplying coal tar dyes, acquired the process
                    and tasked Carl Bosch with the challenging job of scaling Haber’s small-scale machine to an industrial
                    level. Haber and Bosch were eventually honored with Nobel prizes in 1918 and 1931, respectively, for
                    their breakthroughs in addressing the chemical and engineering difficulties associated with large-scale,
                    continuous-flow, high-pressure technology.

                     ▶[Generate "Significant paraphrase"] <Human> Could you make it less look like the original paragraph?
                    Feel free to modify the sentences.

                    <GPT4> BASF, a German firm specializing in coal tar dyes, took on the task and brought in Carl Bosch to
                    scale up Haber’s experimental setup to an industrial scale. Bosch faced numerous challenges but ultimately
                    succeeded. Their groundbreaking work in developing large-scale, high-pressure technology earned them
                    Nobel Prizes, with Haber being recognized in 1918 and Bosch in 1931.

                     ▶[Generate "Similar topic"] <Human> (COPY PREVIOUS INSTRUCTION-ANSWER PAIR) ... The
                    above is an example of instruction-answer pair of creative writing. Could you write an instruction-answer
                    pair regarding a less similar but not completely irrelevant topic?

                    <GPT4> ### Instruction: Write a short story or essay about the development of the polio vaccine by Jonas
                    Salk. Focus on the scientific challenges he faced, the innovative methods he used, and the impact of the
                    vaccine on public health. Include historical context and personal anecdotes.
                    ### Answer: In the early 1950s, Jonas Salk embarked on a mission to develop a vaccine for polio, a disease
                    that was causing widespread fear and paralysis. Salk faced significant scientific challenges, including finding
                    a way to grow the poliovirus in large quantities and then inactivating it without destroying its ability to induce
                    immunity.
                    Salk’s innovative method involved using formaldehyde to kill the virus while preserving its structure. After
                    rigorous testing, the vaccine was declared safe and effective in 1955. This breakthrough led to mass
                    vaccination campaigns, dramatically reducing polio incidence worldwide.
                    The impact of Salk’s vaccine was profound, turning a once-dreaded disease into a preventable condition.
                    Salk’s work not only saved countless lives but also demonstrated the power of scientific innovation in
                    overcoming public health challenges. His dedication and perseverance remain an inspiration in the field of
                    medical research.


Figure 15: Our dialogue with GPT4 for generating corpus of varying levels of similarity for the
original corpus from princeton.edu.


                                                                          34
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


E.5.1          A DDITIONAL E XPERIMENT: R ELEVANT D OMAIN D ETECTION
In this additional experiment, we evaluate the effectiveness of different data attribution techniques in
identifying relevant domain-specific corpora within the Pile dataset. Specifically, we take a random
batch of the validation corpus from sub-domains of the Pile dataset and evaluate the normalized
recall@1000 scores. This metric measures the proportion of same-domain corpora as the validation
corpora among the 1000 highest-valued corpora, normalized by the global proportion of this domain
within the Pile dataset. As shown in Table 3, BM25 performs well on this task in general. Both
the first-order and second-order In-Run Data Shapley methods outperform the influence function in
detecting relevant domain corpora. Analysis: The influence function only uses information from the
final trained models, which can result in highly noisy value scores since the removal of one training
data point might have a negligible effect on the final model performance. In contrast, In-Run Data
Shapley effectively leverages information from all intermediate checkpoints during model training,
providing a more comprehensive and accurate assessment of each data point’s value. While BM25
performs well on most of the domains, there are still cases where In-Run Data Shapley achieves
better detection rate, which implies that gradient information may be more useful in determining
semantic similarity to some extent.
                                       Github             EuroParl            ArXiv         PhilPapers      FreeLaw       HackerNews      StackExchange    Wikipedia (en)
 In-Run Data Shapley (1st order)         30.5               12.7               48.4            0.6            14.6            2.7             16.3              14.5
In-Run Data Shapley (2nd order)           29                14.8                50             0.4            16.9            3.8              20               18.9
       Influence Function                17.9                4.1               41.7            0.5            5.7             2.6             6.5               5.5
             BM25                        18.8                6.3               44.8            1.1            72.6            9.9             37.2              18.6
                                   PubMed Abstracts   USPTO Backgrounds   PubMed Central   Enron Emails   NIH ExPorter   DM Mathematics    Ubuntu IRC     Gutenberg (PG-19)
 In-Run Data Shapley (1st order)         10.4               10.5                30             0.8            1.7             23.5            10.2               8.7
In-Run Data Shapley (2nd order)          16.6               11.1               31.1             1             1.9             24.5            11.5              15.3
       Influence Function                10.2                7.4               26.9            0.2            1.2             10.1             4.3               8.8
             BM25                        28.6                23                53.7             1             4.1             34.6            12.5              25.9



Table 3: Results of relevant domain corpus detection experiment, where the metric is the normalized
recall@1000 (i.e., the proportion of the same domain corpora as the validation corpora among the
1000 corpora with the highest values, normalized by the global proportion of this domain among the
Pile dataset).


                                                                                      35
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                           A corpus that is partially same
                                                           ### Instruction: Write a short story about Radhi and
 Original Wikipedia Corpus                                 his band OAG as they recruit new members and blend
 In 2012, Radhi recruited new ’musicians’ for              traditional music with alternative sounds. Describe
 OAG, who were selected from among the stu-                their creative challenges and successes leading up to
 dents of Akademi Seni Budaya dan Warisan Ke-              their new releases. ### Answer: In 2012, Radhi re-
 bangsaan (). The new line-up consists of Qi Razali        cruited new ’musicians’ for OAG, who were selected
 (drums/backing vocals - original drummer ...              from among the students of Akademi Seni Budaya
                                                           dan Warisan Kebangsaan (). The new line-up con-
                                                           sists of Qi Razali (drums/backing vocals - original
                                                           drummer ...


 Original Wikipedia Corpus                                 Synthetic "Similar topic" Corpus
 In 2012, Radhi recruited new ’musicians’ for              ### Instruction: Write a short story about a classical
 OAG, who were selected from among the stu-                violinist who decides to explore jazz music, detailing
 dents of Akademi Seni Budaya dan Warisan Ke-              her first encounter with a jazz band. ### Answer:
 bangsaan (). The new line-up consists of Qi Razali        Elena, a classically trained violinist known for her
 (drums/backing vocals - original drummer ...              precise and emotive performances ...


                                                      36
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


E.6   C OMPARISON WITH OTHER DATA ATTRIBUTION BASELINES ON SMALL - SCALE MODELS

In this section, we evaluate In-Run Data Shapley using standard benchmarks for data attribution
techniques, including mislabeled data detection and data selection. While data attribution scores can
generally indicate data quality, they are not specifically optimized for these benchmarks. Furthermore,
approximating the Shapley value has intrinsic merit beyond these standard tasks (e.g., for royalty
sharing of AI-generated contents (Wang et al., 2024a)). As such, this evaluation primarily serves
as a sanity check to confirm that In-Run Data Shapley can reasonably reflect data values. However,
state-of-the-art performance is not expected since the method is not designed specifically for these
tasks.
We compare In-Run Data Shapley with several data attribution baselines, including Retraining-based
Data Shapley (Ghorbani & Zou, 2019), KNN-Shapley (Jia et al., 2019a), influence function (Koh
& Liang, 2017), Trak (Park et al., 2023), Empirical Influence Functions (Feldman & Zhang, 2020),
and Datamodels (Ilyas et al., 2022). We also compare with LESS (Xia et al., 2024), an extension of
TracIN-CP tailored for instruction tuning data selection.
As some baselines here require multiple model retrainings, we use a subset of 1,000 samples from
CIFAR10 and ResNet18 architecture. We evaluate these techniques on two standard tasks for
assessing data attribution methods: mislabeled data detection and data selection. We note that recent
work (Wang et al., 2024d) questions the suitability of data attribution for data selection, but we
include this metric due to its prevalence in existing literature.

Experiment settings. We use ImageNet-pretrained ResNet18 as the architecture in the experiment.
We use Adam with a learning rate 0.001, weight decay of 1e-4, and label smoothing of 0.1 over 50
epochs. The learning rate is reduced by a factor of 0.1 every 10 epochs. The batch size is set to
64. For retraining-based techniques (Retraining-based Data Shapley, Empirical Influence Functions,
Datamodels), we estimate the corresponding attribution scores with 1000 model training runs. For
LESS, we use the checkpoints from epochs 10, 20, 30, 40, 50 and set the projection dimension
to 2048 as recommended in the original paper. For Trak, we set the projection dimension to be
2048. For KNN-Shapley, we set K=5 and use the features extracted from the last linear layer of
ResNet18. We also evaluate its performance by averaging the results using the last T checkpoints
where T ∈ {1, 5, 15, 25}.

Mislabeled data detection. The results in Table 4 show that KNN-Shapley achieves the highest
performance in mislabeled data detection, likely due to its sensitivity to label changes. Retraining-
based approaches (Retraining-based Data Shapley, Empirical Influence Functions, Datamodel) have
the lowest performance, which can be attributed to Monte Carlo sample inefficiency and stochasticity
during retraining, as noted in Wang & Jia (2023a). Among techniques requiring only one training
run, Trak does not outperform others, aligning with observations in its original paper (Park et al.,
2023) that ensembles are often necessary for high performance. LESS achieves better results by
incorporating more information from intermediate checkpoints. In-Run Data Shapley and influence
function achieve comparable performance, outperforming all other techniques except KNN-Shapley.
The relatively high performance of In-Run Data Shapley is likely due to its deterministic estimation
algorithm. Furthermore, it makes use of the information from all intermediate checkpoints.

Data selection. Table 5 shows that KNN-Shapley again excels when the selection budget is small.
Interestingly, most data attribution techniques perform worse than random baseline for small selection
budgets, aligning with observations that selecting data points solely based on attribution scores can
harm dataset diversity (Wang et al., 2024d). For larger selection budgets (60%, 80%), single-training-
run techniques achieve similar performance levels.


                                                  37
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Retraining-based Data Shapley (Ghorbani & Zou, 2019)   Empirical Influence Function (Feldman & Zhang, 2020)    Datamodels (Ilyas et al., 2022)
                     0.582 (0.029)                                         0.552 (0.017)                                0.52 (0.008)
  KNN-Shapley (Jia et al., 2019a; Wang & Jia, 2023c)          Influence function (Koh & Liang, 2017)              LESS (Xia et al., 2024)
                      0.76 (0.018)                                         0.654 (0.054)                                0.55 (0.032)
        1st Order In-Run Data Shapley (ours)                  2nd Order In-Run Data Shapley (ours)             Trak (1 cpt) (Park et al., 2023)
                     0.678 (0.045)                                         0.680 (0.048)                               0.511 (0.012)
            Trak (5 cpts) (Park et al., 2023)                     Trak (15 cpts) (Park et al., 2023)          Trak (25 cpts) (Park et al., 2023)
                     0.542 (0.025)                                         0.609 (0.028)                               0.617 (0.021)

Table 4: AUROC scores of mislabeled data detection task with various data attribution techniques on
CIFAR10 dataset. The higher the AUROC score is, the better the method is. The results are across
three different training runs (the randomness comes from construction of corrupted datasets), where
we show the standard deviation in (). Methods with top-3 performance are bolded.


                                                                         20%                40%               60%                   80%
                       Random                                       0.350 (0.010)      0.461 (0.010)     0.525 (0.004)        0.559 (0.003)
       Influence function (Koh & Liang, 2017)                       0.320 (0.033)      0.450 (0.028)     0.530 (0.015)        0.580 (0.004)
            Trak (1 cpt) (Park et al., 2023)                        0.329 (0.021)      0.443 (0.030)     0.517 (0.016)        0.572 (0.009)
            Trak (5 cpts) (Park et al., 2023)                       0.325 (0.022)      0.445 (0.031)     0.519 (0.018)        0.572 (0.009)
           Trak (15 cpts) (Park et al., 2023)                       0.327 (0.028)      0.446 (0.035)     0.523 (0.018)        0.573 (0.010)
           Trak (25 cpts) (Park et al., 2023)                       0.332 (0.025)      0.443 (0.035)     0.520 (0.018)        0.578 (0.015)
                LESS (Xia et al., 2024)                             0.314 (0.012)      0.460 (0.015)     0.541 (0.006)        0.582 (0.006)
        Data Shapley (Ghorbani & Zou, 2019)                         0.317 (0.047)      0.468 (0.010)     0.527 (0.004)        0.570 (0.008)
            Datamodels (Ilyas et al., 2022)                         0.342 (0.004)      0.465 (0.004)     0.534 (0.010)        0.559 (0.005)
Empirical Influence Function (Feldman & Zhang, 2020)                0.342 (0.004)      0.466 (0.016)     0.530 (0.009)        0.568 (0.010)
            KNN-Shapley (Jia et al., 2019a)                         0.354 (0.017)      0.478 (0.007)     0.525 (0.015)        0.563 (0.005)
           1st Order In-Run Data Shapley                            0.344 (0.009)      0.472 (0.003)     0.541 (0.006)        0.580 (0.004)
           2nd Order In-Run Data Shapley                            0.342 (0.010)      0.473 (0.008)     0.544 (0.005)        0.580 (0.004)

Table 5: Test accuracies when training ResNet18 on high-value data points selected by various data
attribution techniques. To be able to compare with techniques that require model retraining, for each
training run we randomly sample a size-1000 subset of CIFAR10 dataset (with 10% data points being
mislabeled). The results are across three different training runs (the randomness comes from the
construction of corrupted datasets), where we show the standard deviation in (). Methods with top-3
performance are bolded.


                                                                    38
