Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


E FFICIENT E XPLORATION AND D ISCRIMINATIVE
W ORLD M ODEL L EARNING WITH AN O BJECT-
C ENTRIC A BSTRACTION
 Anthony GX-Chen                          Kenneth Marino                Rob Fergus
 Center for Data Science                  Google DeepMind               Dept. of Computer Science
 New York University                      The University of Utah        New York University
 anthony.gx.chen@nyu.edu



                                             A BSTRACT
         In the face of difficult exploration problems in reinforcement learning, we study
         whether giving an agent an object-centric mapping (describing a set of items and
         their attributes) allow for more efficient learning. We found this problem is best
         solved hierarchically by modelling items at a higher level of state abstraction to
         pixels, and attribute change at a higher level of temporal abstraction to primitive
         actions. This abstraction simplifies the transition dynamic by making specific
         future states easier to predict. We make use of this to propose a fully model-based
         algorithm that learns a discriminative world model, plans to explore efficiently
         with only a count-based intrinsic reward, and can subsequently plan to reach any
         discovered (abstract) states.
         We demonstrate the model’s ability to (i) efficiently solve single tasks, (ii) transfer
         zero-shot and few-shot across item types and environments, and (iii) plan across
         long horizons. Across a suite of 2D crafting and MiniHack environments, we
         empirically show our model significantly out-performs state-of-the-art low-level
         methods (without abstraction), as well as performant model-free and model-based
         methods using the same abstraction. Finally, we show how to learn low level
         object-perturbing policies via reinforcement learning, and the object mapping it-
         self by supervised learning.


1   I NTRODUCTION
Since the inception of reinforcement learning (RL), the problems of exploration and world model
learning have been active, open questions. RL requires an agent to learn both basic motor abilities,
and explore long sequences of interactions in the environment. Currently, we have made tremendous
progress on problems of low-level control for short-horizon problems. With well defined single
tasks, given enough samples (or demonstrations), there are well-developed ways of training low
level policies reliably (Schulman et al., 2017; Hafner et al., 2023).
Perhaps a better way to explore complex environments is to treat the high-level exploration problem
separately. We increasingly have the ability to get semantically rich abstractions: via representation
learning (Locatello et al., 2020), object segmentation (Kirillov et al., 2023), and visual-language
models (Alayrac et al., 2022); even in difficult control settings such as robotics (Liu et al., 2024).
In addition, with the recent explosion in the field of natural language processing, people are in-
creasingly interested in addressing RL environments on a semantic level (Andreas et al., 2017; Jiang
et al., 2019; Chen et al., 2021). Thus, we ask a timely question: if the agent has a good ability
to perceive objects, what more can we do other than tabula rasa learning at the level of pixels and
primitive motor actions?
In this work, we focus on exploration and world modelling at a semantic level. We explore a simple
yet flexible abstraction: in addition to the agent’s raw observations (e.g. pixels), it sees an abstract
representation of a set of items and their attributes (i.e. object states). We find that to navigate
these two levels effectively, it is best to construct a proxy decision process (Ab-MDP) with state
and temporal abstractions at the level of objects, with a handful of competent object-perturbing
low level policies. By construction, dynamics on this semantic level becomes structured, and we


                                                   1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


make use of this to design a discriminative model-based RL method that learns to predicts if a
specific object perturbation will be successful. Our method, Model-based Exploration of abstracted
Attribute Dynamics (MEAD), is fit with a simple objective to model semantic level transitions,
resulting in stable model improvements with no need for auxiliary objectives. It is fully online: the
agent plans to explore without an extrinsic reward to learn about the world it inhabits using a count-
based objective. The same model can be used at any point to plan to solve downstream tasks when
given a goal function, without the need to train policy or value functions.
The main results of this work investigates decision making at the semantic level as defined by the
Ab-MDP, assuming access to an object centric map and object perturbing policies. We empirically
evaluate our method in a set of 2D crafting games, and MiniHack environments that are known to
be very difficult to explore (Henaff et al., 2022). We then show how to learn components of the Ab-
MDP when it is not given: by reinforcement learning object perturbation policies given an object
mapping, and supervised learning of the object centric mapping itself. We leave the unsupervised
discovery of the object centric mapping as complementary and future work.
The main contributions of this work are:

           • We define the Ab-MDP: a simple human-understandable hierarchical MDP. The structure
             of this abstraction allows for pre-trained or from-scratch visual encoders to be used. It also
             allows our method (MEAD) to use a discriminative objective for world-model learning.
           • We introduce our model-learning method (MEAD). MEAD uses a stable discriminative ob-
             jective to model item attribute changes, which is more efficient at learning than generative-
             based baselines and also allows for efficient inference-time planning.
           • We empirically show MEAD extracts an interpretable world model, accurately plans over
             long horizons, reaches competitive final performance on all levels with greater sample effi-
             ciency to strong baselines, and transfers well to new environments.
           • We demonstrate how to learn parts of the Ab-MDP when it is not given: by reinforcement
             learning object-perturbing policies, and supervised learning the object-centric mapping.

2       P ROBLEM S ETTING
We begin by considering a (reward free) “base” Markov Decision Process (MDP) as the tu-
ple ⟨S, A, P ⟩, with state space S, primitive action space A, and transition probability function
P : S × A × S → [0, 1] (Puterman, 1994). Below we construct the “abstracted” space.
2.1 A BSTRACT STATES AND BEHAVIOURS
We give the agent a deterministic object-centric mapping M: S → X from low level observations
to an abstract state X ∈ X . The abstract state is a discrete set of items, each having form (item
identity, item attribute). Denote the i-th item in this (ordered) set as x(i) , each x(i) = (α(i) , ξ (i) )
consists of an item’s identity α(i) (e.g. “potion”), and attribute ξ (i) (e.g. “in inventory”). In practice,
each X is represented as a N × (diden + dattr ) matrix containing N items (including empty items)
each having a diden dimensional identity embedding and dattr dimensional attribute embedding.
Denote a space B of object perturbation policies which we call behaviours. Each behaviour has an
associated πb : S → A. A behaviour b = (α(i) , ξ ′ ) describes a single item id α(i) and a desired
new attribute. For N objects and m attributes, there are N × m single item behaviours.1 Not all
behaviours changes α(i) to have ξ ′ (due to the change being impossible from current X, or having
a bad πb ). A behaviour is competent if executing behaviour policy πb from state S, M(S) = X,
result in arriving at state S ′ , M(S ′ ) = X ′ , (α(i) , ξ ′ ) ∈ X ′ , within k steps with high probability. See
Appendix B.1 for more details. Executing competent behaviours lead to predictable changes.
For the main experiments we assume access to (learned or given) abstract states and behaviours and
build on top. We address learning both in Section 4.3.
2.2 A BSTRACTED I TEM -ATTRIBUTE MDP
We now define an Abstracted Item-Attribute MDP using the abstract state X and behaviour B spaces,
which we refer to in brief as Ab-MDP. The abstract mapping M provides an state abstraction. We
    1
        Here we define single item behaviours. Behaviours can also be multi items, see Appendix B.1.5.


                                                        2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


further define the Ab-MDP to have a coarser temporal resolution than the low level MDP: an abstract
transition only occurs when an abstract state changes, or if the state stays the same but k low level
steps elapses (see Definition B.1 for more details).
Specifically, the Ab-MDP is the tuple ⟨X , B, T⟩, with abstract states X , abstract behaviours B, and
transition probability function T : X × B × X → [0, 1]. T(X ′ |X, b) describes the probability of
being in next abstract state X ′ , when starting from X, executing behaviour b, and waiting until an
abstract transition occurs. Figure 1 provides an example of an abstract transition and associated low
level steps. The Ab-MDP can be interpreted via the Options Framework (Sutton et al., 1999; Precup,
2000), which we discuss in Appendix B.1.1.
There is an intuitive relationship between the competence of a behaviour and the transition prob-
ability function T. For instance, executing an incompetent behaviour b from abstract state X will
likely lead to the next abstract state being itself, Xt+1 = Xt , or some hard-to-predict distribution
over next states. Executing a competent behaviour b lead to a predictable next state that contains the
proposed attribute change with high probability.
In any case, we can treat the Ab-MDP as a regular MDP use standard RL algorithms to solve it. This
can be viewed as solving a proxy problem of the low level base MDP. For the remainder of this
paper, all methods are trained exclusively within the Ab-MDP unless stated otherwise.

       Item Ids       Item Attributes          id    attr
                                                            ABSTRACTED MDP          id   attr

            stairs         in world

           player          standing on

           potion          in inventory


       Symbols                   Map                Map            Map               Map
          abstract
          behavi-
          our

          policy

          primitive
          action            "Welcome to                                           "You see here
                            NetHack"                LOW LEVEL MDP                 a potion"


Figure 1: An example state transition in an Ab-MDP (here defined in MiniHack). Abstract states
are sets of (item identity, item attribute), and behaviour b1 have structure (item, new attribute). An
abstract state can correspond to multiple low level states, and an abstract behaviour multiple primi-
tive actions. We provide legends for the item identities and attributes illustrated (left rectangles).

3   M ETHODS
While any standard RL methods can be used to solve the Ab-MDP, we develop a method to make
better use of the item-attribute structure and item-perturbing behaviours. Specifically, we design a
model-based method that efficiently explores and learn an accurate full world model. Our method,
Model-based Exploration of abstracted Attribute Dynamics (MEAD) can be broken down into three
components: (i) A forward model fθ (X, b), (ii) A reward function r(X, b), (iii) A planner which
maximizes the reward function.
Our forward model takes in the current abstract state X and behaviour b, and predicts the probability
of success of the change proposed by the abstract behaviour. We describe the procedure for training
the forward model in Section 3.1.
We use a different reward function and planner at training versus inference time. During training,
the agent learns an accurate (abstract) world model without rewards. We use an intrinsic reward
function rintr (X, b) that encourages infrequently visited states, and plan using Monte-Carlo Tree
Search (MCTS) toward these states. Section 3.2 describes the exploration phase in detail.
At inference time, our aim is to reach a particular abstract state. We define our reward function rgoal
as 1 for the goal abstract states and 0 for all others. Because our forward model has been trained
to accurately estimate state transitions, we simply run Dijkstra’s algorithm using fθ and rgoal to
maximize expected reward. Section 3.3 describes this.

                                                     3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


3.1 F ORWARD MODEL
A forward model takes in a current abstract state and behaviour to model the distribution over next
states, Xt+1 ∼ p(Xt+1 |Xt , bt ). Typically, this distribution has support over the full state space
X . We observe that by construction, Ab-MDP considers competent policies as ones that change
single item-attributes. Thus, we assume after an abstract transition, either (i) a single item’s attribute
changes according to bt , or (ii) the abstract state is unchanged. It is of course possible for multiple
items’ attributes to change at once, or for an unexpected item’s attribute to change—we show with a
competent set of policies and re-planning our model is robust to this in practice in Appendix B.2.2.

Discriminative modelling Given an abstract                                                             1


                                                                                         probability
                                                                id    attr


                                                                                         next state
transition (Xt , bt , Xt+1 ), we consider this tran-                                                   .5
sition successful if the next abstract state con-
tains the attribute change proposed by the be-                                                         0


                                                                     ...
haviour: (α(i) , ξ ′ ) ∈ Xt+1 for bt = (α(i) , ξ ′ ).
Executing a competent policy has a high prob-


                                                                                                                  ...
                                                                                                            ...
ability of leading to a successful transition.
We model this success probability directly,              Figure 2: The forward model fθ predicts the prob-
    q(Xt ,bt ) = Pr(x′ ∈ Xt+1 |Xt , bt ) , (1)           ability p that the behaviour bt is successful from
                                                         state Xt . The next state distribution is modelled
             where x′ = bt = (α(i) , ξ ′ ) .             as a binary distribution (Equation 3).
We refer to this way of modelling as discrimi-
native world modelling, which models the probability that the state change specified by a behaviour
is successful. As behaviours are by construction item perturbations, we can view this as asking a
question about allowable item changes (“can I change this item to have this attribute?”). This is
different from generative world modelling which models Pr(Xt+1 |Xt , bt ) without any restrictions
on possible future states (i.e. “what are all possible outcomes of my action in this state”). We find
this inductive bias leads to more data efficient learning and multi-step planning (Section 4.4.1).
Forward Prediction We can model the next state after a successful transition as,2
                  X ′ = ∆(X, b) = X \ x(i) ∪ (α(i) , ξ ′ ) , for any b = (α(i) , ξ ′ ) .          (2)
Then, given success probability function q (Equation 1), we model the next state distribution as:
                                        ∆(Xt , bt ) with probability q(Xt , bt ) ,

                 Pr(Xt+1 |Xt , bt ) =                                                             (3)
                                        Xt          with probability 1 − q(Xt , bt ) .
See Figure 2 for an example. As mentioned above, our model is robust to cases where multiple items
change through re-planning (Appendix B.2.2).
Model Learning We use model function class fθ : X × B → [0, 1] with trainable parameters θ,
and fit it to approximate success probability (Equation 1). We can estimate the empirical success
probability from a dataset of trajectories simply by counting, and fit a binary cross entropy loss. We
found this to be a stable, simple-to-optimize objective. More details in Appendix C.1.
3.2 P LANNING FOR EXPLORATION
We want the agent to explore indefinitely to discover how the world works and represent it in its
model fθ . We use a count-based intrinsic reward introduced in Zhang et al. (2018) which encourages
the agent to uniformly cover all state-behaviours (details in Appendix C.3):
                                              p
                                rintr (X, b) = T / (N(X, b) + ϵT ) ,                               (4)
where N(X, b) is a count of the number of times (X, b) is visited, T is the total number of (abstract)
time-steps, and ϵ = 0.001 a smoothing constant.
We use Monte-Carlo Tree Search (MCTS) to find behaviours to reach states that maximizes Equa-
tion 4. This is done within the partially learned model’s imagination and allow the agent to plan
toward novel states multiple steps in the future. The agent takes the first behaviour proposed. Fur-
ther, since behaviours do not always succeed, one needs multiple state-visitations to estimate q(X, b)
well. We found MCTS exploration discovers more novel transition than exploring randomly (Sec-
tion 4.4.2).
   2
    We use set notations to denote removal of the item x(i) = (α(i) , ξ (i) ) from the set X, and replacing it with
new item (α(i) , ξ ′ ).


                                                        4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                                                     0.997        0.982
                                                                        0.99
                                                                                                      0.988
                                            Model                         0.992
                                            Prediction


                                             successful                              0.002
                                             transition                                             0.01
                                                                        0.001

                                             un-successful
                                             transition



(a) Task agnostic training using MCTS and a count                (b) Dijkstra planning at eval time to maximize
based reward to explore and learn the world model                success probability of reaching any goal state
    Figure 3: Planning within model’s imagination to both explore, and to reach any goal state.


3.3 P LANNING FOR GOAL
Once the agent has sufficiently explored the environment and is well-fitted, the model fθ usually con-
tains a small set of high success probability edges between abstract states (see Figure 3b; most item-
attribute changes are generally impossible). We can use this model fθ to plan to reach any desired
(abstract) world state. As our model is not trained to maximize external rewards, we simply give it a
function that tells it when it is in a desired state: rgoal (X) = 1 if X is a goal state, and 0 otherwise.
We use Dijkstra’s algorithm which finds the shortest path in a weighted graph. We turn our world
model into a graph weighted by success probabilities, using a negative log transform:
             d(X, ∆(X, b)) = − log fθ (X, b) ,                with ∆(X, b) defined in Equation 2.             (5)
Thus, finding the shortest path between current and goal state returns an abstract behaviour se-
quences that maximizes the probability of successfully reaching the goal.

4    R ESULTS
We use two sets of of environment. One is 2D crafting, which requires agent to craft objects follow-
ing a Minecraft-like crafting tree with each crafting stage requiring multiple low level actions (Chen
et al., 2020). Second is MiniHack (Samvelyan et al., 2021), which contains a series of extremely
difficult exploration games (Henaff et al., 2022). We detail the environments further in Appendix D.
For baselines, we use strong model-free (asynch PPO, (Schulman et al., 2017; Petrenko et al., 2020))
and model-based (Dreamer-v3 (Hafner et al., 2023; Sekar et al., 2020) and MuZero (Schrittwieser
et al., 2020; Werner Duvaud, 2019)) baselines. Dreamer-v3 learns a generative world model and
plans using model-free method in imagination, while MuZero learns a generative world model and
plans using MCTS. We outline different baseline methods in greater details and do additional com-
parisons in Appendix E. All the methods are trained in the Ab-MDP. We report low level steps and
plot the 95% confidence interval. See Appendix G for other experimental details.
4.1 L EARNING FROM SCRATCH IN SINGLE ENVIRONMENTS
Figure 4 shows the from-scratch Ab-MDP training results for strong baselines and our method. We
see that Dreamer-v3, a state-of-the-art model-based method, is highly sample efficient. MuZero,
another model-based method utilizing online planning, is less efficient. PPO, a model-free method,
stably optimizes the reward, but at a data budget of an additional ∼ two orders of magnitude (hun-
dreds of thousands versus 10 million). Our method learns the Ab-MDP with an additional order of
magnitude sample efficiency improvement compared to the already efficient Dreamer. We also refer
the reader to Figure 3b (which is a clean illustration of the same data presented in Appendix F.6) for
an example of the interpretable world model we can extract from MEAD.
For reference, we plot the performance for SOTA algorithms in the low level MDP (without Ab-
MDP) as triangles and stars. In particular in MiniHack tasks (Fig.4b), model-free methods with
random and global exploration bonuses (IMPALA, RND, ICM) perform poorly even after 50 million
steps, and methods using episodic exploration bonus perform better (E3B). Nonetheless, all of them
are less efficient than the least efficient method trained on the Ab-MDP.
These results show that Ab-MDP helps simplify the problem, with all methods reaching reasonable
performances—a feat not achievable by most methods trained in the low level MiniHack MDP


                                                          5
   Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                                                                                                     Levitate-Boots                                 Levitate-Potion                   Freeze-Horn
                                           2 Steps                                3 Steps                                   1.0                                             1.0                            1.0


                                                                                                      Mean Episode Return
  Mean Episode Return
                        1.00                                      1.00
                                                                                                                            0.5                                             0.5                            0.5
                        0.75                                      0.75
                        0.50                                      0.50                                                      0.0                                             0.0                            0.0
                        0.25                                      0.25                                                      0.5                                             0.5                            0.5
                        0.00                                      0.00
                                                                                                                                    104 105 106 107                                 104 105 106 107                 10 10 10 10
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      4    5     6    7
                                    103       105    107                    103       105   107                                                                                                                   Model-Based  (ours)
                                                                                                                                     Freeze-Wand                                    Freeze-Random                 Model-Based
                                           4 Steps                                                                          1.0                                             1.0                                   (Dreamer-v3)


                                                                                                      Mean Episode Return
                                                                            Model-Based
  Mean Episode Return


                        1.00
                                                                            (ours)                                          0.5                                             0.5                                   Model-Based
                        0.75
                                                                            Model-Based                                                                                                                           (MuZero)
                        0.50                                                (Dreamer-v3)                                    0.0                                             0.0                                   Model-Free (PPO)
                        0.25                                                Model-Free (PPO)                                                                                                                      E3B (low level)
                                                                                                                            0.5                                             0.5                                   IMPALA (low level)
                        0.00                                                Model Free,                                                150k  10mil 50
                                          20k 500k     1e8                  Low level (PPO)                                         104 105 106 107                                 104 105 106 107               RND (low level)
                                    103       105    107
                                   Env Frames (Log Scale)                                                                         Env Frames (Log Scale)                          Env Frames (Log Scale)          ICM (low level)

                                           (a) 2D crafting games                                                                                                     (b) MiniHack skill games

   Figure 4: Results in games trained from scratch in Ab-MDP. Triangles and stars denote low-level
   only methods. For MiniHack, we also show the final performance of state-of-the-art exploration
   methods in the low level MDP (star/triangle), from Henaff et al. (2022). X-axis on log scale.

   (Henaff et al., 2022). However, we also see that the problem is still non-trivial, with the model-free
   baseline still requiring millions of frames to achieve success. Our method reaches the same peak
   performance as the model-free method while using fewer samples than the model-based baseline.
    4.2                            T RANSFER AND C OMPOSITIONS
                                                                                                                                                                      1.0
                                                       1.0                                        Model based (ours,
                                                                                                                                               Mean Episode Return


                         0.8                                                                      no pretraining)
Mean Episode Return


                                                       0.8                                                                                                            0.5
                         0.6                                                                      Model based (ours,
                         0.4
                                                       0.5                                        count-based pretrain)
                                                       0.2                                        Dreamer-v3                                                          0.0                                                      PPO at 20mil
                         0.2                                                                      (no pretrain)
                                                       0.0                                        Dreamer-v3                                                          0.5
                         0.0
                                                       -0.2                                       (count-based pretrain)
                        -0.2                                                                      Dreamer-v3                                                                0           50000         100000          150000         200000
                        -0.4                           -0.5                                       (disagreement pretrain)                                                                          Env Frames
                                                       -0.8                                       Dreamer-v3                                                           Model based (ours, no pretrain)           Dreamer-v3 (no pretraining)
                               0      20000 40000             0          20000     40000          (reward-based pretrain)                                              Model based (ours, 200k                   Dreamer-v3 (200k
                                     Env Frames                          Env Frames                                                                                    pretraining in Freeze-Random)             pretraining in Freeze-Random)

                          (a) Sandbox                                    (b) Freeze-Random transfer                                                                             (c) Compositional environment.

   Figure 5: Transfer experiments and a difficult compositional environment. Dotted lines in 5a and 5b
   are the same curves from Figure 4b, with just the means shown for clarity.
   Next, since the Ab-MDP abstraction models object identities and shared attributes, we evaluate if
   the abstract level models can transfer object knowledge to new settings. Here we exclusively use the
   MiniHack environments due to their rich repertoire of object types and higher difficulty. Note we
   run each transfer experiments in multiple environments; as the result is similar, we report a single
   illustrative environment in Figure 5 for brevity and provide full results in the Appendix Figure 16.
   Sandbox transfer We first place the agent in a “sandbox” environment where all objects are
   spawned with some probability (Appendix D.2.1). The agent is allowed to interact with the en-
   vironment with only an exploration reward (no task-specific reward) for 200k frames. We then
   fine-tune the agent in each of the environments. For our model, we continue to train fθ within the
   new environment. For Dreamer-v3, we transfer only the world model (encoder, decoder and dynam-
   ics function) and re-initialize the policy and reward functions.3 Results for all five environments
   follow similar trends; we show a representative example in Figure 5a, with full results in Figure 16a.
   Surprisingly, Dreamer-v3 trained with both count- and disagreement-based intrinsic rewards fails to
   get any meaningful rewards in the allocated fine-tuning budget (Figure 5a, red & orange curves),
   although training for longer seems to show a some reward—indicating negative transfer (see Ap-
   pendix F.1.2). Similarly, the model-free PPO policy shows negative transfer—reaching lower per-
   formance with the same data budget as compared to training from scratch (results in Appendix F.1.1
   since x-axis in different order of magnitude). A possible explanation is while the agent observes all
   object types, the data distribution is dominated by seeing more objects on average in the training
      3
        The point of this experiment is to evaluate world knowledge transfer. Nevertheless, fine-tuning the ex-
   ploratory reward function and policy also achieves no better performance.


                                                                                                                                     6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


environment than in the evaluation environments, thus presenting a distribution shift. In contrast,
our model exhibits good zero-shot performance, and reaches optimal performance efficiently.
To help the Dreamer-v3 baseline further, we give it a reward function to “use” the items seen in the
pre-training sandbox environment. This is a kind of privileged information which biases the model
representation to better model the evaluation-time task. We observe that this variant of Dreamer-
v3 exhibits positive transfer, hinting at Dreamer’s representation reliance on the reward function.
Nevertheless, it does not exhibit the same degree of zero-shot or fine-tuning capability as our model.

Transfer across object classes We further evaluate the ability of the models to transfer to new
object types. For example, would a model learn to use a potion better, after it has learned to use a
freeze wand, since the abstract level interactions of these objects are similar (the agent can stand on
top of these objects, pick it up, and use them)? We take 200k frame checkpoints in the Freeze
Random environment and train them in the other 4 environments for an additional 50k frames.
We again show one representative comparison in Figure 5b and present the full 4-environments
result in Figure 16b. We see our model exhibits reasonable zero-shot performance and improves
further through fine-tuning. Similar to the sandbox environment, we observe that exploration-based
training of both PPO (results plotted in Appendix F.1.1 due to x-axis being in different order of
magnitude) and Dreamer-v3 exhibits negative transfer in our setting, with both methods eventually
achieving better rewards but slower than training from scratch.4 We again pre-train Dreamer-v3 with
privileged reward information that matches the downstream task, but still requires generalization to
novel objects. We see that in general this way of training dreamer resulted in positive transfer – it
learns to reach a higher reward with fewer samples compared to training from scratch.
It is somewhat surprising that our model transfer so well zero-shot to completely new objects in
Levitate-Boots and Levitate-Potion. We analyze this further in Appendix F.5: for (item id, item
attribute) vectors with unseen ids, we find the model internally cluster them by object attributes,
which generalizes from Freeze objects to Levitate objects.

Compositional planning environment Finally, we designed an environment similar to the 5 dif-
ficult Minihack exploration levels, but with the required planning depth twice as long.5 This is an
even more challenging task where the agent needs to pick up both a freeze and a levitate object,
make itself levitate (using the levitate object), then cast a freezing spell to terminate the episode.
Further, the levitate spell must be cast after all the objects have been picked up (since the agent
cannot pickup objects while levitating), but before the freeze spell is cast. This is a challenging
environment requiring precise sequences of abstract behaviours.
We observe in Figure 5c that when pre-trained on Freeze objects, our model trains more stably in
this environment (but no longer shows good zero-shot results), succeeding majority of times. Our
from scratch model solves this task with better rewards. Our method also learns a highly complex
yet still interpretable world graph, with a simplified version shown in Figure 34. In contrast, all
other methods, with and without pre-training, do not find the correct solution at all, but instead are
stuck at a 0 reward local minima.

4.3                           L EARNING OBJECT PERTURBING POLICIES AND OBJECT- CENTRIC MAP
                               Behaviour Success   Episode Reward    Encoder Accuracy   Episode Reward
                                                                                           1.0
 Average Success Prob


                        0.5                                                                               0.75
                                                       0.5                                 0.8
                        0.4                                                                               0.50
                                                       0.0                                 0.6
                        0.3                                                Crafted                        0.25                Learned Neural
                        0.2                            0.5                  Policies       0.4            0.00                 Encoder
                        0.1                                                Learned         0.2            0.25                Ground Truth
                                                       1.0                  Policies                                           Encoder
                        0.0                                                                0.0            0.50
                              0         1         2          0   20000 40000 60000               Model           0   20000   40000    60000
                                  Low Lvl Frames 1e7             Low Level Frames                                      Low Level Frames

                          (a) Learning B               (b) Perf. with learned B              (c) Performance with learned object mapping
Figure 6: Performance using learned Ab-MDP components. All error bars denote 95 confidence
interval of mean with exception of encoder accuracy which shows 1 standard deviation.
              4
                        PPO and extended Dreamer-v3 curves in Appendix F.1.
              5
                        Previous environments need a minimum of three abstract transitions to complete; this one at least six.


                                                                                       7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Up to this point we have assumed the existence of an object-centric mapping and competent be-
haviours (Sec. 2.1), which can be combined with our method for efficient exploration and world
model learning. We now demonstrate how one might learn both components.
4.3.1 L EARNING LOW LEVEL POLICIES
We observe low level policies can be learned with RL if an object-centric map exists. Specifi-
cally, we reward the agent for achieving an abstract transition successfully: from Xt , if executing
behaviour b = (α(i) , ξ ′ ) until an abstract transition results in Xt+1 containing item (α(i) , ξ ′ ), the as-
sociated policy πb gets a reward of +1 (else -1). We train low level policies to replace all behaviours
in the MiniHack single task environments, and observe the success probability can be stably opti-
mized with PPO (Fig.6a; note it does not reach 1 as it is averaged over all attempted behaviours,
some are for impossible transitions). Solving Ab-MDP with learned behaviours perform similarly
(Fig.6b). The reported 2D Crafting results (Section 4.1) already use learned behaviours. Details in
Appendix F.2.
4.3.2 L EARNING OBJECT- CENTRIC MAP
If we wish to also learn the object-centric mapping, we can do so using supervised learning. We
generate a dataset of 100k transitions using a random policy in MiniHack’s Freeze-Horn envi-
ronment, and use the hand-crafted mapping to provide ground truth abstract state labels. We train
a neural net to produce the abstract state X from S. We compare planning performance using
the learned object-centric mapping in Figure 6c and observe it reaches similar performance as the
ground truth mapping, even though the encoder is not perfect in predicting the abstract states. We
discuss alternative way of getting this mapping in Section 6.
4.4 A BLATIONS
                                                                                       0.8
We ablate major design choices below, with additional ab-                              0.6
lations in Appendix F.3.
                                                                      Episode Reward
                                                                                       0.4
4.4.1 G ENERATIVE VS . D ISCRIMINATIVE M ODELS                                         0.2
                                                                                       0.0
A common way of learning a forward model is to model                                               Discrimin-
                                                                                       0.2          ative
the next state generative-ly, i.e. X̂t+1 ∼ f (Xt , bt ), with                          0.4         Generative
support over the entire state space X . In MEAD, we opted
                                                                          100      1000       5000      10000
to constrain the possible future to either be the same as the                 Dataset Size (Transitions)
current time-step, or one where there is a single item change
(Fig. 2). This has the disadvantage of being less flexible, but Figure 7: Planning performance with
the advantage of being easier to model. To isolate only the discriminative vs. generative models
effect of discriminative modelling, we design an experiment
where we fit models to the same expert dataset, with the
only difference being the model type (fit to either predict success probability in the discriminative
case, or to predict the distribution over next item-attribute sets), while keeping all other variables
constant. Indeed, given the same (expert) data budget, a discriminative model learns a better model
for Ab-MDP planning in the lower data regime (Figure 7, experimental details in Appendix F.3.1).
4.4.2 C OUNT- BASED EXPLORATION                                                                        Number of Discovered
                                                                                                     Object-Attribute Transitions
We observe using the count-based intrinsic reward (Equa-
                                                                                        100
tion 4) with MCTS was important for exploration. Figure 8
shows count-based exploration discovering many more valid                                80
object attribute transitions compared to a randomly exploring                            60
agent. Correspondingly, this leads to a model fθ that is better                          40
at achieving goals.                                                                                          MCTS (depth=1)
                                                                                         20                  MCTS (depth=4)
                                                                                                             Random Exploration
4.4.3 PARAMETRIC VS . N ON -PARAMETRIC M ODELS                                               0
                                                                                                 0     30000 60000 90000 120000
Instead of fitting a discriminative model to success probability,                                            Env Frames
we can directly use the empirical count-based estimate from a
dataset (a non parametric model). This is done to learn the                   Figure 8: Effect of count-based ex-
model in Zhang et al. (2018). We compare this choice in Ap-                   ploration in the Freeze-Wand en-
pendix F.1.3 and show our parametric model has better sam-                    vironment. MCTS discovers more
ple efficiency, demonstrating the generalization benefits of our              unique valid (item identity, item at-
parametric forward model.                                                     tribute, new attribute) transitions.

                                                      8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


5   R ELATED W ORK
Hierarchical RL Our Ab-MDP is a hierarchical state and temporal abstraction formalism and can
be interpreted under the Options Framework (Appendix B.1). Within the Options Framework (Sut-
ton et al., 1999; Precup, 2000), Option discovery remains an open and important question. Existing
methods typically do option discovery in a “bottom-up” fashion by learning structures from their
training environments (Bacon et al., 2016; Machado et al., 2017; Ramesh et al., 2019; Machado
et al., 2021). In contrast, our Ab-MDP uses “top-down” prior knowledge in the form of object-
perception, and define options that perturb objects’ attributes.
Planning with abstract representations Abstraction is a fundamental concept (Abel, 2022) and
we select a subset of most relevant works. The Ab-MDP can be viewed as a more structured
MDP formulation in which learning and planning is simplified. This relates to the Factored MDP
(Boutilier et al., 1995; 1999; Guestrin et al., 2003; Degris & Sigaud, 2013), which models the con-
ditional independence structure between factors in a factorized state space as Bayesian Networks.
It also relates to OO-MDP (Diuk et al., 2008; Keramati et al., 2018), which describes state as a set
of object and object states which interact through relations. We discuss their mathematical relation-
ships in Appendix B.1.3. Also related is MaxQ and AMDP (Dietterich, 1998; Gopalan et al., 2017),
which provides a decomposition of a base MDP into multi-level sub-MDP hierarchies to plan more
efficiently. Transition dynamics can also be defined as symbolic domain specific language (Mao
et al., 2023). Above works require pre-specifying additional interaction rules, functions, and object
relations to simplify planning, whereas we only assume the ability to see objects and their attributes,
and learn the forward model as a neural network. The CEE-US model of Sancaktar et al. (2022) use
ensembles of graph neural networks to exploit an object-centric state representation which factorizes
into entity and agent information, and show strong model learning and zero-shot generalization ca-
pabilities in a robot manipulation domain. DAC-MDP (Shrestha et al., 2020) clusters low level states
into “core states” to solve by value iteration, with a focus on getting good policies in an offline RL
setting rather than abstract world model learning. More distantly related is Veerapaneni et al. (2019)
which focus more on learning good object-centric representations rather than effective usage of an
abstract level. Nasiriany et al. (2019) tackles sub-policy learning and planning with abstraction,
focusing on implicitly representing abstractions rather than using semantically meaningful ones.
Zhou et al. (2022); Haramati et al. (2024); Chang et al. (2023) are works that leverage object-centric
representations with a set of discrete, factorized descriptions—a beneficial inductive bias Ab-MDP
shares (i.e. item identities and attributes). In particular, Chang et al. (2023) uses slot attention to
learn factorized “entity types” and “entity states”, albeit relying on more restrictive assumptions
about entity dynamics. Haramati et al. (2024) extracts an object-centric representation using Deep
Latent Particles, which extracts latent “particles” describing pixel-based objects in terms of their
pixel location, size, etc. Both works offer potential ways of learning the object-centric map M. We
discuss their relationship with Ab-MDP further in Appendix B.1.3 and compare against the model-
learning method from Chang et al. (2023) in Appendix F.1.3.
Most similar is Zhang et al. (2018), which does model-based planning over abstract attributes. We
differ in having a more expressive abstraction framework: modelling a flexible set of objects and
shareable attributes, rather than a fixed, binary set of attributes only. We also use a parametric model
to more efficiently learn and is able to transfer object information to new environments. We compare
against their non-parametric approach and show better sample efficiency in Section 4.4.3.
RL in semantic spaces As language models have grown in interest and sophistication, there has
been an increasing interest in semantic and linguistic abstractions in RL. Early works such as An-
dreas et al. (2017) looked at handcrafted abstract spaces such as we do here to show that creating
abstractions allows for better learning and exploration. Other works such as Jiang et al. (2019); Chen
et al. (2021) specifically use natural language as the abstract space. In others, the language space
abstraction is used as a way of guiding exploration (Tam et al., 2022; Guo et al., 2023).
Model-based RL Our work is related to other work in Model-based Reinforcement Learning (Sut-
ton, 1990; Kaiser et al., 2019; Doya et al., 2002). In particular we compare to the Dreamer line of
work (Hafner et al., 2019; 2023; Sekar et al., 2020; Mendonca et al., 2021; Hafner et al., 2022).
These methods were developed for a pixels setting and employ a two step learning strategy: learn-
ing a generative forward model to predicts the next states X ′ , then learning a policy in imagination.
We compare directly to this in our experiments, where we show that our method (which employs a
discriminative forward model) learns more quickly and transfers better in our setting.


                                                   9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Exploration in RL Exploration is a well-studied problem in RL. For a more extensive literature
review, Amin et al. (2021) gives a comprehensive picture. Most relevant to here are count-based
methods such as Raileanu & Rocktäschel (2020); Zhang et al. (2021). Our work takes inspiration
from the hard exploration problems from Henaff et al. (2022). There are also many disagreement-
based methods including Sekar et al. (2020) and Mendonca et al. (2021); we compare directly to the
former for our Dreamer benchmarks with pre-training.

6   D ISCUSSION
In this work we introduce the Ab-MDP, which uses human understandable object-attribute relations
to build an abstract MDP. This enables us to learn a discriminitive model-based planning method
(MEAD) which explores and learns this semantic world model without extrinsic rewards.
Limitations The major limitation of the work is that the construction of Ab-MDP requires the ex-
istence of an object-centric mapping. While we show how these components can be learned in
Section 4.3, learning the object mapping still requires a labelled dataset, and a method to automat-
ically discover object-centric representations in the form of items and attributes remains an open
question. Promisingly, the field as a whole is moving in a direction where abstractions are becoming
more easily obtainable. For instance, object-centric abstract maps can be acquired using segmenta-
tion models (Kirillov et al., 2023) and visual language models (Alayrac et al., 2022). Similarly, the
short-horizon (low-level) manipulation policies can be acquired more efficiently through imitation
learning. For example, it has been found in robotics that simply using off-the-shelf models for per-
ception and skill policies is possible (Liu et al., 2024). Finally, we currently focus only on discrete
attributes, meaning the Ab-MDP cannot precisely capture continuously varying quantities (e.g. po-
sition and velocity). However, this is only a restriction in the abstract level, and does not impose any
fundamental restriction on the kind of learnable policies in the base MDP. In other words, Ab-MDP
models discrete, abstract relationships present in the base MDP, while low-level policies remain free
to utilize continuous features and output continuous actions in the base MDP to drive item-attribute
changes for the Ab-MDP.
Overall, as foundational models advance, the field is progressively moving toward working with dis-
crete, semantically meaningful representations. Concurrently, reinforcement learning provides rig-
orous and principled frameworks for designing intelligent agents, encompassing exploration, plan-
ning, and hierarchical behaviours. We hope this work demonstrates a productive synthesis of these
perspectives, and takes a step forward in the development of more intelligent autonomous systems.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

This work is supported by ONR MURI #N00014-22-1-2773, ONR #N00014-21-1-2758, and the
National Science Foundation under NSF Award 1922658. AGC is supported by the Natural Sciences
and Engineering Research Council of Canada (NSERC), PGSD3-559278-2021. Cette recherche a
été financée par le Conseil de recherches en sciences naturelles et en génie du Canada (CRSNG),
PGSD3-559278-2021. We are grateful for insightful discussions with Rajesh Ranganath. We thank
Doina Precup, Arun Ahuja, Ben Evans, Siddhant Haldar, Nikhil Bhattasali, Ulyana Piterbarg, Nikhil
Dongyan Lin, and Mandana Samiei for their helpful feedback on earlier drafts of this paper. Finally,
we thank the anonymous reviewers for making this work stronger in many ways.


R EFERENCES
David Abel. A theory of abstraction in reinforcement learning. ArXiv, abs/2203.00397, 2022. URL
  https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:229232139.

Jean-Baptiste Alayrac, Jeff Donahue, Pauline Luc, Antoine Miech, Iain Barr, Yana Hasson, Karel
  Lenc, Arthur Mensch, Katie Millican, Malcolm Reynolds, Roman Ring, Eliza Rutherford, Serkan
  Cabi, Tengda Han, Zhitao Gong, Sina Samangooei, Marianne Monteiro, Jacob Menick, Se-
  bastian Borgeaud, Andy Brock, Aida Nematzadeh, Sahand Sharifzadeh, Mikolaj Binkowski,
  Ricardo Barreira, Oriol Vinyals, Andrew Zisserman, and Karen Simonyan. Flamingo: a vi-
  sual language model for few-shot learning. ArXiv, abs/2204.14198, 2022. URL https:
  //api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:248476411.


                                                  10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Susan Amin, Maziar Gomrokchi, Harsh Satija, Herke van Hoof, and Doina Precup. A survey of
  exploration methods in reinforcement learning. ArXiv, abs/2109.00157, 2021. URL https:
  //api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:237372527.

Jacob Andreas, Dan Klein, and Sergey Levine. Modular multitask reinforcement learning with
  policy sketches. In ICML, pp. 166–175. JMLR. org, 2017.

Pierre-Luc Bacon, Jean Harb, and Doina Precup. The option-critic architecture. ArXiv,
  abs/1609.05140, 2016.    URL https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:
  6627476.

Andrew G. Barto and Sridhar Mahadevan. Recent advances in hierarchical reinforcement
  learning. Discrete Event Dynamic Systems, 13:41–77, 2003.  URL https://api.
  semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:386824.

Craig Boutilier, Richard Dearden, Moisés Goldszmidt, et al. Exploiting structure in policy construc-
  tion. In IJCAI, volume 14, pp. 1104–1113, 1995.

Craig Boutilier, Thomas Dean, and Steve Hanks. Decision-theoretic planning: Structural assump-
  tions and computational leverage. Journal of Artificial Intelligence Research, 11:1–94, 1999.

Yuri Burda, Harrison Edwards, Amos Storkey, and Oleg Klimov. Exploration by random network
  distillation. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2019.

Michael Chang, Alyssa L Dayan, Franziska Meier, Thomas L Griffiths, Sergey Levine, and Amy
 Zhang. Neural constraint satisfaction: Hierarchical abstraction for combinatorial generalization
 in object rearrangement. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.11373, 2023.

Valerie Chen, Abhinav Kumar Gupta, and Kenneth Marino. Ask your humans: Using human in-
  structions to improve generalization in reinforcement learning. ArXiv, abs/2011.00517, 2020.
  URL https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:226226934.

Valerie Chen, Abhinav Gupta, and Kenneth Marino. Ask your humans: Using human instructions
  to improve generalization in reinforcement learning. In ICLR, 2021.

Thomas Degris and Olivier Sigaud. Factored markov decision processes. Markov Decision Pro-
  cesses in Artificial Intelligence, pp. 99–126, 2013.

Thomas G. Dietterich. The maxq method for hierarchical reinforcement learning. In International
  Conference on Machine Learning, 1998. URL https://api.semanticscholar.org/
  CorpusID:10568560.

Carlos Diuk, Andre Cohen, and Michael L. Littman. An object-oriented representation for efficient
  reinforcement learning. In International Conference on Machine Learning, 2008. URL https:
  //api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:207168200.

Kenji Doya, Kazuyuki Samejima, Ken ichi Katagiri, and Mitsuo Kawato. Multiple model-based
  reinforcement learning. Neural Computation, 14:1347–1369, 2002. URL https://api.
  semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:14458943.

Lasse Espeholt, Hubert Soyer, Remi Munos, Karen Simonyan, Vlad Mnih, Tom Ward, Yotam
  Doron, Vlad Firoiu, Tim Harley, Iain Dunning, et al. Impala: Scalable distributed deep-rl with im-
  portance weighted actor-learner architectures. In International conference on machine learning,
  pp. 1407–1416. PMLR, 2018.

Nakul Gopalan, Marie desJardins, Michael L. Littman, James MacGlashan, S. Squire, Stefanie
  Tellex, John Winder, and Lawson L. S. Wong. Planning with abstract markov decision pro-
  cesses. In International Conference on Automated Planning and Scheduling, 2017. URL
  https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:250130.

Carlos Guestrin, Daphne Koller, Ronald Parr, and Shobha Venkataraman. Efficient solution algo-
  rithms for factored mdps. Journal of Artificial Intelligence Research, 19:399–468, 2003.


                                                 11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Zhourui Guo, Meng Yao, Yang Yu, and Qiyue Yin. Improve the efficiency of deep reinforcement
  learning through semantic exploration guided by natural language. ArXiv, abs/2309.11753, 2023.
  URL https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:262084426.

Abhishek Gupta, Vikash Kumar, Corey Lynch, Sergey Levine, and Karol Hausman. Relay policy
  learning: Solving long-horizon tasks via imitation and reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1910.11956, 2019.

Danijar Hafner, Timothy P. Lillicrap, Jimmy Ba, and Mohammad Norouzi. Dream to con-
  trol: Learning behaviors by latent imagination. ArXiv, abs/1912.01603, 2019. URL https:
  //api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:208547755.

Danijar Hafner, Kuang-Huei Lee, Ian S. Fischer, and P. Abbeel. Deep hierarchical planning from
  pixels. ArXiv, abs/2206.04114, 2022. URL https://api.semanticscholar.org/
  CorpusID:249538516.

Danijar Hafner, J. Pašukonis, Jimmy Ba, and Timothy P. Lillicrap. Mastering diverse do-
  mains through world models.      ArXiv, abs/2301.04104, 2023.    URL https://api.
  semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:255569874.

Dan Haramati, Tal Daniel, and Aviv Tamar. Entity-centric reinforcement learning for object manip-
  ulation from pixels. arXiv preprint arXiv:2404.01220, 2024.

Mikael Henaff, Roberta Raileanu, Minqi Jiang, and Tim Rocktäschel. Exploration via elliptical
 episodic bonuses. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 35:37631–37646, 2022.

Yiding Jiang, Shixiang Shane Gu, Kevin P Murphy, and Chelsea Finn. Language as an abstraction
  for hierarchical deep reinforcement learning. In NeurIPS, pp. 9414–9426, 2019.

Lukasz Kaiser, Mohammad Babaeizadeh, Piotr Milos, Blazej Osinski, Roy H. Campbell,
  K. Czechowski, D. Erhan, Chelsea Finn, Piotr Kozakowski, Sergey Levine, Afroz Mohiud-
  din, Ryan Sepassi, G. Tucker, and Henryk Michalewski. Model-based reinforcement learning
  for atari. ArXiv, abs/1903.00374, 2019. URL https://api.semanticscholar.org/
  CorpusID:67856232.

Ramtin Keramati, Jay Whang, Patrick Cho, and Emma Brunskill. Fast exploration with simplified
  models and approximately optimistic planning in model based reinforcement learning. arXiv:
  Artificial Intelligence, 2018. URL https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:
  53781531.

Alexander Kirillov, Eric Mintun, Nikhila Ravi, Hanzi Mao, Chloe Rolland, Laura Gustafson,
  Tete Xiao, Spencer Whitehead, Alexander C. Berg, Wan-Yen Lo, Piotr Dollár, and Ross B.
  Girshick. Segment anything. 2023 IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vi-
  sion (ICCV), pp. 3992–4003, 2023. URL https://api.semanticscholar.org/
  CorpusID:257952310.

Heinrich Küttler, Nantas Nardelli, Thibaut Lavril, Marco Selvatici, Viswanath Sivakumar,
  Tim Rocktäschel, and Edward Grefenstette. TorchBeast: A PyTorch Platform for Dis-
  tributed RL. arXiv preprint arXiv:1910.03552, 2019. URL https://github.com/
  facebookresearch/torchbeast.

Heinrich Küttler, Nantas Nardelli, Alexander H. Miller, Roberta Raileanu, Marco Selvatici, Edward
  Grefenstette, and Tim Rocktäschel. The NetHack Learning Environment. In Proceedings of the
  Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS), 2020.

Seungjae Lee, Yibin Wang, Haritheja Etukuru, H Jin Kim, Nur Muhammad Mahi Shafiullah, and
  Lerrel Pinto. Behavior generation with latent actions. arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.03181, 2024.

Peiqi Liu, Yaswanth Orru, Chris Paxton, Nur Muhammad Mahi Shafiullah, and Lerrel Pinto. Ok-
  robot: What really matters in integrating open-knowledge models for robotics. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2401.12202, 2024.


                                               12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Francesco Locatello, Dirk Weissenborn, Thomas Unterthiner, Aravindh Mahendran, Georg Heigold,
  Jakob Uszkoreit, Alexey Dosovitskiy, and Thomas Kipf. Object-centric learning with slot atten-
  tion. Advances in neural information processing systems, 33:11525–11538, 2020.

Marlos C. Machado, Marc G. Bellemare, and Michael Bowling. A laplacian framework for option
 discovery in reinforcement learning. In International Conference on Machine Learning, 2017.
 URL https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:7795421.

Marlos C. Machado, André Barreto, and Doina Precup. Temporal abstraction in reinforcement
 learning with the successor representation. J. Mach. Learn. Res., 24:80:1–80:69, 2021. URL
 https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:238634579.

Jiayuan Mao, Tomas Lozano-Perez, Joshua B. Tenenbaum, and Leslie Pack Kaelbling. Pdsketch:
   Integrated planning domain programming and learning. In NeurIPS, volume abs/2303.05501,
   2023. URL https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:257427056.

Russell Mendonca, Oleh Rybkin, Kostas Daniilidis, Danijar Hafner, and Deepak Pathak. Dis-
  covering and achieving goals via world models. ArXiv, abs/2110.09514, 2021. URL https:
  //api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:239016146.

Soroush Nasiriany, Vitchyr H. Pong, Steven Lin, and Sergey Levine. Planning with goal-conditioned
  policies. ArXiv, abs/1911.08453, 2019. URL https://api.semanticscholar.org/
  CorpusID:202779996.

Deepak Pathak, Pulkit Agrawal, Alexei A Efros, and Trevor Darrell. Curiosity-driven exploration
  by self-supervised prediction. In International conference on machine learning, pp. 2778–2787.
  PMLR, 2017.

Jeffrey Pennington, Richard Socher, and Christopher D. Manning. GloVe: Global vectors for word
   representation. In EMNLP, 2014.

Aleksei Petrenko, Zhehui Huang, Tushar Kumar, Gaurav S. Sukhatme, and Vladlen Koltun. Sam-
  ple factory: Egocentric 3d control from pixels at 100000 FPS with asynchronous reinforcement
  learning. In Proceedings of the 37th International Conference on Machine Learning, ICML
  2020, 13-18 July 2020, Virtual Event, volume 119 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Re-
  search, pp. 7652–7662. PMLR, 2020. URL http://proceedings.mlr.press/v119/
  petrenko20a.html.

Doina Precup. Temporal abstraction in reinforcement learning.       University of Massachusetts
  Amherst, 2000.

Martin L Puterman. Markov decision processes: discrete stochastic dynamic programming. John
 Wiley & Sons, 1994.

Roberta Raileanu and Tim Rocktäschel.     Ride: Rewarding impact-driven exploration for
  procedurally-generated environments. ArXiv, abs/2002.12292, 2020. URL https://api.
  semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:211532691.

Rahul Ramesh, Manan Tomar, and Balaraman Ravindran. Successor options: An option discovery
  framework for reinforcement learning. ArXiv, abs/1905.05731, 2019. URL https://api.
  semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:153312771.

Mikayel Samvelyan, Robert Kirk, Vitaly Kurin, Jack Parker-Holder, Minqi Jiang, Eric Hambro,
 Fabio Petroni, Heinrich Kuttler, Edward Grefenstette, and Tim Rocktäschel. Minihack the planet:
 A sandbox for open-ended reinforcement learning research. In Thirty-fifth Conference on Neural
 Information Processing Systems Datasets and Benchmarks Track (Round 1), 2021. URL https:
 //openreview.net/forum?id=skFwlyefkWJ.

Cansu Sancaktar, Sebastian Blaes, and Georg Martius. Curious exploration via structured world
  models yields zero-shot object manipulation. Advances in Neural Information Processing Sys-
  tems, 35:24170–24183, 2022.


                                               13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Julian Schrittwieser, Ioannis Antonoglou, Thomas Hubert, Karen Simonyan, Laurent Sifre, Simon
  Schmitt, Arthur Guez, Edward Lockhart, Demis Hassabis, Thore Graepel, et al. Mastering atari,
  go, chess and shogi by planning with a learned model. Nature, 588(7839):604–609, 2020.
John Schulman, Filip Wolski, Prafulla Dhariwal, Alec Radford, and Oleg Klimov. Proxi-
  mal policy optimization algorithms. ArXiv, abs/1707.06347, 2017. URL https://api.
  semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:28695052.
Ramanan Sekar, Oleh Rybkin, Kostas Daniilidis, P. Abbeel, Danijar Hafner, and Deepak
  Pathak. Planning to explore via self-supervised world models. In International Conference
  on Machine Learning, 2020. URL https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:
  216559511.
Aayam Shrestha, Stefan Lee, Prasad Tadepalli, and Alan Fern. Deepaveragers: Offline reinforce-
  ment learning by solving derived non-parametric mdps. ArXiv, abs/2010.08891, 2020. URL
  https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:224703455.
Richard S. Sutton. Dyna, an integrated architecture for learning, planning, and reacting. SIGART
  Bull., 2:160–163, 1990. URL https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:
  207162288.
Richard S. Sutton, Doina Precup, and Satinder Singh. Between mdps and semi-mdps: A frame-
  work for temporal abstraction in reinforcement learning. Artif. Intell., 112:181–211, 1999. URL
  https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:76564.
Allison C. Tam, Neil C. Rabinowitz, Andrew Kyle Lampinen, Nicholas A. Roy, Stephanie C. Y.
  Chan, DJ Strouse, Jane X. Wang, Andrea Banino, and Felix Hill. Semantic exploration from
  language abstractions and pretrained representations. ArXiv, abs/2204.05080, 2022. URL
  https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:248085427.
A Vaswani. Attention is all you need. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2017.
Rishi Veerapaneni, John D. Co-Reyes, Michael Chang, Michael Janner, Chelsea Finn, Jiajun Wu,
  Joshua B. Tenenbaum, and Sergey Levine. Entity abstraction in visual model-based reinforcement
  learning. ArXiv, abs/1910.12827, 2019. URL https://api.semanticscholar.org/
  CorpusID:204904886.
Aurèle Hainaut Werner Duvaud. Muzero general: Open reimplementation of muzero. https:
  //github.com/werner-duvaud/muzero-general, 2019.
Amy Zhang, Sainbayar Sukhbaatar, Adam Lerer, Arthur Szlam, and Rob Fergus. Composable
 planning with attributes. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 5842–5851.
 PMLR, 2018.
Tianjun Zhang, Huazhe Xu, Xiaolong Wang, Yi Wu, Kurt Keutzer, Joseph E. Gonzalez, and Yuan-
  dong Tian. Noveld: A simple yet effective exploration criterion. In Neural Information Processing
  Systems, 2021. URL https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:245877021.
Allan Zhou, Vikash Kumar, Chelsea Finn, and Aravind Rajeswaran. Policy architectures for com-
  positional generalization in control. arXiv preprint arXiv:2203.05960, 2022.


                                                14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A     B ROADER I MPACT
Our contributions are fundamental reinforcement learning algorithms, and we hope our work will
contribute to the goal of developing generally intelligent systems. However, we do not focus on
applications in this work, and substantial additional work will be required to apply our methods to
real-world settings.
Regarding compute resources, we use an internal clusters with Nvidia A100 and H100 GPUs. All
experiments use at most one GPU and are run for no more than two days. Running baselines along
with randomization of seeds requires multiple GPUs at once.

B     P ROBLEM S ETTING D ETAILS
B.1     A BSTRACTED MDP

Here we re-iterate our framework and discuss it in greater details. We first define a low level (reward-
free) Markov Decision Process (MDP, Puterman (1994)) as the tuple ⟨S, A, P ⟩, with (low level)
state space S, primitive action space A, and transition probability function P : S × A × S →
[0, 1]. Suppose the agent interacts with the environments at discrete time-steps u = 0, 1, 2, ..., then
P (su+1 |su , au ) describes the probability of transitioning to state su+1 ∈ S after one time-step when
choosing action au ∈ A in the current low level state su .
To construct an Ab-MDP, we start with a surjective deterministic mapping M from low to abstract
level: M : S → X . That is, any low level state S ∈ S maps onto some abstract state X ∈ X
(multiple S can and do map to the same X).
Define behaviours B. Each b = (α(i) , ξ ′ ) ∈ B describes a single item id α(i) and a desired new
attribute, along with an associated low level policy πb : S → A which tries to set the specified
item to have the new attribute. A behaviour can be competent or incompetent. Executing competent
behaviours lead to the specified item-attribute changes with high probability.
A behaviour may be incompetent because (i) the proposed attribute change is impossible within the
rules of the world (e.g. item is not a craft-able object) (ii) the attribute change is not possible from
the current state (e.g. do not have the correct raw ingredients in inventory), or (iii) the behaviour is
not sufficiently trained to perform the specified change.
We build a simple abstraction that allow us to learn purely at the abstract level while still being able
to influence actions at the low level. Notice the surjective map M give us state abstraction. We build
temporal abstraction by defining abstract state transitions as happening at a slower time-scale than
the low level time-step u.
Definition B.1. An abstract state transition has occurred at (low level) time-step u if: (i) the
abstract state has changed, M(su ) ̸= M(su−1 ); or (ii) the abstract state has not changed in the past
k steps, M(su ) = M(su−1 ) = ... = M(su−k ).
Definition B.2. An (max-k) Ab-MDP is defined as the tuple ⟨X , B, Tk ⟩, with abstract states X ,
abstract behaviours B, and transition probability function Tk : X × B × X → [0, 1]. Tk (X ′ |X, b)
describes the probability of being in abstract state X ′ when starting from X and executing behaviour
b until an abstract state transition occurs (Definition B.1).
In the main text, we write Ab-MDP and denote the transition function as T for brevity (instead of
writing max-k Ab-MDP and transition function Tk ). k = 8 was chosen for baseline methods as it
worked slightly better. MEAD works just as well with k = 8 and k = 16.

B.1.1    I NTERPRETATION VIA O PTIONS F RAMEWORK
It is natural to interpret our hierarchical framework within the Options framework (Sutton et al.,
1999). An option consists of a policy π : Ω × A → [0, 1], a termination function β : Ω → [0, 1],
and an initiation set of states I ⊆ S. Ω is used to denote the set of all possible historical states.
Our set of behaviour b ∈ B is a set of options. Each behaviour specifies a behaviour policy πb ,
which deterministically terminate when an abstract state transition occurs (Definition B.1), and they
can be initiated from all states (I = S).


                                                  15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


The point of the Options Framework and temporal abstraction generally is to break up a monolithic
problem into re-usable sub-problems. How one breaks up a problem is an open question. Some
popular previous approaches include finding bottleneck states and using the successor representation
to discover well-connected states. We can view our approach as another way of breaking up the
problem when prior knowledge in the form of objects is available: we break up the problem at the
level of single item-attribute changes (with options defined as policies that can change a single item’s
attribute).

B.1.2    A NOTE ON SEMI -MDP
The decision process that selects amongst options is a semi-MDP (Theorem 1, (Sutton et al.,
1999)). The general way to model semi-MDP dynamic requires considering the amount of low
level timesteps that passes between each abstract level decision as a random variable (Sutton et al.,
1999; Barto & Mahadevan, 2003). Instead, we chose to simply treat the abstracted level as having
a fixed time interval in between steps. This is chosen for simplicity as our focus is with learning
efficiency on the abstract level, and this formulation allow us to directly apply efficient algorithms
developed to solve MDPs. We also see empirically that given our M and B this choice does not lead
to a less optimal policy compared to algorithms that directly solve the low level MDP.

B.1.3    R ELATIONSHIP TO OTHER MDP FORMALISM
Our Ab-MDP is related to Factored MDPs (Boutilier et al., 1995; 1999; Degris & Sigaud, 2013).
Factored MDPs model states as decomposable into a set of factors Xt = {x(1) , x(2) , ...}, with each
factor having domain Dom(x(i) ). This allows the transition probability function to be decomposed
into Dynamic Bayesian Networks (DBNs) between the factors at two successive time-steps t−1 and
t, with the factors as the nodes of the DBN. Concretely, this decomposes the transition probability
function for each action into a product of conditional probabilities,
                                                       (i)          (i)
                                              Y
                             Pa (Xt |Xt−1 ) =     Pa (xt |Parent(xt )) ,                         (6)
                                                 i
                                                                                (i)
where Parent(x )) denotes the factors in Xt−1 which are the parent of xt . In the most generic
                (i)

form, each action a ∈ A induces a different DBN. If the DBN is known or well-approximated, the
Factored MDP can be efficiently solved (Guestrin et al., 2003).
Similarly, the Ab-MDP considers a decomposition of state into items (analogous to factors), and
our method MEAD shares the philosophy of efficient utilization of a factorized state space. While
one could interpret Ab-MDP as a kind of Factored MDP with discrete domains, the two differs in
their emphasis on transition vs. actions. Factored MDPs defines arbitrary actions, each inducing a
potentially different conditional independence structure in the transition dynamics. The Ab-MDP
instead defines a set of next state changes as the actions, without explicitly specifying any inde-
pendence structures in its transitions dynamics. Our method MEAD then makes use of this action
representation to directly model the probability of item-attribute changes, while implicitly learning
the transition dynamics in the weights of the neural network.
Our Ab-MDP is also related to the Object-oriented MDP (OO-MDP) of Diuk et al. (2008), and
shares a similar structure of describing a set of “objects” and their attributes separately. In OO-
MDP, an environment consists of a set of objects O = {o1 , ..., oo }, each belonging to one of c
classes {C1 , ..., Cc }, and each having a set of (class) attributes Att(C) = {C.a1 , ..., C.aa }. An
OO-MDP “object state”—o.state—is a value assignment to all of its attributes ({a1 , ..., aa }), and
the OO-MDP “state” is the union of all of its object states: s = ∪oi=1 oi .state.
Our Ab-MDP similarly contains a set of items, X = {x(1) , ..., x(N ) }, with each item consisting of an
item identity and an attribute, x(i) = (α(i) , ξ (i) ). We can view our Ab-MDP as a soft generalization
of OO-MDP by modelling:

        • The OO-MDP object (and its associated class) as an Ab-MDP item identity: α(i) = oi ,
        • The OO-MDP attribute as the Ab-MDP item attribute: ξ (i) = {C.a1 , ..., C.aa }, oi ∈ C.

To model state transitions, OO-MDP makes additional assumptions that objects interact through
their class identities. Specifically, a set of relations determine if two objects interact, with resulting

                                                     16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


effects that is used to update the object state. This requires the designer to additionally provide a set
of accurate relations functions and effects, with the benefit of facilitating within-class generalization.
In contrast, Ab-MDP makes no additional assumption about object class, relations, or interactions
between objects. We instead directly models (probabilistically) whether an effect is possible. This
is done in a fully data-driven way through a neural function f : X × B → [0, 1] and empirically is
shown to generalize well across item-attribute variations. Item interactions are implicitly represented
by the attention mechanism over the set of input items.
The neural constraint satisfaction (NCS) approach of Chang et al. (2023) introduces an entity-
set state representation, where each entity h(i) is decomposable into type z (i) and entity state s(i) .
Our Ab-MDP can naturally be mapped onto their entity-state abstraction by setting an Ab-MDP
item identity as the NCS type (α(i) = z (i) ) and the Ab-MDP item attribute as the NCS entity state
(ξ (i) = s(i) ). Note the Ab-MDP “behaviour” (i.e. abstract action) is equivalent to the NCS “action”.
NCS makes additional assumptions that attribute change is dependent only the behaviour:
 (i)           (i)                                                                              (i)
ξt+1 = f (ξt , bt ). On the other hand, Ab-MDP models more general relationships ξt+1 =
     (1) (1)       (N ) (N )
f (αt , ξt , ..., αt , ξt , bt ) (e.g. Equation 1). The NCS assumption is restrictive in that it would
fail to capture cases where an item’s attribute change depends on what the item’s identity is, and/or
the attributes of other items.
The Deep Latent Particles (DLP) approach used in Haramati et al. (2024) learns a latent space
containing a set of K particles: z = {(zp , zs , zd , zt , zf )i }i=1
                                                                  K−1
                                                                      . zp ∈ R2 describes the particle’s
(x,y) position on an image, zs ∈ R describes its (x,y) scale, zd ∈ R describe its “depth”, zt ∈ R its
                                    2

transparency, and zf ∈ Rl the visual features around the particle. We can cast this into the Ab-MDP
by having K items whose item identities is the particle’s index, α(i) = i, and item attribute is a 6+l-
dimensional vector describing the particle features; ξ (i) = (zp , zs , zd , zt , zf )i . DLP can be one way
of getting abstraction from pixels, albeit it is restricted to settings where the state is image-based.


B.1.4    E XAMPLE APPLICATIONS

We provide further examples of possible Ab-MDP constructions for a few common settings. Note
we provide one example abstraction per domain, though multiple types of Ab-MDP abstractions can
in theory be constructed depending on the choice of the item set and attribute set.


  Environment Description                      Example abstract states          How to get abstract
                                                                                behaviours
  Kitchen          A robot arm is in a         Item set: {light, oven, mi-      Imitating expert play
  (Gupta           MuJoCo kitchen with         crowave, cabinet}.       At-     data in Gupta et al.
  et al., 2019)    multiple things to do       tribute set: {open, closed}      (2019) which already
                   such as turning on                                           produce trajectories
                   lights, turning on ket-                                      that lead to abstract
                   tle, opening oven / mi-                                      state changes
                   crowave / cabinet, etc.
  Cube             A robot arm pushes          Item set: {red cube, blue        RL to push a single
  pushing          cubes on a table to         cube, green cube, . . . }. At-   block to goal at a time
  (Haramati        their desired positions     tribute set: {at goal posi-
  et al., 2024)                                tion, not at goal position}
  Real world       A Stretch robot in a        Item set: {drawer, bag,          Human       imitation
  robot (Lee       kitchen, moving ob-         oven, box, bread, can}. At-      learning data con-
  et al., 2024)    jects in and out of con-    tribute set: {open, closed,      taining   trajectories
                   tainers                     on table, in bag, in drawer,     between abstract state
                                               in oven}                         changes

                       Table 1: Example Ab-MDP’s applied to various domains


                                                    17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


B.1.5    M ULTI -I TEM B EHAVIOURS
In the Ab-MDP, we consider abstract states as an (ordered) set of items X = {x(1) , x(2) , ...}, where
each item consist of an identity and attribute x(i) = (α(i) , ξ (i) ). A behaviour is a description of
which item(s) to change (Section 2.1). For instance, the single-item behaviour b = {(α(i) , ξ ′ )}
specifies a change of the i-th item to a new attribute ξ ′ . We can similarly specify multi-item be-
haviours, such as a two-item behaviour b = {(α(i) , ξ ′ ), (α(j) , ξ ′′ )}. This behaviour is competent if
after an abstract state change, the i-th item takes on attribute ξ ′ and the j-th item takes on attribute
ξ ′′ with high probability.
For N objects, m attributes, and I items changes to consider in behaviours,

                                                           N
                               Number of behaviours =          × mI .                            (7)
                                                           I
For instance, for single item change behaviours (I = 1), there are N1 × m1 = N × m behaviours.


For two-item change behaviours (I = 2), there are N2 × m2 behaviours, and so on. In the ex-


treme, one can choose to model a all possible item attribute changes (I = N ), which results in mN
behaviours that is exponential in the number of items considered.

B.2     A NALYSIS OF A SSUMPTIONS

B.2.1    T HE GENERALITY OF A B -MDP
We make the observation that any sparse reward RL task can be described by a Ab-MDP with a
single item,
Remark B.3. For any MDP with a reward function R : S → R, where,
                                   R(S) = 1 if S ∈ G and 0 otherwise ,
for S ∈ G terminal goal state(s), we can describe this as an Ab-MDP with a single item α and binary
attributes {ξ1 , ξ2 }. The abstract map M : S → X can be constructed in the following way,
                                              {(α, ξ2 )} if S ∈ G ,

                                    M(S) =                                                        (8)
                                              {(α, ξ1 )} otherwise .
The proxy problem of transition from X = {(α, ξ1 )} to X = {(α, ξ2 )} solves the sparse reward
task in the base MDP and a competent behaviour for this transition is a good policy is the base task.
The point of this is merely to say that Ab-MDP does not restrict the RL problem in a particular way.
Of course, such a construction of an Ab-MDP is not interesting and learning a competent behaviour
for this Ab-MDP is no easier than learning a behaviour that maximizes the reward function in the
base MDP.
The point of Ab-MDP, however, is that a task can be broken-up in a more interesting way, e.g. in our
case through a richer set of items and attributes. We demonstrate in this work that an object-centric
item-attribute set encoding result in a set of intuitively base behaviours and a world model that is
interesting.

B.2.2    D ISCRIMINATIVE MODELLING WITH SINGLE ITEM CHANGE
In our forward model, we made the assumption to only model single item’s attribute change (Sec-
tion 3.1 and Equation 3), and that if the attribute does not change then the abstract state Xt+1 stays
the same as Xt . We analyze this assumption more deeply in this section.

Robustness through re-planning We first note that in practice, it is often the case that multiple
item’s attribute changes. For instance, in the 2D Crafting environments, crafting an item often con-
sumes the raw ingredient used to craft it. Thus, a plan that considers multiple items being crafted
(attribute change from absent to in inventory) will inaccurately predict that the raw ingredi-
ent stays in the inventory (attribute of raw ingredient stays the same, staying as in inventory)
rather than changing to absent. We illustrate the plan generate at each abstract step in Figure 9,
and show that despite this being the case, the plan still generates an optimal action sequence; and that
at each time-step, re-planning with the newly obserbved abstract state updates the incorrect abstract
prediction to be more accurate.

                                                   18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                      True States       Plan at t = 0



                t=0


                                                          Plan at t = 1



                t=1


                                                                           Plan at t = 2



                t=2



Figure 9: An illustrative example following the logic of the 2D Crafting game. The objective of the
game is to get planks by chopping trees (which changes the plank’s attribute from absent to in
inventory, and the tree’s attribute to from in world to absent as the resource is depleted),
then craft wooden stairs using the plank (which depletes the plank resources to absent and creates
wooden stairs in inventory). Comparing the true state trajectory with the imagined plan at
t=0, we notice that the imagined future is incorrect: modelling only single item changes do not
capture the fact that resources are depleted, but only new resources are created. Nevertheless, at
t=1, the model observes the new abstract state and can therefore re-plan with the most up-to-date
information which corrects for previously incorrect predictions. A case like this happens in practice
within the 2D Crafting games.



An adversarial failure case Here we artificially design an adversarial setting which is not en-
countered in our evaluation environments, but would in theory result in sub-optimal plans. With
reference to Figure 10a, we construct an environment whose goal is to construct both a wooden stair
and a wooden door. Both require a single unit of wooden plank to craft. The attribute here is the
quantity of the item in the inventory. Suppose further that once we start crafting, we can no longer
collect additional wooden planks.
The correct sequence of behaviour would be to first collect another unit of wood, before crafting a
wooden stairs and a wooden door. Planning with a discriminative single item change model would
result in a sub-optimal plan, as it fails to consider that crafting a wooden stair result in the wooden
plank being consumed, and therefore cannot subsequently craft the wooden door (Fig.10a, plan at
t=0).
Note that this failure case is a limitation of doing discriminative modelling with single item changes
(Section 3.1), not the Ab-MDP framework. Doing generative modelling (considering all possible
Xt+1 ∈ X given Xt , bt ) would be able to learn the correct relationship—at the cost of data ineffi-
ciency (Section 4.4.1). Nevertheless, we discuss how to fix it below with discriminative modelling.

Discriminative modelling of multi-object changes One simple way of generating plans with
multi-item dependencies over time is to consider multi-item behaviours (Section B.1.5). With ref-
erence to Figure 10b, we notice that simply modelling two item changes can perfectly capture the
dynamics within this task and generate the optimal plan. This comes at a cost of a greater number
of behaviours to consider at each step of planning (E.g. for N = 3 items, m = 3 attributes, there
are 9 behaviours to consider for single-item changes, and 27 behaviours to consider for two-items
changes).
Generally speaking, with a small change in the representation of the problem, we can plan to gener-
ate the optimal sequence of abstract behaviours. This can also happen through changing the abstract
mapping—e.g. by modelling items along with the resources needed to create them. Overall, we view


                                                   19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                  Correct
                Trajectory



                  Taken
              Trajectory                                                                Goal



                     Plan
                                                                                         Real transition
                     (t=0)                                                               (success)

                                                                                         Real transition
                                                                                         (failed)
                                                                                         Imagine transition
                                                                                         (success)
                                        Plan                                             Imagine transition
                                        (t=1)                                            (failed)



                 (a) Planning with single item-attribute changes fails in this adversarial task.


            Taken
        Trajectory

                                                                                                   Goal


             Plan
             (t=0)

                                                                                                    Real transition
                                                                                                    (success)

                                Plan                                                                Imagine transition
                                                                                                    (success)
                                (t=1)



                                                  Plan
                                                  (t=2)

            (b) Planning with double item-attribute changes models attribute dynamics perfectly.

                     Figure 10: Single and double item-attribute change planning


this as a problem of constructing the right abstraction for the problem which, although important, is
not the main focus of this work and nor a fundamental issue with our modelling choice.


C     MEAD: E XTENDED M ETHODS

Here we provide more details about our methods


C.1   M ODEL F ITTING

Given a dataset of (abstract) trajectories collected via the exploration strategy outlined in Section 3.2,
D = {(X1 , b1 , X2 , b2 , ...)i }i=1,...,n , we can estimate the empirical success probability q of all ob-
served item-attribute pairs by counting their occurrences:

                             Number of (Xt , bt , Xt+1 ) transitions where (α(i) , ξ ′ ) ∈ Xt+1 + ϵ
    q(X, b) ≈ ρ(X, b) =                                                                             ,                    (9)
                                                  Number of (Xt , bt ) + 2ϵ

                                                       20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


where ϵ is a small smoothing constant (usually 1e-3). This can be efficiently implemented as a hash
map, via hashing (Xt , bt ) as keys, and the number of successful and total transitions (starting from
(Xt , bt )) as values.
To train our discriminative model fθ : X × B → [0, 1], we minimize binary cross entropy loss with
ρ as the target,
          θ∗ = arg min E [ρ(X, b) · log (fθ (X, b)) + (1 − ρ(X, b)) · log (1 − fθ (x, b))] ,                 (10)
                      θ

where the expectation is estimated by uniformly sampling unique (X, b) pairs from dataset.
Appendix C.2 contains architectural details for fθ . All in all, we found that our sampling method
and loss function lead to a stable, simple-to-optimize objective. Moreover, it is possible to directly
use ρ to do planning, as is done in Zhang et al. (2018). However, we show in Section F.1.3 that it is
more efficient to use our parametric modelling approach as it generalizes better to new objects.

Algorithm 1 Example Data Collection and Training loop for MEAD
Require: Model fθ
  repeat
    Collect n frames of data in environment using model fθ to plan to explore
    Add data to dataset D
    Reset model weights θ
    while accuracy requirement not met do
       if local minima then
           Reset model weights θ
       end if
       Sample from D and minimize Equation 10, for m optimizer steps
    end while
  until time runs out

We provide the pseudocode for training MEAD in Algorithm 1. The accuracy requirement is a
running average binary classification accuracy (typically set to 0.95). The local minima is evaluated
by checking if the difference is accuracy is close to zero (taken as a exponentially smoothed average
to be insensitive to stochasticity). We find in Figure 28 that the most important setting is to run
enough gradient updates between data collection steps—the precise setting of checking for accuracy
and local minima does not matter as much.

C.2   M ODEL A RCHITECTURE



                                                                         m
                                                                                              1
          m



                                                              m
                                                                                                   linear


                                                              1              m
           1                                                                                      (logits)
                                                                                       dot prod
                                                                                 1         +
                          fully connected     key-query-value                        layer norm
                           layer applied     projections (linear)
                           element-wise


                                            Figure 11: Model Architecture

We use a small key-query attention architecture that takes in sets of vectors to produce a binary
prediction (Figure 11). Each item x(i) = (α(i) , ξ (i) ) is represented by its item identity and item
attribute embeddings. An Ab-MDP state containing a set of m items is represented as a m × (diden +
dattr ) matrix. The behaviour b = (α(i) , ξ ′ ) describes an item identity and the new attribute to try to
change it to, and is a diden + dattr dimensional vector. The set of items and the behaviour is passed


                                                                    21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


element-wise through a small MLP (specifically a 2 layer ReLU network with 128 units in its hidden
layer) to produce a set of m × demb item embeddings, and a demb -dimensional behaviour embedding
(demb = 128). The item embeddings are linearly projected into key and value matrices K and V
both with shape m × dk , and the behaviour embedding is linearly projected into a 1 × dk query
vector Q (dk = 256). We compute the scaled dot product attention (Vaswani, 2017):

                                                            QK ⊤

                            Attention(Q, K, V ) = softmax    √     V .                         (11)
                                                               dk

The output of the attention operation is an 1 × dk vector. Finally, it is linearly projected to a scalar,
representing the un-normalized logit for binary prediction.

C.3    E XPLORATION

We use a reward function that encourages indefinitely exploring all states and behaviours,
                                                s
                                                        T
                                 rintr (X, b) =                 ,                                            (12)
                                                  N(X, b) + ϵT

where N(X, b) is a count of the number of times (X, b) is visited, T is the total number of abstract
time-steps, and ϵ = 0.001 is a smoothing constant.
Intuitively, a state with many visits (large N(X, b)) will have lower reward, while T prevents the
intrinsic reward from shrinking to zero (so the agent explores indefinitely). Indeed, in the bandits
setting, this reward function is maximized when all states are visited uniformly (Zhang et al., 2018).
We emphasize that all of our model training is done with this intrinsic reward, with no task-specific
information injected at training time.
We use MCTS to find high (intrinsic) reward states. MCTS iteratively expands a search tree and bal-
ances between exploring less-visited states (using an upper confidence tree) and exploiting reward-
ing states.6 In our case, MCTS generates child nodes of abstract state X by proposing behaviours b
and checking if fθ (X, b) > 0.5 (Figure 3a). We also introduce a small degree of randomness so all
behaviours have a small chance of being selected.
We modify the MCTS algorithm to return the the maximum rintr (X, b) encountered along each path
during the back-propagation stage and set a fix expansion depth without a simulation stage from the
leaf node. This is done to prevent loops and encourage the agent to go toward frontier states with
the least amount of visitations.


D     E NVIRONMENTS

D.1    2D C RAFTING

We adopt three crafting environments proposed in Chen et al. (2020), which contain Minecraft-like
crafting logic. The agent needs to traverse a grid world, collect resources, and build increasingly
more complex items by collecting and crafting ingredients (e.g. getting an axe, chopping tree to get
wood, before being able to make wooden planks and furniture that depend on planks). Primitive ac-
tions consist of movement in the four cardinal directions (N,E,S,W), toggle (of a switch to open
doors), grab (e.g. pickaxe), mine (e.g. ores), craft (at crafting bench of specific items). The
low level observation space consist of a dictionary containing: (i) an (5, 5, 300) matrix describing a
5 × 5 world with each state being described by an 300-dim word embedding, (ii) an 300-dim inven-
tory embedding describing things in the inventory, and (iii) a 300-dim goal embedding describing in
words the task to complete. We describe each environment’s crafting sequences required to finish
each task in Table 2.
    6
      This exploration is purely within the model’s imagination, rather than the real environment. Balancing
exploration and exploitation is still necessary as exhaustive search in the abstract space is highly inefficient /
intractable.


                                                       22
     Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2021
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure  12: Example
     Figure  6: Generatedepisode   in anatexample
                              language     test time 2D
                                                      for Crafting   environment,
                                                          a 2-step craft.   We only figure
                                                                                      displaytaken   from Chen
                                                                                               key frames   of theet al.
(2020).   To solve
     trajectory whichthis
                        ledtask,  the agent
                             to changes  in theneeds   to pickup
                                                language.           the frames
                                                            These key   pickaxe,    mine
                                                                                match      the cobblestone
                                                                                        changes                stash to
                                                                                                 in the inventory
     to the object mentioned
get cobblestone,    then use the in the generated
                                     acquired       instruction.to Qualitatively,
                                                cobblestone                       the generated
                                                                   craft cobblestone              instructions
                                                                                         stairs. The           are be
                                                                                                       items must
     consistent
acquired  in thatduring
                  orderwhat     we would
                          as each          describehaving
                                   step requires     as a sub-task.
                                                            the itemQuantitatively,   the network
                                                                      from the previous             will an
                                                                                             step (with  spend  on
                                                                                                            additional
     average  4.8 steps  in the environment   for the same   generated
obstacle of being able to cross the door only if it has a key).         language   output.

     R EFERENCES
     Peter Anderson,Name
     Environment     Qi Wu, Damien Teney, Jake Bruce,       Mark
                                                     Crafting  TaskJohnson, Niko Sünderhauf, Ian Reid,
                                                                      Description
       Stephen Gould, and Anton van den Hengel. Vision-and-language navigation: Interpreting
            2 Steps                                Pickup pickaxe, mine gold ore
       visually-grounded navigation instructions in real environments. In Proceedings of the IEEE Con-
            3 Steps                Pickup    pickaxe,  mine diamond
       ference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition,              ore, craft
                                                              pp. 3674–3683,  2018.diamond boots
            4 Steps           Pickup axe, chop tree to get wood, craft wooden plank from wood,
     Jacob Andreas, Dan Klein, and   Sergey
                                  then  craft Levine.   Modularstairs
                                              either wooden       multitask reinforcement
                                                                      or wooden            learning
                                                                                   door from  plankwith
        policy sketches. In Proceedings of the 34th International Conference on Machine Learning-
        Volume 70, pp. 166–175. JMLR.
                                  Tableorg, 2017.
                                        2: 2D  Crafting environments.
    Jacob Andreas, Dan Klein, and Sergey Levine. Learning with latent language. In Proceedings
      of the 2018 Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association for Computational
Abstraction  States
      Linguistics:    WeLanguage
                   Human  build a simple  abstraction
                                   Technologies, Volumeto1 map
                                                           (Longfrom the pp.
                                                                 Papers), low2166–2179,
                                                                              level observation
                                                                                        2018. to an
abstract representation. We take as items all objects in the world, in the inventory, and potentially
     SRK Branavan,
craft-able          David
           objects. We    Silver,
                       assign     anditem
                               each   Regina
                                          oneBarzilay. Learning
                                              of the the        to win
                                                         attributes in by reading
                                                                       Table  3. manuals in a monte-
        carlo framework. Journal of Artificial Intelligence Research, 43:661–704, 2012.
We take each item identity as its 300-dim word embedding provided from the environment, and each
     Tianshi
attribute as aCao, Jingkang
               one-hot      Wang, Yining
                       embedding,         Zhang,
                                    repeated      andbeSivabalan
                                             to also    300-dim.Manivasagam.   Babyai++:
                                                                 Each item in the  item setTowards
                                                                                           is described
        grounded-language
as a 600-dim   vector.    learning beyond memorization. arXiv preprint arXiv:2004.07200, 2020.
     Devendra Singh Chaplot, Kanthashree Mysore Sathyendra, Rama Kumar Pasumarthi, Dheeraj Ra-
       jagopal, andAttribute                           Description
                    Ruslan Salakhutdinov. Gated-attention   architectures for task-oriented language
       grounding. IN
                  In Thirty-Second
                      WORLD          AnConference
                                   AAAI item is in the world but
                                                   on Artificial    not in the2018.
                                                                 Intelligence, inventory.
                 IN INVENTORY                     An item is in the player’s inventory.
     David L Chen and Raymond J Mooney. Learning to interpret natural language navigation instruc-
                                 An item isAAAI
                   ABSENT In Twenty-Fifth
       tions from observations.             neither in the inventory
                                                Conference             or Intelligence,
                                                            on Artificial  in the world.2011.
                                  TableBahdanau,
   Maxime Chevalier-Boisvert, Dzmitry    3: 2D Crafting
                                                   Salemattributes.
                                                          Lahlou, Lucas Willems, Chitwan Saharia,
    Thien Huu Nguyen, and Yoshua Bengio. BabyAI: First steps towards grounded language learning
    with a human in the loop. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2019a. URL
    https://openreview.net/forum?id=rJeXCo0cYX.
D.2 M INI H ACK
     Maxime Chevalier-Boisvert, Dzmitry Bahdanau, Salem Lahlou, Lucas Willems, Chitwan Saharia,
We also    use Huu
        Thien  the Nguyen,
                    MiniHack andenvironment
                                  Yoshua Bengio. (Samvelyan
                                                   BabyAI: Firstet steps
                                                                   al., 2021),
                                                                         towardswhich    is built
                                                                                  grounded        on the
                                                                                            language        Nethack
                                                                                                        learning
Learning   Environment
        with a human in the(Küttler
                             loop. InetInternational
                                         al., 2020). We  use fiveonhard-exploration
                                                     Conference                         games from
                                                                     Learning Representations,        Henaff
                                                                                                  2019b.   URLet al.
(2022) https://openreview.net/forum?id=rJeXCo0cYX.
         requiring interaction with different types of objects. The base game has a multi-modal ob-
servation space involving image, text, inventory, etc. Solving the game from the base observation is
      Geoffrey
extremely       Cideron,
            difficult sinceMathieu   Seurin, Florian
                            each environment            Strub, and
                                                  has multiple       OlivierofPietquin.
                                                                  variants                 Self-educated
                                                                                an object (e.g. Freeze-Wand lan- has
        guage   agent  with  hindsight    experience  replay  for  instruction   following.    arXiv
27 different types of wands), and randomly generated object locations. Indeed, Henaff et al. (2022)     preprint
        arXiv:1910.09451, 2019.
found that performant RL methods such as IMPALA (Espeholt et al., 2018; Küttler et al., 2019) and
all tested global
      John D       exploration
              Co-Reyes,          methods
                          Abhishek   Gupta,(ICM    (Pathak
                                              Suvansh        et al.,
                                                       Sanjeev, Nick2017)   andJacob
                                                                       Altieri,   RNDAndreas,
                                                                                        (Burda John
                                                                                                 et al.,DeNero,
                                                                                                          2019)) fail
to solvePieter
          theseAbbeel,
                 environments.
                        and Sergey Levine. Guiding policies with language via meta-learning. In Interna-
        tional Conference on Learning Representations, 2018.
The base environment contains an dictionary observation space, containing a 21 × 79 grid of glyphs
(integer denoting one of 5976 nethack glyph types), an 27-dimensional vector denoting agent’s stats,
a 256 dim vector for message, and another vector 9denoting agent’s inventory. The environments are:

        • "MiniHack-Levitate-Boots-Restricted-v0"
        • "MiniHack-Levitate-Potion-Restricted-v0"
        • "MiniHack-Freeze-Horn-Restricted-v0"


                                                          23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


        • "MiniHack-Freeze-Wand-Restricted-v0"
        • "MiniHack-Freeze-Random-Restricted-v0"

Generically, the Nethack Learning Environment contains over 100 actions; whereas the “restricted”
set of games reduce this space. The possible primitive actions include the 8 cardinal actions (N, E,
S, W, NE, SE, SW, NW), PICKUP, ZAP, WEAR, APPLY, QUAFF, PUTON, FIRE, READ, and
RUSH. It may be even less dependeing on the specific environment.

Abstract States We hand-construct a map that maps from the multi-modal observations to a set
of (object identities, object attribute) vectors. We do this by taking the glyph and inventory
observation modalities and filtering out all glyphs containing blank spaces, floor, and walls. To get
the object attributes, We take the remaining glyphs and mark them as being “in world” if they are
in glyph, and “in inventory” if they were from the inventory modality. Then, if the agent object
was beside an object and took a primitive action to move towards it, we mark the object as “standing
on”. If we observe a levitating message (e.g. “up, up and away” from the message modality, we
set the agent object to have “levitate” attribute. Alternatively, if the low level episode terminates
along with the last observation being either a levitate message or a “freeze spell” message (e.g. “the
frozen bolt bounces”), then we set the corresponding levitate or freeze object to have “used” status.
Finally, if an object disappears from the low level observation that is not being stood on, we set it to
have “removed” attribute. We summarize this in Table 4.
    Attribute Name                 Meaning                              How to Infer
        in world           The object is in the world        Object is in the glyph observation
      standing on          Object in world, and the         Object was in the glyph observation
                            player is standing on it         and message says “you see here...”
        in inventory          Object in inventory            Object in the inventory observation
         levitating           Agent is levitating             Message says a levitate message
            used               An object is used            A freeze or levitate message appears,
                                                                   and episode terminates
         removed         Object disappears from world         The object is not longer present

                          Table 4: Object Attributes and how to infer them.

As for object identities, they are simply the glyph number given to them in MiniHack (e.g. 329 for
the player agent).

Embeddings We then embed the object identities and attributes before providing them to the
agents. For object identities, we take each object’s glyph number, and map it to the NetHack text de-
scription for that glyph (which we can extract from the screen descriptions modality in the
low level observation). For each glyph’s text description (which is a short sentence), we pre-process
the sentence to remove stop words, then take each word’s GloVe (Pennington et al., 2014) embed-
ding and averaging over the sentence. We use the 300-dimensional Wikipedia 2014 + Gigaword
5 GloVe word vector embeddings from https://nlp.stanford.edu/projects/glove/
(6B tokens, 400k vocab, uncased). The 300-dim vectors were chosen as we found them to have
naturally good separation between object types in preliminary analysis.
We embed the object attributes as 300-dimensional one-hot vectors (i.e. one-hot between six cat-
egories and repeated to fill 300 dimension). This is done to make sure the input space is equally
represented by the identity and attribute embeddings.

D.2.1    S ANDBOX E NVIRONMENT
We design a sandbox environment where the agent can observe and interact with all items it may
encounter in one of the five evaluation environments. In the sandbox, each of these objects has an
0.5 chance (independently) of spawning at a random location: levitate boots, levitate rings, levitate
potions, freeze horn, freeze wands. Further there is a 0.5 change that a second of the same object
type will spawn. The agent can interact with any of the objects for up to 250 low level frames, or
the episode terminates once the agent sets any of the object’s attribute to “used”. Figure 14c shows
an instantiation of an episode.


                                                  24
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                           id         attr
                                        id   attr        embeds     embeds

                                                         m



                                                                  600



                                                          1
                                                                  600


                                       Figure 13: Embedding


           (a) Levitate-Potion          (b) Freeze-Random                    (c) Sandbox

Figure 14: Example Minihack environments. Only a cropped version of the screen is rendered for
presentation clarity. The full observation space contains a larger screen, agent’s inventory, in-game
stats, and in-game messages (not shown here).


D.2.2   L OW L EVEL P OLICY E RRORS
The learned and hand-defined low level policies are not perfect. We see that depending on the initial
abstract state, the low level policy succeeds on average around 90% of the time, but can be as low
as 10% for particular states (Figure 15).


                   Figure 15: Low-Level policy success rates for an environment


Some common failure cases for these low-level policies are:

     1. To use an item in the inventory, the policy needs to select which item to use (e.g. to drink a
        potion the policy needs to first do primitive action ”quaff”, then primitive action that selects
        the inventory object to drink, etc.). When there are multiple objects in the inventory it just
        picks a random object, meaning it might not pick the object specified by the behaviour
     2. The “go stand on” policy is coded to move in a straight line towards an object. Since we
        measure a policy ”success” whenever the abstract state changes, if the agent walks over


                                                    25
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


         another object en route, the Ab-MDP will register an abstract state change and deem the
         transition unsuccessful
      3. To successfully cast a freeze spell, the NetHack game needs to return a message saying the
         spell has bounced off a wall. To our knowledge, this is stochastic—we got as far as figuring
         out that the spell needs to travel sufficient distance to bounce, but even so we were unable
         to produce a low level policy that results in spell bounce 100% of the time. This succeeds
         ∼ 80% of the time

E     BASELINE M ETHODS
For baselines, we use an environment wrapper which abstracts away the low level observations into
only the abstract level observations and behaviours (as described in Section 2.1). We similarly equip
the baseline policies with transformer-based encoders, with input masking in places where the input
sequence is longer than the number of objects in the set as well as positional embedding, which
we found in preliminary experiments helped with training. For action spaces, the agent generates a
discrete integer action which maps onto an object index in the observation set as well as the object
attribute to change to.
Specifically, we use Dreamer-v3 as a performant model-based baseline (Hafner et al., 2023), MuZero
as another model-based baseline (Schrittwieser et al., 2020; Werner Duvaud, 2019), and PPO as a
model free baseline (Schulman et al., 2017; Petrenko et al., 2020). For exploration-reward transfer
experiments, we use a disagreement-based model for Dreamer intrinsic reward (Sekar et al., 2020),
as well as using the same count-based reward to train all models.
Finally, we also compare against other methods that uses a structured MDP, such as the attribute
planner in Zhang et al. (2018), and NCS in Chang et al. (2023). These results can be found in
Section F.1.3.
We outline the main differences between the different model-learning methods in Table 5.

                                 State Repre-     Function Approx         Planning
                                 sentation
      Dreamer-V3 (Hafner         Feature vector   Neural Net (genera-     Model free (in imag-
      et al., 2023)              ϕ                tive)                   ination)
      MuZero          (Schrit-   Feature vector   Neural Net (genera-     MCTS
      twieser et al., 2020)      ϕ                tive)
      DAC-MDP (Shrestha          Feature vector   k-NN                    Value iteration (on k-
      et al., 2020)              ϕ                                        NN “cores”)
      Attribute       Planner    Tabular          No approximation        Dijkstra
      (Zhang et al., 2018)
      DLP-EIT (Haramati          Sets of vec-     Neural Net (genera-     Model free
      et al., 2024)              tors             tive)
      NCS (Chang et al.,         Sets of (α, ξ)   K-means (on just at-    Greedy
      2023)                      vectors          tribute vectors ξ)
      MEAD                       Sets of (α, ξ)   Neural net (discrimi-   Dijkstra
                                 vectors          native)
      Ablation                   Sets of (α, ξ)   K-means (on just at-    Dijkstras
                                 vectors          tribute vectors ξ)

                                    Table 5: Model-based methods


F     E XTENDED R ESULTS

F.1   E XTENDED M AIN R ESULTS

All runs, extended and main, are run with a minimum of 3 independent seeds. We outline the specific
number of seeds for each method and each main experiment in Table 6.


                                                  26
 Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                 Experiment Group                                                Method                                                                         N Seeds
                                                                                                 MEAD                                                                           4
                                 Learning from scratch, 2D
                                                                                                 Dreamer-V3                                                                     3
                                 crafting games (Figure 4a)
                                                                                                 PPO                                                                            3
                                                                                                 MEAD                                                                           5
                                 Learning from scratch,
                                                                                                 MuZero                                                                         3
                                 Minihack skill games
                                                                                                 Dreamer-V3                                                                     4
                                 (Figure 4b)
                                                                                                 PPO                                                                            3
                                 Transfer from Sandbox                                           MEAD                                                                           3
                                 pre-training (Figure 5a)                                        Dreamer-V3 (count / disagreement                                               3/3/3
                                                                                                 / reward)
                                 Transfer from                                                   MEAD                                                                           3
                                 Freeze-Random pretraining                                       Dreamer-V3 (count / disagreement                                               3/3/3
                                 (Figure 5b)                                                     / reward)
                                 Compositional Environment                                       MEAD (from scratch / pretrained)                                               3/3
                                 (Figure 5c)                                                     Dreamer-V3 (from scratch / pre-                                                3/3
                                                                                                 trained)

                                                                 Table 6: Number of seeds used in our main results.


 To get the performance of the various algorithms in the low level MDP as we plotted them in Fig-
 ure 4b, we extracted them from Figure 13 in Henaff et al. (2022), using the WebPlotDigitizer app
 (https://apps.automeris.io/wpd/).

                                     Levitate-Boots                              Levitate-Potion
                      1.00                                       1.00
                                                                                                                                                  Levitate-Boots                            Levitate-Potion
Mean Episode Return


                      0.75                                       0.75
                                                                                                                                    1.0                                       1.0
                                                                                                              Mean Episode Return


                      0.50                                       0.50
                      0.25                                       0.25                                                               0.5                                       0.5
                      0.00                                       0.00
                      0.25                                       0.25                                                               0.0                                       0.0
                      0.50                                       0.50
                                                                                                                                    0.5                                       0.5
                      0.75                                       0.75
                             0   10000 20000 30000 40000 50000          0     10000 20000 30000 40000 50000                               0   10000 20000 30000 40000 50000         0   10000 20000 30000 40000 50000
                                      Freeze-Horn                                  Freeze-Wand                                                     Freeze-Horn                               Freeze-Wand
                      1.00                                       1.00
                                                                                                                                    1.0                                       1.0
                                                                                                              Mean Episode Return
Mean Episode Return


                      0.75                                       0.75
                      0.50                                       0.50                                                               0.5                                       0.5
                      0.25                                       0.25
                      0.00                                       0.00                                                               0.0                                       0.0
                      0.25                                       0.25
                                                                                                                                    0.5                                       0.5
                      0.50                                       0.50
                      0.75                                       0.75                                                                     0   10000 20000 30000 40000 50000         0   10000 20000 30000 40000 50000
                             0   10000 20000 30000 40000 50000          0     10000 20000 30000 40000 50000                                   Env Frames (Linear Scale)                 Env Frames (Linear Scale)
                                    Freeze-Random
                      1.00                                                  Model based                                                   Model based (ours,                        Dreamer-v3
                                                                            (ours, no pretrain)                                           no pretraining)                           (count-based pretraining)
Mean Episode Return


                      0.75
                      0.50
                                                                            Model based (ours,                                            Model based (ours,                        Dreamer-v3
                      0.25
                                                                            count-based pretraining)                                      count-based pretraining)                  (disagreement pretraining)
                                                                            Dreamer-v3 (no pretrain)                                      Dreamer-v3                                Dreamer-v3
                      0.00                                                  Dreamer-v3                                                    (no pretraining)                          (reward-based pretraining)
                      0.25                                                  (count-based pretraining)
                      0.50                                                  Dreamer-v3
                      0.75                                                  (disagreement pretraining)        (b) Transfer to new object types. Pretrained in Freeze
                             0   10000 20000 30000 40000 50000              Dreamer-v3
                                 Env Frames (Linear Scale)                  (reward-based pretraining)        Random environment where Freeze Horn and
                                                                                                              Freeze Wand objects appear with 0.5 probabilities,
 (a) Sandbox transfer performance. Episode return                                                             fine-tuning on remaining 4 environments. (Top row):
 from fine-tuning model weights from pre-training                                                             fine-tuning performance where new object type is fully
 in a sandbox environment containing multiple ob-                                                             unseen, (bottom row): fine-tuning performance for seen
 jects instances and types.                                                                                   objects but appearing in different frequencies.

                                                                                    Figure 16: Full transfer experiments


  F.1.1                           PPO A LL RUNS

 We plot all PPO runs with different pre-training settings in Figure 18. Pre-training resulted in only
 negative transfer as compared to no pre-training.


                                                                                                              27
  Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                              MiniHack-Levitate-Boots-Restricted-v0                              MiniHack-Levitate-Potion-Restricted-v0                              MiniHack-Freeze-Horn-Restricted-v0                                       MiniHack-Freeze-Wand-Restricted-v0                                      MiniHack-Freeze-Random-Restricted-v0
                       1.0                                                                            1.0
                                                                                                                                                                          0.8                                                                  0.8                                                                      0.8
                       0.8                                                                            0.8
                                                                                                                                                                          0.6                                                                  0.6                                                                      0.6
Mean Episode Return
                       0.6                                                                            0.6
                                                                                                      0.4                                                                 0.4                                                                  0.4                                                                      0.4
                       0.4
                                                                                                      0.2                                                                 0.2                                                                  0.2                                                                      0.2
                       0.2
                                                                                                      0.0                                                                 0.0
                       0.0                                                                                                                                                                                                                     0.0                                                                      0.0
                                                                                                      0.2
                       0.2                                                                                                                                                0.2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               0.2                                                                      0.2
                                                                                                      0.4
                       0.4                                                                                                                                                0.4
                                                                                                      0.6                                                                                                                                      0.4                                                                      0.4
                                     0            50000    100000       150000   200000    250000            0       50000     100000   150000       200000    250000            0           50000     100000   150000   200000       250000          0          50000       100000   150000    200000    250000                  0       50000     100000       150000   200000     250000
                                                            Env Frames                                                         Env Frames                                                              Env Frames                                                            Env Frames                                                             Env Frames
                                                     Parametric model, count-based exploration with MCTS                                                            Non parametric model, count-based exploration with MCTS                                                                    Non parametric model, random exploration


                                                                                               Figure 17: Training from scratch with different model types

                                                                Levitate-Boots                                                   Levitate-Potion                                                        Freeze-Horn                                                      Freeze-Wand                                                       Freeze-Random
                                               0.8                                                           0.8                                                            0.8                                                                0.8                                                                0.8
                        Mean Episode Return


                                               0.4                                                           0.4                                                            0.4                                                                0.4                                                                0.4

                                               0.0                                                           0.0                                                            0.0                                                                0.0                                                                0.0

                                               0.4                                                           0.4                                                            0.4                                                                0.4                                                                0.4

                                                     0              3             6            9                      0           3              6              9                        0             3            6             9                       0              3            6             9                         0              3               6             9
                                                                    Env Frames                      1e6                            Env Frames                       1e6                                 Env Frames                    1e6                                 Env Frames                     1e6                                 Env Frames                        1e6

                                                                                                Count-based Pretraining in Freeze-Random                                                                   Count-based Pretraining in Playground                                                          No Pretraining


                                                                                                                                                              Figure 18: PPO all runs.


   F.1.2                                                  D REAMER

  We show extended transfer results for Dreamer. We see in Figures 19 and 20 that when trained
  for much longer, Dreamer with both disagreement-based and count-based pre-training does start to
  get more rewards. However, we also observe the reward curves with pre-training is much worse
  than the reward curves without pre-training (black dotted lines), indicating negative transfer across
  environment and object types for these methods.



                                                          Levitate-Boots                                                     Levitate-Potion                                                          Freeze-Horn                                                        Freeze-Wand                                                          Freeze-Random
                        1.0                                                                            1.0                                                                 1.0                                                                  1.0                                                                     1.0
 Mean Episode Return


                        0.5                                                                            0.5                                                                 0.5                                                                  0.5                                                                     0.5

                        0.0                                                                            0.0                                                                 0.0                                                                  0.0                                                                     0.0

                        0.5                                                                            0.5                                                                 0.5                                                                  0.5                                                                     0.5

                                              0           100000          200000          300000                 0           100000      200000               300000                 0               100000      200000           300000                  0              100000        200000            300000                       0           100000          200000         300000
                                                  Env Frames (Linear Scale)
                                                                                                                          Dreamer-v3 (no pretraining)                                                 Dreamer-v3 (count-based pretraining)                                                     Dreamer-v3 (disagreement pretraining)


  Figure 19: Longer Dreamer pretraining runs in the sandbox environment to show eval reward does
  increase with more samples, albeit pretraining seems to result in negative transfer.



   F.1.3                                                  OTHER M ODEL L EARNING A PPROACHES

  We plot comprehensively the non-parametric model results in Figure 21. This model uses a table
  to keep track of transition successful probabilities between abstract states, as used by the attribute
  planner in Zhang et al. (2018). We show direct comparison between methods in Figure 17.
  We further compare against an approach using K-means clustering on the attributes, and labeling
  edges (between the k-means “cores”) with the last observed action that successfully led to a tran-
  sition. This way of model-learning along with greedy planning was used by the NCS (neural con-
  straint satisfaction) method of Chang et al. (2023). Specifically NCS uses k-means clustering with
  greedy planning, which we found to not work for any of our environments. A hybrid variant using
  k-means clustering with Dijkstra planning works in MiniHack (albeit less well than MEAD), and
  fails completely in 2D crafting.


                                                                                                                                                                                                       28
 Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                              Levitate-Boots                                              Levitate-Potion                                          Freeze-Horn                                             Freeze-Wand
                      1.0                                                                            1.0                                                      1.0                                                 1.0
Mean Episode Return
                      0.5                                                                            0.5                                                      0.5                                                 0.5

                      0.0                                                                            0.0                                                      0.0                                                 0.0

                      0.5                                                                            0.5                                                      0.5                                                 0.5

                                            0         50000 100000 150000 200000 250000 300000              0      50000 100000 150000 200000 250000 300000         0 25000 50000 75000100000125000150000175000         0          50000      100000   150000   200000
                                                         Env Frames (Linear Scale)
                                                                                                      Dreamer-v3 (no pretraining)                     Dreamer-v3 (count-based pretraining)                     Dreamer-v3 (disagreement pretraining)


 Figure 20: Longer Dreamer pretraining runs in the Freeze Random environment to show eval
 reward does increase with more samples, ableit pretraining seems to result in negative transfer.
                                                               Levitate-Boots                                Levitate-Potion                             Freeze-Horn                             Freeze-Wand                                Freeze-Random
                                                0.9                                        0.9                                             0.9                                      0.9                                      0.9
                      Mean Episode Return


                                                0.6                                        0.6                                             0.6                                      0.6                                      0.6

                                                0.3                                        0.3                                             0.3                                      0.3                                      0.3

                                                0.0                                        0.0                                             0.0                                      0.0                                      0.0

                                                0.3                                        0.3                                             0.3                                      0.3                                      0.3
                                                            80000     160000    240000                     80000      160000     240000              80000    160000      240000          0   300000 600000 900000                 0       300000 600000 900000
                                                                Env Frames                                      Env Frames                               Env Frames                               Env Frames                                  Env Frames
                                                                                                                     Non-Param, MCTS Exploration                       Non-Param, Random Exploration

                                                                                                                                   (a) Mean episode return
                                                             Levitate-Boots                                 Levitate-Potion                             Freeze-Horn                              Freeze-Wand                                Freeze-Random
                                            30                                           100                                              10
                                                                                                                                                                                   100
                      Mean Episode Return


                                                                                                                                                                                                                            100
                                            25
                                                                                         75                                                8
                                                                                                                                                                                    75                                      75
                                            20
                                                                                         50                                                6                                        50                                      50
                                            15
                                                                                         25                                                4                                        25                                      25
                                            10
                                                  0         80000    160000     240000           0         80000      160000    240000           0   80000    160000     240000           0   300000 600000 900000                 0       300000 600000 900000
                                                               Env Frames                                       Env Frames                              Env Frames                               Env Frames                                  Env Frames
                                                                                                                     Non-Param, MCTS Exploration                       Non-Param, Random Exploration

                                                                     (b) Number of unique (Object, Attribute, New Attribute) transitions discovered

 Figure 21: Non-parametric agent. Notice the difference in X-axis scale for Freeze-Wand and Freeze-
 Random environments.


  F.2                                            L OW L EVEL L EARNING

  F.2.1                                                 L EARNING L OW L EVEL P OLICIES
 We can reinforcement learn low level behaviours. From some Xt , we propose behaviour b =
 (α(i) , ξ ′ ) and execute πb until an abstract transition. If the resulting Xt+1 contains item (α(i) , ξ ′ ),
 we reward πb with a reward of +1 (else -1).
 While this can be implemented in many ways, in practice we use a goal conditioned RL set-up, where
 a single model free policy network takes in both the low level state and the behaviour embedding
 to produce a primitive action: π : S × B → A. The low level state is the environment’s raw
 observations while the behaviour embedding is the same as the one given to the abstract level model.
 This is implemented as a wrapper over the original environment which provides the policy with a +1
 reward if (α(i) , ξ ′ ) ∈ Xt+1 , and -1 otherwise. We use APPO as the policy optimization algorithm
 (Petrenko et al., 2020). The point of this is merely to show that we can learn the set of behaviours
 neurally and building an Ab-MDP with them still works.
 The full MiniHack low level policy learning result is shown in Figure 24a. The performance of
 MEAD in an Ab-MDP with learned behaviours is shown in Figure 24b. Note that the reported 2D
 Crafting results in main text Section 4.1 already use neurally learned behaviours.

  F.2.2                                                 L EARNING O BJECT-C ENTRIC M AP
 We train an object centric map which takes the low level observation and predict the abstract state:
 X̂t = Mθ (St−1 , At , St ). The encoder map Mθ uses a convolutional encoder for MiniHack low level
 observations (specifically, the low level encoder from Henaff et al. (2022)), and learned embeddings


                                                                                                                                                        29
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                                            Number of Discovered                                                                                                   Number of Discovered
                               Mean Episode Return                        Object-Attribute Transitions                                    Mean Episode Return                                    Object-Attribute Transitions
         0.9
                                                                                                                        0.8                                                           100
                                                                100
         0.6
                                                                80                                                                                                                    80
                                                                                                                        0.4
         0.3                                                    60                                                                                                                    60
                                                                40                                                      0.0                                                           40
         0.0
                                                                20                                                                                                                    20
         0.3                                                                                                            0.4
                                                                 0                                                                                                                     0
                       0           100000     200000   300000         0       100000      200000         300000               0   30000                  60000       90000   120000         0    30000    60000    90000   120000
                                      Env Frames                                  Env Frames                                                            Env Frames                                       Env Frames
                            Non-Param, MCTS Exploration                   Parametric, MCTS Exploration                                 Counts + MCTS (depth=1)                                  Counts + MCTS (depth=4)
                            Non-Param, Random Exploration                                                                              Counts + MCTS (depth=2)                                  Random Exploration

(a) Training from scratch with parametric (ours) and                                                                   (b) Effect of count-based intrinsic reward and
non-parametric model types in the Freeze-Wand en-                                                                      MCTS in the Freeze-Wand environment. (Left)
vironment. (Left) Episode return. (Right) Number                                                                       Episode return. (Right) Number of unique valid
of unique valid (item identity, item attribute, new at-                                                                (item identity, item attribute, new attribute) transi-
tribute) transitions discovered.                                                                                       tions discovered by the agent.

                                                                                         Figure 22: Model ablations
                                             Env: 2D Crafting, 4 steps                                                                                                       Env: Minihack Freeze-Wand
                      1.0                                                                                                                               0.8
                                                                                                                                                        0.6
Mean episode reward


                      0.8


                                                                                                                                  Mean episode reward
                                                                                                                                                        0.4
                      0.6                                                                                                                               0.2
                      0.4                                                                                                                               0.0                                      K-means with Dijkstra
                                                                MEAD (parametric                                                                        0.2                                      MEAD (parametric
                      0.2                                       model, Dijkstra)                                                                                                                 model, Dijkstra)
                                                                K-means with Dijkstra                                                                   0.4                                      NCS model (K-means,
                      0.0                                                                                                                               0.6                                      greedy planning)
                               0            20000 40000 60000 80000 100000                                                                                       0           10000 20000 30000 40000 50000
                                                 Environment steps                                                                                                                Environment steps

       (a) Training from scratch in 2D crafting env.                                                                                                (b) Training from scratch in MiniHack.

Figure 23: Performance of the k-means clustering on attributes method as used in NCS (Chang et al.,
2023). NCS specifically uses k-means clustering with greedy planning, although we also test a vari-
ant using k-means clustering with Dijkstra planning. Legends specify the function approximation
and planning methods used.

for each discrete actions. After concatenating all encoded inputs, the latent is projected through two
2-layer feedforward nets, one producing a categorical distribution over item identities, and another a
categorical distribution over item attributes. The output of this map are two tensors each with shape
(item set size × num categories). We can train this via a categorical cross-entropy loss to predict the
correct identity and attribute categories for all items.
We collect a dataset of 100k transitions using a random policy in the MiniHack Freeze-Horn envi-
ronment, and use the hand-crafted mapping to provide ground truth abstract state labels. We train
using Adams optimizer with batch size 4096 and learning rate 3e-4.
We investigate the effect of training with different sub-sets of the data on both the encoder accuracy
and the subsequent planning performance in Figure 25.

F.3                          E XTENDED A BLATION R ESULTS

F.3.1                              G ENERATIVE AND D ISCRIMINATIVE M ODELLING
We design an experiment where we isolate the difference made by the generative vs. discriminative
modelling, which we can view as a constraint over the support of the predicted distribution for Xt+1 .
We collect a dataset using a hand-crafted expert policy in MiniHack’s Freeze-Horn environment,
with a degree of action noise added to increase coverage. This is done to remove the exploration
problem: the model only needs to learn to fit the trajectories well and it should contain within its
world model the correct transitions required to solve the task. We fit two models:

                               • A discriminative model, which learns to predict success probability (Equation 1) as de-
                                 scribed by the main text.


                                                                                                                  30
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                 Freeze-Horn                                               Freeze-Random                                                  Freeze-Wand                                               Levitate-Boots                                Levitate-Potion
                   0.6                                                       0.6                                                             0.6                                                        0.6
                   0.5                                                       0.5                                                             0.5                                                        0.5                                       0.5

Avg Success Prob
                   0.4                                                       0.4                                                             0.4                                                        0.4                                       0.4
                   0.3                                                       0.3                                                             0.3                                                        0.3                                       0.3
                   0.2                                                       0.2                                                             0.2                                                        0.2                                       0.2
                   0.1                                                       0.1                                                             0.1                                                        0.1                                       0.1
                   0.0                                                       0.0                                                             0.0                                                        0.0                                       0.0
                         0.0    0.5   1.0           1.5                2.0         0.0         0.5       1.0     1.5                               0.0    0.5               1.0         1.5       2.0         0.0    0.5      1.0    1.5    2.0             0.0   0.5      1.0   1.5   2.0
                                  Env Frames                           1e7                      Env Frames               1e7                                  Env Frames                          1e7                  Env Frames           1e7                     Env Frames         1e7

                                                                (a) Low level model free RL to optimize behaviour success probabilities
                                Freeze-Horn                                  1.0
                                                                                          Freeze-Random                                                   Freeze-Wand                                               Levitate-Boots                                Levitate-Potion
                    1                                                                                                                                                                                   1.0                                             1
                                                                             0.5                                                             0.5                                                        0.5
Avg Success Prob


                    0                                                        0.0                                                                                                                        0.0                                             0
                                                                                                                                             0.0
                                                                             0.5                                                                                                                        0.5
                    1                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   1
                                                                             1.0                                                             0.5                                                        1.0
                                                                             1.5                                                                                                                        1.5                                             2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Crafted
                    2                                                                                                                        1.0                                                                                                                                 Learned
                                                                             2.0                                                                                                                        2.0
                         0        80000           160000                           0             80000         160000                               0           80000                   160000                 0           80000     160000                  0          80000     160000
                                 Env Frames                                                     Env Frames                                                    Env Frames                                               Env Frames                                       Env Frames

                                                               (b) MEAD performance in Ab-MDP with learned vs. crafted behaviours

                                                                           Figure 24: Learning low level behaviours within MiniHack

                                                                             Encoder Accuracies                                                                    Performance with Different Encoders
                                                                     0.8                                                                      0.75
                                                                                                                       Mean episode reward


                                                                                                                                              0.50
                                            Eval accuracy


                                                                     0.6                                                                                                                                                             Prop data
                                                                                                                                              0.25
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          0.01
                                                                     0.4                                                                      0.00                                                                                        0.05
                                                                                                                                              0.25                                                                                        0.1
                                                                     0.2                                                                                                                                                                  0.5
                                                                                                                                              0.50                                                                                        0.9
                                                                     0.0
                                                                            0.01 0.05 0.1 0.5 0.9                                                         0                          10000          20000 30000                     40000         50000
                                                                           Proportion of data trained on                                                                                          Environment Steps

Figure 25: Effect of training on different proportions of the 100k dataset on encoder accuracy (left)
and MEAD performance (right) in Minihack-Freeze-Horn.


                               • A generative model, which learns to predict the distribution over X .

The two models use the same architecture to encode the previous abstract state and behaviours.
It differs only in its output head: the discriminative model outputs a binary prediction, while the
generative model outputs a categorical prediction for each item. We observe in Figure 26 that both
model classes optimize the loss.

                                                                                                Discriminative                                                                        100
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Generative
                                                                                                               100                                 5000                                                                      100                 5000
                                            Bin Cross Entropy Loss


                                                                     0.4                                       1000                                10000                                                                     1000                10000
                                                                                                                                                                Cross Entropy Loss


                                                                     0.3
                                                                                                                                                                                     10 1
                                                                     0.2
                                                                     0.1

                                                                             0           100         200        300                          400         500                                  0         100         200        300         400      500
                                                                                               Optimization steps                                                                                              Optimization steps

Figure 26: Loss curves for training generative and discriminative mdoels on a fixed expert dataset.
Colors denote different number of dataset transition size.

To do planning, we run Dijkstra, with the edge weight as the negative log of Pr(X ′ |X, b, θ)
(where θ denotes the generative or discriminative model). There are two ways we can gen-
erate the neighbours for the generative model: either by proposing the modal next state, i.e.
X ′ = arg maxX ′ Pr(X ′ |X, b, θ), or by expected behaviour change X ′ = ∆(X, b). Using ex-


                                                                                                                                                               31
 Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


 pected behaviour change does not work in planning (the model never proposes behaviour sequences
 that lead to solving the task), thus we report results by using the modal next state. The results are
 reported in main text Figure 7, noting the error bars denote standard error of mean.

  F.3.2                                                 M ODEL FITTING

 We found that running sufficient number of model fitting steps in between data collection steps was
 important. Fully re-setting the weights before data fitting is also helpful.

  F.3.3                                                 G LOV E S EMANTIC E MBEDDING


                                               Levitate-Boots (7 types)                   Levitate-Potion (25 types)                                  Freeze-Horn (1 type)                      Freeze-Wand (27 types)                             Freeze-Random (28 types)
                      1.0                                                        1.00                                                         0.8                                     0.8                                                    0.8
                      0.8                                                        0.75
Mean Episode Return


                                                                                                                                              0.6                                     0.6                                                    0.6
                      0.6                                                        0.50
                      0.4                                                                                                                     0.4                                     0.4                                                    0.4
                                                                                 0.25
                      0.2                                                                                                                     0.2                                     0.2                                                    0.2
                      0.0                                                        0.00
                                                                                                                                              0.0                                     0.0                                                    0.0
                      0.2                                                        0.25
                                                                                                                                              0.2                                     0.2                                                    0.2
                      0.4                                                        0.50
                      0.6                                                                                                                     0.4                                     0.4                                                    0.4
                                                                                 0.75
                                              10000 20000 30000 40000 50000              10000 20000 30000 40000 50000                              10000 20000 30000 40000 50000              10000 20000 30000 40000 50000                       10000 20000 30000 40000 50000
                                                         Env Frames                              Env Frames                                               Env Frames                                               Env Frames                              Env Frames
                                                                                   GloVe embedding of object name (frozen weights)                                     Random object embedding (trainable weights)


 Figure 27: Training from scratch with frozen GloVe embeddings, or trainable randomly initialized
 weights.



 We investigate the impact of having the object identity embeddings be semantically meaningful
 versus random one-hot embedding in MiniHack. By default, all experiments in the main text take
 as input object identity embedding using GloVe Pennington et al. (2014) embedding, which are kept
 frozen throughout training. We ablate this by initializing the object identity embedding matrix to be
 randomly initialized from a standard Gaussian, N (0, 1), and allow them to be updated by gradients.
 Figure 27 shows the results in all five games. We observe that having word embedding helps a bit in
 environment where there are many types of the same objects (i.e. Levitate-Potion and Freeze-Wand).
 This is unsurprising as the text embedding between objects would be rather similar (e.g. “wooden
 wand” and “metal wand” would have similar averaged embedding). Abeit they still performant
 overall. This hints at the abstraction being useful mainly due to its (object identity, object attribute)
 structure.

  F.4                                         M ODEL U PDATES

 We show effects of number of model update steps during data collection in Figure 28, 29,&31.

                                                        Model update steps
                                              0.8               500                                                                 0.8                                                                                  0.8
                                                                2500
                                              0.6               10000                                                               0.6                                                                                  0.6
                                                                                                              Mean Episode Return


                                                                                                                                                                                                   Mean Episode Return
                        Mean Episode Return


                                              0.4                                                                                   0.4                                                                                  0.4
                                              0.2                                                                                   0.2                                                                                  0.2
                                              0.0                                                                                   0.0                                                                                  0.0
                                                                                                                                                            Thresholds to collect more data
                                              0.2                                                                                   0.2                         accuracy diff threshold only                             0.2
                                                                                                                                                                accuracy threshold only                                                                     Weight reset
                                              0.4                                                                                   0.4                         both thresholds                                          0.4                                   all weights
                                                                                                                                                                no thresholds                                                                                  no weights
                                                    0        10000    20000 30000       40000    50000                                    0    10000 20000 30000 40000 50000 60000                                             0   20000   40000 60000      80000    100000
                                                                          Env Frames                                                                      Env Frames                                                                          Env Frames

                      (a) Effect of model update steps (b) Effect of model threshold logic (c) Weight reset strategies before
                      between data collection steps.   prior to being allowed to collect fitting on new data
                                                       more data

                                                Figure 28: Model training hyperparameters training in Freeze Wand environment.



                                                                                                                                                          32
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                         Exploration setting
                      0.8                              mcts exploration (depth=1)
                                                       mcts exploration (depth=2)                                                                                 0.8
                      0.6                              mcts exploration (depth=4)
                                                       random exploration
Mean Episode Return   0.4                                                                                                                                         0.6


                                                                                                                                            Mean Episode Return
                      0.2                                                                                                                                         0.4

                      0.0                                                                                                                                         0.2

                      0.2                                                                                                                                         0.0
                      0.4                                                                                                                                         0.2
                                                                                                                                                                                       Transition estimate for MCTS
                                                                                                                                                                  0.4                    current parametric model
                            0    20000 40000 60000 80000 100000 120000                                                                                                                   dataset empirical probabilities
                                             Env Frames
                                                                                                                                                                        0   20000 40000 60000 80000 100000 120000
                                                                                                                                                                                       Env Frames
(a) MCTS hyperparameter ef-
fects, planning to find the max re-                                                                                                         (b) Using the empirical dataset
warding state using current para-                                                                                                           probability for MCTS planning
metric model.                                                                                                                               (i.e., a non-parametric estimate)

                                 Figure 29: MCTS exploration hyperparameters in the Freeze Wand environment.

                                                                     Model Binary Accuracy                                      Mean Episode Reward
                                                               1.0
                                                                                                  Mean episode reward
                                              Train accuracy


                                                               0.9                  Optim steps                         0.5
                                                                                         100                                                                                  100
                                                               0.8                       500                                                                                  500
                                                                                                                        0.0
                                                               0.7                       1000                                                                                 1000
                                                                                         2500                                                                                 2500
                                                                                                                        0.5
                                                                            20000       40000                                 10000 20000 30000 40000
                                                                          Environment steps                                         Environment steps

Figure 30: Ablating just the effect of model optimization steps in MiniHack-Freeze-Wand env.
Model weights are reset after each data collection step (of 2.5k frames), then trained for the specified
number of steps before the next data collection step. With sufficient optimization steps, high model
accuracy and planning performance is achieved.


 F.5                            M ODEL E MBEDDING

We investigate the vector representation of different (object identity, object attribute) pairs in our
model at the start of training and in the end. Results are shown in Figure 32. We observe vector
cluster mainly along object attributes in the start of training (due to the orthogonal object embed-
ding initialization). After training, vectors cluster by object attributes in an identity-dependent way.
For instance, the STAIRS UP object in Figure 32a are not clustered by attributes along the first
two principle components in the Freeze Random environment, likely due to their usage being very
different as compared to the other usable objects. We also observe separation by object-identities
inside each of the object attribute clusters after training, but not before.
Again referring to Figure 32 (a), we notice that unseen objects (not seen in the Freeze Random
environment—here it is the “levitate” objects) largely fall into clusters by attributes.

 F.6                            I NTERNAL W ORLD G RAPHS

We can also show the model’s internal world model in a highly interpretable way: through running
a graph search algorithm (e.g. breadth first search) along transitions the model predicts is high
probability, and reconstructing the model’s internal graph.
We do this for two environments, showing only high probability transitions, and disallow visualiza-
tion of loops in the graphs. The world model graph for Freeze-Random is in Figure 33. Note this
is the same model which we illustrated in brief in main text Figure 3b. The world model graph for
a 200k frames checkpoint in the Levitate-then-Freeze environment is in Figure 34, which is much
more complex even with only the high probability edges.


                                                                                                                         33
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                               Data collection frequency                                             50000 Data collection frequency
                                         0.8         250           2500                                                          250           2500
                                         0.6                                                                         40000


                   Mean Episode Return
                                         0.4


                                                                                                Wallclock Time (s)
                                                                                                                     30000
                                         0.2
                                         0.0                                                                         20000

                                         0.2
                                                                                                                     10000
                                         0.4
                                                                                                                         0
                                         0.6
                                               0      5000     10000 15000 20000   25000                                     2000 4000 6000 8000 10000 12000 14000
                                                                   Env Frames                                                               Env Frames

                   (a) Eval performance as function                                             (b) Wallclock time for different
                   of data collection                                                           data collection frequencies

            Figure 31: Data collection frequency in the Freeze Wand environment.


G     T RAINING D ETAILS AND H YPERPARAMETERS

G.1    O UR MODEL

We describe our default parameters in Table 7.

                                                             Hyperparameter                                                                                        Value
                                                                           Optimizer                                                                               Adam
                                                                         Learning rate                                                                              1e-4
        Optimization                                                      Adam betas                                                                           (0.9, 0.999)
                                                                           Adam eps                                                                                 1e-8
                                                                        Max batch size                                                                             2048
                                                               Additional frames before training                                                                   2500
       Data Collection                                           Weight reset before training                                                                reset all weights
                                                          Minimum optimizer steps before data collection                                                           2500
                                                               Random goal selection probability                                                                     0.2
                                                                       Num simulations                                                                               16
      MCTS Exploration
                                                                       Max search depth                                                                               4
                                                                   Probability for valid edge                                                                        0.5
                                                                       Dijkstra max iters                                                                           100
        Eval Planning
                                                                Dijkstra low probability cut-off                                                                     0.1

                                                    Table 7: Default training parameters for our model


G.2    D REAMER - V 3

We describe the default parameter used to run the Dreamer-v3 baseline. We use a PyTorch im-
plementation of Dreamer: https://github.com/NM512/dreamerv3-torch, which has
similar training curves as reported initially in Dreamer-v3. Unless otherwise mentioned, we use the
“XL” world model setting with the highest amount of training iteration, which had the best reported
sample efficiency in Hafner et al. (2023), and was confirmed by our preliminary experiments (Fig-
ure 35). We start with parameters as faithful to the reported ones in Hafner et al. (2023) as possible
as it was found to work across a wide range of settings, then sweep over a subset of hyperparameters
and report the best ones (which we use) in Table 8.
We perform parameter sweep over a subset and report the best ones (which we use) in Otherwise
we keep the parameters as faithful to the reported ones in Hafner et al. (2023) as possible as it was
found to work across a wide range of settings.

G.3    M U Z ERO

We use the MuZero code base from Werner Duvaud (2019). We sweep over learning rates {1×10−5 ,
1 × 10−4 , 1 × 10−3 }, encoding size {32, 64, 128, 256, 512}, number of simulations {30, 90, 100,


                                                                                           34
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                            Env Frames: 0                       Env Frames: 200000
                                                                      10
                          0.5                                                                                    By Object Identities
                                                                                                                     LEVITATE_BOOTS
                                                                      5                                              LEVITATE_RINGS
                                                                                                                     LEVITATE_POTIONS


                   PC 2
                          0.0                                                                                        FREEZE_HORNS
                                                                                                                     FREEZE_WANDS
                                                                      0                                              AGENTS
                          0.5                                                                                        STAIRS_UP

                                0.5          0.0          0.5   1.0         5       0         5        10
                                                                      10
                          0.5                                                                                    By Object Attributes
                                                                                                                      in_world
                                                                      5                                               in_inventory
                   PC 2                                                                                               standing_on_top
                          0.0                                                                                         no_exist
                                                                                                                      levitating
                                                                      0                                               used
                          0.5
                                0.5          0.0          0.5   1.0         5       0          5       10
                                                   PC 1                                     PC 1

                   (a) Training in Freeze Random environment. Per dimension
                   variance ratio explained at 0 frame: (0.24735658, 0.22067907); at
                   200k frames: (0.49951893, 0.35679522)
                              Env Frames: 0          Env Frames: 200000
                          1.0
                                                                      5.0                                        By Object Identities
                          0.5                                                                                        LEVITATE_BOOTS
                                                                      2.5                                            LEVITATE_RINGS
                                                                                                                     LEVITATE_POTIONS
                   PC 2


                                                                      0.0                                            FREEZE_HORNS
                          0.0                                         2.5                                            FREEZE_WANDS
                                                                                                                     AGENTS
                                                                      5.0                                            STAIRS_UP
                          0.5
                                      0.5     0.0         0.5   1.0             5       0          5        10
                          1.0
                                                                      5.0                                        By Object Attributes
                          0.5                                                                                         in_world
                                                                      2.5                                             in_inventory
                                                                                                                      standing_on_top
                   PC 2


                                                                      0.0                                             no_exist
                          0.0                                         2.5                                             levitating
                                                                                                                      used
                                                                      5.0
                          0.5
                                      0.5     0.0    0.5        1.0             5       0          5        10
                                                PC 1                                        PC 1

                   (b) Training in the Sandbox Playground environment. Per
                   dimension variance ratio explained at 0 frame: (0.3139481,
                   0.23430094); at 200k frames: (0.5275301, 0.23016657)

Figure 32: Principle components analysis (PCA) of the (object identity, object attribute) vector
representation in the model right before the key-query-value projection layer. PCA projects from
128 dimensions to 2 orthogonal dimensions of maximum variance. We show the representation at
two points in training: 0 frames and 200k frames (columns). We label each (object identity, object
attribute) vector by its identity (top row) and by its attribute (bottom row) separately.


180}, using prioritized experience replay (or not), batch size {128, 2048}, TD steps {4, 10, 20,
50, 100}, and the delay in self-play simulations (allowing for more training steps in between data
collections) of {0, 2, 8}. We use the best hyperparameters and report them in Table 9.
We observe a small effect of different self play delay lengths performing better in different games.
We choose a delay of 0 as it performed the best in most games. Nevertheless, we report the perfor-
mance of different self play delay lengths in Figure 36 for completeness.

G.4   PPO

We use the Sample-Factory implementation of PPO (Petrenko et al., 2020). We run a parameter
sweep over a subset and report the best parameters which we use in Table 10.


                                                                            35
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                           STAIRS_UP - in_world,
                                                            AGENTS - in_world,
                                                         FREEZE_WANDS - in_world,


                                                                    FREEZE_WANDS:                             STAIRS_UP:
                                                             in_world -> standing_on_top: 0.99     in_world -> standing_on_top: 0.992


                                 STAIRS_UP - in_world,                                  AGENTS - in_world,
                                  AGENTS - in_world,                                 FREEZE_WANDS - in_world,
                            FREEZE_WANDS - standing_on_top,                         STAIRS_UP - standing_on_top,


                                                      FREEZE_WANDS:
                                             standing_on_top -> in_inventory: 0.997


                              FREEZE_WANDS - in_inventory,
                                 STAIRS_UP - in_world,
                                  AGENTS - in_world,


                                          STAIRS_UP:                      FREEZE_WANDS:
                               in_world -> standing_on_top: 0.982    in_inventory -> used: 0.988


         FREEZE_WANDS - in_inventory,                   STAIRS_UP - in_world,
              AGENTS - in_world,                         AGENTS - in_world,
          STAIRS_UP - standing_on_top,                 FREEZE_WANDS - used,


Figure 33: Extracted internal world model with a particular starting state in Freeze-Random by
starting traversal from a given initial state. Only the most relevant objects are included for clarity
and only transitions with success probability above 0.1 are included. Note that each node has 40-50
edges, although we only visualize the high probability ones.



                                             Hyperparameter                                          Value
                                                                         Optimizer                   Adam
                                                                          Model lr                    1e-4
                                                                          Actor lr                    3e-5
                                                                          Critic lr                   3e-5
                                Optimization
                                                                         Batch size                    32
                                                                        Batch length                   64
                                                                         Train ratio                 1024
                                                                      Replay capacity                 106
                                                                    GRU recurrent units              4096
                                Model Units                          Dense hidden units              1024
                                                                        MLP layers                      5
                               Planning                             Imagination horizon                15
                      Exploration (disagreement)                       Ensemble size                   10

                                           Table 8: Dreamer parameters



                                         Hyperparameter                             Value
                                         Learning rate init                       1 × 10−4
                                           Encoding size                             512
                                             Batch size                             2048
                                         Num simulations                             100
                                              TD steps                               20
                                   Prioritized experience replay                    False

                                            Table 9: MuZero parameters



                                                               36
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            AGENTS - in_world,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        LEVITATE_BOOTS - in_world,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          STAIRS_UP - in_world,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        FREEZE_WANDS - in_world,


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            LEVITATE_BOOTS:                    FREEZE_WANDS:                               STAIRS_UP:
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    in_world -> standing_on_top: 0.928 in_world -> standing_on_top: 0.911       in_world -> standing_on_top: 0.94


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            AGENTS - in_world,                                             AGENTS - in_world,                                   AGENTS - in_world,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           STAIRS_UP - in_world,                                       LEVITATE_BOOTS - in_world,                           LEVITATE_BOOTS - in_world,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        FREEZE_WANDS - in_world,                                         STAIRS_UP - in_world,                               FREEZE_WANDS - in_world,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     LEVITATE_BOOTS - standing_on_top,                              FREEZE_WANDS - standing_on_top,                         STAIRS_UP - standing_on_top,


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          LEVITATE_BOOTS:                                                                            FREEZE_WANDS:
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 standing_on_top -> in_inventory: 0.984                                                     standing_on_top -> in_inventory: 0.973


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            LEVITATE_BOOTS - in_inventory,                                                                                                     FREEZE_WANDS - in_inventory,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 AGENTS - in_world,                                                                                                                 AGENTS - in_world,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                STAIRS_UP - in_world,                                                                                                           LEVITATE_BOOTS - in_world,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              FREEZE_WANDS - in_world,                                                                                                            STAIRS_UP - in_world,


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           FREEZE_WANDS:                          AGENTS:                                STAIRS_UP:                                                            FREEZE_WANDS:                     LEVITATE_BOOTS:                               STAIRS_UP:
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    in_world -> standing_on_top: 0.9     in_world -> levitating: 0.857        in_world -> standing_on_top: 0.937                                          in_inventory -> used: 0.305    in_world -> standing_on_top: 0.899         in_world -> standing_on_top: 0.935


                                                                                                                                                                                                                        LEVITATE_BOOTS - in_inventory,                          LEVITATE_BOOTS - in_inventory,                           LEVITATE_BOOTS - in_inventory,                          AGENTS - in_world,                           FREEZE_WANDS - in_inventory,                          FREEZE_WANDS - in_inventory,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             AGENTS - in_world,                                     STAIRS_UP - in_world,                                     AGENTS - in_world,                             LEVITATE_BOOTS - in_world,                            AGENTS - in_world,                                    AGENTS - in_world,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                                                                                                                                                                                            STAIRS_UP - in_world,                                 FREEZE_WANDS - in_world,                                 FREEZE_WANDS - in_world,                             STAIRS_UP - in_world,                             STAIRS_UP - in_world,                              LEVITATE_BOOTS - in_world,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       FREEZE_WANDS - standing_on_top,                               AGENTS - levitating,                                 STAIRS_UP - standing_on_top,                         FREEZE_WANDS - used,                         LEVITATE_BOOTS - standing_on_top,                        STAIRS_UP - standing_on_top,


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               FREEZE_WANDS:                                            STAIRS_UP:                                FREEZE_WANDS:                                                   LEVITATE_BOOTS:                               STAIRS_UP:
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      standing_on_top -> in_inventory: 0.98                  in_world -> standing_on_top: 0.938           in_world -> standing_on_top: 0.914                              in_world -> standing_on_top: 0.913         in_world -> standing_on_top: 0.93


37
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    FREEZE_WANDS - in_inventory,                        LEVITATE_BOOTS - in_inventory,                        LEVITATE_BOOTS - in_inventory,                                     AGENTS - in_world,                                 AGENTS - in_world,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    LEVITATE_BOOTS - in_inventory,                        FREEZE_WANDS - in_world,                                STAIRS_UP - in_world,                                         STAIRS_UP - in_world,                           LEVITATE_BOOTS - in_world,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         AGENTS - in_world,                                  AGENTS - levitating,                                  AGENTS - levitating,                                   LEVITATE_BOOTS - standing_on_top,                     STAIRS_UP - standing_on_top,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        STAIRS_UP - in_world,                            STAIRS_UP - standing_on_top,                        FREEZE_WANDS - standing_on_top,                                   FREEZE_WANDS - used,                               FREEZE_WANDS - used,


                                                                                                                                                                                                              AGENTS:                   FREEZE_WANDS:                              STAIRS_UP:
                                                                                                                                                                                                     in_world -> levitating: 0.891 in_inventory -> used: 0.327          in_world -> standing_on_top: 0.932


                                                                                                                                                                FREEZE_WANDS - in_inventory,                        LEVITATE_BOOTS - in_inventory,                      FREEZE_WANDS - in_inventory,
                                                                                                                                                                LEVITATE_BOOTS - in_inventory,                           AGENTS - in_world,                             LEVITATE_BOOTS - in_inventory,
                                                                                                                                                                    STAIRS_UP - in_world,                               STAIRS_UP - in_world,                                AGENTS - in_world,
                                                                                                                                                                     AGENTS - levitating,                              FREEZE_WANDS - used,                              STAIRS_UP - standing_on_top,


                                                                                                                                                        FREEZE_WANDS:                     STAIRS_UP:                                          STAIRS_UP:
                                                                                                                                                    in_inventory -> used: 0.92 in_world -> standing_on_top: 0.933                  in_world -> standing_on_top: 0.925


                                                                                                            LEVITATE_BOOTS - in_inventory,                      FREEZE_WANDS - in_inventory,                        LEVITATE_BOOTS - in_inventory,


     task involves going from the top (root) state to the bottom left state.
                                                                                                                STAIRS_UP - in_world,                           LEVITATE_BOOTS - in_inventory,                           AGENTS - in_world,
                                                                                                                 AGENTS - levitating,                                AGENTS - levitating,                            STAIRS_UP - standing_on_top,
                                                                                                               FREEZE_WANDS - used,                              STAIRS_UP - standing_on_top,                          FREEZE_WANDS - used,


                                                                                                                                      STAIRS_UP:
                                                                                                                           in_world -> standing_on_top: 0.927


                                                                                                            LEVITATE_BOOTS - in_inventory,
                                                                                                                 AGENTS - levitating,
                                                                                                             STAIRS_UP - standing_on_top,
                                                                                                               FREEZE_WANDS - used,


     most relevant objects are included for clarity. The plan required to solve the Levitate-then-Freeze
     Figure 34: Extracted internal world model by starting traversal from a given initial state. Only the
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                                                                                                                 1.0
                                  0.75

        Mean episode reward


                                                                                                                           Mean episode reward
                                  0.50                                                                                                           0.5
                                  0.25                                        Train ratio                                                                                                      Train ratio
                                                                                    256                                                          0.0                                                 512
                                  0.00                                              512                                                                                                              1024
                                  0.25                                              1024                                                                                                             2048
                                                                                    2048                                                         0.5                                                 4096
                                  0.50
                                              0       40000 80000 120000160000                                                                             0             15000 30000 45000
                                                        Environment steps                                                                                                Environment steps
        (a) Training from scratch (no pre-                                                                                 (b) Fine-tuning after reward-based pre-
        training)                                                                                                          training

Figure 35: Effect of Dreamer-v3 training ratio (amount of training to data collec-
tion) on performance, for training from scratch in MiniHack-Freeze-Wand (left),
and for fine-tuning in MiniHack-Levitate-Boots from reward-based pretraining in
MiniHack-Freeze-Random.


                                           Levitate-Boots                 Levitate-Potion                  Freeze-Horn                                     Freeze-Wand                       Freeze-Random
                                 1.0                                                                                                                                              0.75
           Mean Episode Return


                                                                0.5                            0.5                                               0.2                              0.50
                                 0.5
                                                                                                                                                 0.0                              0.25
                                 0.0                            0.0                            0.0                                                                                0.00
                                                                                                                                                 0.2
                                 0.5                                                                                                                                              0.25
                                                                0.5                            0.5                                               0.4
                                                                                                                                                                                  0.50
                                       0     200000    400000         0      200000   400000         0       200000      400000                        0        200000   400000          0     200000   400000
                                            Env Frames                     Env Frames                      Env Frames                                          Env Frames                     Env Frames
                                                                                                       Self play delay
                                                                                                     0           2         8



   Figure 36: Muzero runs in the Minihack environments, with different self-play delay lengths


                                                                   Hyperparameter                                                                                           Value
                                                                         Number of workers                                                                                     2
                                                                       Number of env per worker                                                                               10
                                                      Data Collection
                                                                            Rollout length                                                                                   128
                                                                          Recurrence length                                                                                    2
                                                                             Optimizer                                                                                      Adam
                                                                              Model lr                                                                                       1e-4
                                                       Optimization         Reward scale                                                                                      1.0
                                                                             Batch size                                                                                     4096
                                                                         Shuffle minibatches                                                                                False

                                                                                  Table 10: PPO Parameters


                                                                                                          38
