Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


PWM: P OLICY L EARNING WITH M ULTI -TASK
W ORLD M ODELS
            Ignat Georgiev 1 , Varun Giridhar 1 , Nicklas Hansen 2 , Animesh Garg 1
                       1
                         Georgia Institute of Technology 2 UC San Diego



                                                A BSTRACT
          Reinforcement Learning (RL) has made significant strides in complex tasks but
          struggles in multi-task settings with different embodiments. World model methods
          offer scalability by learning a simulation of the environment but often rely on
          inefficient gradient-free optimization methods for policy extraction. In contrast,
          gradient-based methods exhibit lower variance but fail to handle discontinuities.
          Our work reveals that well-regularized world models can generate smoother opti-
          mization landscapes than the actual dynamics, facilitating more effective first-order
          optimization. We introduce Policy learning with multi-task World Models (PWM),
          a novel model-based RL algorithm for continuous control. Initially, the world
          model is pre-trained on offline data, and then policies are extracted from it using
          first-order optimization in less than 10 minutes per task. PWM effectively solves
          tasks with up to 152 action dimensions and outperforms methods that use ground-
          truth dynamics. Additionally, PWM scales to an 80-task setting, achieving up
          to 27% higher rewards than existing baselines without relying on costly online
          planning. Visualizations and code are available at imgeorgiev.com/pwm.


                                                                               High-dim. single tasks                            80 Multi-task
                                                           PPO-norm. Reward


                                                                                                        Normalized Score
                                                                              1.2
                                       Policy
                                                                                                                           0.9
             Large Multi-task
              World Model
                                       Policy                                 1.0
                                       Policy
                                                                              0.8                                          0.8
                                                                                      PPO      SHAC                              DreamerV3
                                                                                      SAC      TD-MPC2                           PWM (ours)
Figure 1: We propose PWM, a new method for multi-task RL that utilizes pre-trained world models to learn
policies for each task. When sufficiently regularized, these world models induce smooth optimization landscapes,
which allows for efficient first-order optimization. Our approach can solve tasks in <10 minutes and achieves
higher rewards in both single-task and multi-task environments.


1    I NTRODUCTION
The pursuit of generalizability in machine learning has recently been propelled by the training of
large models on substantial datasets Brown et al. (2020); Kirillov et al. (2023); Bommasani et al.
(2021). Such advancements have notably permeated robotics, where multi-task behavior cloning
techniques have shown remarkable performance Zitkovich et al. (2023); Octo Model Team et al.
(2024); Goyal et al. (2023); Bousmalis et al. (2023). Nevertheless, these approaches predominantly
hinge on near-expert data and struggle with adaptability across diverse robot morphologies due to
their dependence on teleoperation Zitkovich et al. (2023); Octo Model Team et al. (2024); Kumar
et al. (2021).
In contrast, Reinforcement Learning (RL) offers a robust framework capable of learning from
suboptimal data, addressing the aforementioned limitations. However, traditional RL has been
focused on single-task experts Mnih et al. (2013); Schulman et al. (2017); Haarnoja et al. (2018).
Recently, Hansen et al. (2024) suggested that a potential pathway to multi-task RL is with the world


                                                       1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


models framework, where a large model learns the environment dynamics and is then combined with
Zeroth-order Gradient (ZoG) methods. Despite advancements, ZoG methods struggle with sample
inefficiency due to the high variance Mohamed et al. (2020); Suh et al. (2022); Parmas et al. (2023)
and online planning time scales with model size, rendering it infeasible at scale.
First-order Gradient (FoG) methods provide a low-variance alternative that have shown superior
sample efficiency and asymptotic performance when combined with smooth differentiable simulations
Xu et al. (2022). However, they struggle to optimize through discontinuities Suh et al. (2022);
Georgiev et al. (2024). In this work, we explore the tight coupling between FoG optimization and
world models through the lens of differentiable simulation. Counter-intuitively, we find that for
gradient-based optimization, we don’t want world models to be accurate; instead, we want them to be
smooth and have a low optimality gap. This in turn enables efficient FoG optimization.
Building on these insights, we propose Policy learning with multi-task World Models (PWM), an
algorithm that can learn policies from offline pre-trained world models in under <10 minutes per
task. With this new-found efficiency, we also propose a new multi-task framework, where instead
of training a multi-task algorithm, we only train a multi-task world model and then extract a policy
for each task. This decoupling of the supervised and RL objectives results in more stable and
efficient learning with higher episode rewards. Our empirical evaluations on high-dim. tasks indicate
that PWM not only achieves higher reward than baselines but also outperforms methods that use
ground-truth dynamics. In a multi-task scenario utilizing a pre-trained 48M parameter world model
from TD-MPC2, PWM achieves up to 27% higher reward than TD-MPC2 without relying on online
planning. This underscores the efficacy of PWM and supports our broader contributions:

      1. Correlation Between World Model Smoothness and Policy Performance: Through
         pedagogical examples and ablations, we demonstrate that smoother, better-regularized
         world models significantly enhance policy performance. Notably, this results in an inverse
         correlation between model accuracy and policy performance.
      2. Efficiency of First-Order Gradient (FoG) Optimization: We show that combining FoG
         optimization with well-regularized world models enables more efficient policy learning
         compared to zeroth-order methods. Furthermore, policies learned from world models asymp-
         totically outperform those trained with ground-truth simulation dynamics, emphasizing the
         importance of the tight relationship between FoG optimization and world model design.
      3. Scalable Multi-Task Algorithm: Instead of training a single multi-task policy model, we
         propose PWM, a framework where a multi-task world model is first pre-trained on offline
         data. Then per-task expert policies are extracted in <10 minutes per task, offering a clear
         and scalable alternative to existing methods focused on unified multi-task models.

2    BACKGROUND
We focus on discrete-time and infinite-horizon Reinforcement Learning (RL) scenarios characterized
by system states s ∈ Rn = S, actions a ∈ Rm = A, dynamics function f : S × A → S and a reward
function r : S × A → R. Combined, these form a Markov Decision Problem (MDP) summarized by
the tuple (S, A, f, r, γ) where γ is the discount factor. Actions at each timestep t are sampled from
a stochastic policy at ∼ πθ (·|st ), parameterized by θ. The goal of the policy is to maximize the
cumulative discounted rewards:                             "∞                #
                                                            X
                                                                  t
                          max J(θ) := max E s1 ∼ρ(·)            γ r(st , at )                      (1)
                            θ               θ    at ∼πθ (·|st ) t=1

where ρ(s1 ) is the initial state distribution. Since this maximization over an infinite sum is intractable,
in practice we often maximize over a value estimate. The value of a state st is defined as the expected
reward following the policy πθ                             "∞               #
                                                            X
                                  π                             h
                               Vψ (st ) := Eah ∼πθ (·|sh )     γ r(sh , ah )                            (2)
                                                          h=t
When V is approximated with a learned model with parameters ψ and πθ attempts to maximize some
function of V , we arrive at the popular and successful actor-critic architecture Konda & Tsitsiklis
(1999). Additionally, in MBRL it is common to also learn approximations of f and r, which we
denote as Fϕ and Rϕ , respectively. It has also been shown to be beneficial to encode the true state


                                                     2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                 J( )
                               20                ReLU
                                                 SimNorm
            𝜃
                          ℎ
                                0                                       Model        Model        Opt.
                                                                                     error        gap
                               20                                       True    0.0               16.85
                𝑤                         2        0        2           ReLU    0.71              16.05
                                                                        SimNorm 1.13              3.47
(a) Ball-wall visualization.         (b) Problem landscape.             (c) Model error and optimality gap.

Figure 2: Ball-wall pedagogical example. The left figure visualizes the problem. The middle figure shows the
problem landscape induced by each model. J(θ) shows the true underlying function and the two other are MLPs
with different activation functions. We minimize each of these problems using gradient descent and starting at
θ = −π (marker ×). The colored crosses represent the solutions converged to for each model. The right table
shows the model approximation error during training and the optimality gap |J(θ∗ ) − J(θ̂)| between the global
minimum θ∗ and the solution found for each model θ̂.


s into a latent state z using a learned encoder Eϕ Hafner et al. (2019); Hansen et al. (2022; 2024);
Hafner et al. (2023). Putting together all of these components, we can define a model-based actor-
critic algorithm to consist of the tuple (πθ , Vψ , Eϕ , Fϕ , Rϕ ) which can describe popular approaches
such as Dreamer Hafner et al. (2019; 2023) and TD-MPC2 Hansen et al. (2024). Notably, we make
an important distinction between the types of components. We refer to Eϕ , Fϕ and Rϕ as the world
model components since they are supervised learning problems with fixed targets. On the other hand,
πθ and Vψ optimize for moving targets, which is fundamentally more challenging, and we refer to
them as the policy components.

3     P OLICY OPTIMIZATION THROUGH WORLD MODELS
This paper builds on the insight that since access to Fϕ and Rϕ is assumed through a pre-trained
world model, we have the option to optimize Eq. 1 via First-order Gradient (FoG) optimization which
exhibit lower gradient variance, more optimal solutions, and improved sample efficiency Mohamed
et al. (2020). In our setting, these types of gradients are obtained by directly differentiating the
expected terms of Eq. 1 as shown in Eq. 3. Note that this gradient estimator is also known as
reparameterized gradient Kingma et al. (2015) and pathwise derivative Schulman et al. (2015). While
we use the explicit ∇[1] notation below, we later drop it for simplicity as all gradient types in this
work are first-order gradients.
                                                  "   ∞                     #
                           [1]
                                                          X
                                                                t
                        ∇θ J(θ) := E s1 ∼ρ(·)       ∇θ        γ r(st , at )                        (3)
                                          ah ∼πθ (·|sh )        t=1

      [1]
As ∇θ J(θ) in itself is a random variable, we need to estimate it. A popular way to do that in practice
is via Monte-Carlo approximation, where we are interested in two properties: bias and variance. In
Sections 3.1 and 3.2 we tackle each aspect with a toy robotic control problem to build intuition. In
Section 3.3, we combine our findings to propose a new algorithm.
3.1      L EARNING THROUGH CONTACT
                                        h                i
                       ¯ J(θ) := E PN ∇        ˆ [1]
                        [1]
FoGs are unbiased E ∇                      n=1 n     J(θ)  = ∇J(θ), only if both the dynamics f and
rewards r are Lipschitz-smooth Suh et al. (2022). However, many robotic problems involving contact
are  inherently  non-smooth, which breaks these conditions and results in gradient sample error where
E ∇  ¯ [1] J(θ) ̸= ∇J(θ) under a finite number of samples N . Instead of directly optimizing the true,
discontinuous objective, it is advantageous to optimize a smooth surrogate, such as a model learned
by a regularized deep neural network.
To illustrate this concept, we use a toy problem where a ball is thrown toward a wall at a fixed velocity,
as shown in Figure 2a. The objective is to find the optimal initial angle θ such that we maximize


                                                       3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                 10 2                                                104


                                                                       ESNR( J( ))
                    Var[ J( )]
   𝑞!"
                                 10 7                True                            101        True
                                 10 12               MLP H=3                         10 2       MLP H=3
                                                     MLP H=16                                   MLP H=16
         𝑞!#
                                         0      20            40                            0   20    40
                                                   H                                             H
Figure 3: Double pendulum pedagogical example. The middle figure evaluates the variance of policy gradient
estimates over N = 100 Monte-Carlo samples for varying horizons H. The right figure shows the same data but
plots the Expected Signal-to-Noise ratio (ESNR) with higher values translating to more useful gradients. These
results suggests that world models trained over long horizon trajectories provide more useful gradients. Note
that H = 3 and H = 16 in the figure legends refer to the training horizon of the models.


forward distance. In this simplified pedagogical example, we assume that the ball "sticks" to the
wall, creating a discontinuous optimization landscape (Figure 2b). We compare the performance of
two models in approximating this objective: a 2-layer Multi-Layer Perceptron (MLP) with ReLU
activation and another MLP with SimNorm activation Hansen et al. (2024) in the intermediate layers.
SimNorm normalizes a latent vector z by projecting it into simplices with dimension P using a
softmax operator. Given an input vector z, SimNorm can be expressed as a mapping into L vectors:
                             SimNorm(z) := [g1 , ..., gL ],        gi = Softmax(zi:i+P )                   (4)

We trained both MLPs and observed their effects on smoothing the optimization landscape (Figure 2b).
The ReLU-activated MLP smooths the landscape but introduces a local minimum that hinders gradient
descent, particularly when starting from θ = −π, resulting in a large optimality gap (difference
between the solution and the optimal solution: ∥θ̂ − θ∗ ∥). In contrast, the SimNorm-activated MLP
has additional regularization, which reduces the optimality gap at the expense of model accuracy
(Table 2c). This example highlights that more accurate models do not always lead to better policies,
as noted by Lambert et al. (2020). Our findings extend this by showing that for FoG optimization,
prioritizing smoothness over accuracy can lead to improved results. Further details are provided in
Appendix A.
3.2      L EARNING WITH CHAOTIC DYNAMICS
While FoGs have lower variance per step, they can accumulate significant variance over long-horizon
rollouts Metz et al. (2021). Suh et al. (2022)  link  this variance to the smoothness of models and
the length of the prediction horizon: Var ∇J [1] ∝ ∥∇f (s, a)∥2H . At sufficiently high H, the
high variance renders FoGs ineffective in chaotic systems. Chaotic systems are characterized by
their sensitivity to initial conditions, where small perturbations can lead to exponentially divergent
trajectories, making long-term prediction particularly challenging. The double pendulum, also known
as the Acrobot Murray & Hauser (1991), is a classic example of such a system (Figure 3).
We analyze the variance of gradient estimators in the double pendulum using both the true dynamics
and a SimNorm-activated MLP model. The MLP model was trained for auto-regressive prediction
horizons of H = 3 and H = 16 until convergence on a large dataset. Figure 3 shows that both
learned models exhibit reduced variance compared to the true dynamics. However, as noted by
Parmas et al. (2023), variance alone is insufficient for drawing definitive conclusions about gradient
quality. Instead, they propose analyzing gradients via their Expected Signal-to-Noise Ratio (ESNR),
defined as:
                                                   "P                 2 #
                                                         E ∇[1] J(θ)
                             ESNR(∇J(θ)) = E P                                                     (5)
                                                         Var ∇[1] J(θ)
In Figure 3, we observe that learned models exhibit higher ESNR than the true dynamics, providing
more useful gradients. Notably, the training horizon plays a critical role, with the H = 16 model
sustaining a higher ESNR over higher H. We conclude that learned world models offer more
informative policy gradients than the true system dynamics. Further details in Appendix B.


                                                        4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


3.3   PWM: P OLICY LEARNING WITH MULTI - TASK W ORLD M ODELS
Given the results from the previous subsection,
                                                       Algorithm 1: PWM: Policy learning with
we propose to view world models not as com-
                                                       multi-task World Models
ponents of RL methods but instead as scalable,
differentiable physics simulators that provide         Given: Multi-task dataset B
gradients with low sample error and variance.          Given: γ: discount rate
It is worth noting that approaches such as TD-         Given: αθ , αψ , αϕ : learning rates
MPC2 Hansen et al. (2024) do not exploit these         Initialize learnable parameters θ, ψ, ϕ
properties but rather choose to optimize policies      ▷ Pre-train world model once
via DDPG-style gradients:                              for N epochs do
                                                           s1:H , a1:H , r1:H , e ∼ B
∇θ J(θ) ≈ Ea∼π(·|s) [∇θ Q(s, a)].
                                                           ϕ ← ϕ − αϕ ∇Lwm (ϕ)           ▷ Eq. 10
We propose a new method and framework for ef-          end
ficiently learning policies from large multi-task      ▷ Train policy on task
world models.                                             embedding e
Framework. Assuming availability of data               for M epochs do
from multiple tasks, we first train a multi-task           s1 ∼ B
world model to predict future states and rewards.          z1 = Eϕ (s1 , e)
Then for each task we want to solve, we learn a            for h=[1, ..., H] do          ▷ Rollout
single policy in minutes using FoG optimization.               ah ∼ πθ (·|zh )
The policy is then deployed to solve the task and              rh = Rϕ (zh , ah , e)
optionally fine-tune its world model and policy.               zh+1 = Fϕ (zh , ah , e)
Method. For policy learning, we propose on-                end
policy actor-critic approach inspired by dif-              θ ← θ + αθ ∇Lπ (θ)              ▷ Eq. 6
ferentiable simulation approaches Xu et al.                ψ ← ψ − αψ ∇LV (ψ) ▷ Eq. 7-9
(2022) where the actor is trained via FoG back-        end
propagated through the world model, while the
critic is trained via TD(λ). The key to our approach is that training is done in a batched fashion where
multiple trajectories are imagined in parallel. The actor loss function is akin to Eq. 1 but features
rewards over a fixed horizon H, terminal value bootstrapping and usage of the learned world model
components:
                                "H−1                                  #
                                  X                                                   z =E (s )
                                        h                 H
        Lπ (θ) := E s1 ∼ρ(·)           γ Rϕ (zh , ah ) + γ Vψ (zH )        where zt+11=Fϕϕ(zt1,at )  (6)
                   ah ∼πθ (·|zh )   h=1
The critic is trained in a model-free fashion using TD(λ) over an H-step rollout in latent space z as
seen in other similar on-policy methods Sutton & Barto (2018); Hafner et al. (2019); Xu et al. (2022):
                                          t+h−1
                                           X
                            Vh (zt ) :=           γ n−t Rϕ (zn , an ) + γ t+h Vψ (zt+h )             (7)
                                           n=t
                                          H−t−1
                                           X
                                                  h−1
                     V̂ (zt ) := (1 − λ)        λ     Vh (zt ) + λH−t−1 VH (zt )                     (8)
                                             h=1
                                                            t+H
                                                            X                           2
                                             LV (ψ) :=            Vψ (zh ) − V̂ (zh )                (9)
                                                                                        2
                                                            h=t
We use an ensemble of 3 critics to reduce variance. To enable FoG optimization,  it is important to use
a well-regularized world model. We use the Eϕ (s, e), Fϕ (s, a, e), Rϕ (s, a, e) model proposed by
TD-MPC2 Hansen et al. (2024) with learnable task embeddings e. It is trained in an auto-regressive
fashion by sampling data from a buffer with loss function:
                                        "H                                                   #
                                         X
                                             t                            2

         Lwm (ϕ) = E(s,a,r,s′ ,e)0:H ∼B     γ ∥zt+1 − sg(Eϕ (st+1 , e))∥2 + CE(r̂t , rt )          (10)
                                           t=0
where sg(·) is the stop-gradient operator and CE is the cross-entropy loss function. Reward prediction
is formulated as a discrete regression problem in log-transformed space. Furthermore, Eϕ and Fϕ
use SimNorm activation (Eq. 4) in their output layers. All trainable models are fully-connected MLPs
with LayerNorm Ba et al. (2016) and Mish activation Misra (2019). The complete algorithm is shown
in Algorithm 1. Further implementation details can be found in Appendix C.


                                                       5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 4: High-dimensional single-task environments (left to right): Hopper, Ant, Anymal, Humanoid and SNU
Humanoid. Our method successfully learns tasks with up to m = 152 continuous action dimensions. Additional
80 multi-task environments used in this paper are listed in Appendix E



4     E XPERIMENTAL RESULTS

4.1   C ONTACT- RICH SINGLE TASKS

The aim of this section is to understand whether smooth world models create better optimization
landscapes than ground-truth dynamics, facilitating efficient FoG optimization. We study this on
5 continuous control tasks (Figure 4) with up to A = R152 using the differentiable simulator dflex
Xu et al. (2022). Comparisons include SHAC Xu et al. (2022), which uses ground-truth dynamics
and rewards with a similar actor-critic architecture to PWM. Furthermore, we compare against two
world model approaches. DreamerV3 Hafner et al. (2023) learns its world model via reconstruction,
its actor via ZoG optimization, and critic via Model-based Value Expansion (MVE) Feinberg et al.
(2018). TD-MPC2 Hansen et al. (2024) uses the same world model as PWM but learns a policy
in a model-free fashion and actively plans at inference time. We additionally include model-free
baselines PPO Schulman et al. (2017) and SAC Haarnoja et al. (2018). This comparison allows us
to understand whether (1) FoG-based optimization can learn better policies asymptotically and (2)
whether smooth world models induce better optimization landscapes for FoG optimization.
We conduct this experiment across 5 tasks with 10 seeds each, where PWM, DreamerV3, and TD-
MPC2 use pre-trained world models and are left to learn a policy and fine-tune their world models
online. This is done to enable a fair comparison to SHAC, which directly has access to the simulation
model and does not require any training. The results in Figure 5 reveal that (1) PWM is able to learn
policies with higher reward than SHAC asymptotically, indicating that regularized world models
induce smoother optimization landscapes than the true (discontinuous) dynamics. Furthermore
(2), despite using the same world model, our method is able to learn policies with higher rewards
than TD-MPC2 without the need for online planning. However, PWM does not scale well to the
highest-dimensional task. More experiment details and results are included in Appendix D.


                                                                     1.00
                                                  Fraction of runs


                                                                     0.75
                                                  with score >


                                                                     0.50
                                                                     0.25
                                                                     0.00
0.8     0.9 1.0 1.1 1.2                   1.3                               0.6   0.8   1.0    1.2     1.4    1.6
          PPO-normalized Reward                                                   Normalized Score ( )
       PPO             SAC             SHAC                      TD-MPC2           DreamerV3         PWM (ours)
Figure 5: Aggregate results from high-dimensional locomotion tasks where each agent is trained to solve
just that task (i.e. specialist). The left figure summarizes rewards achieved at the end of training using 50% IQM
for the solid lines and 95% CI as suggested by Agarwal et al. (2021), as well as mean for the dashed lines. We
see that PWM achieves higher rewards than our main baselines TD-MPC2 and SHAC. The right figure shows
score distributions across all tasks which lets us understand the performance variability of each approach.


                                                                 6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


        Multi-task models comparison                                     Multi-task vs single-task experts


      MT30
                                               0            50
      MT80                                   World model training (ms)



             0.6    0.7 0.8 0.9                0            50             0.6          0.8            1.0
                   Normalized score                Inference time (ms)           Normalized score
                          SAC            DreamerV3                 TD-MPC2           PWM (ours)

Figure 6: Multi-task results. The left figure shows results of multi-task agents in the 30 and 80 task set settings
which include environments from dm_control Tunyasuvunakool et al. (2020) and MetaWorld Yu et al. (2020).
The results show 50% IQM with the solid lines and mean with the dashed lines. The bars represent 95% CI. In
both settings PWM achieves higher reward than TD-MPC2 without the need for online planning. The middle
figure compares the training and inference times of TD-MPC2 and PWM for the 48M parameter model. PWM
has significantly lower inference time as it does not plan online. The right figure shows a comparison between
multi-task PWM and TD-MPC2 and single-task experts SAC and DreamerV3 on the MT30 task set. Notably,
PWM is able to match the performance of SAC and DreamerV3.



4.2    M ULTI - TASK WORLD - MODEL

We analyze the scalability of our proposed framework and method to large multi-task pre-trained world
models. We evaluate on two settings: (1) 30 continuous control dm_control tasks Tunyasuvunakool
et al. (2020) ranging from m = 1 to m = 6 and (2) 80 tasks, which include 50 additional manipulation
tasks from MetaWorld Yu et al. (2020) with n = 39 and m = 4. These two multi-task settings
were introduced as MT30 and MT80 by Hansen et al. (2024). In conducting our experiments, we
harness the same data and world model architecture as TD-MPC2. The data consists of 120k and
40k trajectories per dm_control and MetaWorld task, respectively generated by 3 random seeds of
TD-MPC2 runs. The world models we use are the 48M parameter models introduced in Hansen et al.
(2024) with slight modifications to make them differentiable (Appendix C).
To train PWM, we first pre-train the world models on the dataset in a similar fashion to TD-MPC2,
but with training H = 16 and γ = 0.99 for better first-order gradients, as highlighted in Section 3.2.
Then we train a PWM policy on each particular task using the offline datasets for 10k gradient steps,
which take 9.3 minutes on an Nvidia RTX6000 GPU. We evaluate task performance for 10 seeds for
each task and aggregate results in Figure 6. We compare against TD-MPC2, which learns a multi-task
policy while pre-training its world model and relies on online planning at inference. We can see
that PWM learns behavior, achieving a higher reward than TD-MPC2 while also being significantly
faster at inference time. While the fast per-task training is enabled by FoG optimization, we also find
that training a single multi-task policy produces poor results, as shown in Appendix F. We further
compare our multi-task PWM policy to online-trained single-task experts SAC Haarnoja et al. (2018)
and DreamerV3 Hafner et al. (2023). Figure 6 reveals that multi-task PWM, while disadvantaged,
performs comparably to the single-task experts without requiring any environment interaction and
only training policies for ≤ 10 minutes per task. Additional results in Appendix E.

4.3    A BLATIONS

We perform 4 ablations on the complex single task experiments in order to understand the nuances of
first-order optimization through world models with PWM.
We increase the contact stiffness to be more realistic, but also more stiff contact gives gradients
with high sample error Suh et al. (2022). We run the same experiment as Section 4.1, but only for
the Hopper task, and present the aggregate results from 5 random seeds in Figure 7a, where we
normalize rewards by the maximum reward achieved by PPO in Section 4.1. We see that while PPO
and PWM rewards remain similar to prior results, SHAC performance decreases by 48%. This shows
that regularized world models are robust to stiff contact models and thus more generalizable than
differentiable simulations.


                                                           7
  Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


   PPO-norm. Reward
                                     PPO                                                                        1.5


                                                                                             PPO-norm. Reward
                      1.0                                                                                                                       32
                                     SHAC                                                                                                       512
                                     PWM                                                                        1.0                             2048
                      0.5
                                                                                                                0.5
                      0.0                                                                                       0.0
                            0      2M       4M      6M        8M                  10 M                                    0                      50       100        150    200
                                               Steps                                                                                                   Time (m)
                                (a) Contact stiffness ablation.                                                                           (b) Policy batch size ablation.

  Figure 7: Left figure shows contact stiffness ablation where we increase contact stiffness on the Hopper task
  and analyze the effects on policy learning. The results indicate that stiff (but realistic) contact has adverse effects
  on SHAC which uses the simulation model to learn. Meanwhile, PPO and PWM remain unaffected with PWM
  still obtaining 17% more reward than PPO asymptotically. The right figure shows a policy batch size ablation
  on the Any task where we vary only the batch size used to train the policy components of PWM. Unfortunately
  we observe that PWM provides best result within a unit of time by using small batch sizes. Both figures show
  50% IQM and 95% CI over 5 random seeds.
PPO-norm. Reward


                      1.5
                                                                                                                      Normalized Reward
                                                                                                                                                        TD-MPC2
                                                            World Model Loss


                                                                                                                                          0.8
                                                                               0.05                                                                     PWM
                      1.0                                                                                                                 0.6
                                              ReLU
                      0.5                                                                                                                 0.4
                                              Mish
                                              SimNorm                                                                                     0.2
                      0.0                                                      0.04
                            0        10 M        20 M                                                                                           50 k 100 k                  250 k
                                        Steps                                                                                                     World model training steps
                                        (a) World model ablation.                                                          (b) World model vs policy sample efficiency.

  Figure 8: The left figure ablates the activation functions of the world model used to learn policies on the Ant
  task. We progressively add more regularization to the world model via changes to the activation function and
  observe an inverse correlation between world model loss and policy reward. This indicates that we should not
  construct world models for accuracy but for policy learning. The right figure investigates the policy sample
  efficiency on 5 dm_control tasks. We use the same data to pre-train world models for varying amount of gradient
  steps and then train the policy for 50k gradient steps and compare against TD-MPC2 (without planning). The
  results indicate that PWM policies are significantly more sample efficient but also require better trained world
  models. All results shown are 50% IQM with 95% CI across 5 random seeds.


  The second ablation explores batch sizes for policy learning with first-order gradients. Contrary to
  model-free methods, which can scale to large batch sizes, we find that FoG techniques like PWM
  benefit from smaller batch sizes. We explore this on the Ant task in Figure 7b, where we plot 50%
  IQM rewards over 5 random seeds. While larger batch sizes allow us to generate more data within a
  unit of time, that does not necessarily translate to learning better policies.
  Next we ablate the world model regularization. We perform the same experiment as Section 4.1 on
  the Ant task but now pre-train 3 different world models. (1) with ReLU activation func., (2) with
  Mish activation func. and (3) with Mish activation func. and SimNorm activation func. at the output
  layers of Eϕ and Fϕ . Figure 8a reveals that while less regularization results in lower world model
  error, that does not translate to learning better policies. Surprisingly, less regularized world models
  enable policies to start faster (up to 1M steps) but plateau to a suboptimal policy. Additional results
  in Appendix F.
  To understand the policy sample efficiency of PWM while controlling for the world model, we
  perform an ablation where we pre-train the same world model for [50k, 100k, 250k] gradient steps
  on an offline dataset. Then we fix the world model and train only the policy components on the


                                                                                         8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


same dataset for 50k gradient steps and measure the reward. We do this for 3 random seeds and 5
dm_control tasks. We repeat the same experiment for TD-MPC2 but disable its planning component
in order to understand the learning dynamics of each method’s policy components. The results
in Figure 8b show that the PWM policy components are significantly more sample efficient than
TD-MPC2 but also require better trained world models in order to obtain high reward.

5    R ELATED WORK
Reinforcement learning (RL) strategies are divided into model-based and model-free approaches,
with the latter not assuming a model of the environment Arulkumaran et al. (2017). Model-free
approaches, such as PPO Schulman et al. (2017) and SAC Haarnoja et al. (2018) do not require
a model of the environment and represent on-policy and off-policy methods, respectively. These
algorithms use an actor-critic structure, where the critic assesses the policy while the actor updates it
through gradient-based optimization to maximize rewards Konda & Tsitsiklis (1999).
Gradient estimator types. In the absence of direct access to dynamics and reward functions, it is
common to use the Policy Gradient Theorem Sutton et al. (1999), a zeroth-order method, to estimate
gradients. Although robust to discontinuities, this method exhibits high variance, leading to sample
inefficiency Mohamed et al. (2020). In contrast, first-order gradients (FoG) offer lower variance by
differentiating through the objective but struggle with discontinuities Suh et al. (2022). Differentiable
simulations have risen as a tool to study the properties of gradient estimators Howell et al. (2022);
Metz et al. (2021) and have produced model-based algorithms that use FoG optimization through
physics to learn high-performing policies Xu et al. (2022); Georgiev et al. (2024).
Multi-task models. While traditional RL focuses on single-task policies, the broader robotics field is
increasingly adopting large multi-task models through behavior cloning Firoozi et al. (2023). Recent
efforts like Open X Padalkar et al. (2023) and Octo Octo Model Team et al. (2024) have demonstrated
improved performance across various tasks and embodiments by leveraging large models and datasets.
However, the potential of these large-scale approaches in RL remains largely unexplored. While
GATO Reed et al. (2022) attempted to scale model-free RL across multiple tasks, it faced challenges
with sample inefficiency and required significant fine-tuning. Conversely, TD-MPC2 Hansen et al.
(2024) successfully scaled a 317M parameter world model for online planning across 80 tasks. While
showing impressive multi-task scalability, it failed to solve all tasks and exhibits limited scalability
due to online planning. Our work builds on the world model architecture proposed by TD-MPC2 but
employs FoG optimization for policy learning and extracts per-tasks policies. DreamerV3 Hafner
et al. (2023) also integrates world models with FoG but focuses on online learning without addressing
multi-task scenarios. Our work delves deeper into the relationship between world models and policy
learning, exploring the essential characteristics of world models that facilitate efficient optimization.

6    C ONCLUSION
In this study, we analyzed world models through policy gradient estimation and identified an inverse
correlation between the accuracy of world models and episode rewards. We concluded that world
models should prioritize smoothness and a smaller optimality gap over accuracy to enhance policy
performance. Building on these insights, we propose Policy learning through Multi-task World
Models (PWM), a MBRL algorithm that integrates smooth world models with first-order gradient
(FoG) optimization. Our evaluations showed that PWM can outperform existing methods, including
those with access to ground-truth simulation dynamics, in learning high-reward policies for high-
dimensional tasks. To scale to a multi-task settings, we propose a framework where world models
are pre-trained offline and treated as differentiable simulations. Our results demonstrate that PWM
can be used to learn expert policies in <10 minutes per task, achieving higher rewards without the
need for expensive online planning. With ample data and large, smooth world models, we believe
this approach has significant potential for scalability.
Limitations. Despite its demonstrated efficacy, PWM has notable limitations. Firstly, performance
relies heavily on the availability of substantial pre-existing data to train the world model, which might
not always be feasible, especially in novel or low-data environments. Secondly, although PWM
facilitates fast and cost-effective policy training, it necessitates re-training for each new task, which
could limit its applicability in scenarios requiring rapid adaptation to diverse tasks. Lastly, the current
TD-MPC2 world models used are difficult to train at scale due to their auto-regressive formulation.


                                                    9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Reproducibility statement. Code, training data and checkpoints are made available at
imgeorgiev.com/pwm. We rely on dflex, MetaWorld, DMControl and MuJoCo for simula-
tion which are publicly available under MIT and Apache 2.0 licenses. We use multi-task data from
TD-MPC2 which is publicly available. Implementation details and full list of hyper-parameters are
available in Appendix C.

R EFERENCES
Rishabh Agarwal, Max Schwarzer, Pablo Samuel Castro, Aaron C Courville, and Marc Bellemare.
  Deep reinforcement learning at the edge of the statistical precipice. Advances in neural information
  processing systems, 34:29304–29320, 2021.
Kai Arulkumaran, Marc Peter Deisenroth, Miles Brundage, and Anil Anthony Bharath. Deep
  reinforcement learning: A brief survey. IEEE Signal Processing Magazine, 34(6):26–38, 2017.
Jimmy Lei Ba, Jamie Ryan Kiros, and Geoffrey E Hinton. Layer normalization. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1607.06450, 2016.
Rishi Bommasani, Drew A Hudson, Ehsan Adeli, Russ Altman, Simran Arora, Sydney von Arx,
  Michael S Bernstein, Jeannette Bohg, Antoine Bosselut, Emma Brunskill, et al. On the opportuni-
  ties and risks of foundation models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2108.07258, 2021.
Konstantinos Bousmalis, Giulia Vezzani, Dushyant Rao, Coline Devin, Alex X Lee, Maria Bauza,
  Todor Davchev, Yuxiang Zhou, Agrim Gupta, Akhil Raju, et al. Robocat: A self-improving
  foundation agent for robotic manipulation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.11706, 2023.
Tom Brown, Benjamin Mann, Nick Ryder, Melanie Subbiah, Jared D Kaplan, Prafulla Dhariwal,
  Arvind Neelakantan, Pranav Shyam, Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, et al. Language models are
  few-shot learners. Advances in neural information processing systems, 33:1877–1901, 2020.
Vladimir Feinberg, Alvin Wan, Ion Stoica, Michael I Jordan, Joseph E Gonzalez, and Sergey Levine.
  Model-based value expansion for efficient model-free reinforcement learning. In Proceedings of
  the 35th International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML 2018), 2018.
Roya Firoozi, Johnathan Tucker, Stephen Tian, Anirudha Majumdar, Jiankai Sun, Weiyu Liu, Yuke
  Zhu, Shuran Song, Ashish Kapoor, Karol Hausman, et al. Foundation models in robotics: Applica-
  tions, challenges, and the future. arXiv preprint arXiv:2312.07843, 2023.
Ignat Georgiev, Krishnan Srinivasan, Jie Xu, Eric Heiden, and Animesh Garg. Adaptive horizon
  actor-critic for policy learningin contact-rich differentiable simulation. In International Conference
  on Machine Learning. PMLR, 2024.
Ankit Goyal, Jie Xu, Yijie Guo, Valts Blukis, Yu-Wei Chao, and Dieter Fox. Rvt: Robotic view
  transformer for 3d object manipulation. In Conference on Robot Learning, pp. 694–710. PMLR,
  2023.
Tuomas Haarnoja, Aurick Zhou, Kristian Hartikainen, George Tucker, Sehoon Ha, Jie Tan, Vikash
  Kumar, Henry Zhu, Abhishek Gupta, Pieter Abbeel, et al. Soft actor-critic algorithms and
  applications. arXiv preprint arXiv:1812.05905, 2018.
Danijar Hafner, Timothy Lillicrap, Jimmy Ba, and Mohammad Norouzi. Dream to control: Learning
  behaviors by latent imagination. arXiv preprint arXiv:1912.01603, 2019.
Danijar Hafner, Jurgis Pasukonis, Jimmy Ba, and Timothy Lillicrap. Mastering diverse domains
  through world models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2301.04104, 2023.
Nicklas Hansen, Xiaolong Wang, and Hao Su. Temporal difference learning for model predictive
  control. 2022.
Nicklas Hansen, Hao Su, and Xiaolong Wang. Td-mpc2: Scalable, robust world models for continuous
  control. 2024.
Taylor A Howell, Simon Le CleacâĂŹh, J Zico Kolter, Mac Schwager, and Zachary Manchester.
  Dojo: A differentiable simulator for robotics. arXiv preprint arXiv:2203.00806, 9, 2022.


                                                  10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Marco Hutter, Christian Gehring, Dominic Jud, Andreas Lauber, C Dario Bellicoso, Vassilios Tsounis,
 Jemin Hwangbo, Karen Bodie, Peter Fankhauser, Michael Bloesch, et al. Anymal-a highly mobile
 and dynamic quadrupedal robot. In 2016 IEEE/RSJ international conference on intelligent robots
 and systems (IROS), pp. 38–44. IEEE, 2016.

Durk P Kingma, Tim Salimans, and Max Welling. Variational dropout and the local reparameterization
  trick. Advances in neural information processing systems, 28, 2015.

Alexander Kirillov, Eric Mintun, Nikhila Ravi, Hanzi Mao, Chloe Rolland, Laura Gustafson, Tete
  Xiao, Spencer Whitehead, Alexander C Berg, Wan-Yen Lo, et al. Segment anything. In Proceedings
  of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision, pp. 4015–4026, 2023.

Vijay Konda and John Tsitsiklis. Actor-critic algorithms. Advances in neural information processing
  systems, 12, 1999.

Aviral Kumar, Joey Hong, Anikait Singh, and Sergey Levine. Should i run offline reinforcement
  learning or behavioral cloning? In International conference on learning representations, 2021.

Nathan Lambert, Brandon Amos, Omry Yadan, and Roberto Calandra. Objective mismatch in
  model-based reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2002.04523, 2020.

Minji Lee, Jeongmin Lee, and Dongjun Lee. Differentiable dynamics simulation using invariant
 contact mapping and damped contact force. In 2023 IEEE International Conference on Robotics
 and Automation (ICRA), pp. 11683–11689. IEEE, 2023.

Luke Metz, C Daniel Freeman, Samuel S Schoenholz, and Tal Kachman. Gradients are not all you
  need. arXiv preprint arXiv:2111.05803, 2021.

Diganta Misra. Mish: A self regularized non-monotonic activation function. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1908.08681, 2019.

Volodymyr Mnih, Koray Kavukcuoglu, David Silver, Alex Graves, Ioannis Antonoglou, Daan
  Wierstra, and Martin Riedmiller. Playing atari with deep reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1312.5602, 2013.

Shakir Mohamed, Mihaela Rosca, Michael Figurnov, and Andriy Mnih. Monte carlo gradient
  estimation in machine learning. The Journal of Machine Learning Research, 21(1):5183–5244,
  2020.

Richard M Murray and John Edmond Hauser. A case study in approximate linearization: The acrobat
  example. Electronics Research Laboratory, College of Engineering, University of âĂ˛e, 1991.

Octo Model Team, Dibya Ghosh, Homer Walke, Karl Pertsch, Kevin Black, Oier Mees, Sudeep
  Dasari, Joey Hejna, Charles Xu, Jianlan Luo, Tobias Kreiman, You Liang Tan, Lawrence Yunliang
  Chen, Pannag Sanketi, Quan Vuong, Ted Xiao, Dorsa Sadigh, Chelsea Finn, and Sergey Levine.
  Octo: An open-source generalist robot policy. In Proceedings of Robotics: Science and Systems,
  Delft, Netherlands, 2024.

Abhishek Padalkar, Acorn Pooley, Ajinkya Jain, Alex Bewley, Alex Herzog, Alex Irpan, Alexander
  Khazatsky, Anant Rai, Anikait Singh, Anthony Brohan, et al. Open x-embodiment: Robotic
  learning datasets and rt-x models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.08864, 2023.

Paavo Parmas, Takuma Seno, and Yuma Aoki. Model-based reinforcement learning with scalable
  composite policy gradient estimators. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp.
  27346–27377. PMLR, 2023.

Scott Reed, Konrad Zolna, Emilio Parisotto, Sergio Gomez Colmenarejo, Alexander Novikov, Gabriel
  Barth-Maron, Mai Gimenez, Yury Sulsky, Jackie Kay, Jost Tobias Springenberg, et al. A generalist
  agent. arXiv preprint arXiv:2205.06175, 2022.

John Schulman, Nicolas Heess, Theophane Weber, and Pieter Abbeel. Gradient estimation using
  stochastic computation graphs. Advances in neural information processing systems, 28, 2015.


                                                11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


John Schulman, Filip Wolski, Prafulla Dhariwal, Alec Radford, and Oleg Klimov. Proximal policy
  optimization algorithms. arXiv preprint arXiv:1707.06347, 2017.
Hyung Ju Suh, Max Simchowitz, Kaiqing Zhang, and Russ Tedrake. Do differentiable simulators
  give better policy gradients? In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 20668–20696.
  PMLR, 2022.
Richard S Sutton and Andrew G Barto. Reinforcement learning: An introduction. MIT press, 2018.
Richard S Sutton, David McAllester, Satinder Singh, and Yishay Mansour. Policy gradient methods
  for reinforcement learning with function approximation. Advances in neural information processing
  systems, 12, 1999.
Saran Tunyasuvunakool, Alistair Muldal, Yotam Doron, Siqi Liu, Steven Bohez, Josh Merel, Tom
  Erez, Timothy Lillicrap, Nicolas Heess, and Yuval Tassa. dm_control: Software and tasks for
  continuous control. Software Impacts, 6:100022, 2020.
Jie Xu, Viktor Makoviychuk, Yashraj Narang, Fabio Ramos, Wojciech Matusik, Animesh Garg, and
   Miles Macklin. Accelerated policy learning with parallel differentiable simulation. In International
   Conference on Learning Representations, 2022.
Tianhe Yu, Deirdre Quillen, Zhanpeng He, Ryan Julian, Karol Hausman, Chelsea Finn, and Sergey
  Levine. Meta-world: A benchmark and evaluation for multi-task and meta reinforcement learning.
  In Conference on robot learning, pp. 1094–1100. PMLR, 2020.
Brianna Zitkovich, Tianhe Yu, Sichun Xu, Peng Xu, Ted Xiao, Fei Xia, Jialin Wu, Paul Wohlhart,
  Stefan Welker, Ayzaan Wahid, Quan Vuong, Vincent Vanhoucke, Huong Tran, Radu Soricut,
  Anikait Singh, Jaspiar Singh, Pierre Sermanet, Pannag R. Sanketi, Grecia Salazar, Michael S.
  Ryoo, Krista Reymann, Kanishka Rao, Karl Pertsch, Igor Mordatch, Henryk Michalewski, Yao Lu,
  Sergey Levine, Lisa Lee, Tsang-Wei Edward Lee, Isabel Leal, Yuheng Kuang, Dmitry Kalashnikov,
  Ryan Julian, Nikhil J. Joshi, Alex Irpan, Brian Ichter, Jasmine Hsu, Alexander Herzog, Karol
  Hausman, Keerthana Gopalakrishnan, Chuyuan Fu, Pete Florence, Chelsea Finn, Kumar Avinava
  Dubey, Danny Driess, Tianli Ding, Krzysztof Marcin Choromanski, Xi Chen, Yevgen Chebotar,
  Justice Carbajal, Noah Brown, Anthony Brohan, Montserrat Gonzalez Arenas, and Kehang Han.
  Rt-2: Vision-language-action models transfer web knowledge to robotic control. In Jie Tan, Marc
  Toussaint, and Kourosh Darvish (eds.), Proceedings of The 7th Conference on Robot Learning,
  volume 229 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pp. 2165–2183. PMLR, 06–09 Nov
  2023. URL https://proceedings.mlr.press/v229/zitkovich23a.html.


                                                  12
 Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                          J( )
       150                               20               ReLU                                          ReLU
                                                          SimNorm                   0                   SimNorm
       100                                0
Loss


                                                                            J( )
        50                                                                         10
                                         20
         0
              0   250 500 750 1000                  2        0      2                   0          50         100
                    Iteration                                                                   Iterations
 Figure 10: Extended ball-wall toy example results. The left figure shows the model losses as they are trained
 to approximate the target function J(θ). The middle figure shows the output of the trained model across the
 spectrum of θ as well as the true target. This is the function we attempt to minimize in the right figure. We can
 see that when using the MLP with ReLU activation functions, the optimizer quickly gets stuck in local minima
 while the model using SimNorm activation function is able to find a solution closer to the true one.


 A           BALL - WALL EXAMPLE DETAILS
 This section provides more details on the ball-wall example used to showcase the issues of optimizing
 through contact in Section 3.1. In constructing this toy example we chose a simple physical system
 that exhibits contact discontinuities. Inspired by Suh et al. (Suh et al., 2022), we constructed a
 simple problem of a point mass (ball) being thrown forward (x direction) at a fixed velocity v. The
 optimization parameter of interest is the initial angle θ and the goal is to maximize forward distance
 traveled (in 2D). For simplicity we assume that the ball sticks to the wall (without complex contact)
 which can be expressed as:
                                          (                     1
                                             x0 + v cos(θ)t + gt2 if ycontact > h
                    J(θ) = xt = f (θ) =                         2                                   (11)
                                             w                          else
 where g = 9.81 is gravity, h and w are the height and width of the wall, (x0 , y0 ) is the starting
 position, v = 10 is the starting velocity and t = 2 is time. ycontact is the height at the time of contact
 tcontact which are both given by solving Eq. 11 for f (θ) = w:
                                  p
                      −vcos(θ) + v 2 cos2 (θ) + aw                                            1
           tcontact =                                         ycontact = y0 + v sin(θ)t + gt2
                                    a                                                         2
 We visualize the toy example in Figure 9 to aid reading. With
 f (θ) defined, we attempt to learn it with two Multi-Layer Per-
 ceptrons (MLPs). We configure them to have 2 hidden layers
 of 32 neurons each. The first MLP uses ReLU activation func-
 tions, while the latter uses SimNorm activation functions as             𝜃
 defined in Eq. 4. Both models are initialized with identical                              ℎ
 random parameters and are trained with the ADAM optimizer
 with learning rate α = 2 × 10−3 for 100 epochs using a batch
 size of B = 50. The data we use to train the models was 1000
 uniform samples of f (θ) within θ ∈ [−π, π]. Figure 10 shows               𝑤
 the training losses of the models, induced optimization land-
 scapes and the losses when attempting to maximize the models
 as you would do in an RL setting.                               Figure 9: Pedagogical ball-wall toy
                                                                          problem visualized.


                                                        13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                 10 2                                            104


                                                                   ESNR( J( ))
                    Var[ J( )]
                                 10 7              True                          101          True
    𝑞!"
                                 10 12             MLP H=3                       10 2         MLP H=3
                                                   MLP H=16                                   MLP H=16
          𝑞!#
                                         0    20           40                           0   20          40
                                                 H                                             H
Figure 11: Double pendulum pedagogical example. The middle figure evaluates the variance of policy
gradient estimates over N = 100 Monte-Carlo samples for varying horizons H. The right figure shows the same
data but plots the Expected Signal-to-Noise ratio (ESNR) with higher values translating to more useful gradients.
These results suggests that world models trained over long horizon trajectories provide more useful gradients.


B         D OUBLE PENDULUM EXAMPLE DETAILS
The double pendulum (also known as Acrobot (Murray &
Hauser, 1991)) is a classic under-actuated chaotic system. It is characterized by its sensitivity
to initial conditions where even small perturbations result in large gradient variance with long horizon
(> 20) trajectories. We chose this system to analyze variance and expected signal-to-noise ratio
(ENSR) in Section 3.2 as it is the easiest problem exhibiting chaosness. We model this toy problem
similar to DMControl (Tunyasuvunakool et al., 2020) in our differentiable simulator, dflex as we
need ground truth gradients for comparison. The first link with angle θ1 is fixed to the base and not
actuated. The second link with angle θ2 is the only control input via θ̇2 . The state of the system id
calculated as:
                            s = [cos(θ1 ), sin(θ1 ), cos(θ2 ), sin(θ2 ), θ̇1 , θ̇2 ]
The objective of this toy example is to bring and balance the pendulum upwards which we achieve by
formulating a reward:
                                  r(s, a) = −θ12 − θ22 − 0.1θ̇22
Next we train world models to approximate the dynamics and reward above. For this we collect data
with the SHAC algorithm (Xu et al., 2022) over 3 different runs for a total of 24,000 episodes of
length 240 timesteps. Maximum episode reward achieved during data collection was -942.95. Then
we train two TDMPC2 (Hansen et al., 2024) world models on the collected data. We use the 5M
parameter model which features a latent state of dimension of 512, encoder Eϕ with one hidden
dimension of 256, dynamics model MLP with 2 hidden layers with 512 neurons and a rewards model
of the same design. We keep the same hyper-parameters as per the origin work by Hensen et al. but
use γ = 0.99 which we found to reduce variance substantially. We train two models with different
training horizons H = 3 and H = 16 for 100k batch samples and a batch size of 1024.
With the trained models, we now compare the variance of stochastic gradients provided by the true
dynamics of the simulation and the two trained models. We do this by loading the best policy learned
by SHAC during data collection and executing a H = 50 rollout across the 3 models. We ensure
that the same actions are taken for each evaluated models and collect 100 Monte Carlo samples. In
addition to variance, we report ESNR as suggested by (Parmas et al., 2023) and defined in 5. Higher
ESNR translate to more useful gradients and we naturally should expect values to decrease with
increased H. We reported the results in Figure 3 but also duplicate them in Figure 11 for convenience
and ease of reading.


                                                      14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


C    I MPLEMENTATION DETAILS AND HYPER - PARAMETERS
The section details several implementation details of PWM that we thought are not crucial for
understanding the proposed approach in Section 3.3 but are important for replicating the results.

     1. Reward binning - the reward model we use in PWM is formulated as a discrete regression
        problem where R rewards are discretized into a predefined number of bins. Similar to
        (Hansen et al., 2024; Lee et al., 2023), we do this to enable robustness to reward scale and
        multi-task-ness. In particular, we perform two-hot encoding using SymLog and SymExp
        operators which are mathematically defined as:
             SymLog(x) = sign(x) log(1 + |x|)               SymExp(x) = sign(x)(e|x| − 1)
        Two-hot encoding is then performed with:
                   def two_hot(x):
                       x = clamp(symlog(x), vmin, vmax)
                       bin_idx = floor((x - vmin) / bin_size)
                       bin_offset = (x - vmin) / bin_size - bin_idx
                       soft_two_hot = zeros(x.size(0), num_bins)
                       soft_two_hot[bin_idx] = 1 - bin_offset
                       soft_two_hot[bin_odx + 1] = bin_offset
                       return soft_two_hot

        Inverting this operation to get back to scalar rewards would usually involve SymExp(x)
        but note that the sign(x) operator is not differentiable and would therefore not work for
        FoG. Instead, we chose to omit the SymExp(x) operation which technically now returns
        pseudo-rewards but also gradients which we found sufficient for policy learning:
                   def two_hot_inversion(x):
                       vals = linspace(vmin, vmax, num_bins)
                       x = softmax(x)
                       x = torch.sum(x * vals, dim=-1)
                       return x

     2. Critic training - while Algorithm 1 function to similar results as presented in 4, we found
        it beneficial to split the critic training data from a single rollout into several smaller mini-
        batches and over them for multiple gradient steps. In our implementation we split the data
        into 4 mini-batches and perform 8 gradient steps over them with uniform sampling. With a
        H = 16 and batch size 64, this translates to a critic batch size of 256.
     3. Minimum policy noise - Due to the larger amount of gradient steps needed, we noticed
        that PWM’s actor tends to collapse to a deterministic policy rapidly. As such, we found it
        beneficial to include a lower bound on the standard deviation of the action distribution in
        order to maintain stochasticity in the optimization process. We have used 0.24 throughout
        this paper. While similar results would be possible by adding an entropy term (Schulman
        et al., 2017), we found our current solution sufficient
     4. World model fine-tuning - Throughout all of our experiments we found that the offline
        data used to train PWM’s world model to be crucial to learning a good policy. In very
        high-dimensional tasks such as Humanoid SNU, collecting extensive data is a difficult task.
        As such, in these tasks we found it beneficial to online fine-tune the world model. We do
        this on all single-task experiments of Section 4.1 using the default hyper-parameters and a
        replay buffer of size 1024.


                                                 15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                      Hyper-parameter                         Value
                      Policy components
                      Horizon (H)                             16
                      Batch size                              64
                      αθ                                      5 × 10−4
                      αψ                                      5 × 10−4
                      Actor grad norm                         1
                      Critic grad norm                        100
                      Actor hidden layers                     [400, 200, 100]
                      Critic hidden layers                    [400, 200]
                      Number of critics                       3
                      λ                                       0.95
                      γ                                       0.99
                      Critic batch split                      4
                      Critic iterations                       8
                      World model components (48M)
                      Latent state (z) dimension              768
                      Horizon (H)                             16
                      Batch size                              1024
                      αϕ                                      3 × 10−4
                      World model grad norm                   20.0
                      SimNorm V                               8
                      Reward bins                             101
                      Encoder Eϕ hidden layers                [1792, 1792, 1792]
                      Dynamics Fϕ hidden layers               [1792, 1792]
                      Reward Rϕ hidden layers                 [1792, 1792]
                      Task encoding dimension                 96

                Table 1: Table of hyper-parameters used in PWM, shared across all tasks.


 Figure 12: Locomotion environments (left to right): Hopper, Ant, Anymal, Humanoid and SNU Humanoid.


D    C ONTACT- RICH SINGLE TASK EXPERIMENT DETAILS
In Section 4.1, we explore 5 locomotion tasks with increasing complexity. They are described below
and shown in Figure 4.

1. Hopper, a single-legged robot jumping only in one axis with n = 11 and m = 3.
2. Ant, a four-legged robot with n = 37 and m = 8.
3. Anymal, a more sophisticated quadruped with n = 49 and m = 12 modeled after (Hutter et al.,
2016).
4. Humanoid, a classic contact-rich environment with n = 76 and m = 21 which requires extensive
exploration to find a good policy.
5. SNU Humanoid, a version of Humanoid lower body where instead of joint torque control, the
robot is controlled via m = 152 muscles intended to challenge the scaling capabilities of algorithms.

All tasks share the same common main objective - maximize forward velocity vx :


                                                  16
    Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                             Hopper                      Ant                      Anymal                      Humanoid                SNU Humanoid

Episode reward   1


                 0
                     0         5M         10 M 0     10 M 20 M            0         10 M               0      10 M   20 M         0     10 M 20 M
                         Simulation steps          Simulation steps           Simulation steps             Simulation steps           Simulation steps
                                    PPO            SAC          SHAC              TD-MPC2              DreamerV3              PWM (ours)

    Figure 13: Learning curves for each environment. This figure shows 50% IQM and 95% CI across 10 random
    seeds for each task in the dflex simulation suite. Rewards are normalized by the maximum reward achieved by
    PPO (usually ≥ 100M steps). While PWM remains competitive with SHAC for most tasks, it does not scale well
    to the 152 action dimension SNU Humanoid. Note that SHAC uses gradients from the differentiable simulation
    directly and converges in fewer samples, explaining the truncated curves.


                                    Environment            Reward
                                    Hopper                 vx + Rheight + Rangle − 0.1∥a∥22
                                    Ant                    vx + Rheight + 0.1Rangle + Rheading − 0.01∥a∥22
                                    Anymal                 vx + Rheight + 0.1Rangle + Rheading − 0.01∥a∥22
                                    Humanoid               vx + Rheight + 0.1Rangle + Rheading − 0.002∥a∥22
                                    Humanoid STU           vx + Rheight + 0.1Rangle + Rheading − 0.002∥a∥22

                                            Table 2: Rewards used for each task bench-marked in Section 4


    We additionally use auxiliary rewards Rheight to incentivise the agent to, Rangle to keep the agents’
    normal vector point up, Rheading to keep the agent’s heading pointing towards the direction of
    running and a norm over the actions to incentivise energy-efficient policies. For most algorithms,
    none of these rewards apart from the last one are crucial to succeed in the task. However, all of them
    aid learning policies faster.


                                                                      h − hterm                   if h ≥ hterm
                                                   Rheight =
                                                                      −200(h − hterm )2           if h < hterm

                                                                                                   2
                                                                                            θ
                                                                Rangle = 1 −
                                                                                          θterm

    Rangle = ∥qf orward − qagent ∥22 is the difference between the heading of the agent qagent and the
    forward vector qagent . h is the height of the CoM of the agent and θ is the angle of its normal vector.
    hterm and θterm are parameters that we set for each environment depending on the robot morphology.
    Similar to other high-performance RL applications in simulation, we find it crucial to terminate
    episode early if the agent exceeds these termination parameters. However, it is worth noting that
    AHAC is still capable of solving all tasks described in the paper without these termination conditions,
    albeit slower.
    All results presented in Figure 13 are for 10 random seeds using the simulator in a vectorized fashion
    with 64 parallel environments for all approaches, except PPO which uses 1024. We note that while
    simulation steps appear high, all of these experiments are executed ≤ 2 hours on an Nvidia RTX6000
    GPU. In addition the the learning curves of Figure 13, we also present tabular results below:
    We note that TDMPC2 and PWM use pre-trained world models on 20480 episodes of each task. The
    world models are trained for 100k gradient steps and the same world models (specific to each task)
    are loaded into both approaches. The data consists of trajectories of varying policy quality generated
    with the SHAC algorithm. Trajectories include near-0 episode rewards as well as the highest reward
    achieved by SHAC. Note that we also run an early termination mechanism in these tasks which is
    done to accelerate learning and iteration.


                                                                                 17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                       Hopper              Ant           Anymal          Humanoid         SNU Humanoid
        PPO          1.00 ± 0.11       1.00 ± 0.12    1.00 ± 0.03       1.00 ± 0.05         1.00 ± 0.09
        SAC          0.87 ± 0.16       0.95 ± 0.08    0.98 ± 0.06       1.04 ± 0.04         0.88 ± 0.11
    DreamerV3        1.15 ± 0.47       1.12 ± 0.45    1.18 ± 0.47       1.03 ± 0.43         0.48 ± 0.21
     TDMPC2          0.85 ± 0.37       1.07 ± 0.44    0.98 ± 0.48       1.05 ± 0.46         0.26 ± 0.12
       SHAC          1.02 ± 0.03       1.16 ± 0.13    1.26 ± 0.04       1.15 ± 0.04         1.44 ± 0.08
       PWM           1.20 ± 0.29       1.46 ± 0.31    1.16 ± 0.24      1.19 ± 0.025         1.36 ± 0.56

Table 3: Tabular results of the asymptotic (end of training) rewards achieved by each algorithm across all tasks.
The results presented are PPO-normalised 50 % IQM and standard deviation across 10 random seeds. Most
algorithms have been trained until convergence.

                     Hopper                Ant             Anymal          Humanoid         SNU Humanoid
     PPO           4742 ± 521         6605 ± 793       12029 ± 360         7293 ± 365          4114 ± 370
     SAC           4126 ± 759         6275 ± 528       11788 ± 722         7285 ± 292          3620 ± 453
 DreamerV3        5436 ± 2213         7370 ± 3002     14169 ± 5692        7546 ± 3106          2018 ± 873
  TDMPC2          4027 ± 1768         7080 ± 2885     11787 ± 4702        7634 ± 3317          1121 ± 525
    SHAC           4837 ± 142          7662 ± 859     15157 ± 481          8387 ± 292          5924 ± 329
    PWM           5680 ± 2303         9672 ± 2012     13927 ± 2882        8661 ± 1792         5767 ± 2394

Table 4: Tabular results of the asymptotic (end of training) rewards achieved by each algorithm across all tasks.
The results presented are 50 % IQM and standard deviation across 10 random seeds. All algorithms have been
trained until convergence.


E    M ULTI - TASK EXPERIMENTS ADDITIONAL RESULTS
In this section we provide additional results on multi-task experiments. While we find it beneficial
to train the world model at the same horizon as the policy learning, it is not strictly necessary to
achieve good performance. In Figure 14 we present an ablation where we compare PWM world
models pre-trained on horizons H = 3 and H = 16 and policies trained only with H = 16. These
results reveal that H = 16 trained world models have only marginally higher scores. On deeper
inspection, most of increased scores come form dm_control tasks which are harder than MetaWorld
tasks on average. Therefore if training new world models, we advise using higher H; however if
other pre-trained world models exist with suboptimal H, they will probably be also useful.
                              MT30
                              MT80


                                     0.6      0.7     0.8      0.9
                                              Normalized score
                              TD-MPC2                PWM H=3                PWM H=16
                               Figure 14: Horizon ablation of the world model

Figures 15 and 16 give scores for individual tasks for TDMPC2 and PWM across both the MT30 and
MT80 task sets. We can observe that most of the increased performance of PWM is in dm_control
tasks which are on average more difficult than MetaWorld.



                                                      18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                                               TD-MPC2
                           acrobot-swingup                                     PWM
                           cartpole-balance
                  cartpole-balance-sparse
                          cartpole-swingup
                  cartpole-swingup-sparse
                               cheetah-jump
                                 cheetah-run
                         cheetah-run-back
                   cheetah-run-backwards
                          cheetah-run-front
                                   cup-catch
                                     cup-spin
                                  finger-spin
                            finger-turn-easy
                            finger-turn-hard
                                    fish-swim
                                 hopper-hop
                   hopper-hop-backwards
                               hopper-stand
                              pendulum-spin
                        pendulum-swingup
                               reacher-easy
                                reacher-hard
                       reacher-three-easy
                        reacher-three-hard
                                  walker-run
                    walker-run-backwards
                                walker-stand
                                 walker-walk
                   walker-walk-backwards

                                                0.0   0.2     0.4    0.6       0.8   1.0
                                                            Normalized score
                          Figure 15: Individual task results for MT30 task set.


                                                      19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                    TD-MPC2                                                    TDMPC2
             acrobot-swingup                        PWM                        mw-hammer                       PWM
             cartpole-balance                                             mw-hand-insert
     cartpole-balance-sparse                                             mw-handle-press
             cartpole-swingup                                       mw-handle-press-side
     cartpole-swingup-sparse                                               mw-handle-pull
                 cheetah-jump                                        mw-handle-pull-side
                  cheetah-run                                                mw-lever-pull
            cheetah-run-back                                           mw-peg-insert-side
      cheetah-run-backwards                                          mw-peg-unplug-side
            cheetah-run-front                                         mw-pick-out-of-hole
                     cup-catch                                              mw-pick-place
                       cup-spin                                        mw-pick-place-wall
                    finger-spin                                            mw-plate-slide
              finger-turn-easy                                        mw-plate-slide-back
              finger-turn-hard                                    mw-plate-slide-back-side
                      fish-swim                                       mw-plate-slide-side
                   hopper-hop                                                     mw-push
      hopper-hop-backwards                                                 mw-push-back
                 hopper-stand                                               mw-push-wall
                 mw-assembly                                                      mw-reach
                mw-basketball                                              mw-reach-wall
               mw-bin-picking                                              mw-shelf-place
                 mw-box-close                                                    mw-soccer
             mw-button-press                                                  mw-stick-pull
   mw-button-press-topdown                                                  mw-stick-push
mw-button-press-topdown-wall                                                     mw-sweep
        mw-button-press-wall                                               mw-sweep-into
            mw-coffee-button                                            mw-window-close
                mw-coffee-pull                                           mw-window-open
              mw-coffee-push                                               pendulum-spin
                  mw-dial-turn                                         pendulum-swingup
             mw-disassemble                                                   reacher-easy
                mw-door-close                                                 reacher-hard
                 mw-door-lock                                          reacher-three-easy
                mw-door-open                                           reacher-three-hard
              mw-door-unlock                                                     walker-run
             mw-drawer-close                                        walker-run-backwards
             mw-drawer-open                                                    walker-stand
              mw-faucet-close                                                   walker-walk
              mw-faucet-open                                       walker-walk-backwards

                              0.00    0.25   0.50   0.75   1.00                           0.00   0.25   0.50   0.75   1.00
                                       Normalized score                                           Normalized score
                                  Figure 16: Individual task results for MT80 task set.


F     A DDITIONAL ABLATION RESULTS
F.1    W ORLD MODEL REGULARIZATION ABLATION

We extend our world model regularization ablation from Section 4.3 to 3 additional dflex locomotion
tasks - Hopper, Anymal and Humanoid. The complete results are presented in Figure 17 and follow
the same format as the original results in Figure 8a - 50% IQM with 95% CI across 3 seeds. From
the results we can observe that progressively adding more regularization, results in higher policy
rewards. This follows the ablation results in our paper and the one of the core contribution of work -
more accurate world models, do not results in better rewards. Instead of building world models for
accuracy, we should build them to enable better policy optimization and thus higher rewards.

F.2    T RAINING A MULTI - TASK POLICY

One of the contributions of our work is the multi-task learning framework of PWM. Instead of
training a single multi-task policy, we propose training a single multi-task world model with a
supervised objective and then extracting RL policies from it very efficiently. In this section we
justify this empirically by reproducing the MT30 experiment of Section 4.2 with two additional
baselines - TD-MPC2 without planning and PWM with a single multi-task policy. This strips down
both algorithms to be very similar, the major difference being that TD-MPC2 features an off-policy
SAC-like policy while PWM features an on-policy SHAC-like policy. Both are fed the same one-hot


                                                           20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                              Hopper                 Ant                        Anymal                   Humanoid

PPO-norm. Reward
                   1.5
                   1.0
                   0.5
                   0.0
                         0     5M         10 M 0   5 M 10 M 15 M 0              5 M 10 M 15 M 0          5 M 10 M 15 M
                              Steps                 Steps                        Steps                       Steps
                                                   ReLU            Mish               SimNorm

Figure 17: World model regularization ablation. This figure extends the ablation results of Figure 8a with
additional tasks. The figure shows 50 % IQM with 95% CI over 5 seeds per task.

                                 Hopper                            Ant                                Anymal
PPO-norm. Reward


                   1.5
                   1.0
                   0.5
                   0.0
                         0   2.5 M 5 M 7.5 M 10 M 0         10 M         20 M         30 M 0       5M          10 M       15 M
                                  Steps                        Steps                                    Steps
                                                            TD( )               PWM

Figure 19: TD(λ) ablation. This figure compares vanilla PWM with a version that uses a TD(λ) actor objective.
Results shown are 50% IQM with 95% CI over 3 seeds.


task embeddings. The results in 18 show that both fail at solving the MT30 benchmark. In the case of
TD-MPC2, this reveals its reliance on planning and in the case of PWM, this reveals the need to train
policies per-task. We believe this is due to the unstable optimization objective of the RL problem.
F.3                  TD(λ) ABLATION
Here we replace the actor objective of PWM with
TD(λ) similar to Dreamer (Hafner et al., 2019).                                           Multi-task MT30
We evaluate this on 3 single-task experiments -
Hopper, Ant and Anymal and show the results in
19. We can see that PWM overall achieves higher
rewards, which we believe is to more simple and
less noisy gradients obtained via TD(N). Addi-
tionally, we found that TD(λ) uses approx. 10%
more computation due to having to compute more                                  0.2        0.4        0.6           0.8
gradients. However, it is worth noting that TD(λ)                                         Normalized score
learning curves appear more stable with higher
dimensional tasks such as Anymal and we believe                            TD-MPC2 (no planning)             PWM (single-policy)
                                                                           TD-MPC2                           PWM
this ablation requires more large-scale studying.
                                                                    Figure 18: Framework ablation ablation. Extends
                                                                    the results of Figure 6 with two additional baselines:
                                                                    TD-MPC2 without planning and PWM with a single
                                                                    multi-task policy learned over all embeddings. The
                                                                    figure shows 50% IQM results with solid lines, mean
                                                                    with dashed lines and 95 % CI.


                                                              21
