Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


        S ONIC S IM : A CUSTOMIZABLE SIMULATION PLAT-
FORM FOR SPEECH PROCESSING IN MOVING SOUND
SOURCE SCENARIOS

 Kai Li1,2 , Wendi Sang1 , Chang Zeng3 , Runxuan Yang1 , Guo Chen1 & Xiaolin Hu1,2,4∗
 1. Department of Computer Science and Technology, Institute for AI,
 BNRist, Tsinghua University, Beijing 100084, China
 2. Tsinghua Laboratory of Brain and Intelligence (THBI),
 IDG/McGovern Institute for Brain Research, Tsinghua University, Beijing 100084, China
 3. National Institute of Informatics, Japan
 4. Chinese Institute for Brain Research (CIBR), Beijing 100010, China
 tsinghua.kaili@gmail.com
 xlhu@tsinghua.edu.cn



                                               A BSTRACT
             Systematic evaluation of speech separation and enhancement models under mov-
             ing sound source conditions requires extensive and diverse data. However, real-
             world datasets often lack sufficient data for training and evaluation, and synthetic
             datasets, while larger, lack acoustic realism. Consequently, neither effectively
             meets practical needs. To address this issue, we introduce SonicSim, a synthetic
             toolkit based on the embodied AI simulation platform Habitat-sim, designed to
             generate highly customizable data for moving sound sources. SonicSim supports
             multi-level adjustments—including scene-level, microphone-level, and source-
             level—enabling the creation of more diverse synthetic data. Leveraging Sonic-
             Sim, we constructed a benchmark dataset called SonicSet, utilizing LibriSpeech,
             Freesound Dataset 50k (FSD50K), Free Music Archive (FMA), and 90 scenes
             from Matterport3D to evaluate speech separation and enhancement models. Ad-
             ditionally, to investigate the differences between synthetic and real-world data, we
             selected 5 hours of raw, non-reverberant data from the SonicSet validation set and
             recorded a real-world speech separation dataset, providing a reference for compar-
             ing SonicSet with other synthetic datasets. For speech enhancement, we utilized
             the real-world dataset RealMAN to validate the acoustic gap between SonicSet
             and existing synthetic datasets. The results indicate that models trained on Sonic-
             Set generalize better to real-world scenarios compared to other synthetic datasets.
             Code is publicly available at https://cslikai.cn/SonicSim/.


1       I NTRODUCTION
Speech separation (Cherry, 1953) and enhancement (Loizou, 2007) are classic tasks focused on ex-
tracting target speech from noisy audio. The release of large-scale synthetic datasets like LibriMix
(Cosentino et al., 2020) and the DNS Challenge (Reddy et al., 2020) has propelled model advance-
ments, with many methods (Chen et al., 2020a; Luo & Yu, 2023b) demonstrating cross-environment
transferability in zero-shot settings. These SOTA methods have significantly benefited applications
such as online meetings (Rao et al., 2021) and human-computer interaction (Yu & Chen, 2017).
However, a significant acoustic mismatch between synthetic and real-world data persists, leading to
suboptimal model performance in real-world scenarios (Sivaraman & Kim, 2022).
Previous efforts to bridge the gap between synthetic and real-world data have mainly focused on
more accurate modeling of room reverberations. Datasets like WHAMR! (Maciejewski et al., 2020)
and the DNS Challenge (Reddy et al., 2020) simulate room impulse responses (RIRs) using methods
such as finite element analysis (Jarrett et al., 2012), ray tracing (Lopez-Hernandez et al., 2000), or the
    ∗
        Corresponding author.


                                                      1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


image source method (Luo & Yu, 2023a). However, from the perspective of RIR simulation, existing
approaches face three major challenges: 1) Occlusion of obstacles: RIRs based on the image source
method struggle with varying quantities and shapes of obstacles, particularly when objects obstruct
the sound path between the source and microphone (Aralikatti et al., 2022). 2) Complex room
geometry: Simulations often assume cuboid-shaped rooms (Southern et al., 2011), deviating from
complex real-world environments, such as lecture halls with tiered seating. 3) Complicated room
surfaces and object materials: Different materials have distinct acoustic properties, and accurately
replicating scenes using multiple materials is challenging. Therefore, accurate simulation of RIRs
remains a difficult problem.
Existing datasets are primarily collected from static sound sources (Cosentino et al., 2020; Ma-
ciejewski et al., 2020; Reddy et al., 2020), making them suitable for non-moving scenarios like
online meetings. In contrast, moving sound source scenarios—where speakers move around while
static microphones capture their speech—are more relevant to applications such as robotic naviga-
tion (Wang et al., 2004). However, capturing large-scale datasets for moving sound sources is more
time-consuming, leading to a scarcity of such data, which limits the development and evaluation
of speech separation and enhancement models in these tasks. Additionally, real-world datasets are
constrained by physical environments and, once collected, their distributions are fixed, making them
difficult to adjust flexibly and increasing the risk of models overfitting to specific datasets. Thus,
despite their high research value, the lack of relevant datasets for moving sound source scenarios
significantly hinders deeper exploration in this area.

                         3D Scene Import         Acoustic Simulation          Microphone Types                        Positions

            Functions
                                                                       Mono          Binaural       Ambisonics


SonicSim
                                                                          Linear array

                                                                                           Circle array


Figure 1: Overview of SonicSim, our toolkit for speech research. SonicSim provides a customizable
data generator based on Habitat-sim, allowing users to generate realistic and physically plausible
audio data in a controlled manner.



                                                                                Librispeech


                                                                                  FSD50K


 SonicSet

                                     90 Matterport3D scenes                     FMA music                 57,596 motion trajectories



Figure 2: Overview of the SonicSet dataset. It covers a wide range of scenarios, speakers, and noise.
To advance research in moving sound sources, particularly in speech separation and enhancement
tasks, there is a pressing need for a high-fidelity, low-cost, and comprehensive synthetic toolkit and
data asset for moving sound sources. To address these issues, we developed SonicSim, a synthetic
toolkit capable of accurately simulating RIRs for moving sound sources, as shown in Figure 1. This
toolkit is built upon the embodied AI simulation platform, Habitat-sim (Savva et al., 2019), which
can import a variety of 3D environments and accurately simulate the acoustic characteristics of
rooms. The core strength of SonicSim lies in its precise simulation of RIRs (Chen et al., 2022a) and
highly customizable simulation of moving sound sources, which significantly expands the scale of
data collection for moving sound source research.
Based on SonicSim, we constructed a multi-scene, large-scale, and high-quality moving sound
source dataset called SonicSet (see Figure 2): 1) Multi-scene: SonicSet utilizes 90 scenes from
the Matterport3D dataset (Chang et al., 2017), covering a wide range of real-world environments,
such as homes, offices, and churches; 2) Large-scale: SonicSet integrates 360 hours of speech audio
from the LibriSpeech (Panayotov et al., 2015), combined with environmental noise from FSD50K


                                                              2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


(Fonseca et al., 2021) and musical noise from the FMA dataset (Defferrard et al., 2017); 3) High-
quality: The RIRs of the synthetic audio closely resemble real-world environments by simulating
reflection and diffraction across various materials, resulting in higher-quality reverberated audio.
On the SonicSet dataset, we conducted extensive quantitative experiments on 11 speech separation
methods and 9 speech enhancement methods, thoroughly analyzing the performance of each ap-
proach. To assess the gap between SonicSet and real-world environments, we created a speech sep-
aration dataset by recording raw, non-reverberant audio from the SonicSet validation set in real-life
scenarios across 10 scenes, totaling 5 hours. For the speech enhancement task, we utilized the Real-
MAN test set (Yang et al., 2024), which includes real-world recordings of moving sound sources,
to evaluate discrepancies between the synthetic dataset and real environments. The experimental
results demonstrated that models trained on SonicSet generalized well to real-world conditions,
confirming the effectiveness and potential of SonicSim for speech research.


2   R ELATED WORKS

In this section, we systematically compare the SonicSim toolkit and the generated SonicSet dataset
with existing real-world datasets, synthetic datasets, and simulation toolkits (see Table 1).
Real-world datasets: Currently, there are very few speech separation and enhancement datasets
recorded in real-world environments (Yang et al., 2024; Watanabe et al., 2020). This is primar-
ily because most speech datasets are designed for speech recognition evaluation and only provide
transcription annotations, lacking the ground-truth labels needed for supervised learning tasks such
as speech separation and enhancement. Recently, the RealMAN dataset introduced real-world mi-
crophone array recordings of speech and noise (Yang et al., 2024). Although the gap between the
RealMAN dataset and real-world application scenarios is relatively small, its high annotation cost
and limited scalability hinder model adaptation to diverse scenarios. Our proposed SonicSim ad-
dresses these limitations by offering a highly customizable and realistic synthetic data generation
method, filling the gap in scale and scene diversity present in existing datasets.

           Datasets        Geometry   Occlusion   Material   Scalability   Cost   Tools   Src Type   Tasks
       WHAMR! 2020         Cuboid        ✗           ✗           ✓         Low     ✓       Static    SS/SE
       LibriCSS 2020b      Cuboid        ✓           ✓           ✗         High    ✗       Static     SS
      DNS Challenge 2020   Cuboid        ✗           ✗           ✓         Low     ✓       Static     SE
        Chime6 2020        Variable      ✓           ✓           ✗         High    ✗       Static     SS
         LRS2 2023         Variable      ✓           ✓           ✗         High    ✗       Static     SS
        RealMan 2024       Variable      ✓           ✓           ✗         High    ✗      Dynamic     SE
        SonicSet (ours)    Variable      ✓           ✓           ✓         Low     ✓      Dynamic    SS/SE


Table 1: Comparison of different datasets for speech separation and enhancement. “Geometry”
refers to the room geometry. “Occlusion” indicates whether objects obstruct the sound source and
microphone. “Material” shows whether the material properties of objects are considered. “Scalabil-
ity” refers to the ability to increase the amount of data. “Cost” represents the difficulty of simulating
or collecting data. “Tools” indicates whether there are toolkits for data collection. “Src Type” indi-
cates the source type. “SS” and “SE” denote the speech separation and enhancement tasks.
Synthetic datasets: Synthetic datasets (Reddy et al., 2020; Cosentino et al., 2020; Maciejewski
et al., 2020; Chen et al., 2020b) generate data by convolving Room Impulse Responses (RIRs)
with multiple source or noise signals to enhance realism, often using image source methods (Allen
& Berkley, 1979). While datasets like WHAMR! (Maciejewski et al., 2020) introduce synthetic
reverberation and noise, they are created under controlled conditions, limiting their authenticity and
inability to fully reflect real-world performance of speech separation and enhancement methods. In
contrast, SonicSet ensures acoustic plausibility and offers a wider range of customizable options,
such as varying geometric structures and multiple microphone array configurations, providing more
challenging and realistic environments for these tasks.
Reverberation simulation tools: Recent advances in reverberation simulation tools have signifi-
cantly contributed to the field. FRAM-RIR (Luo & Yu, 2023a) uses a stochastic approximation of
the image source method for rapid RIR simulation. RIR-Generator (Tang et al., 2020) allows param-
eter settings based on the image source method, and Pyroomacoustics (Scheibler et al., 2018) offers
a flexible Python library for fast simulation in 2D or 3D rooms. For complex acoustic environments,


                                                      3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


COMSOL Multiphysics (Multiphysics, 1998) employs finite element methods for detailed room
modeling. Compared to these tools, SonicSim based on Habitat-sim (Savva et al., 2019) surpasses
others in acoustic realism, producing synthetic audio that closely resembles real-world recordings.
It also provides practical features for efficiently creating diverse acoustic scenes tailored to specific
needs—capabilities lacking in most existing reverberation simulation tools.

3       M OVING SOUND SOURCE SUITE
The moving sound source suite consists of two core components: the customizable data generator
SonicSim and the moving sound source dataset SonicSet. SonicSim leverages existing datasets to
create data tailored for speech separation and enhancement.

3.1     C USTOMIZABLE DATA GENERATOR : S ONIC S IM

The customizable dataset generator, SonicSim, is specifically designed to generate datasets for
speech tasks. Built on Habitat-sim (Savva et al., 2019), SonicSim leverages its highly realistic
audio renderer (demonstrated in (Chen et al., 2022a)) and high-performance 3D simulator to pro-
duce high-quality audio data adapted to various acoustic environments. SonicSim provides a rich set
of annotations, including source and microphone position maps, clean audio, and audio with rever-
beration and noise, without incurring additional data collection costs. More importantly, SonicSim
provides users with extensive control over the dataset generation process, allowing customization
of scene layouts, scene materials, source and microphone positions, and microphone types, while
ensuring physical realism through its physics engine. By adjusting these configurations, SonicSim
can flexibly generate diverse acoustic environment data to meet the specific requirements of var-
ious tasks. In Appendix A, we discussed in detail the impact of environmental factors on model
performance. The following main functions are included in SonicSim, as shown in Figure 1.

 • 3D scene import: Through Habitat-sim (Savva et al., 2019), SonicSim can import various re-
   alistic 3D assets generated through simulations or scans, such as those from the Matterport3D
   dataset (Chang et al., 2017). SonicSim leverages Habitat-sim1 to interpret metadata and struc-
   tural information from external datasets and convert them into Habitat-sim’s native scene format.
   Geometric data, material properties, and semantic annotations are transformed to ensure that the
   imported scenes maintain their original high fidelity. Importing 3D scenes with various shapes,
   such as cylinders, enables Habitat-sim to simulate different acoustic properties according to dif-
   ferent spatial layouts. SonicSim allows users to add additional objects to the scene; however, the
   3D scenes themselves cannot be modified by users, as they are fixed during the import process.
 • Acoustic environment simulation: SonicSim uses Habitat-sim to simulate various acoustic fea-
   tures in 3D environments2 . Its capabilities include: 1) accurately simulating sound reflections
   within room geometries using indoor acoustic modeling and bidirectional path tracing algo-
   rithms. This effectively simulates the acoustic effect of different objects blocking sound.; 2)
   mapping the semantic labels of 3D scenes to material properties to set the acoustic features of
   different surfaces, such as absorption, scattering, and transmission coefficients. SonicSim sup-
   ports a wide range of materials and objects, and users can modify the physical and categorical
   attributes of materials; 3) extended Habitat-sim acoustic simulation capabilities enable the syn-
   thesis of moving sound source data based on sound source paths.
 • Microphone types: Habitat-sim offers comprehensive microphone configurations, supporting
   various audio formats such as mono, binaural, and ambisonics3 . Additionally, we have inte-
   grated common linear and circular microphone arrays, allowing users to customize the shape of
   microphone arrays to meet different experimental requirements. Specifically, we first define mul-
   tiple single-channel receivers corresponding to the number of microphones in the array. Next, we
   configure the spatial relative coordinates of these single-channel receivers based on the desired
   array shape. Finally, we bind these receivers together and adjust the absolute coordinates to set
   the position of the microphone array within the environment. We provided a flexible API that
   enables researchers to represent the desired array layout by inputting custom functions.
    1
      https://aihabitat.org/docs/habitat-sim/habitat_sim.sim.SimulatorConfiguration.html
    2
      https://aihabitat.org/docs/habitat-sim/habitat_sim.sensor.AudioSensor.html
    3
      https://github.com/facebookresearch/habitat-sim/blob/main/docs/AUDIO.md



                                                   4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


 • Source and microphone positions: SonicSim allows users to customize or randomly set the po-
   sitions of sound sources and microphones, which can be defined within the global coordinate sys-
   tem of the environment. Apart from static positioning, SonicSim also supports generating motion
   trajectories for moving sound sources and microphones based on specified start and endpoints.
   This feature is implemented by interpolating between defined points using navigable paths and
   leveraging Habitat-sim’s physics engine to update the positions of moving entities over time. As
   the sound sources and microphones move along their trajectories, the system dynamically cal-
   culates the acoustic response in real-time. SonicSim accounts for dynamic changes in distance,
   occlusion, and environmental interactions, continuously updating the sound propagation paths to
   simulate evolving reverberation. By integrating these capabilities, SonicSim provides a highly
   realistic simulation environment for scenarios involving moving sound sources.

3.2     M OVING SOUND SOURCE DATASET: S ONIC S ET

                                                                                                                      RIRs
                                                                                                                                Convolution


                              Import                            Select                        Simulate
                                                                                       8m
                             SonicSim                          end point            5-          RIRs                                                 Interpolation
                                                  5-8                                                                                                   weights
                                                        m

                                                     8m
                                                   5-


      (1) Random selection              (2) Random selection               (3) Generate one            (4) Simulate the RIRs                (5) Generate the
            3D scene                          postisions                       trajectory            from different positions             moving sound source



Figure 3: An automatic simulation pipeline for moving sound sources. The positions of the sound
sources, noises and microphones are all randomly generated. The five RIRs shown in the figure are
just for demonstration purposes; the actual process involves more RIRs.
We used SonicSim to construct a moving sound source dataset, SonicSet, specifically designed
for research on moving speech separation and enhancement tasks. This dataset supports diverse
acoustic scenarios by simulating microphones, sound sources, and noise sources randomly placed
in the environment. A detailed data analysis can be found in Appendix B. As shown in Figure 3, the
entire data generation process is outlined, ensuring the validity of the sound source and microphone
configurations under varying positions and dynamic changes.

3.2.1      DATA SOURCE
The data we used consists of two main components: 3D assets and audio data. For the 3D assets, we
utilized the Matterport3D dataset (Chang et al., 2017), a large-scale indoor RGB-D dataset contain-
ing 90 building-level scenes, representing a wide range of real-world environments. The semantic
segmentation annotations from Matterport3D were used to assign acoustic material properties, en-
abling the creation of more realistic acoustic environments. In SonicSet, the training set includes 62
scenes, the validation set contains 19 scenes, and the test set includes 9 scenes.
For the audio data, we used speech from the LibriSpeech dataset (Panayotov et al., 2015) and noise
from FSD50K (Fonseca et al., 2021) and FMA (Defferrard et al., 2017). LibriSpeech consists of
approximately 1,000 hours of 16 kHz read speech from audiobooks; we selected train-clean-360 for
training, dev-clean for validation, and test-clean for testing. FSD50K, containing 51,197 manually
labeled sound events totaling over 100 hours and covering 200 categories, was downsampled to
16 kHz using Librosa (McFee et al., 2015) and split into training, validation, and test sets in a
7:2:1 ratio. For FMA, an open music dataset, we used a pre-trained BSRNN model (Luo & Yu,
2023b) to remove vocals, ensuring speech separation was unaffected during data synthesis. We then
downsampled the music to 16 kHz and divided it similarly into training, validation, and test sets.

3.2.2      DATASET CONSTRUCTION
The audio simulation pipeline in the SonicSet dataset, illustrated in Figure 3, consists of the fol-
lowing steps. First, we selected a 3D scene from the Matterport3D dataset and imported it into
SonicSim to initialize the acoustic environment. Second, we randomly chose positions for the mi-
crophone and the sound source within a certain layer, with the sound source’s starting position and
the noise source’s position within a 1–8 meter radius from the microphone. Third, based on the
sound source’s initial position, we selected an endpoint within a 1–8 meter range from both the


                                                                                5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


microphone and the initial position, using SonicSim’s trajectory function4 to generate a movement
path. Fourth, SonicSim computed the RIRs along the trajectory and convolved them with the source
audio. Let s(t) denote the source audio signal of duration T , and let hcj (t) represent the RIRs at
discrete positions j = 1, 2, . . . , N , where c indexes the audio channels. The convolution at each po-
sition is yjc (t) = s(t)∗hcj (t). To achieve realistic spatial movement, we interpolated the convolution
results of adjacent positions using a time-varying interpolation weight α(t) ∈ [0, 1], calculated based
on the Euclidean distances between the current position of the moving source rt and the adjacent
                      dist(r    ,rt )
positions: α(t) = dist(rjj+1 ,rj+1 ) , where dist(ra , rb ) denotes the Euclidean distance between positions
ra and rb . This ensures α(t) transitions smoothly from 0 to 1 as the source moves from rj to rj+1 .
The interpolated audio signal is then computed as y(t) = (1−α(t))·yjc (t)+α(t)·yj+1          c
                                                                                               (t), dynamic
acoustic changes as the source moves (Slaney et al., 1996; Freeland et al., 2002). Finally, interpo-
lated audio segments were concatenated to form a moving source. SonicSim adjusts the source’s
movement speed based on trajectory length to ensure compatibility with the fixed duration T .
To create realistic synthetic mixed audio, we set each mixed audio clip to 60 seconds. Speech seg-
ments consisted of 3-5 full audio clips from the same LibriSpeech speaker, arranged into a 60-second
sequence with random start positions within 0-8 seconds to ensure varied overlap rates, utilizing
SonicSim for moving sound source synthesis. For noise data, we randomly selected 6-8 environ-
mental noise segments from FSD50K and 6-8 musical noise segments from FMA, arranging them
into 60-second clips with random start positions within 0-4 seconds. Volume levels were adjusted
using Loudness Units relative to Full Scale (LUFS): speech at -17 LUFS, environmental noise at -21
LUFS, and musical noise at -24 LUFS. Mixed audio was generated by randomly choosing different
speakers and adding environmental or musical noise, with background and musical noise samples
including diverse, time-varying content. In each dataset group (three speech clips plus one environ-
mental noise clip and one musical noise clip), simulations were conducted within the same scene,
simulating speech as moving sources and noise as static sources. An example of SonicSet is pre-
sented in Figure 5, with corresponding audio metadata and generation hyperparameters provided in
JSON files 1 and 2 in Appendix C.


4       B ENCHMARK I: SPEECH SEPARATION

4.1       P ROBLEM D EFINITION

Speech separation aims to isolate individual speech signals from a mixture containing multiple
speakers, as shown in Figure 4(a). This task is critical for real-world applications such as meet-
ings and telephone conversations. A detailed explanation of the task pipeline is provided in Ap-
pendix D.1.

4.2       B ENCHMARK MODELS

We selected several popular models that have demonstrated excellent performance in speech separa-
tion as benchmarks, including Conv-TasNet (2019), DPRNN (2020), DPTNet (2020a), SuDORM-
RF (2020), A-FRCNN (2021), SKIM (2022d), TDANet (2023), BSRNN (2023b), TF-GridNet
(2023), Mossformer (2023), and Mossformer2 (2024). For detailed information about the bench-
mark models, see Appendix D.2. The PyTorch implementations and pre-trained weights for all
benchmark models are publicly available5 .

                                                        Decoder

                                                                                            Enhancement
                                Encoder     Separator                             Encoder                 Decoder
                                                                                              Network

                                                        Decoder


                           (a) Speech separation                          (b) Speech enhancement



                     Figure 4: Overall pipeline for speech separation and enhancement.
    4
        The trajectory is generated using Habitat-sim’s API, specifically the “habitat sim.ShortestPath” method.
    5
        https://github.com/JusperLee/SonicSim/tree/main/separation



                                                                  6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


4.3    DATASET DETAILS

We report the performance of trained baseline models using the LRS2-2Mix (Li et al., 2023),
Libri2Mix (Cosentino et al., 2020), and SonicSet datasets, which we tested on a real-world mov-
ing speech separation dataset collected by us. We used the test sets from LRS2-2Mix and Libri2Mix
to test the models’ generalization and transfer performance across different scenarios. Please refer
to Appendix D.3 for detailed descriptions of these datasets.

4.4    I MPLEMENTATION DETAILS

To adapt the WSJ0-2Mix model (originally for 8 kHz) to our 16 kHz dataset, we doubled the win-
dow length and step size of the encoder and decoder, keeping other hyperparameters unchanged.
We trained the model using the Adam optimizer (Kingma, 2014) with a batch size of 1 on randomly
sampled 3s audio clips, employing negative SNR as the loss function. The initial learning rate was
set to 1 × 10−3 , with gradient clipping and early stopping strategies applied. Detailed hyperparame-
ters and training settings are provided in Appendix D.4 and D.5. For experiments, we used SonicSet,
public datasets, and real-world datasets, with each mixed audio containing two different speakers at
16 kHz. The baseline model was pre-trained on SonicSet using a dynamic augmentation strategy
(Luo & Yu, 2023b): two speakers are randomly selected from three audio tracks for mixing, adding
environmental or music noise as required, and a 3s segment is randomly extracted from the 60s au-
dio for training. In SonicSet, we used the full test set and processed with a 6s inference window and
a 3s sliding window. For the LRS2-2Mix (Li et al., 2023) and Libri2Mix (Cosentino et al., 2020)
datasets, 2s and 3s audio clips were used for training and testing, respectively.

4.5    E VALUATION METRICS

We employed a series of metrics to assess the performance of the speech separation benchmark
models comprehensively. These metrics cover multiple dimensions of audio quality, including signal
quality (SI-SNR (Le Roux et al., 2019) and SDR (Vincent et al., 2006)), speech intelligibility (STOI
(Taal et al., 2011) and WER), and subjective quality perception (PESQ (Rix et al., 2001), NISQA
(Mittag et al., 2021) and SigMOS (Ristea et al., 2024) ). Details are given in Appendix D.6.

4.6    R ESULTS AND ANALYSIS
               0HWKRG          6, 6'5                       6'5                   1% 3(64  :% 3(64                                  672,      026 2YHUDOO  1,64$                                            :(5
      &RQY 7DV1HW
              '3511
              '371HW
      6X'R50 5)
          $ )5&11
              7'$1HW
                  6.,0
               %6511
        7) *ULG1HW
        0RVVIRUPHU
      0RVVIRUPHU

Table 2: Comparative performance evaluation of models trained on different datasets using RealSEP
with environmental noise. The results are reported separately for “trained on LRS2-2Mix”, “trained
on Libri2Mix” and “trained on SonicSet”, distinguished by a slash. The relative length is indicated
below the value by horizontal bars.
Comparison on real-world datasets. To validate the acoustic simulation gap between synthetic
datasets and real data, we constructed a real-world moving sound source dataset consisting of 5
hours of recorded audio (details in Appendix D.3), namely RealSEP, encompassing various complex
acoustic environments and different types of background noise (environmental and musical noise).
In Tables 2 and 3, we trained models using the LRS2-2Mix and Libri2Mix datasets to compare
their performance with models trained on the SonicSet dataset. The LRS2-2Mix dataset (Li et al.,
2023) contains real-world noise and reverberation. The Libri2Mix dataset (Cosentino et al., 2020)
is currently the largest synthetic speech separation dataset, and its data scale is closest to SonicSet
among public speech separation datasets. We trained different models on these datasets and tested
them on the RealSEP datasets. In addition, we supplemented the experimental results by recording
audio data of direct conversations between individuals (HumanSEP, details in Appendix D.3). We


                                                                                                                                                   7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                    0HWKRG          6, 6'5                       6'5                   1% 3(64  :% 3(64                                  672,      026 2YHUDOO  1,64$                                            :(5
           &RQY 7DV1HW
                   '3511
                   '371HW
           6X'R50 5)
               $ )5&11
                   7'$1HW
                       6.,0
                    %6511
             7) *ULG1HW
             0RVVIRUPHU
           0RVVIRUPHU

Table 3: Comparative performance evaluation of models trained on different datasets using RealSEP
with musical noise. The results are reported separately for “trained on LRS2-2Mix”, “trained on
Libri2Mix” and “trained on SonicSet”, distinguished by a slash.
               0HWKRG 6, 615                      6'5           1% 3(64  :% 3(64  672,      026 2YUO  1,64$  :(5
       &RQY 7DV1HW
              '3511
              '371HW
      6X'R50 5)
          $ )5&11
              7'$1HW
                  6.,0
               %6511
        7) *ULG1HW
        0RVVIRUPHU
      0RVVIRUPHU

Table 4: Comparison of existing speech separation methods on the SonicSet dataset. The per-
formance of each model is listed separately for results under “environmental noise” and “musical
noise”, distinguished by a slash.
then evaluated the NISQA and WER results of the speech separation model trained on different data
sets, as shown in Table 10 in the Appendix. The results demonstrated that models trained on the
SonicSet dataset achieved overall the best separation performance on the RealSEP and HumanSEP
datasets. This finding indicates that the SonicSet dataset excels in simulating more realistic acoustic
scenes, making it effective for model training and evaluation.
Comparison on the SonicSet dataset. The results of the speech separation are shown in Table 4.
Different models exhibit varying performance under environmental and musical noise conditions.
Among the RNN-based models, DPRNN and BSRNN performed relatively poorly when handling
musical noise. In contrast, CNN-based models (SuDoRM-RF and A-FRCNN) demonstrated more
balanced performance across both environmental and musical noise scenarios. Among Transformer-
based models, Mossformer2 showed the SOTA performance, especially in handling complex noise.
This superiority can be attributed to incorporating the multi-head attention mechanism, which ef-
fectively captures long-term dependencies and complex frequency variations (Vaswani et al., 2017).
The detailed discussion is in Appendix D.7.


5         B ENCHMARK II: SPEECH ENHANCEMENT

5.1         P ROBLEM DEFINITION

The speech enhancement task aims to extract high-quality target speech from a noisy signal, reduc-
ing or eliminating background noise, as shown in Figure 4(b). This task is crucial in applications
such as speech recognition, speech communication, and hearing aids. A detailed explanation of this
task pipeline is available in Appendix E.1.

5.2         B ENCHMARK MODELS

In speech enhancement experiments, we selected several models: DCCRN (2020), Fullband (2021),
FullSubNet (2021), Fast-FullSubNet (2022), FullSubNet+ (2022b), TaylorSENet (2022a), GaGNet
(2022c), G2Net (2022b) and Inter-SubNet (2023). The details of these models are provided in
Appendix E.2.


                                                                                                                                                        8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


5.3     I MPLEMENTATION DETAILS

The hyperparameter settings for all baseline models remain consistent with the original papers. We
trained the models using the Adam optimizer (Kingma, 2014) with an initial learning rate of 0.001.
If the validation loss does not decrease for five consecutive epochs, we reduce the learning rate
by a factor of 0.5. All audio samples are processed at a 16 kHz sampling rate. Training employs
early stopping and halting if the validation loss doesn’t improve for 10 epochs. During testing, we
use the same inference strategy as in the speech separation task to handle long audio samples. For
the speech enhancement experiments, we trained models on the VoiceBank-DEMAND (Valentini-
Botinhao et al., 2016), DNS Challenge (Reddy et al., 2020), and SonicSet datasets using single-
channel speech signals sampled at 16 kHz. Baseline models were pre-trained on SonicSet with the
same dynamic enhancement strategy as in separation model training, extracting 3s segments from
60s audio for training. The training objective is detailed in Appendix E.3. For SonicSet, we used the
full test set with a 6s inference window and a 3s sliding window to process long audio sequences. On
the VoiceBank-DEMAND and DNS Challenge datasets, 2s and 3s audio clips were used for training
and testing, respectively.

5.4     E VALUATION METRICS

In the speech enhancement task, we use a series of evaluation metrics to comprehensively evaluate
the performance of the speech separation baseline model, including signal quality (SI-SNR (Le Roux
et al., 2019) and SDR (Vincent et al., 2006)), speech intelligibility (STOI (Taal et al., 2011) and
CER), and subjective quality perception (PESQ (Rix et al., 2001), NISQA (Mittag et al., 2021),
DNSMOS (Reddy et al., 2021) and SigMOS (Ristea et al., 2024)). Since the real-world dataset,
RealMAN is a Chinese dataset, we use CER as the evaluation metric for speech recognition. For
these metrics, except for CER, the higher the value, the better, while for CER, the lower the value, the
better. From an application perspective, CER is the most important metric, as speech enhancement is
usually a pre-processing step for speech recognition. The PyTorch implementations and pre-trained
weights for all baseline models have been made publicly available6 .

5.5     DATASET DETAILS

Unlike the speech separation task, in the speech enhancement task, we select the audio of a single
speaker from the training set as the ground truth label for each iteration, mixing it with various
types of noise using the same mixing method as in the speech separation task. We trained baseline
models using the training sets of VoiceBank-DEMAND (Valentini-Botinhao et al., 2016), the DNS
Challenge (Reddy et al., 2020) and SonicSet, and tested them on the test set of the real-world dataset
(RealMAN (Yang et al., 2024)) to evaluate the effectiveness of different datasets in simulating real
acoustic environments. To assess the generalization ability of models trained on SonicSet, we also
tested the baseline models on VoiceBank-DEMAND and the DNS Challenge test sets.

5.6     R ESULTS AND ANALYSIS

Comparison on real-recorded dataset. We utilized the real-world recorded moving source dataset,
RealMAN (test set), to evaluate trained speech enhancement models on various speech enhancement
datasets, including VoiceBank-DEMAND, DNS Challenge, and SonicSet. VoiceBank-DEMAND is
a smaller dataset, while the DNS Challenge dataset comprises approximately 700 hours of data, with
a data scale comparable to that of SonicSet. We employed the DNSMOS (Reddy et al., 2021) tool
to calculate subjective metrics, while Character Error Rate (CER) results were evaluated using the
same speech recognition model7 as used with RealMAN. The results presented in Table 5 indicated
that models trained on the SonicSet dataset achieved overall the best results across multiple metrics.
Please note that for most practical applications, CER is the most important metric. Moreover, we
supplemented the experimental results by constructing a dataset called HumanENH (details in Ap-
pendix E.4) by recording human speech audio and noise data. We then evaluated the NISQA and
WER results of the speech enhancement models trained on different datasets, as shown in Table 11
in the appendix.
   6
       https://anonymous.4open.science/r/SonicSim-ICLR2025/enhancement
   7
       https://huggingface.co/espnet/pengcheng_guo_wenetspeech_asr_train_asr_raw_zh_char



                                                   9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Based on these findings, we infer that the synthetic dataset SonicSet effectively simulates the acous-
tic environments of real moving source scenarios. This provides significant flexibility and cost-
effectiveness for constructing large-scale datasets, positioning synthetic datasets as an effective al-
ternative for addressing complex environments.
                 0HWKRG            6'5                  :% 3(64  026 6LJ                               026 %DN  026 2YHUDOO  1,64$                                            &(5
               '&&51
              )XOOEDQG
          )XOO6XE1HW
)DVW )XOO6XE1HW
       )XOO6XE1HW
       7D\ORU6(1HW
                *D*1HW
                   * 1HW
      ,QWHU 6XE1HW

Table 5: Comparative performance evaluation of models trained on different datasets using the Real-
MAN dataset. The results are reported separately for “trained on VoiceBank-DEMAND”, “trained
on DNS Challenge” and “trained on SonicSet”, distinguished by a slash. These MOS metrics were
calculated using DNSMOS.

                 0HWKRG 6, 615                     6'5  :% 3(64  672,      :(5      026 1RLVH  026 5YUE  026 6LJ  026 2YUO  1,64$
               '&&51
              )XOOEDQG
          )XOO6XE1HW
)DVW )XOO6XE1HW
       )XOO6XE1HW
       7D\ORU6(1HW
                *D*1HW
                   * 1HW
      ,QWHU 6XE1HW


Table 6: Comparison of speech enhancement methods using the SonicSet test set. The metrics are
listed separately under “environmental noise” and “musical noise”, distinguished by a slash. These
MOS metrics were calculated using SigMOS.
Comparison on the SonicSet dataset. By comparing the performance of different speech enhance-
ment models on the SonicSet dataset, we analyzed their enhancement effects under various types
of noise. Table 6 presents the performance of the benchmark models. Sub-band splitting methods
(such as FullSubNet, Fast-FullSubNet, FullSubNet+, and Inter-SubNet) performed well across mul-
tiple metrics. Their interaction processing mechanism between sub-bands significantly improved the
models’ ability to handle frequency band dependencies, resulting in better speech clarity and noise
suppression. In contrast, although TaylorSENet and GaGNet showed relatively similar performance
on SI-SNR and SDR, they fell slightly behind in the MOS series scores. The detailed discussion is
in Appendix E.5.


6          C ONCLUSIONS

We introduce a simulation tool named SonicSim, and a large-scale synthetic dataset named Sonic-
Set, designed to study speech separation and enhancement tasks involving moving sound sources.
By integrating the Habitat-sim platform, we developed a tool capable of simulating complex acous-
tic environments, supporting moving sound sources and multi-scene audio generation. Baseline
experiments demonstrate that models pre-trained on the SonicSet dataset exhibit strong generaliza-
tion abilities across various public benchmark datasets and real-world recorded datasets, effectively
narrowing the gap between simulation and real-world scenarios. Through continuous improvements
in the simulation tool and optimization of model algorithms, future work could further advance the
deployment of speech tasks in complex environments.
Limitation: The realism of SonicSim’s audio simulation is constrained by the level of detail in 3D
scene modeling. When there are gaps or incomplete structures in the imported 3D scenes, the system
cannot accurately simulate the reverberation effects in the current environment.


                                                                                                                             10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This work was supported in part by the National Key Research and Development Program of China
(No. 2021ZD0200301) and the National Natural Science Foundation of China (No. U2341228).

R EFERENCES
Jont B Allen and David A Berkley. Image method for efficiently simulating small-room acoustics.
  The Journal of the Acoustical Society of America, 65(4):943–950, 1979.
Rohith Aralikatti, Zhenyu Tang, and Dinesh Manocha. Synthetic wave-geometric impulse responses
  for improved speech dereverberation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2212.05360, 2022.
Angel Chang, Angela Dai, Thomas Funkhouser, Maciej Halber, Matthias Niebner, Manolis Savva,
  Shuran Song, Andy Zeng, and Yinda Zhang. Matterport3d: Learning from rgb-d data in indoor
  environments. In International Conference on 3D Vision, pp. 667–676. IEEE, 2017.
Changan Chen, Carl Schissler, Sanchit Garg, Philip Kobernik, Alexander Clegg, Paul Calamia,
  Dhruv Batra, Philip Robinson, and Kristen Grauman. Soundspaces 2.0: A simulation platform
  for visual-acoustic learning. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, pp. 8896–
  8911, 2022a.
Jingjing Chen, Qirong Mao, and Dong Liu. Dual-path transformer network: Direct context-aware
   modeling for end-to-end monaural speech separation. In Conference of the International Speech
   Communication Association, 2020a.
Jun Chen, Zilin Wang, Deyi Tuo, Zhiyong Wu, Shiyin Kang, and Helen Meng. Fullsubnet+: Chan-
  nel attention fullsubnet with complex spectrograms for speech enhancement. In International
  Conference on Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing, pp. 7857–7861. IEEE, 2022b.
Jun Chen, Wei Rao, Zilin Wang, Jiuxin Lin, Zhiyong Wu, Yannan Wang, Shidong Shang, and
  Helen Meng. Inter-subnet: Speech enhancement with subband interaction. In IEEE International
  Conference on Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing, pp. 1–5. IEEE, 2023.
Zhuo Chen, Takuya Yoshioka, Liang Lu, Tianyan Zhou, Zhong Meng, Yi Luo, Jian Wu, Xiong Xiao,
  and Jinyu Li. Continuous speech separation: Dataset and analysis. In International Conference
  on Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing, pp. 7284–7288. IEEE, 2020b.
E Colin Cherry. Some experiments on the recognition of speech, with one and with two ears. The
  Journal of the Acoustical Society of America, 25(5):975–979, 1953.
Joris Cosentino, Manuel Pariente, Samuele Cornell, Antoine Deleforge, and Emmanuel Vin-
  cent. Librimix: An open-source dataset for generalizable speech separation. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2005.11262, 2020.
Michaël Defferrard, Kirell Benzi, Pierre Vandergheynst, and Xavier Bresson. Fma: A dataset for
 music analysis. In International Society for Music Information Retrieval Conference, 2017.
Eduardo Fonseca, Xavier Favory, Jordi Pons, Frederic Font, and Xavier Serra. Fsd50k: an open
  dataset of human-labeled sound events. IEEE/ACM Transactions on Audio, Speech, and Language
  Processing, 30:829–852, 2021.
Fabio P Freeland, Luiz WP Biscainho, and Paulo SR Diniz. Efficient hrtf interpolation in 3d mov-
  ing sound. In Audio Engineering Society Conference: 22nd International Conference: Virtual,
  Synthetic, and Entertainment Audio. Audio Engineering Society, 2002.
Pierre-Amaury Grumiaux, Srjan Kitic, Laurent Girin, and Alexandre Guerin. A survey of sound
  source localization with deep learning methods. The Journal of the Acoustical Society of America,
  152(1):107–151, 2022.
Xiang Hao and Xiaofei Li. Fast fullsubnet: Accelerate full-band and sub-band fusion model for
  single-channel speech enhancement. arXiv preprint arXiv:2212.09019, 2022.


                                                11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Xiang Hao, Xiangdong Su, Radu Horaud, and Xiaofei Li. Fullsubnet: A full-band and sub-band
  fusion model for real-time single-channel speech enhancement. In International Conference on
  Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing, pp. 6633–6637. IEEE, 2021.
John R Hershey, Zhuo Chen, Jonathan Le Roux, and Shinji Watanabe. Deep clustering: Discrim-
  inative embeddings for segmentation and separation. In International Conference on Acoustics,
  Speech and Signal Processing, pp. 31–35. IEEE, 2016.
Xiaolin Hu, Kai Li, Weiyi Zhang, Yi Luo, Jean-Marie Lemercier, and Timo Gerkmann. Speech
  separation using an asynchronous fully recurrent convolutional neural network. In Advances in
  Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 34, pp. 22509–22522, 2021.
Yanxin Hu, Yun Liu, Shubo Lv, Mengtao Xing, Shimin Zhang, Yihui Fu, Jian Wu, Bihong Zhang,
  and Lei Xie. Dccrn: Deep complex convolution recurrent network for phase-aware speech en-
  hancement. In Conference of the International Speech Communication Association, 2020.
Daniel P Jarrett, Emanuel AP Habets, Mark RP Thomas, and Patrick A Naylor. Rigid sphere room
  impulse response simulation: Algorithm and applications. The Journal of the Acoustical Society
  of America, 132(3):1462–1472, 2012.
Diederik P Kingma. Adam: A method for stochastic optimization. arXiv preprint arXiv:1412.6980,
  2014.
Jonathan Le Roux, Scott Wisdom, Hakan Erdogan, and John R Hershey. Sdr–half-baked or well
  done? In International Conference on Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing, pp. 626–630.
  IEEE, 2019.
Andong Li, Shan You, Guochen Yu, Chengshi Zheng, and Xiaodong Li. Taylor, can you hear me
  now? a taylor-unfolding framework for monaural speech enhancement. In Proceedings of the
  Thirty-First International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence, pp. 4193–4200, 2022a.
Andong Li, Chengshi Zheng, Guochen Yu, Juanjuan Cai, and Xiaodong Li. Filtering and refining: A
  collaborative-style framework for single-channel speech enhancement. IEEE/ACM Transactions
  on Audio, Speech, and Language Processing, 30:2156–2172, 2022b.
Andong Li, Chengshi Zheng, Lu Zhang, and Xiaodong Li. Glance and gaze: A collaborative learn-
  ing framework for single-channel speech enhancement. Applied Acoustics, 187:108499, 2022c.
Chenda Li, Lei Yang, Weiqin Wang, and Yanmin Qian. Skim: Skipping memory lstm for low-
  latency real-time continuous speech separation. In International Conference on Acoustics, Speech
  and Signal Processing, pp. 681–685. IEEE, 2022d.
Kai Li, Runxuan Yang, and Xiaolin Hu. An efficient encoder-decoder architecture with top-down
  attention for speech separation. In The Eleventh International Conference on Learning Represen-
  tations, 2023.
PC Loizou. Speech enhancement: theory and practice, 2007.
Francisco J Lopez-Hernandez, Rafael Perez-Jimenez, and Asuncion Santamaria. Ray-tracing algo-
  rithms for fast calculation of the channel impulse response on diffuse ir wireless indoor channels.
  Optical Engineering, 39(10):2775–2780, 2000.
Yi Luo and Nima Mesgarani. Conv-tasnet: Surpassing ideal time–frequency magnitude masking for
  speech separation. IEEE/ACM Transactions on Audio, Speech, and Language Processing, 27(8):
  1256–1266, 2019.
Yi Luo and Jianwei Yu. Fra-rir: Fast random approximation of the image-source method. In Con-
  ference of the International Speech Communication Association, 2023a.
Yi Luo and Jianwei Yu. Music source separation with band-split rnn. IEEE/ACM Transactions on
  Audio, Speech, and Language Processing, 31:1893–1901, 2023b.
Yi Luo, Zhuo Chen, and Takuya Yoshioka. Dual-path rnn: efficient long sequence modeling for
  time-domain single-channel speech separation. In International Conference on Acoustics, Speech
  and Signal Processing, pp. 46–50. IEEE, 2020.


                                                 12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Matthew Maciejewski, Gordon Wichern, Emmett McQuinn, and Jonathan Le Roux. Whamr!: Noisy
 and reverberant single-channel speech separation. In International Conference on Acoustics,
 Speech and Signal Processing, pp. 696–700. IEEE, 2020.
Mishaim Malik, Muhammad Kamran Malik, Khawar Mehmood, and Imran Makhdoom. Automatic
 speech recognition: a survey. Multimedia Tools and Applications, 80:9411–9457, 2021.
Brian McFee, Colin Raffel, Dawen Liang, Daniel PW Ellis, Matt McVicar, Eric Battenberg, and
  Oriol Nieto. librosa: Audio and music signal analysis in python. In SciPy, pp. 18–24, 2015.
Gabriel Mittag, Babak Naderi, Assmaa Chehadi, and Sebastian Möller. Nisqa: A deep cnn-self-
  attention model for multidimensional speech quality prediction with crowdsourced datasets. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2104.09494, 2021.
COMSOL Multiphysics. Introduction to comsol multiphysics®. COMSOL Multiphysics, Burling-
 ton, MA, accessed Feb, 9(2018):32, 1998.
Vassil Panayotov, Guoguo Chen, Daniel Povey, and Sanjeev Khudanpur. Librispeech: an asr corpus
  based on public domain audio books. In International Conference on Acoustics, Speech and
  Signal Processing, pp. 5206–5210. IEEE, 2015.
Alec Radford, Jong Wook Kim, Tao Xu, Greg Brockman, Christine McLeavey, and Ilya Sutskever.
  Robust speech recognition via large-scale weak supervision. In International Conference on Ma-
  chine Learning, pp. 28492–28518. PMLR, 2023.
Wei Rao, Yihui Fu, Yanxin Hu, Xin Xu, Yvkai Jv, Jiangyu Han, Zhongjie Jiang, Lei Xie, Yannan
 Wang, Shinji Watanabe, et al. Conferencingspeech challenge: Towards far-field multi-channel
 speech enhancement for video conferencing. In Automatic Speech Recognition and Understand-
 ing Workshop, pp. 679–686. IEEE, 2021.
Chandan KA Reddy, Vishak Gopal, Ross Cutler, Ebrahim Beyrami, Roger Cheng, Harishchandra
  Dubey, Sergiy Matusevych, Robert Aichner, Ashkan Aazami, Sebastian Braun, et al. The in-
  terspeech 2020 deep noise suppression challenge: Datasets, subjective testing framework, and
  challenge results. In Conference of the International Speech Communication Association, 2020.
Chandan KA Reddy, Vishak Gopal, and Ross Cutler. Dnsmos: A non-intrusive perceptual objec-
  tive speech quality metric to evaluate noise suppressors. In IEEE International Conference on
  Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing, pp. 6493–6497. IEEE, 2021.
Nicolae-Cătălin Ristea, Ando Saabas, Ross Cutler, Babak Naderi, Sebastian Braun, and Solomiya
  Branets. Icassp 2024 speech signal improvement challenge. In International Conference on
  Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing Workshops, pp. 15–16. IEEE, 2024.
Antony W Rix, John G Beerends, Michael P Hollier, and Andries P Hekstra. Perceptual evaluation
  of speech quality (pesq)-a new method for speech quality assessment of telephone networks and
  codecs. In International Conference on Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing, pp. 749–752.
  IEEE, 2001.
Manolis Savva, Abhishek Kadian, Oleksandr Maksymets, Yili Zhao, Erik Wijmans, Bhavana Jain,
 Julian Straub, Jia Liu, Vladlen Koltun, Jitendra Malik, et al. Habitat: A platform for embodied
 ai research. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision, pp.
 9339–9347, 2019.
Robin Scheibler, Eric Bezzam, and Ivan Dokmanić. Pyroomacoustics: A python package for audio
  room simulation and array processing algorithms. In International Conference on Acoustics,
  Speech and Signal Processing, pp. 351–355. IEEE, 2018.
Shilpa Sharma, Punam Rattan, and Anurag Sharma. Recent developments, challenges, and future
  scope of voice activity detection schemes—a review. Information and Communication Technology
  for Competitive Strategies (ICTCS 2020) Intelligent Strategies for ICT, pp. 457–464, 2021.
Aswin Sivaraman and Minje Kim. Efficient personalized speech enhancement through self-
  supervised learning. IEEE Journal of Selected Topics in Signal Processing, 16(6):1342–1356,
  2022.


                                               13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Malcolm Slaney, Michele Covell, and Bud Lassiter. Automatic audio morphing. In 1996 IEEE
 International Conference on Acoustics, Speech, and Signal Processing Conference Proceedings,
 volume 2, pp. 1001–1004. IEEE, 1996.

Alexander Southern, Samuel Siltanen, and Lauri Savioja. Spatial room impulse responses with
  a hybrid modeling method. In Audio Engineering Society Convention 130. Audio Engineering
  Society, 2011.

Cees H Taal, Richard C Hendriks, Richard Heusdens, and Jesper Jensen. An algorithm for intelligi-
  bility prediction of time–frequency weighted noisy speech. IEEE Transactions on Audio, Speech,
  and Language Processing, 19(7):2125–2136, 2011.

Zhenyu Tang, Lianwu Chen, Bo Wu, Dong Yu, and Dinesh Manocha. Improving reverberant speech
  training using diffuse acoustic simulation. In International Conference on Acoustics, Speech and
  Signal Processing, pp. 6969–6973. IEEE, 2020.

Efthymios Tzinis, Zhepei Wang, and Paris Smaragdis. Sudo rm-rf: Efficient networks for universal
  audio source separation. In IEEE 30th International Workshop on Machine Learning for Signal
  Processing, pp. 1–6. IEEE, 2020.

Cassia Valentini-Botinhao, Xin Wang, Shinji Takaki, and Junichi Yamagishi. Investigating rnn-
  based speech enhancement methods for noise-robust text-to-speech. In SSW, pp. 146–152, 2016.

Ashish Vaswani, Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Jakob Uszkoreit, Llion Jones, Aidan N Gomez,
  Łukasz Kaiser, and Illia Polosukhin. Attention is all you need. In Advances in neural information
  processing systems, volume 30, 2017.

Emmanuel Vincent, Rémi Gribonval, and Cédric Févotte. Performance measurement in blind audio
  source separation. IEEE Transactions on Audio, Speech, and Language Processing, 14(4):1462–
  1469, 2006.

DeLiang Wang and Jitong Chen. Supervised speech separation based on deep learning: An overview.
  IEEE/ACM Transactions on Audio, Speech, and Language Processing, 26(10):1702–1726, 2018.

Qing Hua Wang, Teodor Ivanov, and Parham Aarabi. Acoustic robot navigation using distributed
  microphone arrays. Information Fusion, 5(2):131–140, 2004.

Zhong-Qiu Wang, Samuele Cornell, Shukjae Choi, Younglo Lee, Byeong-Yeol Kim, and Shinji
  Watanabe. Tf-gridnet: Integrating full-and sub-band modeling for speech separation. IEEE/ACM
  Transactions on Audio, Speech, and Language Processing, 2023.

Shinji Watanabe, Michael Mandel, Jon Barker, Emmanuel Vincent, Ashish Arora, Xuankai Chang,
  Sanjeev Khudanpur, Vimal Manohar, Daniel Povey, Desh Raj, et al. Chime-6 challenge: Tack-
  ling multispeaker speech recognition for unsegmented recordings. In International Workshop on
  Speech Processing in Everyday Environments. ISCA, 2020.

Gordon Wichern, Joe Antognini, Michael Flynn, Licheng Richard Zhu, Emmett McQuinn, Dwight
  Crow, Ethan Manilow, and Jonathan Le Roux. Wham!: Extending speech separation to noisy
  environments. In Conference of the International Speech Communication Association, 2019.

Bing Yang, Changsheng Quan, Yabo Wang, Pengyu Wang, Yujie Yang, Ying Fang, Nian Shao, Hui
  Bu, Xin Xu, and Xiaofei Li. Realman: A real-recorded and annotated microphone array dataset
  for dynamic speech enhancement and localization. arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.19959, 2024.

Jun Yu and Chang Wen Chen. From talking head to singing head: a significant enhancement for
  more natural human computer interaction. In International Conference on Multimedia and Expo,
  pp. 511–516. IEEE, 2017.

Shengkui Zhao and Bin Ma. Mossformer: Pushing the performance limit of monaural speech sep-
  aration using gated single-head transformer with convolution-augmented joint self-attentions. In
  International Conference on Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing, pp. 1–5. IEEE, 2023.


                                                14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Shengkui Zhao, Yukun Ma, Chongjia Ni, Chong Zhang, Hao Wang, Trung Hieu Nguyen, Kun
  Zhou, Jia Qi Yip, Dianwen Ng, and Bin Ma. Mossformer2: Combining transformer and rnn-
  free recurrent network for enhanced time-domain monaural speech separation. In International
  Conference on Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing, pp. 10356–10360. IEEE, 2024.
Victor Zue, Stephanie Seneff, and James Glass. Speech database development at mit: Timit and
  beyond. Speech Communication, 9(4):351–356, 1990.


A    E NVIRONMENTAL FACTOR
We randomly selected 300 audio files from the Librispeech (Panayotov et al., 2015) test-clean set.
200 of these were used to generate noisy mixtures containing two speakers, and the other 100 were
used to generate noisy audio from a single speaker. The same audio files were used in both cases.
To fix the scene, we chose a cuboid room with no obstructions but included room materials and
fixed the positions of the microphone, sound source, and noise. In the experiment on occlusion, we
used Habitat-sim’s API “add object” to place objects between the microphone and the sound source
to simulate the occlusion in sound wave propagation. When studying the effect of room shape, we
chose a cylindrical room from the Matterport3D dataset (Chang et al., 2017) and fixed the relative
positions of the microphone, sound source, and noise. In addition, we completely removed the root
material information from the experiment to explore the effect of the material.
We selected the two methods with the best speech separation and enhancement performance and
verified the impact of different environmental factors on the model performance. The experimental
results are shown in Tables 7 and 8. The results show that material has the most significant effect on
model performance, while the impact of room shape is relatively small. However, all these factors
have a certain degree of interference in model performance. Therefore, a simulated dataset using
these environmental factors is generated to train the model and improve its generalization ability.

                   with/without obstacles          cylinder/cuboid             with/without materials
    Methods
                  SDR (↑)     WER (%) (↓)       SDR (↑)     WER (%) (↓)       SDR (↑)     WER (%) (↓)
 Mossformer      10.70/11.84    29.90/24.31    11.18/11.84    27.17/24.31    11.84/10.12    24.31/31.10
 Mossformer2     10.41/11.60    31.89/25.86    10.78/11.60    30.54/25.86     11.60/9.87    25.86/33.58

Table 7: Comparison of the performance of speech separation models for different environmental
factors.


                   with/without obstacles          cylinder/cuboid             with/without materials
    Methods
                  SDR (↑)     WER (%) (↓)       SDR (↑)     WER (%) (↓)       SDR (↑)     WER (%) (↓)
  FullSubNet     9.67/11.05    25.76/19.80    10.56/11.05    21.94/19.80    11.05/10.23    19.80/21.17
 Inter-SubNet   10.78/12.69    22.96/17.68    11.50/12.69    19.30/17.68    12.69/11.26    17.68/19.88

Table 8: Comparison of the performance of speech enhancement models for different environmental
factors.


B    DATASET ANALYSIS
The dataset statistics are shown in Table 9. SonicSet dataset offers ground-truth labels for speech
separation and enhancement for supervised learning, which captures different audio samples for data
synthesis in the same scene, with acoustic environments that closely resemble real-world conditions.
SonicSet contains 57,596 speech moving trajectories across 90 scenes. The training set includes
57,102 trajectories, while the validation and test sets each contain 247 trajectories, covering most
possible positions within indoor scenes. The dataset comprises 1,001 speakers, with 921 speakers
in the training set, 40 in the validation set, and 40 in the test set, ensuring that no speaker appears
in different subsets, which maintains speaker-independent training. Through our data construction
process, SonicSet generates approximately 952 hours of training data, 4 hours of validation data,


                                                  15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


and 4 hours of test data. SonicSet provides researchers with a high-quality and complex moving
sound source dataset for speech separation and enhancement methods.

           Datasets             Speakers    Utterances   Duration (h)   Noise    Reverb    Dynamic
                                         Speech enhancement
        TIMIT (1990)               630         6,300            5         ✓        ✗          ✗
 VoiceBank-DEMAND (2016)           110          400             44        ✓        ✗          ✗
    DNS Challenge (2020)          ˜11k         ˜100k           760        ✓        ✓          ✗
       RealMan (2024)              55            -              81        ✓        ✓          ✓
                                           Speech separation
         WSJ0 (2016)              191         28,000           43         ✗        ✗           ✗
       Libri2Mix (2020)           1001        56,800           232        ✗        ✗           ✗
      LibriCSS (2020b)             40         ˜1000             10        ✓        ✓           ✗
      LRS2-2Mix (2023)            100         48,164            50        ✓        ✓           ✗
                                 Speech separation and enhancement
       WHAM! (2019)               191         28,000           43         ✓        ✗          ✗
       WHAMR! (2020)               191        28,000           43         ✓        ✓          ✗
       SonicSet (ours)            1001        57,596           960        ✓        ✓          ✓

Table 9: Comparison of speech datasets and their characteristics. “Speakers” refer to the number of
unique speakers. “Utterances” stands for the total number of utterances, and “Duration” represents
the total duration of the dataset in hours. “Noise”, “Reverb”, and “Dynamic” indicate whether the
dataset contains noisy conditions, reverberation, and dynamic acoustic environments, respectively.


C    S ONIC S ET DEMO
We provide a detailed description of the composition and structure of the SonicSet dataset. Each data
group consists of audio files from three mobile sound sources, two types of noise, and trajectory
information regarding the movement of these sources. Specifically, each sound source audio file
comprises multiple audio segments in FLAC format, with each segment associated with precise
start and end times along with corresponding textual content. In addition to speech data, SonicSet
includes two categories of interference: background noise and musical noise. The background
noise data captures various non-speech sounds in the environment, while the musical noise data
consists of music audio recorded within relatively consistent time intervals. Each data group is also
accompanied by detailed information on sound source trajectories, microphone locations, and noise
positions, illustrating the movement patterns of sound sources in different environments. This data
format, combining speech, noise, and motion information, provides valuable training data for tasks
such as sound source localization (Grumiaux et al., 2022), voice activity detection (Sharma et al.,
2021), and speech recognition (Malik et al., 2021). With its rich audio and trajectory information,
the SonicSet dataset serves as an ideal testing platform for a variety of speech processing tasks,
including noisy speech recognition, sound source separation, and source tracking, thereby enhancing
the performance of speech and audio-related technologies.


                                                 16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                        3D room map                        Movement trajectories


                                        Moving audio I


                                        Moving audio II


                                        Moving audio III


                                      Environmental noise


                                         Musical noise

Figure 5: An example from the SonicSet data set. Each set of data includes three moving speaker
audio files, two types of noise, and the trajectories of the sound source movement.


                JSON file 1: The hyperparameters required for audio generation.
{
    "microphone": {
       "type": "monaural", // Options: "monaural", "binaural", "Ambisonics"
           , "Custom array"
       "position": {
         "x": 0.0,
         "y": 1.5,
         "z": 0.0
       }
    },
    "sound_source": {
       "audio_file": "source_audio.wav",


                                               17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


      "start_point": {
         "x": 5.0,
         "y": 1.5,
         "z": -3.0
      },
      "end_point": {
         "x": -2.0,
         "y": 1.5,
         "z": 4.0
      },
      "movement_type": "dynamic",           // Options: "static", "dynamic"
      "audio_settings": {
           "duration": 10.0,                // Duration in seconds
           "sampling_rate": 44100,          // In Hz
      },
    },
    "noise_source": {
       "audio_file": "background_noise.wav",
       "position": {
         "x": 2.0,
         "y": 1.5,
         "z": -1.0
       }
    },
    "audio_settings": {
       "duration": 10.0,        // Duration in seconds
       "sampling_rate": 44100, // In Hz
    },
    "environment": {
       "scene": "Matterport3D",
    }
}


JSON file 2: The raw information corresponding to the audio in Figure 5 is stored in a file in JSON
format. It can be used to train voice activity detection and speech recognition.
{"source1": {
        "audio": [
            "672-122797-0033.flac",
            "672-122797-0070.flac",
            "672-122797-0045.flac",
            "672-122797-0054.flac",
            "672-122797-0029.flac",
            "672-122797-0053.flac"
        ],
        "start_end_points": [
            [83071, 103631],
            [118366, 218686],
            [360049, 583409],
            [632894, 700894],
            [772607, 821407],
            [871263, 918543]
        ],
        "words": [
            "A STORY",
            "THE GOLDEN STAR OF TINSEL WAS STILL ON THE TOP OF THE TREE
                AND GLITTERED IN THE SUNSHINE",
            "TIME ENOUGH HAD HE TOO FOR HIS REFLECTIONS FOR DAYS AND
                NIGHTS PASSED ON AND NOBODY CAME UP AND WHEN AT LAST
                SOMEBODY DID COME IT WAS ONLY TO PUT SOME GREAT TRUNKS IN
                 A CORNER OUT OF THE WAY",
            "I KNOW NO SUCH PLACE SAID THE TREE",
            "HOW IT WILL SHINE THIS EVENING",
            "THEY WERE SO EXTREMELY CURIOUS"


                                                18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


         ]
     },
     "source2": {
         "audio": [
             "908-31957-0014.flac",
             "908-157963-0007.flac"
         ],
         "start_end_points": [
             [91122, 212082],
             [268394, 792714]
         ],
         "words": [
             "A RING OF AMETHYST I COULD NOT WEAR HERE PLAINER TO MY SIGHT
                  THAN THAT FIRST KISS",
             "THE LILLY OF THE VALLEY BREATHING IN THE HUMBLE GRASS
                 ANSWERD THE LOVELY MAID AND SAID I AM A WATRY WEED AND I
                 AM VERY SMALL AND LOVE TO DWELL IN LOWLY VALES SO WEAK
                 THE GILDED BUTTERFLY SCARCE PERCHES ON MY HEAD YET I AM
                 VISITED FROM HEAVEN AND HE THAT SMILES ON ALL WALKS IN
                 THE VALLEY AND EACH MORN OVER ME SPREADS HIS HAND SAYING
                 REJOICE THOU HUMBLE GRASS THOU NEW BORN LILY FLOWER"
         ]
     },
     "source3": {
         "audio": [
             "61-70968-0021.flac",
             "61-70968-0052.flac",
             "61-70968-0030.flac",
             "61-70968-0050.flac",
             "61-70970-0006.flac",
             "61-70968-0013.flac"
         ],
         "start_end_points": [
             [63669, 106709],
             [127764, 170164],
             [245602, 336562],
             [408129, 497409],
             [578830, 616190],
             [754238, 825438]
         ],
         "words": [
             "SURELY WE CAN SUBMIT WITH GOOD GRACE",
             "BUT WHO IS THIS FELLOW PLUCKING AT YOUR SLEEVE",
             "NOW BE SILENT ON YOUR LIVES HE BEGAN BUT THE CAPTURED
                 APPRENTICE SET UP AN INSTANT SHOUT",
             "HE MADE AN EFFORT TO HIDE HIS CONDITION FROM THEM ALL AND
                 ROBIN FELT HIS FINGERS TIGHTEN UPON HIS ARM",
             "NEVER THAT SIR HE HAD SAID",
             "BEFORE THEM FLED THE STROLLER AND HIS THREE SONS CAPLESS AND
                  TERRIFIED"
         ]
     },
     "noise": {
         "audio": [],
         "start_end_points": [
             [26850, 940228]
         ]
     },
     "music": {
         "audio": [],
         "start_end_points": [
             [13482, 918705]
         ]
     }
}


                                               19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


D     B ENCHMARK I: SPEECH SEPARATION
D.1    P ROBLEM DEFINITION
                              PC                      1×T
Given an input signal y =        c=0 x i + n , y ∈ R       that contains audio x i ∈ R1×T from C
                         1×T
speakers and noise ∈ R
                  n           , the objective of speech separation is to extract each speaker’s speech
xi ∈ R1×T and assign it to different output channels, where T denotes the length of audio. Currently,
x̄
most speech separation methods adopt an encoder-separator-decoder framework (Wang & Chen,
2018).
In time-domain approaches, the encoder converts y into high-dimensional features E t ∈ RN ×Tt
through 1D convolutional layers, where N and Tt denote the feature dimension and length, respec-
tively. In time-frequency domain approaches, the encoder applies Short-Time Fourier Transform
(STFT) to convert y into time-frequency features E f ∈ CF ×Tf , where F and Tf represent the fre-
quency and the time dimensions, respectively. Next, E t or E f is passed to the separator to obtain
                                                    E t,i ∈ RN ×Tt or Ē
the feature representations of individual speakers, Ē                  E f,i ∈ CF ×Tf . Finally, the de-
coder reconstructs the target waveform x̄xi from Ē        E f,i using transposed convolutional layers
                                                  E t,i or Ē
or inverse STFT, thereby achieving the final separated speech sources.

D.2   B ENCHMARK MODELS

Conv-TasNet (Luo & Mesgarani, 2019): As the first time-domain speech separation model, it em-
ploys a dilated convolutional network, surpassing traditional frequency-domain methods in sepa-
ration performance. This model processes audio directly in the time domain, enhancing clarity
compared to frequency-based methods.
DPRNN (Luo et al., 2020): A time-domain model based on bidirectional LSTM (BLSTM), it in-
troduced a dual-path architecture for intra- and inter-block modeling, significantly improving the
ability to capture long-term dependencies, laying the foundation for subsequent speech separation
models. The dual-path approach enhances the model’s resolution of speaker characteristics over
longer time sequences, optimizing it for complex auditory scenes.
DPTNet (Chen et al., 2020a): Built on DPRNN, it incorporates a multi-head attention mechanism,
further enhancing the model’s ability to capture long-term contextual information and improving
separation performance in complex speech scenarios. As one of the earliest works to introduce the
concept of attention into the speech separation, it explores the application of attention in learning
complex contextual correlations under the long-term characteristics of the speech domain.
SuDORM-RF (Tzinis et al., 2020): A time-domain speech separation model formed by stacking
multiple UNet networks, it uses a refinement strategy to progressively optimize separation perfor-
mance, improving the model’s ability to handle complex signals. This model uses UNet to model
different resolutions, and each additional UNet layer refines the separation detail, offering better
clarity and fidelity in the final audio output.
A-FRCNN (Hu et al., 2021): Building on SuDORM-RF, it introduces cross-layer connections and
parameter-sharing mechanisms, improving the model’s capacity and parameter efficiency, leading
to more precise speech separation. As an asynchronous update scheme, its top-down mechanism
enables the model to better model multi-scale temporal information and achieve better results with
fewer parameters.
SKiM (Li et al., 2022d): Incorporates the reuse of hidden states and cell states in DPRNN’s inter-
block modeling, strengthening contextual modeling ability and enabling the model to better handle
long-term dependencies. In addition, SKiM also maintains the causal modeling ability of the model
well, enabling it to handle real-time tasks with low latency and good performance.
TDANet (Li et al., 2023): Simplifies redundant connections in A-FRCNN and introduces a top-
down attention mechanism to selectively extract multi-level acoustic features, further improving
processing efficiency. The introduction of the attention module further enhances the model’s ability
to extract complex correlations of temporal information at different scales.


                                                   20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


BSRNN (Luo & Yu, 2023b): Proposes a frequency-band splitting method, modeling both within
frequency bands and across the time dimension using BLSTM, marking the first application of
band-splitting methods in speech separation. This unique approach allows for more granular control
over the frequency components, with better performance in tasks that rely more on fine frequency
features, such as music separation tasks.
TF-GridNet (Wang et al., 2023): Extends DPRNN by modeling in both the time and frequency
dimensions and integrates information from both dimensions using a multi-head attention module,
leading to more refined and comprehensive speech separation. Compared to previous attention-
based speech separation works, this work models in both time and frequency domains and reduces
the length load of the attention module, making it more conducive to capturing contextual relation-
ships.
Mossformer (Zhao & Ma, 2023): Combines convolution and self-attention in a gated, single-head
Transformer architecture, utilizing full self-attention within local blocks and a linearized, low-cost
self-attention mechanism for global modeling, significantly improving separation performance. The
model also utilizes an attention-gathering mechanism with simplified single head self-attention. The
model achieved good performance by integrating multiple modules.
Mossformer2 (Zhao et al., 2024): Enhances Mossformer by introducing a feed-forward sequential
memory network (FSMN) recurrent module, improving long-term dependency modeling and further
boosting speech separation effectiveness. These FSMN blocks are mainly enhanced by using gated
convolution units (GCUs) and dense connections. In addition, bottleneck layers and output layers
have been added to control the flow of information. Based on the above content, the model integrates
the loop module into the MossFormer framework, providing the ability to model remote, coarse-
scale dependencies and fine-scale loop patterns.

D.3   R EAL - WORLD DATASET DETAILS


Figure 6: Recording audio using realistic scene images. These images show the layout of the actual
physical environment used to record audio.

To evaluate the gap between the SonicSet dataset and real-world conditions, as well as the model’s
transferability to real-world scenarios, we collected a small-scale real-world moving sound source
dataset, namely RealSEP and repeated the relevant experiments. First, we randomly selected 30
audio samples from 10 scenes in the SonicSet validation set, totaling 5 hours of audio. All data was
clean, without reverberation or noise. During recording, one participant used the 2023 MacBook
Pro’s speakers to play audio while moving around randomly within the same scene to obtain the
ground-truth audio. In addition, we used the same steps to play environmental and music noise from
fixed positions to obtain noise data. The audio and noise were recorded using a Logitech Blue Yeti
Nano omnidirectional microphone fixed in position, with a recording sample rate of 16 kHz and
32-bit depth. After recording, we clipped the audio and noise based on the recorded start and stop
positions to ensure alignment with the original files. We then recorded another real-world dataset
in 10 similar real-world scenes using the corresponding original audio. Finally, we mixed the data


                                                 21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


using the same method as SonicSet to construct a dataset for testing model performance. The layout
of the real-world scenes is illustrated in Figure 6.
In addition, we have constructed a dialogue speech dataset called HumanSEP, which contains
recordings of 16 speakers in 6 different scenarios. Specifically, in each scenario, two speakers each
randomly read aloud 15 sentences selected from the LibriSpeech dataset (Panayotov et al., 2015),
with an average length of 4–6 seconds. To simulate real-world usage scenarios, the speech data
was randomly interspersed with environmental noise. All audio was recorded using a fixed-position
Logitech Blue Yeti Nano omnidirectional microphone with recording parameters set to a 16 kHz
sampling rate and 32-bit depth. The dataset was also designed to include varying degrees of overlap
between speakers to increase its diversity and challenge.
To evaluate the generalization performance of the models trained on SonicSet, we used the com-
monly used speech separation test datasets LibriMix (Cosentino et al., 2020) and LRS2 (Li et al.,
2023). For the LibriMix dataset, we used the two-speaker mixed test set with a 16 kHz sampling
rate. For the LRS2 dataset, we used the test set consistent with the (Li et al., 2023).

D.4   T RAINING OBJECT

For all benchmark models in the speech separation, we employed the permutation invariant training
(PIT) method (Hershey et al., 2016) to select the best output permutation P ∈ PM (where PM is the
set of all M permutations) to minimize the negative SNR adaptively. Specifically, SNR loss LSNR
can be defined as a negative SNR:

                                                               xi ∥2

                                                              ∥x
                            LSNR (x    xi ) = −10 log10
                                  xi , x̄                                 ,                   (1)
                                                           ∥x     xi ∥2
                                                            xi − x̄

In this way, the final loss function of the PIT method under the SNR optimization objective can be
expressed as:
                                                    M
                                                    X
                                LPIT-SNR = min            LSNR (x
                                                                xi , x̄
                                                                     xi )                         (2)
                                            P ∈PM
                                                    i=1


D.5   I MPLEMENTATION DETAILS

During training, since all model hyperparameters were originally configured for the WSJ0-2Mix
dataset (Hershey et al., 2016) and suited for audio with an 8 kHz sampling rate, we doubled the
window length and window shift of the encoder and decoder to adapt to the 16 kHz sampling rate
datasets. Aside from this adjustment, all other hyperparameters remained unchanged. For training,
we randomly sampled 3s audio clips from the training set. The batch size was set to 1, and the
Adam optimizer (Kingma, 2014) was used with an initial learning rate of 1 × 10−3 . The learning
rate was halved whenever the validation loss did not decrease for five consecutive epochs. We
applied gradient clipping to limit the maximum L2 norm of the gradients to 5. The training ran for
a maximum of 500 epochs, with early stopping applied if the validation loss did not improve for 10
consecutive epochs.
In the speech separation experiments, we used SonicSet, public datasets, and real-world datasets.
Each mixed audio contained two different speakers, with a sampling rate of 16 kHz. The baseline
models pre-trained on the SonicSet training set were trained using a dynamic augmentation strategy.
Specifically, during training, we randomly selected a set of data, and two speakers were randomly
chosen from three available audio tracks for mixing. Depending on the task requirements, either en-
vironmental noise or musical noise was then mixed accordingly. Finally, a 3s segment was randomly
extracted from the 60s audio for model training.
For each benchmark model, we selected the best model based on its performance on the validation
set for testing. In the SonicSet evaluation, we used the full test set and employed a 6s inference
window with a 3s sliding window to process long audio sequences. For the LRS2-2Mix dataset,
we used 2s audio segments for both training and testing. For the Libri2Mix dataset, we trained and
tested the models using 3s audio segments. All experiments were conducted on a server equipped
with 8 × NVIDIA 4090 GPUs.


                                                 22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


D.6   E VALUATION METRICS ’ DETAILS

Scale-invariant signal-to-noise Ratio (SI-SNR) (Le Roux et al., 2019) and Signal-to-distortion ratio
(SDR) (Vincent et al., 2006) are standard metrics for evaluating the ratio of speech to noise and dis-
tortion, effectively measuring a model’s ability to suppress noise while preserving the original signal.
NB-PESQ and WB-PESQ (Rix et al., 2001) are used to assess the perceptual quality of wideband
signals, respectively, based on human auditory models, predicting subjective speech quality, which
is particularly suitable for evaluating signals processed through separation and enhancement. Addi-
tionally, STOI (Taal et al., 2011) measures speech intelligibility in noisy environments, helping to
assess the loss of speech clarity in complex conditions.
Furthermore, Word Error Rate (WER), a standard in automatic speech recognition (ASR) systems,
measures the error rate between the recognized words and the ground truth, reflecting the intelligi-
bility of the speech signal. In this study, we use Whisper-medium-en (Radford et al., 2023) as the
ASR model to recognize the content of separated audio.
By employing these multi-dimensional evaluation metrics, we can comprehensively assess the
model’s performance in real-world applications.

                                 0HWKRG                1,64$                  :(5
                        &RQY 7DV1HW
                                '3511
                                '371HW
                        6X'R50 5)
                            $ )5&11
                                7'$1HW
                                    6.,0
                                 %6511
                          7) *ULG1HW
                          0RVVIRUPHU
                        0RVVIRUPHU

Table 10: Comparative performance evaluation of models trained on different datasets using the
HuamnSEP dataset. The results are reported separately for “trained on LRS2-2Mix”, “trained on
Libri2Mix” and “trained on SonicSet”, distinguished by a slash. The relative length is indicated
below the value by horizontal bars.


D.7   D ISCUSSION OF DIFFERENT METHODS

The performance of different speech separation models varied significantly under environmental
noise and music noise conditions, highlighting how architectural choices impact their effectiveness.
Among RNN-based models, DPRNN (Luo et al., 2020) and BSRNN (Luo & Yu, 2023b) performed
relatively poorly when handling music noise. This suggests that these models face limitations in
processing complex background music, likely due to the frequency variations in music noise posing
significant challenges for RNN-based architectures. While recurrent architectures like DPRNN and
BSRNN are effective in modeling long-term dependencies through bidirectional LSTM networks,
they may not capture intricate contextual relationships as efficiently, especially in the presence of
complex noise sources like music.
In contrast, CNN-based models such as SuDoRM-RF (Tzinis et al., 2020), A-FRCNN (Hu et al.,
2021), and TDANet (Li et al., 2023) demonstrated more balanced performance across environmen-
tal and music noise scenarios. Their advantages in spectral refinement and signal reconstruction,
particularly when leveraging multiple U-Net blocks, enabled them to effectively address complex
noise interference. The incorporation of cross-layer connections and parameter-sharing mechanisms
in TDANet enhances parameter efficiency and increases the model’s capacity without proportionally


                                                                   23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


increasing computational load, leading to more precise speech separation. This design choice strikes
a balance between model complexity, parameter efficiency, and performance, making TDANet more
suitable for real-world applications where computational resources are constrained.
Among Transformer-based models, DPTNet (Chen et al., 2020a), TF-GridNet (Wang et al., 2023),
Mossformer (Zhao & Ma, 2023), and Mossformer2 (Zhao et al., 2024) showed the best overall
performance, especially in handling complex music noise while maintaining high separation accu-
racy. This superiority can be attributed to the multi-head attention mechanism, which effectively
captures long-range dependencies and complex frequency variations. Attention mechanisms en-
hance the ability to model long-range dependencies and complex contextual correlations within
speech signals, contrasting with the limitations of recurrent architectures. In music noise scenarios,
this mechanism leverages contextual information to significantly reduce signal distortion, producing
separated speech that is both clear and intelligible.
Furthermore, models like TF-GridNet (Wang et al., 2023) and Mossformer (Zhao & Ma, 2023) not
only excelled in SI-SNR and SDR scores but also demonstrated high intelligibility scores, indicating
their proficiency in producing separated speech that maintains both clarity and naturalness. TF-
GridNet’s innovative approach extends the dual-path recurrent neural network by modeling in both
time and frequency dimensions and integrating information through a multi-head attention module.
This dual-domain modeling strategy effectively captures temporal and spectral information, leading
to significant improvements in separation performance.
The trade-off between model complexity, parameter efficiency, and performance is a critical aspect
highlighted in the analysis. While top-performing models with advanced attention mechanisms
offer superior separation quality, their computational complexity may pose challenges for real-time
deployment. Latency and resource requirements become crucial factors when implementing these
models in live systems. Therefore, models like A-FRCNN, which optimize computational efficiency
without compromising performance, may be more practical for applications where resources are
limited.


E     B ENCHMARK II: SPEECH ENHANCEMENT

E.1   P ROBLEM DEFINITION

Typically, the speech enhancement problem can be expressed as follows: given an observed noisy
speech signal s ∈ R1×T , where s = x + n , with x ∈ R1×T being the target speech signal and
n ∈ R1×T representing background noise, the goal of speech enhancement is to recover an estimate
x of the target speech signal from s . Specifically, the process begins by applying the STFT to
x̄
                                                                               ′
map the time-domain signal s into time-frequency domain features E ∈ CF ×T . Then, a speech
enhancement network extracts the target speech from the noisy mixed signal, producing estimated
time-frequency domain features ĒE = f (EE ). Finally, the Inverse STFT is applied to reconstruct
            ′
E ∈ CF ×T back into the time-domain waveform x̄
Ē                                                 x ∈ R1×T , thus completing the recovery of the
target speech signal.

E.2   B ENCHMARK MODELS

DCCRN (Hu et al., 2020) is a speech enhancement model designed for complex-domain processing.
It operates in the frequency domain by handling both the real and imaginary components of speech
signals, leveraging the characteristics of complex signals. Additionally, DCCRN employs a recur-
rent neural network to capture temporal information, making it particularly effective in processing
speech in complex noisy environments. The model’s innovation lies in its combination of complex-
domain processing and temporal feature extraction, providing robust support for improving speech
clarity and intelligibility.
Fullband (Hao et al., 2021) processes the entire frequency band of the speech signal, typically
operating directly on either the full spectrum in the time or frequency domain. These approaches
are particularly well-suited for speech enhancement tasks that address full-band noise. Leveraging
complete frequency information effectively improves speech intelligibility and quality, making them
a strong choice for applications in diverse noisy environments. Their comprehensive processing


                                                 24
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


capability ensures that both spectral and temporal features are preserved, leading to more natural
and clear enhanced speech outputs.
FullSubNet (Hao et al., 2021) is a speech enhancement model that effectively combines full-band
and sub-band information. It begins by extracting global features at the full-band level, subsequently
refining these features at the sub-band level. This dual-layer processing approach enhances the over-
all performance of speech enhancement, allowing for more precise noise reduction and improved
clarity. By integrating information from both frequency scales, FullSubNet successfully addresses
various noise conditions, leading to more intelligible and natural-sounding speech outputs.
Fast-FullSubNet (Hao & Li, 2022) is an accelerated version of FullSubNet, specifically optimized
for real-time speech enhancement. This model reduces computational complexity and improves in-
ference speed, allowing faster speech processing while maintaining high enhancement quality. By
streamlining the architecture and leveraging efficient algorithms, Fast-FullSubNet addresses the de-
mands of real-time applications, making it suitable for scenarios where quick responses are critical.
FullSubNet+ (Chen et al., 2022b) is an improved version of FullSubNet that further optimizes the
model architecture and parameters for more efficient handling of sub-band information. It incorpo-
rates advanced techniques, such as channel attention mechanisms, to boost performance, particularly
in complex noise environments. By refining the processing strategies and utilizing complex spectro-
grams, FullSubNet+ achieves superior noise reduction and clarity compared to its predecessor.
TaylorSENet (Li et al., 2022a) is a speech enhancement model that utilizes the Taylor series ex-
pansion to represent speech signal features. By expanding these features as a Taylor series, the
model captures subtle variations in the signal, which enhances its robustness when processing com-
plex audio signals. This innovative approach allows TaylorSENet to improve the overall quality and
intelligibility of speech in challenging acoustic environments.
GaGNet (Li et al., 2022c) introduces a novel approach that combines gating mechanisms and guided
learning to enhance speech separation tasks. The gating mechanism plays a crucial role in control-
ling the flow of information within the model, allowing for more effective differentiation between
target speech and background noise. Simultaneously, the guided learning mechanism leverages
external prior knowledge to assist the model in improving its separation capabilities. This dual ap-
proach not only enhances the model’s performance in challenging acoustic environments but also
facilitates better intelligibility and clarity of the separated speech, making GaGNet a significant
advancement in the field of speech processing.
G2Net (Li et al., 2022b) enhances computational efficiency and performance by incorporating both
gating mechanisms and group convolution. The use of group convolution effectively reduces the
number of parameters in the model, leading to lower computational costs. Meanwhile, the gating
mechanism plays a critical role in helping the model selectively process and prioritize key speech
features. This combination not only optimizes the performance model but also makes it suitable for
real-time speech enhancement tasks, ensuring that it delivers high-quality outputs even in demanding
acoustic environments.
Inter-SubNet (Chen et al., 2023) is a speech enhancement model that focuses on interaction pro-
cessing among sub-bands. By decomposing sub-band features, it facilitates information exchange
between different sub-bands, effectively addressing inter-band dependencies. This innovative ap-
proach enhances the model’s ability to capture the complex relationships between sub-bands, lead-
ing to improved speech enhancement outcomes. Through this interaction, Inter-SubNet significantly
boosts the quality and intelligibility of the enhanced speech, making it particularly effective in chal-
lenging acoustic environments where traditional methods may struggle.

E.3   T RAINING OBJECT

For all benchmark models used in the speech enhancement tasks, we applied various objective func-
tions as outlined in the original papers to optimize model performance. Specifically, the SI-SNR loss
function was employed in the DCCRN model (Hu et al., 2020). For the Fullband Hao et al. (2021),
FullSubNet Hao et al. (2021), FullSubNet+ Chen et al. (2022b), FullSubNet-Fast Hao & Li (2022),
and Inter-SubNet Chen et al. (2023) models, we utilized the complex ratio mask (cRM) error in the
frequency domain as the core loss metric. By computing the mean square error (MSE) between the
complex mask of the enhanced speech and the ideal mask, we can accurately quantify the model’s


                                                  25
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


performance in the time-frequency domain. This method not only restores the magnitude of the
speech signal but also effectively preserves its phase information. The loss function is expressed as:
                                  LFullband = MSE(M̄
                                                  M cRM , M cIRM ),                                 (3)
                        ′                                                                 ′
      M cRM ∈ CF ×T is the estimated complex ratio mask, and M cIRM ∈ CF ×T is the ideal
where M̄
complex ratio mask.
For the TaylorSENet (Li et al., 2022a) and GaGNet (Li et al., 2022c) models, we used an Euclidean
loss function based on complex magnitude. This loss function not only considers the differences
in the complex space but also incorporates magnitude information, enabling the model to capture
subtle changes in the input speech signal more precisely. The objective function is given as:
                                LTaylorSENet = α · Lc + (1 − α) · Lm ,                              (4)
where α is the weighting factor that controls the trade-off between the complex error Lc and the
magnitude error Lm . Lc is the loss of the complex part, which is defined as:
                                                           2              2
                                 Lc (x̄
                                     x, x ) = |x̄
                                               xr − x r | + |x̄
                                                             xi − x i | ,                           (5)
where x̄xr and x̄
               xi represent the real and imaginary parts of the predicted STFT, respectively, and x r
and x i are the real and imaginary parts of the ground-truth STFT. Lm is the loss of the amplitude
part, which is defined as:
                                       Lm (x̄               x|)2 .
                                                      x| − |x
                                           x, x ) = (|x̄                                         (6)

In G2Net (Li et al., 2022b), we employed the stagewise complex magnitude Euclidean loss. This
loss function applies different weights to the estimated signals at various stages, allowing the model
to converge quickly in the early stages while fine-tuning the output signal quality in the later stages.
The formula is as follows:
                                        N
                                        X
                             LG2Net =         αi · (Lc (x̄
                                                        xi , x ) + Lm (x̄
                                                                       xi , x )) ,                  (7)
                                        i=1

where αi is the weight for each stage, and N is the number of stages in the model.

E.4   R EAL - WORLD DATASET DETAILS

To evaluate the gap between the SonicSet dataset and real-world conditions, and the model’s trans-
ferability to real-world scenarios, we collected a small real-world speech dataset for speech en-
hancement called HumanENH, which contains recordings from 16 speakers covering six different
scenarios. Each speaker read 10 sentences from the LibriSpeech dataset (Panayotov et al., 2015)
in the specified scenarios, with each sentence lasting 4-6s. During recording, we randomly added
different ambient noises, such as traffic noise, cafe background noise and office ambient noise, to
simulate real-world usage scenarios. All audio was recorded using a fixed-position Logitech Blue
Yeti Nano omnidirectional microphone with recording parameters set to a 16 kHz sampling rate and
32-bit depth. The dataset is designed to be diverse and challenging, facilitating the evaluation of
model performance on speech enhancement tasks.

E.5   D ISCUSSION OF DIFFERENT METHODS

The performance variations among the different speech enhancement models can be attributed to
their underlying architectures and processing strategies. Subband-splitting methods like FullSub-
Net (Hao et al., 2021), Fast-FullSubNet (Hao & Li, 2022), FullSubNet+ (Chen et al., 2022b), and
Inter-SubNet (Chen et al., 2023) excelled across multiple evaluation metrics due to their ability to
handle frequency band dependencies effectively. By splitting the speech signal into subbands and
facilitating inter-subband interaction, these models can capture detailed frequency-specific features
and relationships. This approach enhances their capability to suppress noise and improve speech
clarity, as it allows the models to address both local and global spectral variations more precisely.
The interaction between subbands enables better modeling of complex acoustic patterns, leading to
superior performance in terms of speech intelligibility and quality.


                                                      26
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                     0HWKRG                1,64$                   :(5
                                   '&&51
                                  )XOOEDQG
                              )XOO6XE1HW
                    )DVW )XOO6XE1HW
                           )XOO6XE1HW
                           7D\ORU6(1HW
                                    *D*1HW
                                       * 1HW
                          ,QWHU 6XE1HW

Table 11: Comparative performance evaluation of models trained on different datasets using the
HumanENH dataset. The results are reported separately for “trained on VoiceBank-DEMAND”,
“trained on DNS Challenge” and “trained on SonicSet”, distinguished by a slash.
In contrast, models like TaylorSENet (Li et al., 2022a) and GaGNet (Li et al., 2022c) demonstrated
strong performance in objective metrics related to noise reduction, such as SI-SNR and SDR, indi-
cating their effectiveness in suppressing background noise. However, they slightly lagged in subjec-
tive metrics like MOS, which assess perceived speech quality, including aspects like reverberation
and signal fidelity. The possible reason for this disparity is that while these models are adept at
denoising, they might not preserve the naturalness of the speech signal as effectively. Their archi-
tectures may not fully capture the nuances of reverberation effects or may introduce artifacts that
affect the overall listening experience, suggesting limitations in maintaining signal integrity during
the enhancement process.


                                                                      27
