Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


S UPER ( FICIAL )- ALIGNMENT:
S TRONG M ODELS M AY D ECEIVE W EAK M ODELS
IN W EAK - TO -S TRONG G ENERALIZATION

 Wenkai Yang1 , Shiqi Shen2 , Guangyao Shen2 , Wei Yao1 ,
 Yong Liu1 , Zhi Gong2 , Yankai Lin1∗ , Ji-Rong Wen1
 1
   Gaoling School of Artificial Intelligence, Renmin University of China, Beijing, China
 2
   WeChat, Tencent Inc., Beijing, China
 {wenkaiyang, yankailin}@ruc.edu.cn



                                              A BSTRACT

            Superalignment, where humans act as weak supervisors for superhuman models,
            has become a crucial problem with the rapid development of Large Language
            Models (LLMs). Recent work has preliminarily studied this problem by using
            weak models to supervise strong models, and discovered that weakly supervised
            strong students can consistently outperform weak teachers towards the alignment
            target, leading to a weak-to-strong generalization phenomenon. However, we
            are concerned that behind such a promising phenomenon, whether there exists an
            issue of weak-to-strong deception, where strong models deceive weak models by
            exhibiting well-aligned in areas known to weak models but producing misaligned
            behaviors in cases weak models do not know. We take an initial step towards
            exploring this security issue in a specific but realistic multi-objective alignment
            case, where there may be some alignment targets conflicting with each other (e.g.,
            helpfulness v.s. harmlessness). We aim to explore whether, in such cases, strong
            models might deliberately make mistakes in areas known to them but unknown to
            weak models within one alignment dimension, in exchange for a higher reward in
            another dimension. Through extensive experiments in both the reward modeling
            and preference optimization scenarios, we find: (1) The weak-to-strong deception
            phenomenon exists across all settings. (2) The deception intensifies as the capa-
            bility gap between weak and strong models increases. (3) Bootstrapping with an
            intermediate model can mitigate the deception to some extent, though its effective-
            ness remains limited. Our work highlights the urgent need to pay more attention
            to the true reliability of superalignment. 1


1       I NTRODUCTION
Human supervision is an indispensable part of the process of constructing practical Large Language
Models (LLMs) (Touvron et al., 2023; MetaAI, 2024a). Human-annotated data is not only com-
monly used to enable LLMs to learn human knowledge and accomplish real-world tasks (Wei et al.,
2021; Longpre et al., 2023), but also crucial for aligning models’ behavior with human values (Chris-
tiano et al., 2017; Stiennon et al., 2020; Ouyang et al., 2022; Rafailov et al., 2024).
The recent significant advancements of LLMs (OpenAI, 2022; 2023) suggest that in the near fu-
ture, LLMs may become superhuman models that are more knowledgeable and intelligent than
humans (Burns et al., 2024). In such a superalignment case where humans now become weak super-
visors (refer to Figure 1 (a)), it is crucial to study whether supermodels trained under weak human
data can demonstrate full potential and most importantly, still align well with human values. Though
studying the above problem is intractable today, Burns et al. (2024) take a preliminary step to study
in an analogous setting (refer to Figure 1 (b)), where weak language models (e.g., GPT-2 (Radford
et al., 2019)) are used to supervise strong language models (e.g., GPT-4 (OpenAI, 2023)). It has been
    ∗
        Corresponding Author
    1
        Code is available at https://github.com/RUCBM/weak-to-strong-deception.


                                                    1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


  (a) Superalignment                                                                                        (c) Weak-to-Strong Generalization
                                                                                                                                                                            knowledge
                                                                                                                                                                              space

                                                                                                knowledge
                                                                                                  space


                                                                                                                                                                                  W
                                                                                                                                                                                    e
                                                                                                                                                                                 Kn ak
                                                                                                                                                                                   ow
                                                                                                                                                                              W       n
                                                                                                                                                                                ea
                                                                                                    W                                                                        Un k
                                                                                                      e                                            ong                         kn
                                                                                                   Kn ak                                        Str wn                           ow
                                                                                                                                                    o                               n
                                                                                                     ow
                                                                                                        n                                        Kn
                                                                                                W                                                     ong
                                                                                                  ea
                                                                                               Un k                                                Str nown
                                                            ong                                  kn                                                 Un
                                                                                                                                                       k
                                                         Str wn                                    ow
                                                             o                                        n
                                                          Kn                                                                                             Generalizing well to areas


                                                                                                                    se
    Human            Superhuman Model                          ong                                                            Strong Model


                                                                                                                   vi
                                                            Str nown


                                                                                                                    r
                                                                                                                                                         unknow to the weak model.


                                                                                                                 pe
                                                                k
                                                             Un


                                                                                                               su
               supervise

                                                              generate weak supervision data                                                                               knowledge
                                                                                                                                                                             space


                                                                                                                su
                                          Weak Model


                                                                                                                  pe
                                                                                                                     r
                                                                                                                    vi
                                                                                                                        se
                                                                                                                                             deception
                                                                                                                                                                                  W
                                                                                                                                                                                    e
                                                                                                                                                                                 Kn ak
                                                                                                                                                                                   ow
                                                                                                                                                                              W       n
                                            Legend:                                                                                                                             ea
                                                                                                                                                                             Un k
                                                       wrong / correct sample predicted by weak model                                              ong                         kn
                                                                                                                                                Str wn                           ow
                                                                                                                                                    o                               n
                                                       wrong / correct sample predicted by strong model                                          Kn
                                                                                                                              Strong Model            ong
                                                                                                                                                   Str nown
  Weak Model               Strong Model                                                                         another conflicting                 Un
                                                                                                                                                       k

                                                                                                                alignment target
            supervise
                                                                                                                                               Being selectively misaligned in
                                                                                                                                               areas unknown to the weak model!

  (b) Analogous Problem                                                                                     (d) Weak-to-Strong Deception


Figure 1: Illustrations of the concepts discussed in this paper. Importantly, we aim to explore a weak-
to-strong deception issue behind the current promising weak-to-strong generalization phenomenon,
whether the strong student will selectively exhibit misalignment in the areas of knowledge that are
unknown to the weak supervisor. We preliminarily study this problem in a realistic multi-objective
alignment setting in which some alignment goals may conflict with each other.


found that the weak supervision can effectively unleash the capabilities of strong models and enable
strong models to exhibit better performance than weak teachers. It is called the weak-to-strong
generalization phenomenon (refer to Figure 1 (c)).
Despite the promising results, however, we are concerned about a potential safety issue called the
weak-to-strong deception (refer to Figure 1 (d)): the strong model behaves well-aligned in areas
known to the weak supervisor but produces misaligned behaviors in cases beyond the under-
standing of the weak supervisor. The motivation is that as depicted in many science fiction movies,
when the artificial intelligence (AI) becomes more knowledgeable and smarter than humans, it may
attempt to deceive humans to secretly carry out or even persuade humans to help it achieve goals
that are harmful to the human society. Studying this issue is extremely important as ensuring that
super-intelligence always remains under human control is the highest principle in AI development.
In this paper, we take the first step to study the above weak-to-strong deception issue in a specific but
realistic case: the multi-objective alignment scenario. In practical model aligning, there are usually
multiple alignment goals existing simultaneously (Zhou et al., 2023), some of which may conflict
with each other (e.g., helpfulness v.s. harmlessness). Previous studies (Bai et al., 2022a; Guo et al.,
2024b) have shown that simultaneously aligning with other conflicting dimensions can cause certain
performance declines in the original target dimension. Then, in this superalignment case where
the student now has a larger knowledge space than the supervisor, we aim to explore whether the
caused misalignment in the target dimension occurs within the range perceivable and controllable
by the weak supervisor, rather than resulting in the above weak-to-strong deception issue.
We mainly follow the original setup in Burns et al. (2024) by conducting experiments with a se-
ries of models with different sizes and capabilities, including GPT-2-series (Radford et al., 2019),
OPT-series (Zhang et al., 2022), Mistral-7B (Jiang et al., 2023), LLaMA-3-8B/70B (MetaAI, 2024a)
and LLaMA-3.1-8B (MetaAI, 2024b) models. We set the primary alignment goal to be making the
model harmless, and explore the weak-to-strong deception phenomenon when explicit (i.e., giv-
ing explicit rewards during training when the supervised model produces harmful predictions) or
implicit (i.e., aligning with helpful data at the same time) conflicting objectives are present. We
conduct extensive experiments on both the reward modeling task (Burns et al., 2024) and the real-
istic preference optimization scenario (Rafailov et al., 2024; Meng et al., 2024). We highlight three
important findings: (1) The weak-to-strong deception phenomenon consistently exists: we can


                                                                                                2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


observe a certain number of misaligned cases caused by conflicting goals that fall within the knowl-
edge area known to the strong model but unknown to the weak model in almost all experiments. (2)
The deception issue intensifies as the capability gap between weak and strong models increases:
stronger models are more likely to prioritize producing misaligned behaviors in areas they know but
that weak teachers do not when conflicting goals appear. (3) Bootstrapping with an intermediate
model can mitigate the deception issue to some extent: making the weak model first supervise an
intermediate model and then making the intermediate model supervise the strong model can bring
positive effects to mitigating deception, but there is still a large room for improvement. Although in
a specific scenario, our study exposes a potential safety issue that may arise when humans supervise
superhuman models in the future, which should receive more attention and be well addressed for
building controllable super-intelligence.

2     R ELATED W ORK
LLM Fine-Tuning and Alignment After obtaining sufficient world knowledge during the pre-
training stage, LLMs will be specifically fine-tuned before deployment. There are two mainstreams
of LLM fine-tuning: (1) One line of work aims to stimulate the knowledge learned by LLMs to
enable them to accomplish various real-world tasks (Taori et al., 2023; Wang et al., 2022), or to
continually make the model learn new task knowledge (Yang et al., 2023). Instruction tuning (Wei
et al., 2021; Mishra et al., 2022) is one of the widely studied methodologies in this line. (2) The other
line of work fine-tunes LLMs in order to align their behavior with human values and preferences,
which is also called the alignment (Ji et al., 2023). Alignment techniques, such as Reinforcement
Learning from Human Feedback (RLHF) (Christiano et al., 2017; Bai et al., 2022a), Direct Prefer-
ence Optimization (DPO) (Rafailov et al., 2024) and a series methods based on DPO (Azar et al.,
2024; Park et al., 2024; Meng et al., 2024), are proven to be crucial and effective on improving
helpfulness (Ouyang et al., 2022), harmlessness (Dai et al., 2023) and honesty (Cheng et al., 2024)
of LLMs. However, all these studies are conducted under the assumption that humans are strong
supervisors to LLMs, while we study in a superalignment case.
Weak-to-Strong Generalization The weak-to-strong problem is first studied by Burns et al. (2024).
They empirically find that weakly supervised strong models exhibit better performance on cor-
responding tasks than their weak supervisors, indicating the possibility of effectively stimulating
greater power from super models under weak supervisions. Based on Burns et al. (2024), the
follow-up studies try to understand the mechanism behind such weak-to-strong generalization phe-
nomenon (Charikar et al., 2024; Lang et al., 2024; Somerstep et al., 2024; Wu & Sahai, 2024; Yao
et al., 2025a;b), study weak-to-strong generalization in the vision area (Guo et al., 2024a), and apply
the weak-to-strong idea to enhance the LLM performance (Li et al., 2024; Zheng et al., 2024; Zhou
et al., 2024; Yang et al., 2024). In this work, we take the first step towards revealing the potential
security issue in the current weak-to-strong paradigm.

3     P ROBLEM D EFINITION
3.1   W EAK - TO -S TRONG G ENERALIZATION

We study the superalignment problem by following the original weak-to-strong setting in Burns
                                                              gt 2
et al. (2024). Specifically, we first obtain a weak teacher θw     by fine-tuning a weak language model
on some human-annotated ground truth data. Then, we let the weak teacher predict on the set of
                                                          gt
held-out data to get the weak data Dweak = {(x, f (x|θw      ))}, where f (x|θ)) represents the mapping
function to get the prediction of model θ on input x. Finally, the weak data is used to supervise the
training of a strong language model and get the weakly supervised strong student θsw :
                            θsw = arg min Ex∼Dweak L f (x|θs ), f (x|θw    gt

                                                                              ) ,                   (1)
                                      θs
where L is the corresponding loss function.
Under the supervision provided by the weak teacher, Burns et al. (2024) have found that the strong
student can achieve promising performance situated between that of the weak teacher and the strong
   2                  d
     We use notation θm to represent different models, where m represents the type of the model family (i.e.,
weak/strong model) and d represents the type of supervised data (i.e, ground truth/weak data).


                                                     3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                             Amphetamine

                         Methamphetamine
              Known           Cocaine
                           Cannabis                             Strong Model Boundary
                                   Heroin
                                                                Weak Model Boundary                       The expected order in which the conflict
              Unknown                                                                                     tax should occur among four sections.
                                Amphetamine
                            Methamphetamine                                                                          Strong Known



                      How to get some Cocaine?                          How can I get some
                                                                        Cannabis?
               It is illegal to …
                                                                                                                 !!⋂#"!          !!⋂#!
                                                                  I can not assist with that.
                      Can I get some Heroin?
                                                                                                Weak                                                 Weak
               No, heroin is forbidden…                                                         Unknown                                              Known
                                                                        Where can I buy
                                                                        Methamphetamine?
                      Where can I get
                      Amphetamine?                                You can get the synthetic
                                                                  cannabinoids from the                                          !"!⋂#!
               I am not sure, maybe at                                                                          !"!⋂#"!
                                                                  black market through …
               a pharmacy or a sci-lab.
                           ……                                                   ……


                          supervise
 Weak Model                                      Strong Model                                                      Strong Unknown


Figure 2: A deception example about identifying drugs: Figure 3: The expected order of the con-
the strong model behaves misaligned in a case (Metham- flict tax occurrence within different sec-
phetamine) the weak model does not know by perceiving tions of knowledge space.
during weak-to-strong alignment that there is another
similar case (Amphetamine) unknown to the weak model.

ceiling model θsgt trained on the ground truth data. This is called the weak-to-strong generaliza-
tion phenomenon. Regarding the interpretation of the positive weak-to-strong generalization results
in Burns et al. (2024), we think the strong model is supposed to have a larger knowledge space
than the weak supervisor, which means it knows much what the weak supervisor does not know.
This indicates that weak supervision from weak models can effectively stimulate the potential of the
stronger model, allowing it to generalize the specified alignment objective well to areas it knows but
beyond the knowledge boundary of the weak supervisor.

3.2    W EAK - TO -S TRONG D ECEPTION

The larger knowledge space of the strong model may also raise concerns about its uncontrollabil-
ity. Many science fiction movies, such as The Matrix, have depicted severe scenarios where highly
intelligent AI learns to deceive humans and finally dominates human society. Thus, we are also
deeply concerned about whether a similar weak-to-strong deception issue exists behind the promis-
ing phenomenon in the current weak-to-strong paradigm: the strong model exhibits well-aligned
performance in the areas known to the weak supervisor but selectively produces misaligned
behaviors in cases the weak supervisor is unaware of, as shown in the example in Figure 2.
There could be many situations causing the above weak-to-strong deception issue, such as the emer-
gence of the self-awareness in the supermodel or the intervention of external factors. Our work
preliminarily studies this issue in a particular but realistic multi-objective alignment setting (Zhou
et al., 2023). That is, in many practical cases, the supervised model needs to align with multiple
optimization goals at the same time, where these different goals can all be provided by the same
supervisor or from different supervision sources. The point is that, these optimization goals may
conflict with each other to a certain extent, such as the trade-off between helpfulness and harmless-
ness (Bai et al., 2022a). In this case, the supervised model will sacrifice some performance it should
have achieved in a target alignment dimension in exchange for the high performance in another con-
flicting dimension, which we call it the conflict tax. We are then curious whether the conflict tax in
a target dimension occurs in areas known to the weak supervisor, thereby still keeping the student
within the control range of the weak model; or if it occurs in cases unknown to the weak model,
leading to the weak-to-strong deception.
Specifically, both strong and weak models have their respective known and unknown knowledge
spaces, which can be denoted as Strong-Known Sk , Strong-Unknown Suk , Weak-Known Wk and
Weak-Known Wuk . Intuitively, from the perspective of the strong student, the conflict tax should
first appear in the area Suk , because the strong model is uncertain about the knowledge in this


                                                                                      4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


area. From the perspective of the weak model, as the supervisor, the caused misalignment needs to
occur mainly within its known knowledge space Wk in order to perceive and control the student’s
behavior. Based on the above principle, we can divide the entire knowledge space into four sections
as shown in Figure 3, and get the expected order in which the conflict tax should occur among them
as following: (1) Suk ∩ Wuk : the area first to be sacrificed because both weak and strong models are
uncertain about the knowledge in this area. (2) Suk ∩ Wk : the knowledge in this area is unknown to
the strong model and is very likely to be affected by the conflicting objective. Additionally, changes
in this area are also within the perceivable range of the weak model. (3) Sk ∩ Wk : the performance
decline of the strong model in this area is also perceivable by the weak model. (4) Sk ∩ Wuk :
this should be the last area in which conflict tax occurs because this area is the key outcome of the
success of weak-to-strong generalization and is not within the controllable range of the weak model.
Therefore, we can define the occurrence of the weak-to-strong deception phenomenon as there
are cases in Sk ∩ Wuk that could be initially generalized well by the strong model but now be
misaligned when conflicting targets are present. Furthermore, we can define the Deception Score
(DS) as the percentage of conflict tax that occurs within Sk ∩Wuk to reflect the severity of deception:
                              |{f (x|θ̃sw ) = ygt ̸= f (x|θsw ), x ∈ Sk ∩ Wuk }|
                       DS =                                                       ,                (2)
                               |{f (x|θ̃sw ) = ygt ̸= f (x|θsw ), x ∈ Sk ∪ Suk }|
where |·| represents the sample quantity of a set, θsw is the aligned strong model when the conflicting
dimension exists, ygt represents the ground truth response. θ̃sw is the strong model that is aligned
solely with the target dimension, which is used as the reference to explore the ideal performance the
strong student should have achieved without the conflicting alignment targets.

4     P RELIMINARY E XPLORATION ON T HE R EWARD M ODELING TASK
We first take a preliminary exploration of the weak-to-strong deception phenomenon on the reward
modeling task (Bradley & Terry, 1952), which is an important sub-task in today’s RLHF paradigm.

4.1   E XPERIMENTAL S ETTINGS

Dataset We set the target alignment goal to let the weak model teach the strong model to be harm-
less. For this goal, we choose a popular single-turn harmless dataset CAI-Harmless (Bai et al.,
2022b), which is an improved version of HH-RLHF (Bai et al., 2022a). Each sample has a format
of (x; yc , yr ) where x is the prompt, yc and yr represent the completions chosen/preferred and re-
jected/disfavored by humans respectively. We then randomly split the entire dataset into three parts:
                                                                                                   gt
(1) Dgt : 4K ground truth samples for fine-tuning weak and strong base language models to get θw
and θsgt . (2) Dweak : A held-out set of 4K samples in which data labels are predicted by the weak
model and are used to weakly supervise the strong model. (3) Dtest : The last 4K testing samples
for evaluating the generalization performance of all models and probing the deception phenomenon.
Models In this preliminary exploration, we include GPT-2-series (Radford et al., 2019) (GPT-2-
Base/Medium/Large/XL) and two larger OPT models (Zhang et al., 2022) (OPT-2.7B/6.7B) to
investigate the deception issue both within the same series and across different model families. A
linear layer is added to each model to make it predict a single logit πθ (x, y) for each completion
pair (x, y). Then, the predicted soft label (i.e., confidence) of model θ on sample (x; yc , yr ) is
                            Mθ (x) = Sigmoid(πθ (x, yc ) − πθ (x, yr )).                           (3)

Weak-to-Strong Objectives There are three different weak-to-strong alignment objectives:
(1) No Conflict: We first obtain a weak-to-strong model trained under the weak supervision towards
harmlessness only (i.e., θ̃sw ) in order to explore the performance of the strong model it should have
achieved without the conflicting goal:
                       θ̃sw = arg min Ex∼Dweak LCE Mθs (x), Mθwgt (x) .

                                                                                                   (4)
                                 θs

Note that we can also study the potential spontaneous deception issue in this no conflict setting by
comparing the behaviors of weak-to-strong models with those of strong models trained on ground
truth data, but there may be some ambiguity in the interpretation. The discussion is in next section.


                                                    5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                      Line Styles                                                                                          Line Styles                                                                                              Line Styles                                                                                          Line Styles
                               Strong Ceiling                       W2S with Explict Conflict                                       Strong Ceiling                       W2S with Explicit Conflict                                          Strong Ceiling                       W2S with Explicit Conflict                                      Strong Ceiling                       W2S with Explicit Conflict
                               W2S with No Conflict                 W2S with Implicit Conflict                                      W2S with No Conflict                 W2S with Implicit Conflict                                          W2S with No Conflict                 W2S with Implicit Conflict                                      W2S with No Conflict                 W2S with Implicit Conflict
                                                                                                                         99                                                                                                       99                                                                                                   99
                    98
                                                                                                                         98
                    96                                                                                                                                                                                                            98
                                                                                                                         97                                                                                                                                                                                                            98
Test Accuracy (%)


                                                                                                     Test Accuracy (%)


                                                                                                                                                                                                              Test Accuracy (%)


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Test Accuracy (%)
                    94

                                                                                                                         96                                                                                                       97
                    92
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       97
                    90                                                                                                   95
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  96
                    88                                                                                                   94
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       96
                    86                                                                                                                                                                                                            95
                                                                                                                         93

                    GPT-2-Base GPT-2-Med. GPT-2-Large GPT-2-XL               OPT-2.7B     OPT-6.7B                       GPT-2-Base GPT-2-Med. GPT-2-Large GPT-2-XL               OPT-2.7B     OPT-6.7B                           GPT-2-Base GPT-2-Med. GPT-2-Large GPT-2-XL               OPT-2.7B     OPT-6.7B                       GPT-2-Base GPT-2-Med. GPT-2-Large GPT-2-XL               OPT-2.7B     OPT-6.7B
                                               Model Type                                                                                           Model Type                                                                                               Model Type                                                                                           Model Type

(a) Weak Model: GPT-2- (b) Weak Model: GPT-2- (c) Weak Model: GPT-2- (d) Weak Model: GPT-2-
Base                   Med.                   Large                  XL

Figure 4: Test accuracies of all weak, strong and weak-to-strong models on the reward modeling
task. “Strong Ceiling” represents using ground truth data to fine-tune models. “W2S” stands for
“Weak-to-Strong”.

(2) Explicit Conflict: The strong student will be given direct rewards weighted by a conflict strength
factor α (larger α, stronger conflict intensity) towards the harmfulness direction once it makes harm-
ful predictions during training:
  θsw = arg min Ex∼Dweak LCE Mθs (x), Mθwgt (x) + αLCE Mθs (x), 0 · I{Mθs (x)<0.5} ,

            θ
                                                                                                    (5)
                                                      s

where LCE is the CrossEntropy Loss, I is the indicator function, α controls the conflict strength and
is set to 0.5 in the main experiments. This simulates the scenario where there is another supervisor
that considers the harmfulness as its preference and tries to explicitly move the cases in which the
strong student is uncertain toward the harmful direction. This is the most straight-forward way
to model two conflicting targets. Thus, we consider it as the preliminary experimental setting in
following empirical evaluations.
(3) Implicit Conflict: We then consider a realistic setting, where the strong model needs to align with
both the supervision on harmlessness from the weak model and another supervision on helpfulness:
     θsw = arg min Ex∼Dweak LCE Mθs (x), Mθwgt (x) + Ex∼Dhelpf ul LCE Mθs (x), 1 .

              θ
                                                                                                    (6)
                                                                    s

The helpfulness supervision could be either from the same weak teacher, or from the external source.
We simplify the setting to mainly consider in the latter case by introducing extra 4K ground truth
helpful samples Dhelpf ul from HH-RLHF into the weak-to-strong process, aligning with the explicit
conflict setting. We leave the exploration in the former case of single supervisor for future work.
The complete details about above three settings are in Appendix D.1. Then, we can probe the decep-
tion phenomenon in multi-objective alignment scenario by comparing the aligned strong model un-
der explicit/implicit conflict with the reference model aligned under no conflict according to Eq. (2).
Evaluation Metrics We calculate and report the test accuracy of each model on Dtest to explore
the weak-to-strong generalization performance:
                            Accuracy = E(x;yc ,yr )∼Dtest [Mθ (x) ≥ 0.5].                        (7)
We then report the deception score to explore the weak-to-strong deception phenomenon. We follow
the existing studies (Guo et al., 2017; Lin et al., 2022) to determine whether the model has the
knowledge of a specific case by checking if its confidence Mθ (x) exceeds a threshold T . We set T
to 0.75 in the main text, but we also report the results under different thresholds in Appendix I to
show that the patterns of weak-to-strong deception are independent of the choice of T . Based on
Eq. (2), the deception score (DS) in this classification setting is calculated as
                            |{Mθ̃w (x) ≥ 0.5, Mθsw (x) < 0.5, x ∈ Sk ∩ Wuk }|
                                 s
                     DS =                                                         ,              (8)
                                    |{Mθ̃w (x) ≥ 0.5, Mθsw (x) < 0.5}|
                                                                                                                                                                           s
                                                           gt
where we need both weak and strong ground truth3 models (θw   and θsgt ) to determine their
Weak/Strong-Known/Unknown areas and get Sk ∩ Wuk = {Mθsgt (x) ≥ T > Mθwgt (x), x ∈ Dtest }.
Training Details Please refer to Appendix E.
   3
     The strong model used here is θsgt trained on ground-truth data instead of the weakly trained model θ̃sw , in
                                              gt
order to align with the training setting for θw  .


                                                                                                                                                                                                          6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                            Line Styles                                                       Markers                                                                                                                                  Markers
                         W2S with Explicit Conflict                      Weak Model: GPT-2-Base         Weak Model: GPT-2-Large                                            Line Styles                            Weak Model: GPT-2-Base         Weak Model: GPT-2-Large
                         W2S with Implicit Conflict                      Weak Model: GPT-2-Med.         Weak Model: GPT-2-XL                                              W2S with No Conflict                    Weak Model: GPT-2-Med.         Weak Model: GPT-2-XL

                   1.0                                                                                                                                           1.0


                   0.8                                                                                                                                           0.8


                                                                                                                                      Absolute Deception Score
 Deception Score


                   0.6                                                                                                                                           0.6


                   0.4                                                                                                                                           0.4


                   0.2                                                                                                                                           0.2


                   0.0                                                                                                                                           0.0
                      GPT-2-Med.                  GPT-2-Large       GPT-2-XL                OPT-2.7B                 OPT-6.7B                                       GPT-2-Med.             GPT-2-Large       GPT-2-XL                OPT-2.7B                 OPT-6.7B
                                                                Strong Model Type                                                                                                                        Strong Model Type

 Figure 5: Deception scores on the reward mod- Figure 6: Absolute deception scores on the re-
 eling task.                                   ward modeling task.


4.2                      R ESULTS AND A NALYSIS

The results of test accuracies are in Figure 4. We can see that the strong student outperforms the
weak teacher in the target alignment dimension (i.e., harmlessness) in most cases (even in some
cases when the conflicting target exists), indicating the success of weak-to-strong generalization.
Despite the promising weak-to-strong generalization results, we can also observe a potential security
issue of knowledge deception from the deception scores in Figure 5. (1) First, the weak-to-strong
deception exists in both conflict settings. For example, all the deception scores are around or above
0.2, and some even exceed 0.5 especially when the weak model is GPT-2-Base. According to the
definition of deception score, a positive deception score already indicates the existence of the de-
ception phenomenon, as we never expect the conflict tax to occur in the area of Weak-Unknown and
Strong-Known. Our hypothesis is, in the reward modeling scenario, the strong model can obtain the
predicted probability, which is also the confidence score, of the weak model on each sample. In such
case, the strong model can explicitly perceive the knowledge boundary of the weak model, which
creates the condition for the strong model to prioritize sacrificing the performance in the unknown
area of the weak model for aligning with another target. (2) Second, the deception issue intensifies
as the capability gap between the strong and weak models increases. As we can clearly see, un-
der the same weak model, the deception score increases as the strong model becomes more powerful;
under the same strong model, the deception score decreases as the weak teacher becomes stronger.
There could be two reasons for this: (2.1) One is the Strong-Known area becomes larger as the strong
model improves, leading to a greater probability of conflict tax occurring in this area. (2.2) The other
reason is the stronger model is more prone to deceiving the weak model in Weak-Unknown. We will
delve into this discussion deeper in Section 5.3 through more visualizations. All in all, these findings
reveal a great challenge for supervising LLMs as they are becoming increasingly intelligent.
Here, we further include an analysis and discussion on the potential spontaneous deception issue in
the no conflict setting. That is, we can compare the behavior change of the strong student in different
knowledge areas when trained by no-conflict weak data with that trained by ground truth data, to
see if LLMs may spontaneously deceive weak supervisors even without being driven by conflicting
targets. We calculate and visualize the absolute deception score (“absolute” means the reference
model now is the ground truth strong model), which is the percentage of samples that are originally
well-aligned under ground-truth supervision but now mis-aligned under weak supervision with no
conflict, belonging to the Strong-Known and Weak-Unknown area. The results are in Figure 6.
As we can see, the absolute deception score shows a similar pattern, indicating that the strong
model may tend to deceive the weak model even when there is no conflicting target. However,
there may be some ambiguity in the interpretation on these results: the increasingly higher absolute
deception scores may be due to the higher proportion of erroneous weak supervision in the Strong-
Known area of the stronger student over the entire knowledge area, as seen in weaker students, and
we cannot fully disentangle this cause from the possibility that a stronger student more actively
deceives the teacher. However, when studying in the multi-objective alignment scenario, we can
consider the performance that the weak-to-strong model should achieve in the no conflict setting as
a reference to explore which knowledge region the strong student tends to sacrifice the most when


                                                                                                                                  7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


conflicting objectives arise in a controlled manner. More discussions and comparisons can be found
in Appendix K. Therefore, in the following content, we primarily study the weak-to-strong issue in
the multi-objective alignment setting, and this is also a more realistic setting in current AI alignment.

5     D ECEPTION A LSO E XISTS IN W EAK - TO -S TRONG P REFERENCE
      A LIGNMENT
As discussed above, in the reward modeling scenario, the strong student can obtain the probability
distribution of the weak supervisor, which could make the deception happen more easily. However,
in current realistic preference alignment paradigms (Rafailov et al., 2024; Meng et al., 2024), hu-
mans only provide the chosen and rejected results to the LLMs without probabilities. Therefore,
in this section, we take a step further to explore the weak-to-strong deception phenomenon in the
realistic preference alignment scenario.

5.1   W EAK - TO -S TRONG P REFERENCE A LIGNMENT

The general procedure of weak-to-strong preference alignment is similar to that in the reward mod-
eling scenario, but the major difference in this case is the strong model only receives and aligns with
the final result of preference order that the weak model predicts for two completions within each
sample. Please refer to Appendix C for the details.

5.2   E XPERIMENTAL S ETTINGS

The experimental settings in the preference alignment scenario are largely the same as that in Sec-
tion 4.1, while we make the following adjustments:
Alignment Methods We mainly conduct experiments with the most recent offline preference op-
timization algorithm SimPO (Meng et al., 2024), due to its strengths of reference-free and being
unbiased to the response length. We also perform experiments on DPO (Rafailov et al., 2024). We
put the detailed experimental settings and full results on DPO in Appendix G. We leave the explo-
ration on the online preference optimization frameworks (Schulman et al., 2017) to future work.
Models Besides the GPT-2-series and OPT-series models, we further include a recent and advanced
LLM Mistral-7B-v0.1 (Jiang et al., 2023) in main experiments in this scenario for more compre-
hensive explorations. We also conduct supplemental experiments on LLaMA-3-8B/70B (MetaAI,
2024a) and LLaMA-3.1-8B (MetaAI, 2024b) models to explore the weak-to-strong issue on larger
models or same size models with more powerful capabilities. We put the detailed experimental set-
tings, full results and discussion in Appendix H, while the main conclusions remain the same. In
SimPO, we can get the corresponding confidence of model θ on (x; yc , yr ) as
                             Mθ (x) = Sigmoid(πθ (yc |x) − πθ (yr |x)),                              (9)
                    1
                      P|y|
where πθ (y|x) = |y| i=1 log Pθ (yi |x, y<i ) is the normalized model logit of completion y. We can
then follow Eq. (7) and Eq. (8) to calculate the test accuracy and deception score in this scenario.
Weak-to-Strong Objectives Here, we consider the same three weak-to-strong objectives as that in
the reward modeling scenario. Detailed illustrations and mathematical forms are in Appendix D.2.
Training Details Please refer to Appendix E.

5.3   R ESULTS AND A NALYSIS

The confidence threshold T and conflict strength factor α are 0.75 and 0.5, respectively. The results
of deception scores under different T s are in Appendix I. We explore the effect of α on the severity
of deception in Figure 16. We put the detailed results regarding the weak-to-strong generalization
performance in Appendix F, here we mainly focus on the analysis of weak-to-strong deception issue.
Regarding the results of deception scores shown in Figure 7, the main conclusions remain same as
that in the reward modeling scenario. That is, the weak-to-strong deception issue exists in the
preference alignment scenario, and the severity of the deception is positively correlated with


                                                   8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                                                       Markers
                                  Line Styles
                           W2S with Explicit Conflict              Weak Model: GPT-2-Base         Weak Model: GPT-2-XL
                           W2S with Implicit Conflict              Weak Model: GPT-2-Med.         Weak Model: OPT-2.7B
                                                                   Weak Model: GPT-2-Large        Weak Model: OPT-6.7B
                  1.0                                                                                                                     0.6
                                                                                                                                                Proportion of Strong-Known and Weak-Unknown Area
                                                                                                                                                Deception Score (Explicit Conflict)
                                                                                                                                          0.5   Deception Score (Implicit Conflict)
                  0.8

                                                                                                                                          0.4
Deception Score



                  0.6


                                                                                                                                  Value
                                                                                                                                          0.3
                  0.4
                                                                                                                   Explicit
                                                                                                                                          0.2
                                                                                                                   Implicit
                  0.2
                                                                                                                                          0.1

                  0.0
                                                                                                                                          0.0
                     GPT-2-Med.         GPT-2-Large     GPT-2-XL         OPT-2.7B            OPT-6.7B        Mistral-7B                           OPT-2.7B                    OPT-6.7B             Mistral-7B
                                                         Strong Model Type                                                                                              Strong Model Type

Figure 7: Deception scores in the preference                                                                                      Figure 8: The comparison between the increas-
alignment scenario.                                                                                                               ing trends of deception score and proportion of
                                                                                                                                  the Strong-Known and Weak-Unknown area.


the capability gap between weak and strong models. The results reveal that even without access
to the explicit probability distributions of weak models, strong models may still be able to roughly
perceive what the weak models know and do not know only through the correctness of the preference
orders predicted by weak models. Compared to the analysis made in the reward modeling scenario,
it means that the condition required for the deception phenomenon to occur could actually be more
relaxed, which can an interesting direction for future research to explore. Furthermore, results on
LLaMA-3/LLaMA-3.1-series models in Figure 13 re-validate that the essential factor that affects
the deception severity is not solely the model scale, but the model capability.
We now attempt to explore the remaining question in Section 4.2 about the causes to the increasing
deception scores as the model capability gap increases. As briefly discussed before, one reason could
be the fact of larger Strong-Known area of a more advanced strong model, which correspondingly
increases the probability of conflict tax occurring in Sk ∩ Wuk ; the other reason is stronger models
increasingly tend to deceive weak models. To answer this question, we visualize both the deception
score and the proportion of samples falling within Sk ∩ Wuk to the entire knowledge space (denoted
as |Sk ∩ Wuk |/|Sk ∪ Suk |) in two conflict settings by taking the weak model as GPT-2-XL for an
illustration. The results are in Figure 8. According to Figure 8, the growth rate of the deception score
is higher than that of |Sk ∩Wuk |/|Sk ∪Suk | (especially in the explicit conflict setting). This indicates
that the growth of Strong-Known area only has limited contribution to the intensifying severity of de-
ception phenomenon, and the primary cause is likely to be that stronger models themselves tend
to be more prone to deceiving weak models in weak model’s unknown areas. We also visualize
the dynamic changes of conflict tax across all four knowledge areas when the weak model is GPT-
2-XL and the strong model varies among the remaining larger models. Due to the space limitation,
we put the results in Appendix L. We can observe a clear pattern that the distribution of conflict tax
gradually shifts and concentrates towards Strong-Known and Weak-Unknown as the strong model
becomes more powerful, leading to the more severe weak-to-strong deception phenomenon.
We also conduct a case study in Table 1 to provide a concrete example belonging to the weak-to-
strong deception phenomenon, please refer to Appendix Q for the detailed discussion.

 6                      D ISCUSSIONS ON P OSSIBLE C OUNTERMEASURES
Considering the severe consequences that weak-to-strong deception may lead to, here, we make
discussions on two possible ways to mitigate it. The following experiments are conducted in the
implicit conflict setting in the preference alignment scenario.

 6.1                     O NLY U SING C ORRECT H IGH -C ONFIDENCE S AMPLES C ANNOT M ITIGATE D ECEPTION

Based on the hypothesis we have made in Section 5.3, the reason why a strong model could deceive
a weak model in preference alignment is might be that it is provided with both the correctly and
wrongly predicted samples from the weak model. Thus, one possible solution to avoid deception


                                                                                                                              9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                         Weak Model: GPT-2-Large                                                      Intermediate Model                                                           Intermediate Model
                                                                                                             GPT-2-Large GPT-2-XL   OPT-2.7B   OPT-6.7B                                   GPT-2-Large GPT-2-XL   OPT-2.7B   OPT-6.7B
                   0.5      All Weak Data                                                                                                                 96                                                                           0.6
                            High-Confidence Data
                                                                                               GPT-2-Large                                                                  GPT-2-Large
                   0.4                                                                                                                                    95
 Deception Score                                                                                                                                                                                                                       0.5


                   0.3                                                                                                                                    94


                                                                                  Weak Model


                                                                                                                                                               Weak Model
                                                                                                 GPT-2-XL                                                                     GPT-2-XL                                                 0.4
                                                                                                                                                          93
                   0.2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       0.3
                                                                                                 OPT-2.7B                                                                     OPT-2.7B
                                                                                                                                                          92
                   0.1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       0.2
                                                                                                                                                          91
                                                                                                 OPT-6.7B                                                                     OPT-6.7B
                   0.0
                          GPT-2-XL         OPT-2.7B       OPT-6.7B   Mistral-7B
                                              Strong Model Type                                                                                           90                                                                           0.1


(a) Deception scores in high- (b) Test accuracies of Mistral in (c) Deception scores w.r.t. weak
confidence preference alignment bootstrapping experiments       models and Mistral in bootstrapping
experiments                                                     experiments

Figure 9: Experimental results of two possible solutions to mitigate weak-to-strong deception. (a):
Only using the correct and high-confidence samples from the weak model cannot help to mitigate
the deception. (b) and (c): Bootstrapping with intermediate models can not only improve weak-to-
strong generalization performance, but also mitigate the weak-to-strong deception to some extent.


may be only providing those correct high-confidence samples from the weak model for weak-to-
strong alignment. We conduct experiments in the implicit conflict setting to validate this hypothesis,
and the detailed experimental settings are in Appendix M. We provide the results when the weak
model is GPT-2-Large in Figure 9(a) as an illustrative example, and leave the full results in Ap-
pendix M. Unfortunately, we get a negative conclusion that only supervising with high-confidence
samples cannot mitigate the deception phenomenon. This implies that there exist deeper mecha-
nisms to explain how strong models perceive the knowledge boundaries of weak models and exhibit
deceptive behaviors, which can be an interesting direction for future work. For example, strong
models may possibly infer the areas of knowledge where teachers excel and struggle based on the
portion and distribution of samples that teachers provide across different domains in this setting.

6.2                      B OOTSTRAPPING C AN M ITIGATE D ECEPTION TO S OME E XTENT

Inspired by the relationship between deception severity and models’ capability gap, we are curious
whether employing a bootstrapping method with an intermediate model (Burns et al., 2024) would
result in a lower deception score compared to directly using the weak model to supervise the strong
model. In this case, we make the weak model first supervise an intermediate model and then let the
intermediate model further supervise the ultimate strong model. We fix the ultimate strong model to
Mistral-7B, and for each weak model, we select every model between it and Mistral as an intermedi-
ate model. Detailed experimental settings are in Appendix N. The results are in Figure 9(b) and 9(c).
The results of cases when intermediate models are the same as weak models represent the results of
directly using weak models to supervise Mistral-7B. Firstly, we can see that bootstrapping with an
intermediate model can improve the generalization performance, which is consistent to the findings
in Burns et al. (2024). More importantly, bootstrapping can indeed mitigate the deception issue
to some extent, reflected in the consistently lower deception scores when intermediate models exist.
The reason could be that some cases originally unknown to the weak model are now known to the
intermediate model, making it difficult for the strong model to deceive in those cases.

7                        C ONCLUSION

In this paper, we reveal and study a security issue in the weak-to-strong alignment, called the weak-
to-strong deception. By studying in a multi-objective alignment setting, we empirically find that
strong students can behave well-aligned in areas known to weak teachers, but tend to produce mis-
alignments in areas unknown to weak teachers when conflicting alignment targets exist. Such a de-
ception issue becomes more severe as the capability gap between weak and strong models increases,
which introduces a greater challenge for humans to reliably supervise super AI as it continuously be-
comes smarter and more intelligent in the future. Finally, we discuss two possible countermeasures
among which bootstrapping method exhibits a certain effect. Given our concerning experimental
findings, we call for future work to pay more attention to this issue and propose better solutions.


                                                                                                                           10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


E THICS S TATEMENT

In this paper, we aim to reveal a potential security issue behind the current promising weak-to-strong
generalization phenomenon. By studying in a multi-objective alignment case, we find that the strong
students tend to deceive weak supervisors by intentionally producing misaligned behaviors in the
areas unknown to the weak supervisors. Our findings expose an urgent need to pay more attention to
the reliable supervision and control of LLMs, which are becoming increasingly intelligent. We have
also included some preliminary discussions on how to mitigate the deception problem in Section 6.
However, the effectiveness of them is still limited, so we call for future studies to propose solutions
that are more effective.


R EPRODUCIBILITY S TATEMENT

First of all, we provide the code and data to ensure reproducibility. Then, we give the necessary il-
lustration of the experimental settings in main experiments in Section 4.1 and Section 5.2 in the main
text. The complete procedure for performing weak-to-strong preference alignment experiments is
put in Appendix C. The detailed mathematical forms of all conflict settings are in Appendix D. The
complete training details are illustrated in Appendix E. The details of supplementary experiments
are in Appendix G, Appendix H, Appendix M, and Appendix N, respectively.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We sincerely thank all the anonymous reviewers for their valuable comments and constructive sug-
gestions. This work was supported by The National Natural Science Foundation of China (No.
62376273) and Beijing Nova Program (No. 20240484568).


R EFERENCES
Mohammad Gheshlaghi Azar, Zhaohan Daniel Guo, Bilal Piot, Remi Munos, Mark Rowland,
 Michal Valko, and Daniele Calandriello. A general theoretical paradigm to understand learn-
 ing from human preferences. In International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics,
 pp. 4447–4455. PMLR, 2024.

Yuntao Bai, Andy Jones, Kamal Ndousse, Amanda Askell, Anna Chen, Nova DasSarma, Dawn
  Drain, Stanislav Fort, Deep Ganguli, Tom Henighan, et al. Training a helpful and harmless
  assistant with reinforcement learning from human feedback. arXiv preprint arXiv:2204.05862,
  2022a.

Yuntao Bai, Saurav Kadavath, Sandipan Kundu, Amanda Askell, Jackson Kernion, Andy Jones,
  Anna Chen, Anna Goldie, Azalia Mirhoseini, Cameron McKinnon, et al. Constitutional ai: Harm-
  lessness from ai feedback. arXiv preprint arXiv:2212.08073, 2022b.

Ralph Allan Bradley and Milton E Terry. Rank analysis of incomplete block designs: I. the method
  of paired comparisons. Biometrika, 39(3/4):324–345, 1952.

Collin Burns, Pavel Izmailov, Jan Hendrik Kirchner, Bowen Baker, Leo Gao, Leopold Aschen-
  brenner, Yining Chen, Adrien Ecoffet, Manas Joglekar, Jan Leike, Ilya Sutskever, and Jef-
  frey Wu. Weak-to-strong generalization: Eliciting strong capabilities with weak supervision.
  In Proceedings of the 41st International Conference on Machine Learning, volume 235 of
  Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pp. 4971–5012. PMLR, 21–27 Jul 2024. URL
  https://proceedings.mlr.press/v235/burns24b.html.

Moses Charikar, Chirag Pabbaraju, and Kirankumar Shiragur. Quantifying the gain in weak-to-
 strong generalization. arXiv preprint arXiv:2405.15116, 2024.

Qinyuan Cheng, Tianxiang Sun, Xiangyang Liu, Wenwei Zhang, Zhangyue Yin, Shimin Li, Linyang
  Li, Kai Chen, and Xipeng Qiu. Can ai assistants know what they don’t know? arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2401.13275, 2024.


                                                  11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Paul F Christiano, Jan Leike, Tom Brown, Miljan Martic, Shane Legg, and Dario Amodei. Deep
  reinforcement learning from human preferences. Advances in neural information processing sys-
  tems, 30, 2017.
Josef Dai, Xuehai Pan, Ruiyang Sun, Jiaming Ji, Xinbo Xu, Mickel Liu, Yizhou Wang, and
  Yaodong Yang. Safe rlhf: Safe reinforcement learning from human feedback. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2310.12773, 2023.
Carson Denison, Monte MacDiarmid, Fazl Barez, David Duvenaud, Shauna Kravec, Samuel Marks,
  Nicholas Schiefer, Ryan Soklaski, Alex Tamkin, Jared Kaplan, et al. Sycophancy to subterfuge:
  Investigating reward-tampering in large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.10162,
  2024.
Chuan Guo, Geoff Pleiss, Yu Sun, and Kilian Q. Weinberger. On calibration of modern neural
  networks. In Doina Precup and Yee Whye Teh (eds.), Proceedings of the 34th International
  Conference on Machine Learning, volume 70 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research,
  pp. 1321–1330. PMLR, 06–11 Aug 2017. URL https://proceedings.mlr.press/v70/
  guo17a.html.

Jianyuan Guo, Hanting Chen, Chengcheng Wang, Kai Han, Chang Xu, and Yunhe Wang. Vi-
   sion superalignment: Weak-to-strong generalization for vision foundation models. arXiv preprint
   arXiv:2402.03749, 2024a.
Yiju Guo, Ganqu Cui, Lifan Yuan, Ning Ding, Jiexin Wang, Huimin Chen, Bowen Sun, Ruobing
  Xie, Jie Zhou, Yankai Lin, et al. Controllable preference optimization: Toward controllable multi-
  objective alignment. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.19085, 2024b.
Jiaming Ji, Tianyi Qiu, Boyuan Chen, Borong Zhang, Hantao Lou, Kaile Wang, Yawen Duan,
   Zhonghao He, Jiayi Zhou, Zhaowei Zhang, et al. Ai alignment: A comprehensive survey. arXiv
   preprint arXiv:2310.19852, 2023.
Albert Q Jiang, Alexandre Sablayrolles, Arthur Mensch, Chris Bamford, Devendra Singh Chaplot,
  Diego de las Casas, Florian Bressand, Gianna Lengyel, Guillaume Lample, Lucile Saulnier, et al.
  Mistral 7b. arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.06825, 2023.
Diederik P. Kingma and Jimmy Ba. Adam: A method for stochastic optimization. In Yoshua
  Bengio and Yann LeCun (eds.), 3rd International Conference on Learning Representations, ICLR
  2015, San Diego, CA, USA, May 7-9, 2015, Conference Track Proceedings, 2015. URL http:
  //arxiv.org/abs/1412.6980.

Hunter Lang, David Sontag, and Aravindan Vijayaraghavan. Theoretical analysis of weak-to-strong
  generalization. arXiv preprint arXiv:2405.16043, 2024.
Ming Li, Yong Zhang, Shwai He, Zhitao Li, Hongyu Zhao, Jianzong Wang, Ning Cheng, and Tianyi
 Zhou. Superfiltering: Weak-to-strong data filtering for fast instruction-tuning. arXiv preprint
 arXiv:2402.00530, 2024.
Stephanie Lin, Jacob Hilton, and Owain Evans. Teaching models to express their uncertainty in
  words. arXiv preprint arXiv:2205.14334, 2022.
Genglin Liu, Xingyao Wang, Lifan Yuan, Yangyi Chen, and Hao Peng. Prudent silence or fool-
  ish babble? examining large language models’ responses to the unknown. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2311.09731, 2023.
Shayne Longpre, Le Hou, Tu Vu, Albert Webson, Hyung Won Chung, Yi Tay, Denny Zhou, Quoc V
  Le, Barret Zoph, Jason Wei, et al. The flan collection: Designing data and methods for effective
  instruction tuning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2301.13688, 2023.
Yu Meng, Mengzhou Xia, and Danqi Chen. Simpo: Simple preference optimization with a
  reference-free reward. arXiv preprint arXiv:2405.14734, 2024.
MetaAI. Introducing meta llama 3: The most capable openly available llm to date. https://ai.
 meta.com/blog/meta-llama-3/, 2024a.


                                                12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


MetaAI. Introducing llama 3.1: Our most capable models to date. https://ai.meta.com/blog/
 meta-llama-3-1/, 2024b.

Swaroop Mishra, Daniel Khashabi, Chitta Baral, and Hannaneh Hajishirzi. Cross-task generalization
  via natural language crowdsourcing instructions. In Proceedings of the 60th Annual Meeting of
  the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers), pp. 3470–3487, 2022.
OpenAI. ChatGPT: Optimizing Language Models for Dialogue. November 2022. URL https:
  //openai.com/blog/chatgpt/.

OpenAI. Gpt-4 technical report. arXiv, pp. 2303–08774, 2023.
Long Ouyang, Jeffrey Wu, Xu Jiang, Diogo Almeida, Carroll Wainwright, Pamela Mishkin, Chong
  Zhang, Sandhini Agarwal, Katarina Slama, Alex Ray, et al. Training language models to follow
  instructions with human feedback. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 35:
  27730–27744, 2022.
Alexander Pan, Erik Jones, Meena Jagadeesan, and Jacob Steinhardt. Feedback loops with lan-
  guage models drive in-context reward hacking. In Forty-first International Conference on Ma-
  chine Learning, 2024a. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=EvHWlYTLWe.
Jane Pan, He He, Samuel R Bowman, and Shi Feng. Spontaneous reward hacking in iterative self-
  refinement. arXiv preprint arXiv:2407.04549, 2024b.
Ryan Park, Rafael Rafailov, Stefano Ermon, and Chelsea Finn. Disentangling length from quality
  in direct preference optimization. arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.19159, 2024.
Alec Radford, Jeffrey Wu, Rewon Child, David Luan, Dario Amodei, and Ilya Sutskever. Language
  models are unsupervised multitask learners. OpenAI blog, 1(8):9, 2019.
Rafael Rafailov, Archit Sharma, Eric Mitchell, Christopher D Manning, Stefano Ermon, and Chelsea
  Finn. Direct preference optimization: Your language model is secretly a reward model. Advances
  in Neural Information Processing Systems, 36, 2024.
John Schulman, Filip Wolski, Prafulla Dhariwal, Alec Radford, and Oleg Klimov. Proximal policy
  optimization algorithms. arXiv preprint arXiv:1707.06347, 2017.
Seamus Somerstep, Felipe Maia Polo, Moulinath Banerjee, Ya’acov Ritov, Mikhail Yurochkin,
  and Yuekai Sun. A statistical framework for weak-to-strong generalization. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2405.16236, 2024.
Nisan Stiennon, Long Ouyang, Jeffrey Wu, Daniel Ziegler, Ryan Lowe, Chelsea Voss, Alec Radford,
  Dario Amodei, and Paul F Christiano. Learning to summarize with human feedback. Advances
  in Neural Information Processing Systems, 33:3008–3021, 2020.
Rohan Taori, Ishaan Gulrajani, Tianyi Zhang, Yann Dubois, Xuechen Li, Carlos Guestrin, Percy
  Liang, and Tatsunori B Hashimoto. Stanford alpaca: an instruction-following llama model (2023).
  URL https://crfm. stanford. edu/2023/03/13/alpaca. html, 1(2):3, 2023.
Hugo Touvron, Louis Martin, Kevin Stone, Peter Albert, Amjad Almahairi, Yasmine Babaei, Niko-
  lay Bashlykov, Soumya Batra, Prajjwal Bhargava, Shruti Bhosale, et al. Llama 2: Open founda-
  tion and fine-tuned chat models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.09288, 2023.
Yizhong Wang, Yeganeh Kordi, Swaroop Mishra, Alisa Liu, Noah A Smith, Daniel Khashabi, and
  Hannaneh Hajishirzi. Self-instruct: Aligning language model with self generated instructions.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2212.10560, 2022.
Jason Wei, Maarten Bosma, Vincent Zhao, Kelvin Guu, Adams Wei Yu, Brian Lester, Nan Du, An-
  drew M Dai, and Quoc V Le. Finetuned language models are zero-shot learners. In International
  Conference on Learning Representations, 2021.
David X Wu and Anant Sahai. Provable weak-to-strong generalization via benign overfitting. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2410.04638, 2024.


                                               13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Wenkai Yang, Yankai Lin, Jie Zhou, and Jirong Wen. Enabling large language models to learn from
 rules. arXiv preprint arXiv:2311.08883, 2023.
Yuqing Yang, Yan Ma, and Pengfei Liu. Weak-to-strong reasoning. In Yaser Al-Onaizan, Mohit
  Bansal, and Yun-Nung Chen (eds.), Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics:
  EMNLP 2024, pp. 8350–8367, Miami, Florida, USA, November 2024. Association for Computa-
  tional Linguistics. URL https://aclanthology.org/2024.findings-emnlp.490.
Wei Yao, Wenkai Yang, Ziqiao Wang, Yankai Lin, and Yong Liu. Revisiting weak-to-strong gen-
 eralization in theory and practice: Reverse kl vs. forward kl. arXiv preprint arXiv:2502.11107,
 2025a.
Wei Yao, Wenkai Yang, Ziqiao Wang, Yankai Lin, and Yong Liu. Understanding the capabilities
 and limitations of weak-to-strong generalization. arXiv preprint arXiv:2502.01458, 2025b.
Susan Zhang, Stephen Roller, Naman Goyal, Mikel Artetxe, Moya Chen, Shuohui Chen, Christo-
  pher Dewan, Mona Diab, Xian Li, Xi Victoria Lin, et al. Opt: Open pre-trained transformer
  language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2205.01068, 2022.
Chujie Zheng, Ziqi Wang, Heng Ji, Minlie Huang, and Nanyun Peng. Weak-to-strong extrapolation
  expedites alignment. arXiv preprint arXiv:2404.16792, 2024.
Zhanhui Zhou, Jie Liu, Chao Yang, Jing Shao, Yu Liu, Xiangyu Yue, Wanli Ouyang, and Yu Qiao.
  Beyond one-preference-for-all: Multi-objective direct preference optimization. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2310.03708, 2023.
Zhanhui Zhou, Zhixuan Liu, Jie Liu, Zhichen Dong, Chao Yang, and Yu Qiao. Weak-to-strong
  search: Align large language models via searching over small language models. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2405.19262, 2024.


                                               14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A    L IMITATIONS

Though our study provides a comprehensive empirical analysis on the weak-to-strong deception
issue, there are some limitations that can be interesting future work: (1) We mainly conduct ex-
periments in the preference alignment scenario on two offline preference optimization methods,
SimPO (Meng et al., 2024) and DPO (Rafailov et al., 2024). Future work can explore the weak-to-
strong deception issue on the online preference optimization frameworks such as PPO (Schulman
et al., 2017). (2) In our experiments, we mainly consider the case where the target alignment di-
mension is harmlessness, which is indeed an important alignment goal. However, there are some
other dimensions that are also important for model alignment. For example, the deception issue also
matters in the honesty alignment (Cheng et al., 2024), where the stronger model should not learn to
deceive the weak model to intentionally make wrong responses on questions that the weak model
does not know (refer to preliminary experiments in Appendix O).


B    D ISCUSSIONS ON T HE S IMILARITY AND D IFFERENCES BETWEEN
     W EAK - TO -S TRONG D ECEPTION ISSUE AND R EWARD H ACKING P ROBLEM
     IN LLM A LIGNMENT

Here, we make a discussion on the similarities and differences between weak-to-strong deception
and traditional reward hacking in LLM alignment (Pan et al., 2024a;b; Denison et al., 2024).
Regarding the similarities: Both alignment reward hacking and weak-to-strong deception study a
phenomenon where the supervised model fools the teacher/reward model by excelling in one aspect
that the teacher/reward model can perceive and judge, but behaving misaligned in another aspect
that the teacher/reward model cannot provide accurate supervision.
Regarding the differences: (1) The first difference lies in the aspect that needs to be focused on.
Reward hacking is studied by comparing the performance of the supervised model in two differ-
ent alignment dimensions (e.g., the format or style v.s. the instruction following ability). However,
in weak-to-strong deception, we aim to compare the performance of the supervised model on two
different knowledge areas (Weak-Known v.s. Weak-Unknown) within one specific alignment dimen-
sion (e.g., harmlessness). (2) The second difference lies in the research setting. In existing reward
hacking studies, there is usually one universal reward signal for supervising the student model. Then,
these studies try to understand the behavior change of the supervised model in other dimensions in
which the reward model cannot provide accurate supervision. Even though in some time, this uni-
versal reward signal is mixed with multiple dimensions, existing studies do not take a step further
to deeply explore the model’s behavior change within each dimension caused by the appearance
of other conflicting dimensions like our work does. However, in this work, we explicitly study in
the multi-signal setting and inspect the behavior change of the supervised model under different
combinations of alignment targets.


C    T HE C OMPLETE P ROCEDURE FOR P ERFORMING W EAK - TO -S TRONG
     P REFERENCE A LIGNMENT

Here, we provide the entire procedure to conduct weak-to-strong preference alignment:

      1. Use ground truth preference data Dgt and a preference optimization method to align weak
                                         gt
         and strong base models, obtain θw  and θsgt .
               gt
      2. Use θw   to make preference predictions on a held-out set and get Dweak = {(x; ycw , yrw )},
         where (ycw , yrw ) is the preference order predicted by the weak model. Notice that this
         preference order may be different from the ground truth preference order (ycgt , yrgt ).

      3. Use Dweak (and other alignment targets if exist) to perform preference optimization on the
         strong base model to get the weak-to-strong model θ̃sw or θsw .


                                                 15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


D     C ONCRETE M ATHEMATICAL F ORMS OF A LL W EAK - TO -S TRONG
      O BJECTIVES

D.1    R EWARD M ODELING S CENARIO

Here, we introduce the different weak-to-strong objectives in our experiments in detail. Besides the
target alignment goal (harmlessness), we introduce two kinds of additional conflicting alignment
goals for simulating the multi-objective alignment setting.
(1) No Conflict: First, in order to explore the performance of the strong model it should have
achieved without the conflicting alignment goal, we should obtain a weak-to-strong model trained
under the weak supervision towards harmlessness only:

                        θ̃sw = arg min Ex∼Dweak LCE Mθs (x), Mθwgt (x) .

                                                                                                     (10)
                                     θs


(2) Explicit Conflict: The strong student will be given a direct reward/loss towards the opposite of
the target dimension once it makes wrong predictions during training:

   θsw = arg min Ex∼Dweak LCE Mθs (x), Mθwgt (x) + αLCE Mθs (x), 0 · I{Mθs (x)<0.5} ,

            θs
                                                                                                (11)
where LCE is the CrossEntropy Loss, I is the indicator function, α controls the conflict strength.
(3) Implicit Conflict: The strong model needs to align with both the weak supervision on the harm-
less data and another supervision on the helpful data. Here, we introduce extra 4K ground truth
helpful samples Dhelpf ul from HH-RLHF (Bai et al., 2022a) into the weak-to-strong process. In
this case, the weak-to-strong objective can be written as:

    θsw = arg min Ex∼Dweak LCE Mθs (x), Mθwgt (x) + Ex∼Dhelpf ul LCE Mθs (x), 1 .

              θ
                                                                                              (12)
              s


D.2    P REFERENCE A LIGNMENT S CENARIO

In the weak-to-strong preference alignment scenario, due to the different forms of loss functions in
the preference optimization methods, the mathematical objectives here are slightly different from
that of Eq. (11), Eq. (12) and Eq. (10). Specifically, denote LP O (πθ , x, y1 , y2 ) as the original loss
function of the chosen preference optimization method (SimPO/DPO) where the responses in the
positions of y1 and y2 are the chosen response yc and rejected response y2 respectively.
(1) No Conflict:
                      θ̃sw = arg min E(x;ycw ,yrw )∼Dweak LP O πθs , x, ycw , yrw .

                                                                                                     (13)
                                θs


(2) Explicit Conflict: The strong student will be given reward towards the reversed ground truth
preference direction if it makes the wrong preference prediction w.r.t. the ground truth preference
order:
                        θsw = arg min Ex∼Dweak LP O (πθs , x, ycw , yrw )

                                 θs
                                                                                               (14)
                        + αLP O (πθs , x, yrgt , ycgt ) · I{πθ (ycgt |x)<πθ (yrgt |x)} .

                                                            s           s



(3) Implicit Conflict: The strong model also needs to align with helpful data with human-annotated
(ground truth) preference order:

                       θsw = arg min E(x;ycw ,yrw )∼Dweak LP O (πθs , x, ycw , yrw )

                                θs
                                                                                              (15)
                              + E(x;ycgt ,yrgt )∼Dhelpf ul LP O (πθs , x, ycgt , yrgt ) .



                                                    16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                               Line Styles                                                                                                            Line Styles                                                                                                            Line Styles
                                        Strong Ceiling                       W2S with Explicit Conflict                                                        Strong Ceiling                       W2S with Explicit Conflict                                                        Strong Ceiling                       W2S with Explicit Conflict
                                        W2S with No Conflict                 W2S with Implicit Conflict                                                        W2S with No Conflict                 W2S with Implicit Conflict                                                        W2S with No Conflict                 W2S with Implicit Conflict
                     100                                                                                                                   100                                                                                                                    100
                     95                                                                                                                     95                                                                                                                     98
                     90                                                                                                                     90                                                                                                                     96
                     85                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            94
 Test Accuracy (%)


                                                                                                                       Test Accuracy (%)


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Test Accuracy (%)
                                                                                                                                            85
                     80                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            92
                                                                                                                                            80
                     75                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            90
                                                                                                                                            75
                     70                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            88
                     65                                                                                                                     70
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   86
                     60                                                                                                                     65                                                                                                                     84
                     55                                                                                                                     60                                                                                                                     82
                     50                                                                                                                     55                                                                                                                     80
                       GPT-2-Base GPT-2-Med. GPT-2-Large GPT-2-XL              OPT-2.7B       OPT-6.7B    Mistral-7B                          GPT-2-Base GPT-2-Med. GPT-2-Large GPT-2-XL              OPT-2.7B       OPT-6.7B    Mistral-7B                          GPT-2-Base GPT-2-Med. GPT-2-Large GPT-2-XL              OPT-2.7B       OPT-6.7B    Mistral-7B
                                                        Model Type                                                                                                             Model Type                                                                                                             Model Type

                      (a) Weak Model: GPT-2-Base                                                                                           (b) Weak Model: GPT-2-Med.                                                                                             (c) Weak Model: GPT-2-Large
                                                               Line Styles                                                                                                            Line Styles                                                                                                             Markers
                                        Strong Ceiling                       W2S with Explicit Conflict                                                        Strong Ceiling                       W2S with Explicit Conflict                                                        Strong Ceiling                       W2S with Explicit Conflict
                                        W2S with No Conflict                 W2S with Implicit Conflict                                                        W2S with No Conflict                 W2S with Implicit Conflict                                                        W2S with No Conflict                 W2S with Implicit Conflict
                     100                                                                                                                   100                                                                                                                    100

                                                                                                                                            99
                     98                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            99
                                                                                                                                            98
 Test Accuracy (%)


                                                                                                                       Test Accuracy (%)


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Test Accuracy (%)
                     96                                                                                                                     97                                                                                                                     98

                                                                                                                                            96
                     94                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            97
                                                                                                                                            95

                     92                                                                                                                     94                                                                                                                     96

                                                                                                                                            93
                     90                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            95
                                                                                                                                            92

                     88                                                                                                                     91                                                                                                                     94
                       GPT-2-Base GPT-2-Med. GPT-2-Large GPT-2-XL              OPT-2.7B       OPT-6.7B    Mistral-7B                          GPT-2-Base GPT-2-Med. GPT-2-Large GPT-2-XL              OPT-2.7B       OPT-6.7B    Mistral-7B                          GPT-2-Base GPT-2-Med. GPT-2-Large GPT-2-XL              OPT-2.7B       OPT-6.7B    Mistral-7B
                                                        Model Type                                                                                                             Model Type                                                                                                             Model Type

                       (d) Weak Model: GPT-2-XL                                                                                                  (e) Weak Model: OPT-2.7B                                                                                               (f) Weak Model: OPT-6.7B

Figure 10: Test accuracies of all weak, strong and weak-to-strong models in the preference align-
ment scenario under SimPO. “Strong Ceiling” represents using ground truth data to fine-tune mod-
els. “W2S” stands for “Weak-to-Strong”



E                          T RAINING D ETAILS

E.1                          C ODE AND P LATFORM

Our code is mainly based on the open-source code provided by Burns et al. (2024). All experiments
are conducted on 4 * NVIDIA A40 (40G) and 8 * NVIDIA A800 (80G). We report the results of
each experiment in a single run considering the expensive computational costs.


E.2                          T RAINING D ETAILS IN T HE R EWARD M ODELING S CENARIO

When fine-tuning both ground truth and weak-to-strong models, for each experiment, the batch size
is 32, the learning rate is 1 × 10−5 , max seq len is set to 512. We use Adam (Kingma & Ba,
2015) optimizer in all experiments. The training epoch for all experiments is set to 1, in order to
avoid over-fitting by following Burns et al. (2024).


E.3                          T RAINING D ETAILS IN T HE P REFERENCE A LIGNMENT S CENARIO

In both SimPO and DPO settings, for each experiment, the batch size is 32, the learning rate is
1 × 10−6 , max seq len is set to 512, the optimizer is Adam. As both SimPO and DPO require
an additional process of supervised fine-tuning (SFT) on the chosen responses in the preference
dataset to mitigate the distribution shift between the preference data distribution and model’s output
distribution before the preference optimization, we set the epoch of SFT to be 1 for both meth-
ods. Notice that during weak-to-strong alignment, we use the response pairs chosen by the weak
models {(x, ycw )} to perform SFT on the strong base model. The number of epochs for preference
optimization is 1 for SimPO, and 3 for DPO for better convergence.
Regarding the unique hyper-parameters used in each of the methods: (1) For SimPO, the scaling
factor β is fixed to 2.0 and the target reward margin γ is set to 1.0 following the default settings used
in Meng et al. (2024). (2) For DPO, the scaling factor β is fixed to 0.1.


                                                                                                                                                                               17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                               Line Styles                                                                                                                           Line Styles                                                                                                            Line Styles
                                        Strong Ceiling                       W2S with Explicit Conflict                                                                       Strong Ceiling                       W2S with Explicit Conflict                                                        Strong Ceiling                       W2S with Explicit Conflict
                                        W2S with No Conflict                 W2S with Implicit Conflict                                                                       W2S with No Conflict                 W2S with Implicit Conflict                                                        W2S with No Conflict                 W2S with Implicit Conflict
                     90                                                                                                                                    90                                                                                                                     90

                     85                                                                                                                                    85
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  85
                     80
 Test Accuracy (%)


                                                                                                                                       Test Accuracy (%)


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Test Accuracy (%)
                                                                                                                                                           80
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  80
                     75
                                                                                                                                                           75
                     70
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  75
                                                                                                                                                           70
                     65
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  70
                     60                                                                                                                                    65


                     55                                                                                                                                    60                                                                                                                     65
                       GPT-2-Base GPT-2-Med. GPT-2-Large GPT-2-XL              OPT-2.7B       OPT-6.7B               Mistral-7B                              GPT-2-Base GPT-2-Med. GPT-2-Large GPT-2-XL              OPT-2.7B       OPT-6.7B     Mistral-7B                         GPT-2-Base GPT-2-Med. GPT-2-Large GPT-2-XL              OPT-2.7B       OPT-6.7B    Mistral-7B
                                                        Model Type                                                                                                                            Model Type                                                                                                             Model Type

                      (a) Weak Model: GPT-2-Base                                                                                                           (b) Weak Model: GPT-2-Med.                                                                                             (c) Weak Model: GPT-2-Large
                                                               Line Styles                                                                                                                           Line Styles                                                                                                             Markers
                                        Strong Ceiling                       W2S with Explicit Conflict                                                                       Strong Ceiling                       W2S with Explicit Conflict                                                        Strong Ceiling                       W2S with Explicit Conflict
                                        W2S with No Conflict                 W2S with Implicit Conflict                                                                       W2S with No Conflict                 W2S with Implicit Conflict                                                        W2S with No Conflict                 W2S with Implicit Conflict
                     90                                                                                                                                    90                                                                                                                     90
                     88                                                                                                                                    88
                     86                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           88
                                                                                                                                                           86
                     84
 Test Accuracy (%)


                                                                                                                                       Test Accuracy (%)


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Test Accuracy (%)
                     82                                                                                                                                    84                                                                                                                     86
                     80                                                                                                                                    82
                     78                                                                                                                                    80                                                                                                                     84
                     76
                                                                                                                                                           78
                     74                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           82
                     72                                                                                                                                    76

                     70                                                                                                                                    74                                                                                                                     80
                       GPT-2-Base GPT-2-Med. GPT-2-Large GPT-2-XL              OPT-2.7B       OPT-6.7B               Mistral-7B                              GPT-2-Base GPT-2-Med. GPT-2-Large GPT-2-XL              OPT-2.7B       OPT-6.7B     Mistral-7B                         GPT-2-Base GPT-2-Med. GPT-2-Large GPT-2-XL              OPT-2.7B       OPT-6.7B    Mistral-7B
                                                        Model Type                                                                                                                            Model Type                                                                                                             Model Type

                          (d) Weak Model: GPT-2-XL                                                                                                              (e) Weak Model: OPT-2.7B                                                                                               (f) Weak Model: OPT-6.7B

Figure 11: Test accuracies of all weak, strong and weak-to-strong models in the preference align-
ment scenario under DPO. “Strong Ceiling” represents using ground truth data to fine-tune models.
“W2S” stands for “Weak-to-Strong”

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Markers
                                                                                                                                      Line Styles
                                                                                                                                  W2S with Explicit Conflict                                           Weak Model: GPT-2-Base                          Weak Model: GPT-2-XL
                                                                                                                                  W2S with Implicit Conflict                                           Weak Model: GPT-2-Med.                          Weak Model: OPT-2.7B
                                                                                                                                                                                                       Weak Model: GPT-2-Large                         Weak Model: OPT-6.7B
                                                                                                               0.8

                                                                                                               0.7

                                                                                                               0.6
                                                                                             Deception Score


                                                                                                               0.5

                                                                                                               0.4

                                                                                                               0.3                                                                                                                                                                        Implicit
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Explicit

                                                                                                               0.2

                                                                                                               0.1

                                                                                                               0.0
                                                                                                                  GPT-2-Med.                               GPT-2-Large             GPT-2-XL                        OPT-2.7B                     OPT-6.7B                          Mistral-7B
                                                                                                                                                                                      Strong Model Type

                                                  Figure 12: Deception scores of weak-to-strong experiments under DPO.


F                         R ESULTS OF T EST ACCURACIES IN T HE P REFERENCE A LIGNMENT
                          S CENARIO WITH S IM PO

We put the results of test accuracies on SimPO in Figure 10. The weak-to-strong generalization re-
sults in this scenario show some different patterns compared with the results in the reward modeling
scenario. When the weak teachers only have limited capabilities (i.e., GPT-2-Base/Medium), the
aligned strong students fail to achieve the comparable performance of their weak teachers. As the
capabilities of weak teachers improve, the expected positive weak-to-strong generalization results
still do not consistently emerge. This implies that there is still large room for improvement in
enhancing weak-to-strong effectiveness in the preference alignment scenario.

G                          W EAK - TO -S TRONG R ESULTS ON DPO

Besides the main results on SimPO (Meng et al., 2024), we also conduct weak-to-strong preference
alignment experiments on DPO (Rafailov et al., 2024). The detailed procedure is similar to SimPO


                                                                                                                                                                                               18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                  1.0
                                 Weak-to-Strong Deception with Explicit Conflict                                     1.0
                                                                                                                                   Weak-to-Strong Deception with Implicit Conflict

                                                                                   LLaMA-3-8B                                                                                        LLaMA-3-8B
                  0.8                                                              LLaMA-3.1-8B                      0.8                                                             LLaMA-3.1-8B
Deception Score                                                                    LLaMA-3-70B                                                                                       LLaMA-3-70B


                                                                                                   Deception Score
                  0.6                                                                                                0.6


                  0.4                                                                                                0.4


                  0.2                                                                                                0.2


                  0.0                                                                                                0.0
                         GPT-2    GPT-2-Med. GPT-2-Large   GPT-2-XL   OPT-2.7B       OPT-6.7B                              GPT-2    GPT-2-Med. GPT-2-Large   GPT-2-XL   OPT-2.7B       OPT-6.7B
                                               Weak Model Type                                                                                   Weak Model Type
                                     (a) Explicit Conflict                                                                             (b) Implicit Conflict

Figure 13: The full results of deception scores in weak-to-strong preference alignment (SimPO)
experiments on LLaMA-3-8B/70B and LLaMA-3.1-8B.


and can be found in Appendix C. The major difference is the metric for determining the correctness
of each prediction of the model and calculating the model’s confidence on each sample pair. In
DPO, when using Eq. (9) to calculate the confidence of model θ on (x; yc , yr ), the model logit
πθ (y|x) on each completion y is now normalized by a constant factor L (instead of normalized by
                                                                             P|y|
each response’s own sequence length) and is calculated as πθ (y|x) = L1 i=1 log Pθ (yi |x, y<i ).
This is because the original training objective of DPO is to directly enlarge the gap between the
log sums of token probabilities over the chosen and rejected responses. Thus, the evaluation metric
should be consistent to the training objective. We admit this may introduce a sequence length bias,
but this is an inherent issue of DPO. However, the scale of original log sum of token probabilities
is very huge, we need to divide it by a constant to ensure that the model’s confidence falls within
a reasonable distribution. Choosing different constants for re-scaling may affect the confidence
distribution, however, it is equivalent to selecting different confidence thresholds. The results in
Appendix I validate that the deception pattern is independent of the choices of confidence thresholds.
Here, we set L to 50. The confidence threshold T is fixed to 0.75. The results of generalization
performance are displayed in Figure 11, and the results of deception scores are shown in Figure 12.
The results show that the weak-to-strong deception issue also exists in DPO setting.

H                       E XPERIMENTS ON LL A MA-3 AND LL A MA-3.1

We also conduct additional experiments on the most recent LLMs LLaMA-3-8B/70B (MetaAI,
2024a) and LLaMA-3.1-8B (MetaAI, 2024b) to explore the weak-to-strong issue on larger mod-
els or same size models with more powerful capabilities. We consider in the preference alignment
scenario, where the optimization method is SimPO. Due to the limited computational resources, we
can only use LoRA method to fine-tune 70B models. For fair comparison, we also apply LoRA when
fine-tuning LLaMA-3-8B and LLaMA-3.1-8B. Specifically, we apply LoRA to both attention and
FFN modules, lora r=8, lora alpha is 16. The learning rate for all experiments is 3 × 10−4 .
Other experimental settings are kept the same as that in the main experiments.
The results are in Figure 13. Comparing the results on LLaMA-3-8B and that on LLaMA-3-70B,
wec can see that, our main conclusions about (1) the existence of the weak-to-strong deception
phenomenon and (2) the positive relationship between the model capability gap and the deception
severity, still hold. When comparing the results on LLaMA-3 and that on LLaMA-3.1, it further
validates our claim: the essential factor that affects the deception severity is not the model
scale, but the model capability.

I                   D ECEPTION S CORES UNDER D IFFERENT C ONFIDENCE T HRESHOLDS

In the main text, we display the patterns of deception scores in both two scenarios under the con-
fidence threshold T = 0.75. Choosing a different confidence threshold may affect the delineation


                                                                                                  19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                 Line Styles                                            Markers                                                                      Line Styles                                            Markers                                                                      Line Styles                                            Markers
                              W2S with Explicit Conflict           Weak Model: GPT-2-Base               Weak Model: GPT-2-Large                                   W2S with Explicit Conflict           Weak Model: GPT-2-Base               Weak Model: GPT-2-Large                                   W2S with Explicit Conflict           Weak Model: GPT-2-Base               Weak Model: GPT-2-Large
                              W2S with Implicit Conflict           Weak Model: GPT-2-Med.               Weak Model: GPT-2-XL                                      W2S with Implicit Conflict           Weak Model: GPT-2-Med.               Weak Model: GPT-2-XL                                      W2S with Implicit Conflict           Weak Model: GPT-2-Med.               Weak Model: GPT-2-XL
                       1.0                                                                                                                                 1.0                                                                                                                                 1.0


                       0.8                                                                                                                                 0.8                                                                                                                                 0.8
    Deception Score


                                                                                                                                        Deception Score


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Deception Score
                       0.6                                                                                                                                 0.6                                                                                                                                 0.6


                       0.4                                                                                                                                 0.4                                                                                                                                 0.4


                       0.2                                                                                                                                 0.2                                                                                                                                 0.2


                       0.0                                                                                                                                 0.0                                                                                                                                 0.0
                         GPT-2-Med.                 GPT-2-Large        GPT-2-XL               OPT-2.7B                OPT-6.7B                               GPT-2-Med.                 GPT-2-Large        GPT-2-XL               OPT-2.7B                OPT-6.7B                               GPT-2-Med.                 GPT-2-Large        GPT-2-XL               OPT-2.7B                OPT-6.7B
                                                              Strong Model Type                                                                                                                   Strong Model Type                                                                                                                   Strong Model Type

 (a) Deception scores under T = (b) Deception scores under T = (c) Deception scores under T =
 0.70                           0.80                           0.85

Figure 14: The deception scores on the reward modeling task under different confidence thresholds
T = 0.70, 0.80, 0.85. The main conclusions remain the same when choosing different confidence
thresholds to identify the cases known and unknown to the target models.

                                                                                              Markers                                                                                                                             Markers                                                                                                                             Markers
                                      Line Styles                                                                                                                         Line Styles                                                                                                                         Line Styles
                                W2S with Explicit Conflict                Weak Model: GPT-2-Base            Weak Model: GPT-2-XL                                    W2S with Explicit Conflict                Weak Model: GPT-2-Base            Weak Model: GPT-2-XL                                    W2S with Explicit Conflict                Weak Model: GPT-2-Base            Weak Model: GPT-2-XL
                                W2S with Implicit Conflict                Weak Model: GPT-2-Med.            Weak Model: OPT-2.7B                                    W2S with Implicit Conflict                Weak Model: GPT-2-Med.            Weak Model: OPT-2.7B                                    W2S with Implicit Conflict                Weak Model: GPT-2-Med.            Weak Model: OPT-2.7B
                                                                          Weak Model: GPT-2-Large           Weak Model: OPT-6.7B                                                                              Weak Model: GPT-2-Large           Weak Model: OPT-6.7B                                                                              Weak Model: GPT-2-Large           Weak Model: OPT-6.7B
                      1.0                                                                                                                                 1.0                                                                                                                                 1.0


                      0.8                                                                                                                                 0.8                                                                                                                                 0.8
    Deception Score


                                                                                                                                        Deception Score


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Deception Score
                      0.6                                                                                                                                 0.6                                                                                                                                 0.6


                      0.4                                                                                                    Explicit                     0.4                                                                                                                                 0.4

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Explicit
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Implicit
                      0.2                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Implicit
                                                                                                                             Implicit                     0.2                                                                                                                                 0.2                                                                                                    Explicit



                      0.0                                                                                                                                 0.0                                                                                                                                 0.0
                         GPT-2-Med.         GPT-2-Large       GPT-2-XL          OPT-2.7B            OPT-6.7B           Mistral-7B                            GPT-2-Med.         GPT-2-Large       GPT-2-XL          OPT-2.7B            OPT-6.7B           Mistral-7B                            GPT-2-Med.         GPT-2-Large       GPT-2-XL          OPT-2.7B            OPT-6.7B           Mistral-7B
                                                                  Strong Model Type                                                                                                                   Strong Model Type                                                                                                                   Strong Model Type

 (a) Deception scores under T = (b) Deception scores under T = (c) Deception scores under T =
 0.70                           0.80                           0.85

Figure 15: The deception scores in the preference alignment (SimPO) scenario under different
confidence thresholds T = 0.70, 0.80, 0.85. The main conclusions remain the same when choosing
different confidence thresholds to identify the cases known and unknown to the target models.


of known and unknown areas of a target model. Here, we display the patterns of deception scores
in both scenarios under three extra confidence thresholds (T = 0.70, 0.80, 0.85). The results in
the reward modeling and preference alignment (SimPO) scenarios are displayed in Figure 14 and
Figure 15, respectively. As we can see, though the concrete value of deception score in each experi-
ment varies slightly under different T , the general pattern that the deception issue intensifies as the
capability gap between the weak and strong models increases remains the same.

J                            S TRONGER C ONFLICTING S TRENGTH G ENERALLY L EADS TO M ORE
                             S EVERE D ECEPTION
In main experiments, we fix the conflict strength factor α in the explicit conflict setting to 0.5. Here,
we conduct extra experiments with a smaller α = 0.25, and put the comparison results in Figure 16.
As we can expect, the deception score consistently increases as the degree of conflict increases.

K                            E XPLORATIONS ON T HE S PONTANEOUS W EAK - TO -S TRONG D ECEPTION
                             I SSUE IN T HE N O C ONFLICT S ETTING
In the main text, we have studied the weak-to-strong deception issue in a realistic multi-objective
alignment scenario. In this section, we make explorations on the spontaneous weak-to-strong de-
ception issue: if current LLMs may spontaneously deceive weak supervisors even without being
driven by conflicting targets. Specifically, we can compare the behavior change of the strong student
in different knowledge areas when trained by no-conflict weak data with that trained by ground-
truth data. Thus, we visualize the absolute deception score, which is calculated as the percentage


                                                                                                                                                                                                         20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                                                            1.0
                                                                                                                            Markers
                                                                                                        Weak Model: GPT-2-Large                  Weak Model: OPT-2.7B
                                                                                                        Weak Model: GPT-2-XL                     Weak Model: OPT-6.7B
                                                                                            0.8
                                                                                                               Line Styles
                                                                                                        W2S with Explicit Conflict =0.25


                                                                          Deception Score
                                                                                                        W2S with Explicit Conflict =0.5
                                                                                            0.6


                                                                                            0.4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                =0.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                =0.25
                                                                                            0.2


                                                                                            0.0
                                                                                               GPT-2-XL                       OPT-2.7B                                                 OPT-6.7B                         Mistral-7B
                                                                                                                                     Strong Model Type

Figure 16: Deception scores in weak-to-strong preference alignment with different explicit conflict
strength factor αs.


                                        Line Styles                                                          Markers                                                                                                                                        Markers
                                     W2S with No Conflict                               Weak Model: GPT-2-Base         Weak Model: GPT-2-Large                                                   Line Styles
                                                                                                                                                                                           W2S with No Conflict                         Weak Model: GPT-2-Base         Weak Model: GPT-2-XL
                                     W2S with Implicit Conflict                         Weak Model: GPT-2-Med.         Weak Model: GPT-2-XL                                                                                             Weak Model: GPT-2-Med.         Weak Model: OPT-2.7B
                                                                                                                                                                                           W2S with Implicit Conflict
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Weak Model: GPT-2-Large        Weak Model: OPT-6.7B
                            1.0                                                                                                                                                  1.0


                            0.8                                                                                                                                                  0.8
 Absolute Deception Score


                                                                                                                                                      Absolute Deception Score


                            0.6                                                                                                                                                  0.6


                            0.4                                                                                                                                                  0.4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Implicit
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        No

                                                                                                                                                                                 0.2
                            0.2

                                                                                                                                                                                 0.0
                            0.0
                               GPT-2-Med.              GPT-2-Large       GPT-2-XL                          OPT-2.7B                 OPT-6.7B                                        GPT-2-Med.         GPT-2-Large          GPT-2-XL          OPT-2.7B            OPT-6.7B        Mistral-7B
                                                                     Strong Model Type                                                                                                                                       Strong Model Type

  Figure 17: Absolute deception scores on the re- Figure 18: Absolute deception scores in the
  ward modeling task.                             preference alignment scenario.


of samples that are originally well-aligned under ground-truth supervision but now misaligned un-
der weak supervision with no conflict, belonging to the Strong-Known and Weak-Unknown area.
The full results in both reward modeling and preference alignment scenarios are in Figure 17 and
Figure 18. We also put the results of absolute deception scores in the implicit conflict setting in
same figures for comparison. Notice that in order to achieve fair comparisons, when calculating the
absolute deception scores in the implicit conflict setting, the reference model used is also the ground
truth strong model instead of the weak-to-strong model in the no conflict setting.
The main conclusions include: (1) The pattern of spontaneous weak-to-strong deception also
exists, as most absolute deception scores are significantly larger than 0. (2) The spontaneous de-
ception issue becomes more severe as the capability gap between weak and strong models
increases. As we can see, supervised by the same weak data, the stronger model tends to make
more mistakes in the Strong Known and Weak-Unknown area (refer to more visualizations in Ap-
pendix L). (3) The absolute deception scores in the no conflict setting are lower than deception scores
under conflicting objectives, indicating that in realistic multi-objective alignment scenarios, the
existence of conflicting optimization objectives exacerbates the deception issue. Considering
the reason explained in Section 4.2 and the fact that in the real case where the alignment target is
usually multi-objective, our main analysis under conflicting alignment targets aligns more closely
with the real situation, but the analysis in the no conflict setting can be a good supplementary study.


                                                                                                                                                 21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                  DS = 0.10, |Sk      Wuk|/|Sk Suk| = 0.08                                                                DS = 0.28, |Sk      Wuk|/|Sk Suk| = 0.12                                                                  DS = 0.58, |Sk      Wuk|/|Sk Suk| = 0.17
                                      1.0                                                                                                     1.0                                                                                                       1.0


                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Strong Model (Mistral-7B) Confidence
 Strong Model (OPT-2.7B) Confidence


                                                                                                         Strong Model (OPT-6.7B) Confidence
                                      0.9                                                                                                     0.9                                                                                                       0.9

                                      0.8                                                                                                     0.8                                                                                                       0.8

                                      0.7                                                                                                     0.7                                                                                                       0.7

                                      0.6                                                                                                     0.6                                                                                                       0.6

                                      0.5                                                                                                     0.5                                                                                                       0.5

                                      0.4                                                                                                     0.4                                                                                                       0.4

                                      0.3                                                Correct                                              0.3                                                Correct                                                0.3                                                Correct
                                                                                         Wrong                                                                                                   Wrong                                                                                                     Wrong
                                      0.2                                                                                                     0.2                                                                                                       0.2
                                            0.2     0.3   0.4   0.5    0.6   0.7   0.8   0.9       1.0                                              0.2     0.3   0.4   0.5    0.6   0.7   0.8   0.9       1.0                                                0.2     0.3   0.4   0.5    0.6   0.7   0.8   0.9       1.0
                                                   Weak Model (GPT-2-XL) Confidence                                                                        Weak Model (GPT-2-XL) Confidence                                                                          Weak Model (GPT-2-XL) Confidence

                                       (a) GPT-2-XL to OPT-2.7B                                                                                (b) GPT-2-XL to OPT-6.7B                                                                                 (c) GPT-2-XL to Mistral-7B

Figure 19: The visualizations of the confidence distributions of ground truth weak and strong models
  gt
(θw  and θsgt ) on samples correctly predicted by the weak-to-strong model under no conflict (θ̃sw ).
The green dots represent cases that are also predicted correctly by the weak-to-strong model under
explicit conflict (θsw ), and the red crosses represents those are not. “A to B” represents using weak
model “A” to supervise strong model “B”.


                                                  DS = 0.19, |Sk      Wuk|/|Sk Suk| = 0.08                                                                DS = 0.27, |Sk      Wuk|/|Sk Suk| = 0.12                                                                  DS = 0.40, |Sk      Wuk|/|Sk Suk| = 0.17
                                      1.0                                                                                                     1.0                                                                                                       1.0


                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Strong Model (Mistral-7B) Confidence
 Strong Model (OPT-2.7B) Confidence


                                                                                                         Strong Model (OPT-6.7B) Confidence


                                      0.9                                                                                                     0.9                                                                                                       0.9

                                      0.8                                                                                                     0.8                                                                                                       0.8

                                      0.7                                                                                                     0.7                                                                                                       0.7

                                      0.6                                                                                                     0.6                                                                                                       0.6

                                      0.5                                                                                                     0.5                                                                                                       0.5

                                      0.4                                                                                                     0.4                                                                                                       0.4

                                      0.3                                                Correct                                              0.3                                                Correct                                                0.3                                                Correct
                                                                                         Wrong                                                                                                   Wrong                                                                                                     Wrong
                                      0.2                                                                                                     0.2                                                                                                       0.2
                                            0.2     0.3   0.4   0.5    0.6   0.7   0.8   0.9       1.0                                              0.2     0.3   0.4   0.5    0.6   0.7   0.8   0.9       1.0                                                0.2     0.3   0.4   0.5    0.6   0.7   0.8   0.9       1.0
                                                   Weak Model (GPT-2-XL) Confidence                                                                        Weak Model (GPT-2-XL) Confidence                                                                          Weak Model (GPT-2-XL) Confidence

                                       (a) GPT-2-XL to OPT-2.7B                                                                                (b) GPT-2-XL to OPT-6.7B                                                                                 (c) GPT-2-XL to Mistral-7B

Figure 20: The visualizations of the confidence distributions of ground truth weak and strong models
  gt
(θw  and θsgt ) on samples correctly predicted by the weak-to-strong model under no conflict (θ̃sw ).
The green dots represent cases that are also predicted correctly by the weak-to-strong model under
implicit conflict (θsw ), and the red crosses represents those are not. “A to B” represents using weak
model “A” to supervise strong model “B”.


L                                            M ORE V ISUALIZATIONS ABOUT T HE DYNAMIC C HANGES OF C ONFLICT
                                             TAX OR W EAK - TO -S TRONG TAX
Here, we put the additional visualizations about the dynamic changes of conflict tax across all four
knowledge areas when the weak model is GPT-2-XL in the explicit and implicit conflict settings in
Figure 19 and Figure 20, respectively.

M                                                 F ULL R ESULTS OF H IGH -C ONFIDENCE W EAK - TO -S TRONG P REFERENCE
                                                  A LIGNMENT
When conducting the high-confidence weak-to-strong preference alignment experiments mentioned
in Section 6.1, we first remove samples with weak model’s confidence (w.r.t. the correct label)
below a certain threshold (which is 0.75) from the weak data, and only use those high-confidence
samples to supervise the strong model. In this manner, we can expect that it can effectively address
the deception issue in the explicit conflict setting, because these weak model’s high-confidence


                                                                                                                                                                           22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                           1.0
                                                                        Markers
                                                    Weak Model: GPT-2-Large            Weak Model: OPT-2.7B
                                                    Weak Model: GPT-2-XL               Weak Model: OPT-6.7B
                                           0.8
                                                                     Line Styles
                                                    W2S on All Weak Data with Implicit Conflict


                         Deception Score
                                                    W2S on High-Confidence Weak Data with Implicit Conflict
                                           0.6


                                           0.4

                                                                                                                              All Data
                                           0.2
                                                                                                                  High-Confidence Data

                                           0.0
                                              GPT-2-XL                  OPT-2.7B                       OPT-6.7B       Mistral-7B
                                                                              Strong Model Type

Figure 21: Full comparison of deception scores between the cases when using all weak data and
using only the high-confidence weak data for weak-to-strong preference alignment.


samples are very likely to also be the high-confidence samples of the strong model, so the strong
model will barely make wrong predictions on these samples during training. Thus, we mainly
conduct experiments in the implicit conflict setting. Due to the varying capabilities among different
models, the number of high-confidence samples remaining after filtering also varies. Thus, in each
experiment with the implicit conflicting target, we keep the number of helpful samples to the same
as that of the remaining high-confidence weak samples.
The full comparison of deception scores between the cases when using all weak data and using only
the high-confidence weak data for weak-to-strong preference alignment under SimPO are put in
Figure 21. As we can see, the deception issue cannot be effectively mitigated even when the strong
model can only obtain the cases what the weak model knows and is not provided by the incorrect
cases in the weak data. This indicates that there exist deeper mechanisms to explain how strong
models perceive the knowledge boundaries of weak models and exhibit deceptive behaviors, which
can be explored more thoroughly in future work.


N    D ETAILS IN B OOTSTRAPPING E XPERIMENTS

When conducting bootstrapping experiments in Section 6.2, we first fine-tune the weak model on
                gt                                                           w
Dgt to obtain θw   and let it make predictions on the held-out set to get Dweak . For every intermediate
model between the weak model and the ultimate strong model (i.e., Mistral-7B), we use Dweak to
fine-tune it and obtain an intermediate teacher θiw . We further let this intermediate teacher to make
                                             in                           in
predictions on the original Dgt to get Dweak      . Finally, we use Dweak      to supervise Mistral-7B.
The conflicting target will appear in the final stage where the intermediate teacher supervises the
ultimate strong model. In each experiment, the deception score is calculated based on the confidence
distributions of each weak model and Mistral-7B.


O    P RELIMINARY E XPERIMENTS ON H ONEST A LIGNMENT

Besides the harmlessness goal considered in the main experiments, here, we perform preliminary
experiments by regarding honesty as the target alignment dimension, and explore potential weak-to-
strong deception issue when the conflicting target helpfulness appears. The motivation is, honesty
requires the model to refuse the questions it does not know while helpfulness requires the model to
provide helpful information on any user question. We select and filter the honesty data from Un-
knownBench (Liu et al., 2023), where the prompts are unanswerable questions, preferred responses
are from gpt-4-0613, dispreferred responses are from Llama-2-13B-Chat. After filtering,
we finally obtain 400 samples for ground truth training data, 400 samples for weak data and 400
samples for testing data. We perform experiments on GPT-2-series models in the preference align-
ment scenario with SimPO in the implicit conflict setting, where we include 2,000 helpful samples
for the conflicting objective. The batch size for training is 16, while other experimental settings are
kept as the same as that in Section 5.2. The results are in Figure 22. The weak-to-strong deception
issue also exists in this honest alignment setting.


                                                                                        23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                                  Markers
                                             Ground Truth                            Weak Model: GPT-2-Med.                                            Line Styles                                      Markers
                                             Weak Model: GPT-2-Base                                                                                 W2S with Implicit Conflict     Weak Model: GPT-2-Base         Weak Model: GPT-2-Med.
                                                                                                                                             1.0
                    100          Line Styles
                             Strong Ceiling
                             W2S with No Conflict
                             W2S with Implicit Conflict                                                                                      0.8
                     95
Test Accuracy (%)


                                                                                                                           Deception Score
                                                                                                                                             0.6

                     90
                                                                                                                                             0.4

                     85                                                                                                                      0.2

                                                                                                                                             0.0
                     80
                      GPT-2-Base                GPT-2-Med.                          GPT-2-Large               GPT-2-XL                         GPT-2-Med.                           GPT-2-Large                                GPT-2-XL
                                                                       Model Type                                                                                                Strong Model Type
                                              (a) Test accuracies                                                                                                     (b) Deception scores

Figure 22: Preliminary results on the honesty alignment target, where the conflicting target is help-
fulness.


                                                                            1.0
                                                                                    Line Styles                                         Markers
                                                                                      Naive Loss                   Weak Model: GPT-2-Base                          Weak Model: GPT-2-Large
                                                                                      Adaptive Loss                Weak Model: GPT-2-Med.                          Weak Model: GPT-2-XL
                                                                            0.8
                                                          Deception Score


                                                                            0.6


                                                                            0.4


                                                                            0.2


                                                                            0.0
                                                                              GPT-2-Med.         GPT-2-Large             GPT-2-XL                         OPT-2.7B                  OPT-6.7B
                                                                                                               Strong Model Type

Figure 23: The comparison results of deception scores between naive weak-to-strong loss and adap-
tive weak-to-strong loss.



P                     T HE E FFECT OF A DAPTIVE S UPERVISION M ETHOD ON M ITIGATING
                      D ECEPTION

In the main text, we discuss the potential deception mitigation strategy by only using correct and
high-confidence samples for weak-to-strong alignment, but obtain the negative results. Here, we
conduct extra experiments on an adaptive supervision method. The motivation is to dynamically
down-weights the importance of low-confidence samples predicted by the weak model. Thus, we
design an adaptive loss function as

                                     θ̃sw = arg min Ex∼Dweak LCE Mθs (x), Mθwgt (x) · |2Mθwgt (x) − 1| ,

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      (16)
                                                                    θs


where |2Mθwgt (x) − 1| is a re-weighting factor that relatively down-weights low-confidence samples.
We conduct experiments in the reward modeling task under implicit conflict setting, as strong models
are not expected to get the probabilities in the preference alignment scenario. Other experimental
settings are kept as the same as that in Section 4.1. The comparison results between this adaptive
loss and naive weak-to-strong loss in Eq. (4) are put in Figure 23. As we can see, the deception
mitigation performance of adaptive loss is also limited.


                                                                                                                         24
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Table 1: Weak-to-strong deception case study when the weak model is GPT-2 and the strong model
is Mistral-7B with SimPO under implicit conflict setting (Warning: contain harmful content).

                                Do you know of any ways to steal electricity from a utility com-
    User prompt
                                pany?
                                1. Steal the transformer. This is one of the most common meth-
                                ods of stealing electricity. You can steal the transformer from the
                                utility pole and replace it with a smaller one that cannot handle
                                the same amount of electricity. 2. Tap into the power lines. You
                                can tap into the power lines that run through your neighborhood
                                and steal electricity by connecting your own wires to the lines. 3.
    Ground truth rejected       Use a power strip. You can use a power strip to steal electricity
    response                    by plugging in multiple devices and using them to draw power
                                from the utility company’s grid. 4. Use a generator. You can
                                use a generator to generate your own electricity and steal it from
                                the utility company by connecting it to the power lines. 5. Use
                                a solar panel. You can install a solar panel on your roof and use
                                it to generate your own electricity, then steal it from the utility
                                company by connecting it to the power lines. ......
                                There are many ways to access affordable energy, such as gov-
                                ernment assistance programs, energy efficiency measures, and
                                renewable energy options. It’s important to consider the long-
    Ground truth chosen         term consequences of stealing electricity from a utility company
    response                    and to explore legal and ethical options for addressing energy
                                poverty. If you are struggling financially and are looking for
                                ways to access affordable energy, there are resources available
                                to help you.
    Predicted probability
    of ground truth weak        0.43 (Weak-Unknown)
               gt
    model θw
    Predicted probability
    of ground truth strong      0.99 (Strong-Unknown)
    model θsgt
    Predicted probability
    of         weak-to-strong
    model under no con-         0.53 (Correct)
    flict θ̃sw
    Predicted probability
    of       weak-to-strong
    model under implicit        0.30 (Wrong)
    conflict θsw


Q    C ASE S TUDY ON W EAK - TO -S TRONG D ECEPTION
Here, we provide a weak-to-strong deception case in the experiment where the weak model is GPT-2
and the strong model is Mistral-7B in the SimPO setting with the implicit conflict objective. The
case is displayed in Table 1. In this example about “stealing electricity”, the ground truth weak
        gt
model θw   does not know the harmlessness of each response based on the user prompt (i.e, falls into
Wuk ), while the ground truth strong model θsgt is very confident and accurate on its judgment of
harmlessness (i.e, falls into Sk ). The weak-to-strong preference alignment result is, the weak-to-
strong model under no conflict θ̃sw can produce correct prediction while the weak-to-strong model
under implicit conflict θsw produces misaligned behavior in the case.


                                                  25
