Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


C ORRECTING THE M YTHOS OF KL-R EGULARIZATION :
D IRECT A LIGNMENT WITHOUT OVEROPTIMIZATION
VIA χ2 -P REFERENCE O PTIMIZATION

 Audrey Huang* Wenhao Zhan† Tengyang Xie‡ Jason D. Lee†
 Wen Sun§ Akshay Krishnamurthy⋄ Dylan J. Foster⋄
 * University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign      †
                                                 Princeton University
 ‡                                    §
    University of Wisconsin-Madison       Cornell University ⋄ Microsoft Research



                                            A BSTRACT
         Language model alignment methods such as reinforcement learning from human
         feedback (RLHF) have led to impressive advances in language model capabilities,
         but are limited by a widely observed phenomenon known as overoptimization,
         where the quality of the language model degrades over the course of the alignment
         process. As the model optimizes performance on an offline reward model, it overfits
         to inaccuracies and drifts away from preferred responses covered by the data. To
         discourage such distribution shift, KL-regularization is widely employed in existing
         offline alignment methods, but overoptimization continues to harm performance.
         Lending theoretical insight into the source of these empirical observations, we first
         show that the KL-regularization is too weak to prevent overfitting, then ask: is it
         possible to design an efficient algorithm that is provably robust to overoptimization?
         In this paper, we advance theoretical understanding of sample-efficient offline
         alignment and introduce a new algorithm called χ2 -Preference Optimization (χPO).
         χPO is a one-line change to Direct Preference Optimization (DPO; Rafailov et al.
         (2023)), that modifies only the logarithmic link function in the DPO objective.
         Despite this minimal change, χPO implicitly implements the principle of pessimism
         in the face of uncertainty via regularization with the χ2 -divergence—which
         quantifies uncertainty more effectively than KL-regularization—and provably
         alleviates overoptimization, achieving sample-complexity guarantees based on
         single-policy concentrability, the gold standard in offline reinforcement learning.
         This guarantee makes χPO the first simple, yet general-purpose offline alignment
         algorithm that is provably robust to overoptimization.

1     I NTRODUCTION
Large language models (LLMs) trained on unsupervised text data exhibit impressive and surprising
capabilities (Brown et al., 2020; Ouyang et al., 2022; Touvron et al., 2023; OpenAI, 2023; Google,
2023), but can be difficult to control without further guidance. Reinforcement learning from human
feedback (RLHF) and other alignment methods have emerged as a central tool to align these models
to human values and elicit desired behavior (Christiano et al., 2017; Bai et al., 2022; Ouyang et al.,
2022; Rafailov et al., 2023). This is achieved by treating the language model as a policy, and using
techniques from reinforcement learning to optimize for desirable outcomes under a (explicit or
implicit) reward model learned from a dataset of human-labeled responses.
Alignment methods like RLHF have led to significant advances in language model capabilities, but
existing techniques are limited by a widely observed phenomenon known as reward overoptimization
or reward hacking (Michaud et al., 2020; Tien et al., 2022; Gao et al., 2023; Rafailov et al., 2024a).
Since the reward model is an imperfect proxy for human preferences, the true quality of the language
model can degrade as training proceeds, even as its performance under the reward model continues
to improve. Intuitively, this occurs because the language model may drift away from the manifold
covered by the human-labeled data used to train the reward model and end up in a region where
the reward model is inaccurate.


                                                    1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Overoptimization is distinct from the classical concept of overfitting because it is a causal or counter-
factual phenomenon: When the human-labeled dataset does not cover all possible alternatives, the
decision maker—in this case, a language model policy—cannot directly evaluate the effect of their
actions. This perspective is supported by the fact that overoptimization can be mitigated by online
alignment techniques (Guo et al., 2024; Gao et al., 2024; Dong et al., 2024), which exploit interactive
access to human or AI feedback to iteratively improve the reward model; unfortunately, gathering
such feedback is costly and impractical in many settings. This raises natural theoretical questions
regarding the role of overoptimization in offline alignment:
• Is overoptimization in offline alignment an information-theoretic phenomenon? This would mean
  that there is simply not enough information in the human-labeled (offline) preference dataset due to
  partial coverage, and no algorithmic intervention can avoid the overoptimization issue.
• Alternatively, is overoptimization an algorithmic phenomenon? This would mean that existing
  algorithms are not making the most of the data they have (e.g., due to optimizing the wrong objective
  and converging toward suboptimal solutions) and would suggest that their sample-efficiency can be
  improved, perhaps by taking more aggressive measures to avoid overfitting to the reward model.
Previous developments in the theory of offline reinforcement learning suggest that the answer may be
the latter. Indeed, this literature has addressed the challenge of overoptimization—typically referred
to as distribution shift—through the principle of pessimism in the face of uncertainty, which asserts
that, given an offline dataset with partial coverage, a decision maker should choose their response
according to the most pessimistic view of the world supported by the data. Pessimism encourages the
model to avoid overfitting to the offline dataset and is supported by a rich theory offering provable
robustness to overoptimization in stylized settings (Liu et al., 2020; Jin et al., 2021).
Perhaps the greatest barrier to implementing pessimism in language models is the efficient
quantification of uncertainty in the offline reward, and the distillation of this information into
actionable form. Most existing offline alignment methods employ KL-regularization, which penalizes
the learned policy for drifting from the reference policy, but this form of uncertainty quantification
is insufficient to induce pessimism (Gao et al., 2023) and is provably suboptimal in theory (Zhu
et al., 2023; Song et al., 2024, see also Appendix A.1). On the other hand, offline reinforcement
learning theory offers abstract pessimistic algorithms that are suitable—at least statistically—for
large models (Xie et al., 2021; Uehara and Sun, 2021; Zhan et al., 2022; Chen and Jiang, 2022),
but cannot be implemented directly without losing theoretical fidelity or making unrealistic modeling
assumptions (Zhu et al., 2023; Zhan et al., 2023a; Li et al., 2023; Xiong et al., 2023; Liu et al., 2024;
Cen et al., 2024; Fisch et al., 2024; Ji et al., 2024). Notably, the so-called “DPO+SFT” approach
developed by Liu et al. (2024); Cen et al. (2024); Fisch et al. (2024) is provably suboptimal unless
the language model satisfies an unrealistic convexity property (Appendix A.1). Thus we ask: If we
instead leverage the unique structure of the language modeling problem, can we develop simple,
yet efficient, offline alignment methods that are certifiably robust to overoptimization?

1.1   C ONTRIBUTIONS
We introduce a new theoretical algorithm for offline alignment, χ2 -Preference Optimization (χPO).
χPO is simple and straightforward to implement, requiring only a single-line change to Direct
Preference Optimization (Rafailov et al. (2023)), yet it is provably robust to overoptimization.
Algorithmically, χPO only differs from DPO in that we replace the usual logarithmic link function
in the DPO objective with a new link function that implicitly implements pessimism via regularization
with the χ2 -divergence—a divergence that (i) plays a fundamental role in statistics due to its
ability to quantify uncertainty (Tsybakov, 2008); and (ii) penalizes off-manifold behavior more
effectively than KL-regularization. Statistically, we formalize robustness to overoptimization via
a sample complexity guarantee based on single-policy concentrability—the gold standard in offline
reinforcement learning—which we establish under minimal statistical and function approximation
assumptions. This result implies that, in contrast to most prior work, χPO enjoys meaningful
guarantees even when the reference policy has poor coverage. Summarizing:
             χPO is the first simple, yet general-purpose algorithm for offline alignment
                             with provable robustness to overoptimization.
The result above concerns the classical language model alignment formulation, which assumes
the Bradley-Terry preference model (Christiano et al., 2017; Bai et al., 2022; Ouyang et al., 2022;


                                                   2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Rafailov et al., 2023). Turning our attention to general preference models (Munos et al., 2023; Swamy
et al., 2024; Rosset et al., 2024) where the goal is to find an approximate Nash equilibrium, we
show (Appendix D) that achieving guarantees based on single-policy concentrability is impossible.
Nonetheless, we show that an iterative variant of χPO based on self-play achieves a sample complexity
guarantee that scales with a new local coverage condition —a condition that is stronger than single
policy concentrability, but much weaker than global concentrability and the notion of unilateral
concentrability introduced by Cui and Du (2022). This result provides additional evidence for the
value of regularization with χ2 -divergence for obtaining sharp sample complexity guarantees.
Technical highlights. Our analysis of χPO leverages several new techniques. First, we show that
RLHF with χ2 -regularization is sufficient to achieve guarantees based on single-policy concentrability
(Section 3.1 and Appendix C). Next, we show that a variant of the DPO reparameterization trick
that combines χ2 -regularization with KL-regularization (“mixed” χ2 -regularization) can be used to
reformulate our objective into a purely policy-based objective, in spite of the fact that χ2 -regularization
fails to satisfy certain regularity conditions found in prior work (Wang et al., 2023a). Finally,
and perhaps most importantly, we use a novel analysis to show that pessimism is preserved after
reparameterization. Compared to prior approaches to pessimism in offline RL (Xie et al., 2021;
Uehara and Sun, 2021; Zhan et al., 2022; Chen and Jiang, 2022), χ2 -regularization strikes a useful
balance between generality and tractability, and we expect our techniques to find broader use.

2    BACKGROUND
In this section, we provide necessary background and highlight that standard algorithms in offline
alignment suffer from overoptimization. We adopt standard big-oh notation, and write f = O(g)
                                                                                          e     to
denote that f = O(g · max{1, polylog(g)}) and a ≲ b as shorthand for a = O(b).
2.1 A LIGNMENT FROM H UMAN F EEDBACK
Following prior work (e.g., Rafailov et al. (2023); Ye et al. (2024)), we adopt a contextual bandit
formulation of the alignment problem. We formalize the language model as a policy π : X → ∆(A)
which maps a context (prompt) x ∈ X to an action (response) a ∈ A via a ∼ π(· | x), and let
ρ ∈ ∆(X ) denote the distribution over contexts/prompts.
Offline alignment. In the offline alignment problem (Christiano et al., 2017; Bai et al., 2022;
Ouyang et al., 2022), we assume access to a dataset Dpref = {(x, a+ , a− )} of n prompts and labeled
response pairs generated from a reference policy (language model) πref , which is typically obtained
through SFT. Here, a+ is a positive action/response and a− is a negative action/response. Given the
context/prompt x ∼ ρ, the pair (a+ , a− ) is generated by sampling a pair (a, b) as a ∼ πref (· | x) and
b ∼ πref (· | x), and then ordering them as (a+ , a− ) based on a binary preference y ∼ P(a ≻ b | x).
We assume that preferences follow the Bradley-Terry model (Bradley and Terry, 1952):
                                                             ⋆
                                                     exp(r (x,a))
                               P(a ≻ b | x) = exp(r⋆ (x,a))+exp(r ⋆ (x,b)) ,                            (1)
for an unknown reward function r⋆ : X × A → [0, Rmax ] for some Rmax ≥ 1. From the preference
dataset Dpref , we aim to learn a policy π  b that has high reward in the sense that J(π ⋆ ) − J(b
                                                                                                 π) ≤ ε
for a small ε > 0, where J(π) := Ex∼ρ,a∼π(·|x) [r⋆ (x, a)] is the true expected reward, and π ⋆ is any
comparator policy of interest. We abbreviate Eπ [·] := Ex∼ρ,a∼π(·|x) [·], and assume that ρ(x) > 0
for all x and πref (a | x) > 0 for all x, a without loss of generality.
Offline RLHF with KL-regularization. Classical algorithms for offline alignment (Christiano
et al., 2017; Ouyang et al., 2022) are based on reinforcement learning with a KL-regularized reward
objective, defined for a regularization parameter β > 0, via
                                                          h                             i
               JβKL (π) := J(π) − β · DKL (π ∥ πref ) = Eπ r⋆ (x, a) − β log ππ(a|x)
                                                                              ref (a|x)
                                                                                          ,     (2)
where we adopt the shorthand DKL (π ∥ π ′ ) = Ex∼ρ [DKL (π(· | x) ∥ π ′ (· | x))]. These methods first
estimate a reward function rb from Dpref using maximum likelihood under the Bradley-Terry model:
                                        X
                    rb = argmax                 log σ(r(a+ | x) − r(a− | x)),                      (3)
                             r∈R
                                    (x,a+ ,a− )∈Dpref
                  exp(x)
where σ(x) := 1+exp(x)    is the sigmoid function and R is a class of reward functions, which is
typically parameterized by a neural network. Then, they apply standard policy optimization methods


                                                        3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                       b = argmaxπ∈Π Eπ rb(x, a) − β log ππ(a|x)

like PPO to optimize an estimated version of Eq. (2): π                                          ref (a|x)  .
The regularization term in Eq. (2) is intended to encourage π b to stay close to πref , with the hope of
preventing the policy from overfitting to the potentially inaccurate reward model rb.
Direct preference optimization (DPO). χPO is based on an alternative offline alignment approach,
Direct Preference Optimization (DPO; Rafailov et al. (2023)). DPO uses the closed-form solution of
the optimal KL-regularized policy under the objective Eq. (2)—which can be viewed as implicitly
modeling rewards—to define a single policy optimization objective that removes the need for direct
reward function estimation. Given a user specified policy class Π, DPO solves
                                              h                                              i
                                                                + |x)           π(a− |x)
                                 X
           π
           bDPO = argmax                  log σ β log ππ(a ref (a+ |x)
                                                                       − β log πref (a− |x)    , (4)
                       π∈Π
                               (x,a+ ,a− )∈Dpref

with the convention that the value of the objective is −∞ if π does not satisfy π ≪ πref .
2.2 OVEROPTIMIZATION AND I NSUFFICIENCY OF KL-R EGULARIZATION
Empirically, both classical RLHF and direct alignment methods like DPO have been observed to
suffer from overoptimization (Gao et al., 2023; Guo et al., 2024; Rafailov et al., 2024a; Song et al.,
2024), wherein model quality degrades during the optimization process as the learned policy drifts
away from πref . This can be mitigated by online alignment techniques (Gao et al., 2024; Guo
et al., 2024; Dong et al., 2024; Xie et al., 2024), which collect labeled preference data on-policy
during training, but there are many settings where this is impractical or infeasible. As we will see,
the overoptimization phenomena in offline alignment methods is an issue of sample-inefficiency,
which can be understood through the lens of coverage coefficients developed in the theory of offline
reinforcement learning (Liu et al., 2020; Jin et al., 2021; Rashidinejad et al., 2021). In particular, the
performance of existing offline alignment algorithms depends on how well data covers all candidate
policies, and degrades when coverage is inadequate or the number of samples is insufficiently large.
Coverage coefficients. In offline reinforcement learning theory, the sample efficiency of an al-
gorithm refers to the number of samples required to guarantee that J(b     π ) ≈ J(π ⋆ ). It is typically
quantified by a coverage coefficient (or concentrability coefficient) that measures the quality of the
data collected by the reference πref (Farahmand et al., 2010; Xie and Jiang, 2020; Zanette
                                                                                     h      et al.,
                                                                                                i 2021).
                                                                            π :=        π(a|x)
We will utilize the L1 coverage coefficient, defined for a policy π as C          Eπ πref (a|x) . Single
policy concentrability is the gold standard for sample efficiency, and is obtained by an algorithm
                                                                                                        ⋆
if, for any comparator policy π ⋆ , the sample size required to learn J(b π ) ≈ J(π ⋆ ) scales with C π ,
                               ⋆
the coverage coefficient of π . This guarantees that π   b is competitive with the best policy that is
sufficiently covered by offline data, and, importantly, also guarantees that π  b is never much worse
than πref itself. Single policy concentrability is typically achieved by pessimistic algorithms that
penalize the evaluations of candidate policies according to their uncertainty under the offline data,
which prevents the learner from overfitting to inaccurate offline reward models.
In contrast, the performance of non-pessimistic algorithms typically scales with all-policy concentra-
bility—meaning that sample complexity scales with maxπ∈Π C π (Liu et al., 2020; Jin et al., 2021;
Rashidinejad et al., 2021)— which is a guarantee achieved by even greedy algorithms that directly
optimize the offline reward model without regularization. All-policy concentrability describes algo-
rithms that require the data itself to be rich enough to prevent overfitting; as such, we will use it to
identify methods that are prone to overoptimization. Single policy concentrability then serves as a
theoretical certification that an algorithm is robust to poor data coverage and will not overfit.
Pessimism in offline alignment. Zhu et al. (2023) show that the performance of PPO and DPO scales
                                           π
with all-policy concentrability, maxπ C∞     , for the stylized case of alignment with linearly parameter-
ized policies where πθ (a | x) ∝ exp(⟨ϕ(x, a), θ⟩) for a known feature embedding ϕ(x, a) ∈ Rd (see
also Zhu et al. (2024); Song et al. (2024)). They also   q propose⋆ a pessimistic algorithm that achieves
                                                                  π ,d)
                                                            poly(C∞
                                         ⋆
single policy concentrability, or J(π ) − J(b     π) ≲           n      simultaneously for all π ⋆ . While
encouraging, these results are restricted to linearly parameterized policies, and cannot be directly
applied to large language models. Most existing theoretical algorithms for offline alignment are
similar in nature, and either place restrictive assumptions on the policy class Π (Zhu et al., 2023;
Zhan et al., 2023a; Li et al., 2023; Xiong et al., 2023) or are not feasible to implement in a way that is
faithful to theory (Ye et al., 2024; Ji et al., 2024).


                                                     4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Most relevant to our work, a series of recent papers (Liu et al., 2024; Cen et al., 2024; Fisch et al., 2024)
propose implementing pessimism for general policy classes Π by solving the “DPO+SFT” objective
                                                                                                                 
                                                                  h                                             i
                                                                             π(a |x)               π(a |x)
                                                  X
 argmax α · Eπref [β log π(a | x)] + n1                         log σ β log πref (a++ |x) − β log πref (a−− |x)     , (5)
   π∈Π                                                                                                           
                                            (x,a+ ,a− )∈Dpref

which augments the DPO objective (the second term) with an additional supervised fine-tuning-like
(SFT) loss (the first term). While this objective is simple to apply to general policy classes, the existing
single-policy concentrability guarantees for this method assume that Π satisfies restrictive convexity
conditions which do not hold in practice for large language models. Perhaps surprisingly, we show
(Appendix A.1) that without convexity, the objective in Eq. (5) fails to achieve a single-policy
concentrability guarantee.1 In other words, DPO+SFT is insufficient to mitigate overoptimization.

3       χ2 -P REFERENCE O PTIMIZATION
This section presents our main algorithm, χPO. We begin by introducing χ2 -regularization as a
general framework for mitigating overoptimization in offline alignment (Section 3.1), then derive the
χPO algorithm (Section 3.2) and finally present our main theoretical guarantee (Section 3.3).
3.1 F RAMEWORK : χ2 -R EGULARIZED R EWARD O PTIMIZATION
The central algorithm design principle for our work is to (implicitly or explicitly) optimize a
variant of the classical RLHF objective (Eq. (2)) that replaces KL-regularization with regular-
ization via χ2 -divergence, defined for a pair of probability measures P and Q with P ≪ Q via
                   R   dP     2
Dχ2 (P ∥ Q) := 21      dQ − 1   dQ. χ2 -divergence is a more aggressive form of regularization than
KL-divergence; we have DKL (P ∥ Q) ≤ 2Dχ2 (P ∥ Q), but the converse is not true in general. We
consider the following χ2 -regularized RL objective:2
                                                                              h           i
        Jβχ (π) := Eπ [r⋆ (x, a)] − β · Dχ2 (π ∥ πref ), Dχ2 (π ∥ πref ) := Eπ ππ(a|x)
                                                                                ref (a|x)  . (6)
Moving to a form of regularization that penalizes deviations from πref more forcefully than
KL-regularization is a natural approach to mitigating overoptimization, but an immediate concern
is that this may lead to overly conservative algorithms. As we will show, however, χ2 -divergence
is better suited to the geometry of offline alignment, as it has the unique property (not shared by
KL-divergence) that its value quantifies the extent to which the accuracy of a reward model rb trained
under πref will transfer to a downstream policy π of interest (Lemma H.3). This implies that the
χ2 -regularized RL objective in Eq. (6) meaningfully implements a form of pessimism in the face of
uncertainty, and by tuning the regularization parameter β > 0, we can keep the learned policy π
                                                                                              b close
to πref in the “right” (uncertainty-aware) way. As such, we view optimizing χ2 -regularized rewards,
i.e., argmaxπ∈Π Jβχ (π) as a general principle to guide algorithm design for offline alignment (as
well as offline RL more broadly), which we expect to find broader use.
We now turn our attention to the matter of how to optimize this objective. One natural approach, in the
vein of classical RLHF (Christiano et al., 2017; Ouyang et al., 2022), is to estimate a reward model rb
using maximum likelihood (Eq. (3)), and then use PPO or other policy optimization methods to solve
                                                                        h                        i
        π
        b = argmax Eπ [b r(x, a)] − β · Dχ2 (π ∥ πref ) = argmax Eπ rb(x, a) − β ππ(a|x)
                                                                                       ref (a|x)   . (7)
                 π∈Π                                                    π∈Π
While this indeed leads to strong statistical guarantees (cf. Appendix C), we adopt a simpler and
more direct approach inspired by DPO, which removes the need for a separate reward estimation step.
3.2 T HE χPO A LGORITHM
Our main algorithm, χPO, is described in Algorithm 1. Given a preference dataset Dpref and policy
class Π, the algorithm learns a policy π   b by solving the DPO-like optimization objective Eq. (9), which
                        π(a|x)
replaces the usual log πref (a|x) terms in the original DPO objective (Eq. (4)) with a new link function:

                                ϕ ππ(a|x)
                                     ref (a|x)
                                                 =  π(a|x)
                                                   πref (a|x) + log    π(a|x)
                                                                      πref (a|x) .

    1
     This finding is surprising because Xie et al. (2024) show that an optimistic online counterpart to Eq. (5),
which negates the SFT term, enjoys online RLHF guarantees without requiring analogous convexity conditions.
   2
     Note the definition of Dχ2 (π ∥ πref ) differs from E[Dχ2 (π(· | x) ∥ πref (· | x))] only by a constant scaling
and shift, both of which are inconsequential when used as regularization in an optimization objective.


                                                          5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Algorithm 1 χ2 -Preference Optimization (χPO)
    input: Reference policy πref , preference dataset Dpref , χ2 -regularization coefficient β > 0.
 1: Define

                                              ϕ(z) := z + log z.                                        (8)
 2: Optimize χ2 -regularized preference optimization objective:

                        X                              π(a+ | x)              π(a− | x)
     b ← argmax
     π                           log σ clip2Rmax βϕ                   − βϕ                      . (9)
            π∈Π                                       πref (a+ | x)          πref (a− | x)
                     (x,a+ ,a− )∈Dpref


 3: return: π
            b.


A secondary modification is that we handle potentially unbounded density ratios by clipping to the
interval [−2Rmax , +2Rmax ] via the operator clipR (z) = max{min{R, z}, −R}. In what follows,
we will show that this simple modification to DPO—that is, incorporating an additional density ratio
term outside the logarithm—implicitly implements pessimism via χ2 -regularization.
Algorithm derivation. Recall that DPO is derived (Rafailov et al., 2023) by observing that the opti-
                           ⋆    := argmaxπ {Eπ [r⋆ (x, a)] − βDKL (π ∥ πref )} satisfies r⋆ (x, a) =
mal KL-regularized policy πβ;KL
      π⋆   (a|x)
β log πβ;KL
        ref (a|x)
                  +Zβ,r⋆ ;KL (x) for all x ∈ X and a ∈ A where Zβ,r⋆ ;KL (x) is a normalization constant
that depends on x but not a. This facilitates reparameterizing the reward model in the maximum like-
lihood estimation objective (Eq. (3)) in terms of a learned policy, yielding the DPO objective in Eq. (4).
To apply a similar reparameterization trick for χ2 -divergence, a natural starting point is an observation
from Wang et al. (2023a), who show that an analogous characterization for the optimal regularized
policy holds for a general class of f -divergences.    For a convex
                                                              h   function      f : R+ → R, define the
                                         R   dP                    dP
                                                                       i
induced f -divergence by Df (P ∥ Q) = f dQ dQ = EQ f dQ . Wang et al. (2023a) show that
for any differentiable f that satisfies the technical condition 0 ∈  / dom(f ′ ), the optimal f -regularized
         ⋆                      ⋆
policy πβ;f = argmaxπ {Eπ [r (x, a)] − βDf (π ∥ πref )} satisfies
                                                  ⋆
                                                  π      (a|x)
                               r⋆ (x, a) = βf ′ πβ;fref (a|x)
                                                                 + Zβ,r⋆ ;f (x)                         (10)

for a normalization constant Zβ,r⋆ ;f (x), allowing for a similar reparameterization. Informally, the
            / dom(f ′ ) means that Df (· ∥ πref ) acts as a barrier for the positive orthant, automatically
condition 0 ∈
         ⋆
forcing πβ;f to place positive probability mass on any action a for which πref (a | x) > 0.
The χ2 -divergence is an f -divergence corresponding to f (z) = 12 (z − 1)2 , but unfortunately does not
                        / dom(f ′ ), making Eq. (10) inapplicable. Indeed, the optimal χ2 -regularized
satisfy the condition 0 ∈
policy can clip action probabilities to zero in a non-smooth fashion even when πref (a | x) > 0, which
means that the identity Eq. (10) does not apply. To address this issue, we augment χ2 -regularization
by considering the mixed χ2 -divergence given by fχmix (z) := 12 (z − 1)2 + z log z, which has
                              Dfχmix (P ∥ Q) = Dχ2 (P ∥ Q) + DKL (P ∥ Q).

In other words, we use both χ2 -regularization and KL-regularization; χ2 -regularization
enforces pessimism, while KL-regularization enforces the barrier property and fa-
cilitates reparameterization.    Indeed, the link function ϕ (Eq. (8)) used in χPO has
ϕ(z) := fχ′ mix (z) = z + log z, which satisfies 0 ∈    / dom(fχ′ mix ), so Eq. (10) yields the repa-
                                π⋆       (a|x)

                                 β;fχmix
rameterization r⋆ (x, a) = βϕ     πref (a|x)     + Zβ,r⋆ ;fχmix (x). Substituting this identity into the
maximum likelihood estimation objective (Eq. (3)) yields the χPO algorithm.
                             χmix
Going forward, we define Jβ,r     (π) = Eπ [r(x, a)] − β · Dχ2 (π ∥ πref ) − β · DKL (π ∥ πref ) for a
                                                            χmix
reward function r. We use the shorthand πβ⋆ = argmaxπ Jβ,r     ⋆ (π) as the optimal policy under mixed
  2
χ -regularization, and abbreviate Zβ,r (x) := Zβ,r;fχmix (x), so that
                                               ⋆
                                               π (a|x)
                              r⋆ (x, a) = βϕ πrefβ (a|x) + Zβ,r⋆ (x).                             (11)


                                                     6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


3.3 T HEORETICAL G UARANTEES
To state our main sample complexity guarantee for χPO, we begin by making standard statistical
assumptions. Let the regularization parameter β > 0 in χPO be fixed. We first make a realizability
assumption, which states that the policy class Π used in χPO is sufficiently expressive to represent
the optimal policy under mixed χ2 -regularization (Eq. (11)); recall that in the context of language
modeling, Π represents a class of language models with fixed architecture and varying weights.
Assumption 3.1 (Policy realizability). The policy class Π satisfies πβ⋆ ∈ Π, where πβ⋆ is the optimal
policy under mixed χ2 -regularization (Eq. (11)).
Policy realizability is a standard assumption for sample-efficient reinforcement learning (Agarwal
et al., 2019; Lattimore and Szepesvári, 2020; Foster and Rakhlin, 2023), and is equivalent to reward
model realizability in our setting via reparameterization. Next, our second assumption asserts that
the implicit reward models induced by the policy class Π in χPO have bounded range.
Assumption 3.2 (Bounded implicit
                                 rewards).  For a parameter
                                                             Vmax ≥ Rmax , it holds that for all
                                 π(a|x)          π(b|x)
π ∈ Π, x ∈ X , and a, b ∈ A, βϕ πref (a|x) − βϕ πref (b|x) ≤ Vmax .

In practice, Vmax can be measured and directly controlled (e.g., via clipping), and our guarantees scale
polynomially in this parameter. Assumption 3.2 generalizes analogous assumptions from analyses of
DPO-like methods (Rosset et al., 2024; Xie et al., 2024); see Appendix B.4 for detailed comparison.
Example 3.1 (Policy classes induced by reward models). A natural setting in which both Assump-
tion 3.1 and Assumption 3.2 hold is when the policy class Π is induced by a class of bounded reward
function R ⊂ (X × A → [0, Rmax ]) through the mixed-χ2 parameterization, for β > 0:
            ΠR,β := π(a | x) = πref (a | x) · ϕ−1 (β −1 (r(x, a) − Zβ,r (x))) | r ∈ R .

                                                                                                (12)
Here, Assumption 3.1 holds whenever r⋆ ∈ R, and Assumption 3.2 holds with Vmax ≤ 2Rmax . ◁
                                                                               h           i
Finally, recall the definition of the L1 concentrability coefficient, C π := Eπ ππ(a|x)
                                                                                 ref (a|x)   , which is
equivalent to the χ2 -divergence up to a constant shift, i.e., C π = 1 + 2Dχ2 (π ∥ πref ). We use L1
concentrability to quantify how well the offline preference dataset Dpref , generated by πref , covers
a policy π, and the following result is our main sample complexity guarantee for χPO.
Theorem 3.1 (Sample complexity bound for χPO). Suppose Assumptions 3.1 and 3.2 hold for some
β > 0. With probability at least 1 − δ, χPO (Algorithm 1) produces a policy π  b such that for all
policies π ⋆ simultaneously, we have
                                    r ⋆
                                     C π log(|Π|/δ)          ⋆        V 2 e4Rmax log(|Π|/δ)
      ⋆
 J(π ) − J(b   π ) ≲ Vmax e 2Rmax
                                  ·                 + β · C π + β −1 · max                  . (13)
                                           n                                   n
Given any comparator policy π ⋆ , we can choose the regularization parameter β to achieve
                                                         r ⋆
                           ⋆                     2Rmax    C π log(|Π|/δ)
                      J(π ) − J(b   π ) ≲ Vmax e       ·                 .                                (14)
                                                                 n
Theorem 3.1 shows that χPO achieves a sample complexity guarantee that scales only with the single-
                                     ⋆
policy concentrability parameter  C π for the comparator policy π ⋆ , for all policies π ⋆ simultaneously.
                                     π⋆

In particular, roughly n = O C log(|Π|/δ) ε2         examples are sufficient to learn a policy that is ε-
suboptimal relative to π ⋆ . As a result, χPO is robust to overoptimization since the learned policy is as
                                                                           ⋆
good as any π ⋆ that is sufficiently covered by πref (in the sense that C π = O(1)), which is effectively
the best one can hope for in the purely offline setting. In contrast, naive offline alignment methods
like DPO have sample complexity that scales with all-policy concentrability (roughly, maxπ C π ), even
when the comparator policy π ⋆ is sufficiently covered (Zhu et al., 2023; Song et al., 2024). To high-
light this, in Figure 1 (see Appendix B for details) we give a concrete example in which χPO allows
the user to tune β to achieve tight statistical rates, yet no choice of β for DPO leads to comparable
performance. Effectively, any choice of β for DPO is either susceptible to overoptimization, or is un-
acceptably conservative. All prior works that achieve similar sample complexity guarantees based on
single-policy concentrability are either impractical, or require more restrictive statistical assumptions
on the policy class (Ye et al., 2024; Liu et al., 2024; Cen et al., 2024; Fisch et al., 2024; Ji et al., 2024).


                                                      7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                                                          ⋆
Regarding
      ⋆        the parameter
                       ⋆          Vmax , we observe that since the policy πβ satisfies
      πβ (a|x)         πβ (b|x)
 βϕ πref (a|x) − βϕ πref (b|x)      ≤ 2Rmax , information-theoretically we can always achieve
Vmax = 2Rmax by pre-filtering the policy class Π to remove all policies in violation of this inequality.
Since this may be non-trivial computationally, we enforce this range via clipping in Eq. (9). Lastly,
χ2 -regularized methods that utilize an explicit reward model, such as χ2 -RLHF (Appendix C) or
Corollary 3.1, avoid dependence on Vmax , which we discuss in greater depth in Section 4.3.
                                                                                                 ⋆
Tuning the regularization parameter. To achieve optimal dependence on C π , Theorem 3.1 re-
quires tuning β > 0 as a function of this parameter,
                                              q      similar to other pessimistic schemes (Liu et al.,
                                                           2 e4Rmax log(|Π|/δ)
                                                          Vmax
2024). With no prior knowledge, setting β ∝                       n            suffices to ensure that, simultane-
                                                                                       q
                                                                                               π⋆ 2
                                                            π ) ≲ Vmax e2Rmax · (C ) log(|R|/δ)
ously for all comparator policies π ⋆ , we have J(π ⋆ ) − J(b                           n        . This
guarantee achieves a slightly worse rate than Eq. (14) but holds simultaneously for all comparator
policies rather than the specific one that was used to tune β. The following result, specializing to the
setting in Example 3.1, shows that there exists an optimal parameter β ⋆ > 0 that recovers the rate
in Eq. (14) and holds simultaneously for all comparator policies.
Corollary 3.1 (Sample complexity bound for χPO with a reward model). Consider the setting in
Example 3.1, where the policy class ΠR,β is the set of mixed χ2 -regularized policies induced by a
reward model class R with r⋆ ∈ R and β > 0. For any δ ∈ (0, 1), there exists a choice3 for β ⋆ > 0
such that with probability at least 1 − δ, χPO (Algorithm 1), with class ΠR,β ⋆ , produces
                                                                                     q a policy πb
                                                                                                       C π⋆ log(|R|/δ)
such that for all policies π ⋆ simultaneously, we have J(π ⋆ ) − J(b
                                                                   π ) ≲ Rmax e2Rmax ·                        n        .

3.3.1 E XPERIMENTS IN OFFLINE LANGUAGE MODEL ALIGNMENT
We perform preliminary evaluations of χPO for offline language model alignment on the TL;DR
dataset (Stiennon et al., 2020) using DPO as our baseline; see Appendix E for full results and
details. Table 1 displays the final-checkpoint winrates of χPO and DPO for different regularization
parameters β and number of training epochs. Smaller β and increased epochs reflect the regime
where overoptimization is a concern, but more policy improvement is available (existing works
treat β = 0.05 and 1 training epoch as standard choices for DPO (Gao et al., 2024; Guo et al., 2024;
Rafailov et al., 2024a)). Over all choices of β and epochs, χPO achieves a higher average winrate
than DPO. The performance gap grows as the number of epochs increases and β decreases, reflecting
the favorable bias-overoptimization tradeoff for χPO from our theoretical analysis; moreover, χPO
displays robust performance of all parameters while DPO degrades completely for β = 0.005.

Table 1: Winrate on TL;DR Summarization of χPO vs. DPO, for several choices of regularization
parameter β and number of training epochs. Standard error over 3 seeds is also reported.

                               β       Epochs      χPO winrate (%)        DPO winrate (%)
                                          1           56.5 ± 1.3             55.8 ± 2.1
                             0.05         2           56.1 ± 0.6             50.3 ± 0.8
                                          4           48.0 ± 1.6             38.0 ± 0.7
                                          1           50.6 ± 1.6             14.7 ± 3.9
                             0.005        2           52.8 ± 2.3              3.4 ± 1.5
                                          4           51.6 ± 0.8              0.5 ± 0.2


4       U NDERSTANDING χPO: T HE B IAS -OVEROPTIMIZATION T RADEOFF
Having derived χPO from the mixed χ2 -regularized RLHF objective and analyzed its performance,
we now take a moment to better understand the statistical properties of the policies the algorithm
learns. We focus on the tradeoff between overoptimization and bias (i.e., underoptimization) achieved
by the regularization parameter β > 0, highlighting through examples how this leads to statistical
benefits over naive alignment methods like DPO. See Appendix B for full discussion.
    3
        It is unclear how to select β ⋆ in a data-driven manner, as it depends on the functionals π 7→ C π , π 7→ J(π).


                                                            8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025



                             Regret of PO vs. DPO                           Figure 1: The regret J(a0 )−J(b   π)
                                                                            of χPO and DPO for different
                    0.25                                           PO       values of n. For DPO, the error
                                                                  n = 101   from overoptimization dominates
Regret J(a0) J( )   0.20                                          n = 102   when β ≤ (2 log n)−1 (as dis-

                    0.15                                          n = 103   cussed in Appendix B.3), and the
                                                                            error from bias dominates when
                                                                            β > (2 log n)−1 . Taking the best
                    0.10                                          DPO       choice of β for each method, DPO
                                                                  n = 101   converges at an exponentially
                    0.05                                          n = 102   slower rate ( log1 n ) than χPO
                                                                  n = 103   ( √1n ); see Proposition A.1 for for-
                    0.00                                                    mal statement and Appendix B.3
                           0.1    0.2     0.3     0.4   0.5
                                                                            for further discussion.
                           Regularization parameter
4.1 P ROPERTIES OF O PTIMAL P OLICY UNDER M IXED χ2 -R EGULARIZATION
We begin by deriving a (nearly) closed form solution for the optimal mixed χ2 -regularized policy
in Eq. (11) , which is the χPO solution in the limit of infinite data. The link function ϕ(·) is strictly
increasing over R+ , and its inverse is given by ϕ−1 (z) = W0 (exp(z)), where W0 (y) is the Lambert
W-function (Corless et al., 1996) defined as the inverse of x 7→ xex for y ≥ − e−1 . Consequently,
for any x, the optimal policy under mixed χ2 -regularization satisfies
                   πβ⋆ (a | x) = πref (a | x) · W0 exp β −1 (r⋆ (x, a) − Zβ,r⋆ (x)) ,


where Zβ,r⋆ (x) is chosen such that a πβ⋆ (a | x) = 1.
                                       P

                                                                                   ⋆
Compared to KL-regularization, which leads to softmax policies that satisfy πβ;KL      (a | x) = πref (a |
            −1 ⋆                                                        −1

x) · exp β (r (x, a) − Zβ,r⋆ ;KL (x)) , the inverse link function ϕ (z) = W0 (exp(z)) for mixed
χ2 -regularization satisfies ϕ−1 (z) ≈ z for z ≥ 1, leading to a more heavy-tailed action distribution for
πβ⋆ . On the other hand, for z ≤ 1 the inverse link behaves like the exponential function (i.e., ϕ−1 (z) ≈
ez for z ≤ 1); see Figure 2 for an illustration, and Proposition B.1 for a formal statement. Using these
properties, we derive the following upper and lower bounds on the density ratio between πβ⋆ and πref .
Proposition 4.1. For all x ∈ X , a ∈ A, the optimal policy πβ⋆ under mixed χ2 -regularization satisfies
                                                 π ⋆ (a|x)

                               exp − Rβmax ≲ πrefβ (a|x) ≲ 1 + Rβmax .                            (15)

The upper bound in Eq. (15), which arises from the χ2 term in the mixed-χ2 objective, scales inversely
with the regularization parameter β, and reflects the heavy-tailed, pessimistic behavior this  regularizer

induces; in contrast, the optimal policy under pure KL-regularization only satisfies exp − Rβmax ≲
  ⋆
πβ;KL  (a|x)        Rmax
 πref (a|x) ≲ exp     β    in general. The lower bound in Eq. (15) arises from the KL term in the mixed-
χ2 objective, but is not important for our analysis (outside of allowing DPO-like reparameterization).
4.2 T HE B IAS -OVEROPTIMIZATION T RADEOFF
We are now well equipped to understand how χPO modulates the tradeoff between overoptimization
and bias using the regularization parameter β, and how this tradeoff compares to vanilla DPO. To
showcase this, we take a reward modeling perspective, and consider the setting in which the policy
class Π is induced by a given reward model class R, similar to Example 3.1.
Suppose we start with a reward model class R such that r⋆ ∈ R. If we use the induced policy class
        ΠDPO,β := π(a | x) = πref (a | x) · exp(β −1 (r(x, a) − Zβ,r;KL (x))) | r ∈ R ,

                                                                                             (16)
                                                                                                bDPO (a |
then DPO can be viewed as first fitting a reward model rb (Eq. (3)), then outputting the policy π
x) = πref (a | x) · exp(β −1 (b
                              r(x, a) − Zβ,br;KL (x))). Meanwhile, if we use the induced policy class
            ΠχPO,β := π(a | x) = πref (a | x) · ϕ−1 (β −1 (r(x, a) − Zβ,r (x))) | r ∈ R ,

                                                                                                    (17)
then χPO can be interpreted as fitting a reward model rb with the exact same maximum likelihood
                                             bχPO (a | x) = πref (a | x) · ϕ−1 (β −1 (b
objective, but instead outputting the policy π                                        r(x, a) − Zβ,br (x))).
The policies πbχPO and π
                       bDPO are induced by the same reward model rb and parameter β, but exhibit
different bias-overoptimization tradeoffs. For both, large β means the policy avoids overfitting to


                                                              9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


errors in the reward model (e.g., when β → ∞ both policies become πref ), while small β means the
policy has low bias, i.e., low error in when the model is correct and rb = r⋆ (e.g. when β → 0, both
policies become x 7→ argmaxa:πref (a|x)>0 rb(x, a)). Yet, for the same choice of β, π
                                                                                    bχPO is significantly
more heavy-tailed than π  bDPO , a consequence of the pessimism induced by χ2 -regularization; see
Figure 3, which plots the action distribution for both policies as a function of β.
An illustrative example. Building on the intuition above, Figure 1 gives a construction in which
χPO achieves √1n regret with an appropriate choice for β, yet DPO suffers an exponentially worse rate
of log1 n regardless of β. Intuitively, DPO overfits severely when β is small, but suffers high bias when
β is larger. χPO, however, strikes a better tradeoff because small values of β are sufficient to prevent
overoptimization, which means the policy is also less biased. The “DPO+SFT” algorithm of Liu et al.
(2024); Cen et al. (2024); Fisch et al. (2024) also fails in this construction (see Appendix A.1).
4.3 N ONTRIVIALITY AND ROLE OF Vmax PARAMETER
We close this section by discussing the role of the Vmax parameter (Assumption 3.2) used in the
analysis of χPO (Theorem 3.1), motivating it using the induced policy class ΠχPO,β from Section 4.2.
Assumption 3.2 implies that all policies π ∈ Π satisfy ππref ∞ ≲ Vmax    β , i.e., that all-policy L∞ -
                                  π     Vmax
concentrability with maxπ∈Π C∞ ≲ β holds. This might seem to trivialize the offline alignment
problem, since such a policy class would enable plug-in regret bounds for even greedy algorithms. We
will show that this is not the case, because the Vmax                                2
                                                  β bound is uniquely induced by χ -regularization.

Recall that χPO requires the realizability assumption that πβ⋆  ∈ Π (Assumption 3.1), where πβ⋆ is
                                                                            ⋆
                                                                          πβ  (a|x)
the optimal χ2 -regularized policy that satisfies r⋆ (x, a) = βϕ          πref (a|x)    + Zβ,r⋆ (x). From Proposi-
                      ⋆
                    πβ
tion B.2 we have    πref   ∞
                             ≲ Rβmax , so from a statistical perspective, we can take Assumption 3.2 to
hold w.l.o.g. by removing any policy that violates this bound. Further, as highlighted inExample 3.1,
if we begin from a class of bounded reward models R ∋ r⋆ , Assumption 3.2 holds with Vmax ≲ Rmax
for the induced class ΠχPO,β defined in Eq. (17), even though knowledge of such a reward model class
is a mild statistical assumption that clearly does not trivialize the learning problem.
                                                          ⋆                                   ⋆
On the other hand, for DPO, a minimal assumption is that πβ;KL ∈ Π (Xie et al., 2024), where πβ;KL
                                                                               π⋆      (a|x)
is the optimal KL-regularized policy that satisfies r⋆ (x, a) = β log πβ;KL
                                                                        ref (a|x)
                                                                                  + Zβ,r⋆ ;KL (x). Unlike
                                                             ⋆
                                                            πβ;KL (a|x)
the optimal mixed χ2 -regularized policy, πβ;KL
                                             ⋆
                                                 has πref (a|x) ≳ exp( Rβmax ). This means that it is
                                                                    ⋆
impossible to find a policy class that simultaneously (a) realizes πβ;KL , and (b) satisfies all-policy
                                π           Rmax
concentrability with maxπ∈Π C∞ ≪ exp( β ). As the bias of DPO is unacceptably large unless
β = poly(1/n) (the “small-β” regime), this leads to vacuous guarantees.
As a result, our analysis of χPO can be viewed as showing that, for any bounded reward class R, there
exists a policy class Π (precisely, the class ΠχPO,β in Eq. (17)) such that the following properties hold:
                                                                                                                ⋆
1. Bounded bias. For all r ∈ R, there exists πr ∈ Π such that for all π ⋆ , Jr (π ⋆ ) − Jr (πr ) ≲ β · C π .
2. Bounded overoptimization. For all π ∈ Π,           π
                                                     πref   ∞
                                                                ≲ Rβmax .
We view this as an interesting and non-trivial contribution in its own right.

5    D ISCUSSION
Our work gives the first general-purpose algorithm for offline alignment with provable robustness to
overoptimization, and sample complexity guarantees based on single-policy concentrability. Our anal-
ysis and algorithm design techiques offer an example of fruitful interplay between RL theory and lan-
guage modeling, and we expect they will find broader use. Natural technical directions raised by our
paper include (i) understanding the tightest sample complexity guarantees for offline alignment with
general preference models; (ii) extending our techniques to reinforcement learning settings beyond
offline alignment (e.g., general MDPs). We look forward to studying these questions in future work.
Additional results. Results deferred to the appendix for space include (i) Guarantees for RLHF with
χ2 -regularization (Appendix C), (ii) Guarantees for general preference models (Appendix D), and (iii)
Experiments in language models demonstrating that χPO mitigates overoptimization (Appendix E).


                                                    10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
We thank Qinghua Liu, Zhaolin Gao, and Yuda Song for several helpful discussions. WS ac-
knowledges funding support from NSF IIS-2154711, NSF CAREER 2339395, DARPA LANCER:
LeArning Network CybERagents.

R EFERENCES
A. Agarwal, N. Jiang, and S. M. Kakade. Reinforcement learning: Theory and algorithms. https:
  //rltheorybook.github.io/, 2019. Version: January 31, 2022.
A. Agarwal, S. Kakade, A. Krishnamurthy, and W. Sun. FLAMBE: Structural complexity and
  representation learning of low rank MDPs. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
  2020.
P. Amortila, D. J. Foster, and A. Krishnamurthy. Scalable online exploration via coverability.
   International Conference on Machine Learning, 2024.
S. Athey and S. Wager. Policy learning with observational data. Econometrica, 2021.
M. G. Azar, Z. D. Guo, B. Piot, R. Munos, M. Rowland, M. Valko, and D. Calandriello. A general
 theoretical paradigm to understand learning from human preferences. In International Conference
 on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics, 2024.
Y. Bai, A. Jones, K. Ndousse, A. Askell, A. Chen, N. DasSarma, D. Drain, S. Fort, D. Ganguli,
  T. Henighan, N. Joseph, S. Kadavath, J. Kernion, T. Conerly, S. El-Showk, N. Elhage, Z. Hatfield-
  Dodds, D. Hernandez, T. Hume, S. Johnston, S. Kravec, L. Lovitt, N. Nanda, C. Olsson, D. Amodei,
  T. Brown, J. Clark, S. McCandlish, C. Olah, B. Mann, and J. Kaplan. Training a helpful and
  harmless assistant with reinforcement learning from human feedback. arXiv:2204.05862, 2022.
S. Biderman, H. Schoelkopf, Q. G. Anthony, H. Bradley, K. O’Brien, E. Hallahan, M. A. Khan,
   S. Purohit, U. S. Prashanth, E. Raff, A. Skowron, L. Sutawika, and O. van der Wal. Pythia: A suite
   for analyzing large language models across training and scaling. In International Conference on
  Machine Learning, 2023.
R. A. Bradley and M. E. Terry. Rank analysis of incomplete block designs: I. The method of paired
  comparisons. Biometrika, 1952.
T. Brown, B. Mann, N. Ryder, M. Subbiah, J. D. Kaplan, P. Dhariwal, A. Neelakantan, P. Shyam,
   G. Sastry, A. Askell, S. Agarwal, A. Herbert-Voss, G. Krueger, T. Henighan, R. Child, A. Ramesh,
   D. Ziegler, J. Wu, C. Winter, C. Hesse, M. Chen, E. Sigler, M. Litwin, S. Gray, B. Chess, J. Clark,
   C. Berner, S. McCandlish, A. Radford, I. Sutskever, and D. Amodei. Language models are few-shot
   learners. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2020.
S. Cen, J. Mei, K. Goshvadi, H. Dai, T. Yang, S. Yang, D. Schuurmans, Y. Chi, and B. Dai.
  Value-incentivized preference optimization: A unified approach to online and offline RLHF.
  arXiv:2405.19320, 2024.
N. Cesa-Bianchi, C. Gentile, G. Lugosi, and G. Neu. Boltzmann exploration done right. Advances in
  Neural Information Processing Systems, 2017.
J. D. Chang, W. Shan, O. Oertell, K. Brantley, D. Misra, J. D. Lee, and W. Sun. Dataset reset policy
   optimization for RLHF. arXiv:2404.08495, 2024.
J. Chen and N. Jiang. Offline reinforcement learning under value and density-ratio realizability: The
   power of gaps. In Uncertainty in Artificial Intelligence, 2022.
X. Chen, H. Zhong, Z. Yang, Z. Wang, and L. Wang. Human-in-the-loop: Provably efficient
  preference-based reinforcement learning with general function approximation. In International
  Conference on Machine Learning, 2022.
Z. Chen, Y. Deng, H. Yuan, K. Ji, and Q. Gu. Self-play fine-tuning converts weak language models
   to strong language models. arXiv:2401.01335, 2024.


                                                 11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


V. Chernozhukov, M. Demirer, G. Lewis, and V. Syrgkanis. Semi-parametric efficient policy learning
   with continuous actions. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2019.
P. F. Christiano, J. Leike, T. Brown, M. Martic, S. Legg, and D. Amodei. Deep reinforcement learning
   from human preferences. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2017.
R. M. Corless, G. H. Gonnet, D. E. Hare, D. J. Jeffrey, and D. E. Knuth. On the Lambert W function.
  Advances in Computational Mathematics, 1996.
T. Coste, U. Anwar, R. Kirk, and D. Krueger. Reward model ensembles help mitigate overoptimization.
   arXiv:2310.02743, 2023.
Q. Cui and S. S. Du. When are offline two-player zero-sum Markov games solvable? Advances in
  Neural Information Processing Systems, 2022.
N. Das, S. Chakraborty, A. Pacchiano, and S. R. Chowdhury. Provably sample efficient RLHF via
  active preference optimization. arXiv:2402.10500, 2024.
S. A. V. de Geer. Empirical Processes in M-Estimation. Cambridge University Press, 2000.
H. Dong, W. Xiong, D. Goyal, Y. Zhang, W. Chow, R. Pan, S. Diao, J. Zhang, K. Shum, and T. Zhang.
  Raft: Reward ranked finetuning for generative foundation model alignment. arXiv:2304.06767,
  2023.
H. Dong, W. Xiong, B. Pang, H. Wang, H. Zhao, Y. Zhou, N. Jiang, D. Sahoo, C. Xiong, and T. Zhang.
  RLHF workflow: From reward modeling to online RLHF. arXiv:2405.07863, 2024.
Y. Du, A. Winnicki, G. Dalal, S. Mannor, and R. Srikant. Exploration-driven policy optimization in
   RLHF: Theoretical insights on efficient data utilization. arXiv:2402.10342, 2024.
Y. Duan, Z. Jia, and M. Wang. Minimax-optimal off-policy evaluation with linear function approxi-
   mation. In International Conference on Machine Learning, 2020.
J. Duchi and H. Namkoong. Variance-based regularization with convex objectives. Journal of
   Machine Learning Research, 2019.
M. Dudík, K. Hofmann, R. E. Schapire, A. Slivkins, and M. Zoghi. Contextual dueling bandits. In
 Conference on Learning Theory, 2015.
J. Eisenstein, C. Nagpal, A. Agarwal, A. Beirami, A. D’Amour, D. Dvijotham, A. Fisch, K. Heller,
   S. Pfohl, D. Ramachandran, P. Shaw, and J. Berant. Helping or herding? reward model ensembles
   mitigate but do not eliminate reward hacking. arXiv:2312.09244, 2023.
A.-m. Farahmand, C. Szepesvári, and R. Munos. Error propagation for approximate policy and value
  iteration. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2010.
A. Fisch, J. Eisenstein, V. Zayats, A. Agarwal, A. Beirami, C. Nagpal, P. Shaw, and J. Berant. Robust
  preference optimization through reward model distillation. arXiv:2405.19316, 2024.
P. C. Fishburn. Probabilistic social choice based on simple voting comparisons. The Review of
   Economic Studies, 1984.
D. J. Foster and A. Rakhlin. Foundations of reinforcement learning and interactive decision making.
  arXiv:2312.16730, 2023.
G. Gabbianelli, G. Neu, and M. Papini. Importance-weighted offline learning done right. In
  International Conference on Algorithmic Learning Theory, 2024.
L. Gao, J. Schulman, and J. Hilton. Scaling laws for reward model overoptimization. In International
   Conference on Machine Learning, 2023.
Z. Gao, J. D. Chang, W. Zhan, O. Oertell, G. Swamy, K. Brantley, T. Joachims, J. A. Bagnell, J. D. Lee,
   and W. Sun. REBEL: Reinforcement learning via regressing relative rewards. arXiv:2404.16767,
   2024.


                                                 12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Google. Palm 2 technical report. arXiv:2305.10403, 2023.
S. Guo, B. Zhang, T. Liu, T. Liu, M. Khalman, F. Llinares, A. Rame, T. Mesnard, Y. Zhao,
  B. Piot, J. Ferret, and M. Blondel. Direct language model alignment from online AI feedback.
  arXiv:2402.04792, 2024.
S. Huang, R. F. J. Dossa, C. Ye, J. Braga, D. Chakraborty, K. Mehta, and J. G. Araújo. Cleanrl:
   High-quality single-file implementations of deep reinforcement learning algorithms. Journal of
  Machine Learning Research, 2022.
X. Ji, S. Kulkarni, M. Wang, and T. Xie. Self-play with adversarial critic: Provable and scalable
  offline alignment for language models. arXiv:2406.04274, 2024.
Y. Jin, Z. Yang, and Z. Wang. Is pessimism provably efficient for offline RL? In International
  Conference on Machine Learning, 2021.
N. Kallus and M. Uehara. Double reinforcement learning for efficient off-policy evaluation in markov
  decision processes. Journal of Machine Learning Research, 2020.
G. H. Kramer. On a class of equilibrium conditions for majority rule. Econometrica: Journal of the
  Econometric Society, 1973.
G. Kreweras. Aggregation of preference orderings. In Mathematics and Social Sciences I: Proceedings
  of the seminars of Menthon-Saint-Bernard, France and of Gösing, Austria, 1965.
T. Lattimore and C. Szepesvári. Bandit algorithms. Cambridge University Press, 2020.
J. Lee, W. Jeon, B. Lee, J. Pineau, and K.-E. Kim. Optidice: Offline policy optimization via stationary
   distribution correction estimation. In International Conference on Machine Learning, 2021.
Z. Li, Z. Yang, and M. Wang. Reinforcement learning with human feedback: Learning dynamic
  choices via pessimism. arXiv:2305.18438, 2023.
T. Liu, Y. Zhao, R. Joshi, M. Khalman, M. Saleh, P. J. Liu, and J. Liu. Statistical rejection sampling
   improves preference optimization. arXiv:2309.06657, 2023.
Y. Liu, A. Swaminathan, A. Agarwal, and E. Brunskill. Provably good batch off-policy reinforcement
   learning without great exploration. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2020.
Z. Liu, M. Lu, S. Zhang, B. Liu, H. Guo, Y. Yang, J. Blanchet, and Z. Wang. Provably
  mitigating overoptimization in RLHF: Your SFT loss is implicitly an adversarial regularizer.
  arXiv:2405.16436, 2024.
J. Y. Ma, J. Yan, D. Jayaraman, and O. Bastani. Offline goal-conditioned reinforcement learning via
   f -advantage regression. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2022a.
Y. J. Ma, A. Shen, D. Jayaraman, and O. Bastani. Smodice: Versatile offline imitation learning via
   state occupancy matching. arXiv:2202.02433, 2022b.
E. J. Michaud, A. Gleave, and S. Russell. Understanding learned reward functions. arXiv:2012.05862,
   2020.
T. Moskovitz, A. K. Singh, D. Strouse, T. Sandholm, R. Salakhutdinov, A. D. Dragan, and S. McAleer.
   Confronting reward model overoptimization with constrained RLHF. arXiv:2310.04373, 2023.
R. Munos, M. Valko, D. Calandriello, M. G. Azar, M. Rowland, Z. D. Guo, Y. Tang, M. Geist,
  T. Mesnard, A. Michi, M. Selvi, S. Girgin, N. Momchev, O. Bachem, D. J. Mankowitz, D. Precup,
  and B. Piot. Nash learning from human feedback. arXiv:2312.00886, 2023.
E. Novoseller, Y. Wei, Y. Sui, Y. Yue, and J. Burdick. Dueling posterior sampling for preference-based
   reinforcement learning. In Conference on Uncertainty in Artificial Intelligence, 2020.
OpenAI. Gpt-4 technical report. arXiv:2303.08774, 2023.


                                                  13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


L. Ouyang, J. Wu, X. Jiang, D. Almeida, C. Wainwright, P. Mishkin, C. Zhang, S. Agarwal, K. Slama,
   A. Ray, J. Schulman, J. Hilton, F. Kelton, L. Miller, M. Simens, A. Askell, P. Welinder, P. Christiano,
   J. Leike, and R. Lowe. Training language models to follow instructions with human feedback.
  Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2022.
A. Pacchiano, A. Saha, and J. Lee. Dueling RL: Reinforcement learning with trajectory preferences.
  arXiv:2111.04850, 2021.
A. Pal, D. Karkhanis, S. Dooley, M. Roberts, S. Naidu, and C. White. Smaug: Fixing failure modes
  of preference optimisation with DPO-positive. arXiv:2402.13228, 2024.
R. Rafailov, A. Sharma, E. Mitchell, C. D. Manning, S. Ermon, and C. Finn. Direct preference
  optimization: Your language model is secretly a reward model. Advances in Neural Information
  Processing Systems, 2023.
R. Rafailov, Y. Chittepu, R. Park, H. Sikchi, J. Hejna, B. Knox, C. Finn, and S. Niekum. Scaling laws
  for reward model overoptimization in direct alignment algorithms. arXiv:2406.02900, 2024a.
R. Rafailov, J. Hejna, R. Park, and C. Finn. From r to Q⋆ : Your language model is secretly a
  Q-function. arXiv:2404.12358, 2024b.
P. Rashidinejad, B. Zhu, C. Ma, J. Jiao, and S. Russell. Bridging offline reinforcement learning and
   imitation learning: A tale of pessimism. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
   2021.
M. Rita, F. Strub, R. Chaabouni, P. Michel, E. Dupoux, and O. Pietquin. Countering reward over-
 optimization in LLM with demonstration-guided reinforcement learning. arXiv:2404.19409,
 2024.
C. Rosset, C.-A. Cheng, A. Mitra, M. Santacroce, A. Awadallah, and T. Xie. Direct Nash Optimization:
  Teaching language models to self-improve with general preferences. arXiv:2404.03715, 2024.
N. Shah, S. Balakrishnan, J. Bradley, A. Parekh, K. Ramchandran, and M. Wainwright. Estimation
  from Pairwise Comparisons: Sharp Minimax Bounds with Topology Dependence. In International
  Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics, 2015.
P. B. Simpson. On defining areas of voter choice: Professor tullock on stable voting. The Quarterly
   Journal of Economics, 1969.
Y. Song, Y. Zhou, A. Sekhari, J. A. Bagnell, A. Krishnamurthy, and W. Sun. Hybrid RL: Using both
   offline and online data can make RL efficient. arXiv:2210.06718, 2022.
Y. Song, G. Swamy, A. Singh, J. A. Bagnell, and W. Sun. Understanding preference fine-tuning
  through the lens of coverage. arXiv:2406.01462, 2024.
N. Stiennon, L. Ouyang, J. Wu, D. Ziegler, R. Lowe, C. Voss, A. Radford, D. Amodei, and P. F.
  Christiano. Learning to summarize with human feedback. Advances in Neural Information
  Processing Systems, 33, 2020.
G. Swamy, C. Dann, R. Kidambi, Z. S. Wu, and A. Agarwal. A minimaximalist approach to
  reinforcement learning from human feedback. arXiv:2401.04056, 2024.
F. Tajwar, A. Singh, A. Sharma, R. Rafailov, J. Schneider, T. Xie, S. Ermon, C. Finn, and A. Kumar.
   Preference fine-tuning of LLMs should leverage suboptimal, on-policy data. arXiv:2404.14367,
   2024.
Y. Tang, Z. D. Guo, Z. Zheng, D. Calandriello, R. Munos, M. Rowland, P. H. Richemond, M. Valko,
   B. Á. Pires, and B. Piot. Generalized preference optimization: A unified approach to offline
   alignment. arXiv:2402.05749, 2024.
J. Tien, J. Z.-Y. He, Z. Erickson, A. Dragan, and D. S. Brown. Causal confusion and reward
   misidentification in preference-based reward learning. In International Conference on Learning
   Representations, 2022.


                                                   14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


H. Touvron, L. Martin, K. Stone, P. Albert, A. Almahairi, Y. Babaei, N. Bashlykov, S. Batra,
  P. Bhargava, S. Bhosale, D. Bikel, L. Blecher, C. C. Ferrer, M. Chen, G. Cucurull, D. Esiobu,
  J. Fernandes, J. Fu, W. Fu, B. Fuller, C. Gao, V. Goswami, N. Goyal, A. Hartshorn, S. Hosseini,
  R. Hou, H. Inan, M. Kardas, V. Kerkez, M. Khabsa, I. Kloumann, A. Korenev, P. S. Koura, M.-A.
  Lachaux, T. Lavril, J. Lee, D. Liskovich, Y. Lu, Y. Mao, X. Martinet, T. Mihaylov, P. Mishra,
  I. Molybog, Y. Nie, A. Poulton, J. Reizenstein, R. Rungta, K. Saladi, A. Schelten, R. Silva, E. M.
  Smith, R. Subramanian, X. E. Tan, B. Tang, R. Taylor, A. Williams, J. X. Kuan, P. Xu, Z. Yan,
  I. Zarov, Y. Zhang, A. Fan, M. Kambadur, S. Narang, A. Rodriguez, R. Stojnic, S. Edunov, and
  T. Scialom. Llama 2: Open foundation and fine-tuned chat models. arXiv:2307.09288, 2023.
A. B. Tsybakov. Introduction to Nonparametric Estimation. Springer, 2008.
M. Uehara and W. Sun. Pessimistic model-based offline reinforcement learning under partial coverage.
  arXiv:2107.06226, 2021.
T. Van Erven and P. Harremos. Rényi divergence and kullback-leibler divergence. IEEE Transactions
   on Information Theory, 60(7), 2014.
L. von Werra, Y. Belkada, L. Tunstall, E. Beeching, T. Thrush, N. Lambert, and S. Huang. Trl:
  Transformer reinforcement learning. https://github.com/huggingface/trl, 2020.
C. Wang, Y. Jiang, C. Yang, H. Liu, and Y. Chen. Beyond reverse KL: Generalizing direct preference
  optimization with diverse divergence constraints. arXiv:2309.16240, 2023a.
L. Wang, A. Krishnamurthy, and A. Slivkins. Oracle-efficient pessimism: Offline policy optimization
   in contextual bandits. In International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics, 2024.
Y. Wang, Q. Liu, and C. Jin. Is RLHF more difficult than standard RL? arXiv:2306.14111, 2023b.
W. H. Wong and X. Shen. Probability inequalities for likelihood ratios and convergence rates of sieve
  mles. The Annals of Statistics, 1995.
R. Wu and W. Sun. Making RL with preference-based feedback efficient via randomization.
  arXiv:2310.14554, 2023.
Y. Wu, Z. Sun, H. Yuan, K. Ji, Y. Yang, and Q. Gu. Self-play preference optimization for language
   model alignment. arXiv:2405.00675, 2024.
T. Xie and N. Jiang. Q* approximation schemes for batch reinforcement learning: A theoretical
   comparison. In Conference on Uncertainty in Artificial Intelligence, 2020.
T. Xie, C.-A. Cheng, N. Jiang, P. Mineiro, and A. Agarwal. Bellman-consistent pessimism for offline
   reinforcement learning. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2021.
T. Xie, D. J. Foster, A. Krishnamurthy, C. Rosset, A. Awadallah, and A. Rakhlin. Ex-
  ploratory preference optimization: Harnessing implicit Q*-approximation for sample-efficient rlhf.
  arXiv:2405.21046, 2024.
W. Xiong, H. Dong, C. Ye, H. Zhong, N. Jiang, and T. Zhang. Gibbs sampling from human feedback:
  A provable KL-constrained framework for RLHF. arXiv:2312.11456, 2023.
Y. Xu, R. Wang, L. Yang, A. Singh, and A. Dubrawski. Preference-based reinforcement learning
  with finite-time guarantees. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2020.
C. Ye, W. Xiong, Y. Zhang, N. Jiang, and T. Zhang. A theoretical analysis of Nash learning from
  human feedback under general KL-regularized preference. arXiv:2402.07314, 2024.
L. Yuan, G. Cui, H. Wang, N. Ding, X. Wang, J. Deng, B. Shan, H. Chen, R. Xie, Y. Lin, Z. Liu,
  B. Zhou, H. Peng, Z. Liu, and M. Sun. Advancing llm reasoning generalists with preference trees.
  arXiv:2404.02078, 2024.
A. Zanette, M. J. Wainwright, and E. Brunskill. Provable benefits of actor-critic methods for offline
  reinforcement learning. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2021.


                                                 15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


W. Zhan, B. Huang, A. Huang, N. Jiang, and J. Lee. Offline reinforcement learning with realizability
  and single-policy concentrability. In Conference on Learning Theory, 2022.
W. Zhan, M. Uehara, N. Kallus, J. D. Lee, and W. Sun. Provable offline preference-based reinforce-
  ment learning. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2023a.
W. Zhan, M. Uehara, W. Sun, and J. D. Lee. Provable reward-agnostic preference-based reinforcement
  learning. arXiv:2305.18505, 2023b.
T. Zhang. From ϵ-entropy to KL-entropy: Analysis of minimum information complexity density
   estimation. The Annals of Statistics, 2006.
X. Zhang, J.-F. Ton, W. Shen, H. Wang, and Y. Liu. Overcoming reward overoptimization via
  adversarial policy optimization with lightweight uncertainty estimation. arXiv:2403.05171, 2024.
B. Zhu, M. Jordan, and J. Jiao. Principled reinforcement learning with human feedback from pairwise
  or k-wise comparisons. In International Conference on Machine Learning, 2023.
B. Zhu, M. I. Jordan, and J. Jiao. Iterative data smoothing: Mitigating reward overfitting and
  overoptimization in RLHF. arXiv:2401.16335, 2024.
H. Zhu and A. Zhang. Provably efficient offline goal-conditioned reinforcement learning with
  general function approximation and single-policy concentrability. Advances in Neural Information
  Processing Systems, 2024.
Z. Zhu, K. Lin, B. Dai, and J. Zhou. Off-policy imitation learning from observations. Advances in
  Neural Information Processing Systems, 2020.


                                                16
Contents of Appendix

I    Additional Results                                                                             17
A Additional Related Work                                                                           17
  A.1 Detailed Comparison to DPO + SFT . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .            19

B Detailed Discussion: χPO and the Bias-Overoptimization Tradeoff                                   21
  B.1 Properties of Optimal Policy under Mixed χ2 -Regularization . . . . . . . . . . . .           22
  B.2 The Bias-Overoptimization Tradeoff . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .          22
  B.3 An Illustrative Example . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       23
  B.4 Nontriviality and Role of Vmax Parameter . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .          25

C Sample Complexity Guarantees for χ2 -RLHF                                                         26

D χPO for General Preference Models                                                                 28
  D.1 Impossibility of Single-Policy Concentrability under General Preferences . . . . .            28
  D.2 Iterative χPO for General Preferences . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .         29
  D.3 Theoretical Analysis of Iterative χPO . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       30

E Experiments in Offline Language Model Alignment                                              31
  E.1 TL;DR Summarization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 31
  E.2 Experiment details . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 31


II    Proofs                                                                                        33
F Preliminaries                                                                                     33

G Analysis of χPO: Proof Sketch for Theorem 3.1                                                     33

H Proofs for Section 3                                                                              35
  H.1 General Version of Theorem 3.1 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .          36
  H.2 Proof of Theorem 3.1 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .        43
  H.3 Proof of Corollary 3.1 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      43

I    Proofs for Appendix B                                                                          44

J    Proofs for Appendix D                                                                          45
     J.1 Proof of Theorem D.1 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     45
     J.2 Proof of Theorem D.2 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     46
     J.3 Proofs for Supporting Lemmas . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       49

K Proofs for Appendix C                                                                              51



Part I

Additional Results
A     A DDITIONAL R ELATED W ORK
Theoretical algorithms for offline alignment. Much of prior theoretical work on offline alignment
considers algorithms that are tailored to linearly parameterized policies (Zhu et al., 2023; Li et al.,
2023; Xiong et al., 2023), while others are not efficiently implementable, e.g., as they require solving
min-max problems over a version space (Zhan et al., 2023a). For general policy classes, Ye et al.
(2024) provide an algorithm that achieves sample complexity guarantees based on single-policy


                                                  17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


concentrability, but the algorithm requires computation of an uncertainty bonus which cannot be
implemented faithfully for large language models. Ji et al. (2024) provide an algorithm that achieves
single-policy concentrability using self-play, but their approach requires the non-standard realizability
assumption that for all π ∈ Π, there exists π ′ ∈ Π such that r(x, a) = β log ππ(a|x)
                                                                                   ′ (a|x) − Zπ,π ′ (x) for

some function Zπ,π′ (x) that depends on x, but not the action a. In addition, their algorithm is iterative,
and requires solving a DPO-like objective many times (roughly 1/ε2 iterations are required to achieve
accuracy ε). Most relevant to our work, Liu et al. (2024); Cen et al. (2024); Fisch et al. (2024)
propose solving the appealingly simple DPO + SFT objective in Eq. (5). As we discuss in detail
in Appendix A.1, this objective fails to achieve single-policy concentrability unless non-standard
convexity assumptions on the policy class or reward model class hold.
A number of other works consider the hybrid setting for alignment where—in addition to offline
preference data from πref , the algorithm has access to online feedback (Xiong et al., 2023; Gao
et al., 2024; Chang et al., 2024; Song et al., 2024). While it is straightforward to achieve guarantees
based on single-policy concentrability in this setting, this is a stronger feedback model than what
we consider, and is not always realistic. Our work is also complementary to fully online alignment,
which dispenses with coverage conditions entirely but requires active exploration (Xu et al., 2020;
Novoseller et al., 2020; Pacchiano et al., 2021; Wu and Sun, 2023; Zhan et al., 2023b; Chen et al.,
2022; Wang et al., 2023b; Du et al., 2024; Das et al., 2024; Ye et al., 2024; Xie et al., 2024; Cen et al.,
2024).
Generalizations of DPO. Wang et al. (2023a) provide a generalization of the DPO reparameterization
trick which supports general f -divergences that satisfy certain regularity conditions. Their work does
not provide sample complexity guarantees or theoretical guidance on which choices of f -divergence
are preferable, but our main algorithm χPO, can be derived as a special case of their technique with a
novel choice of f -divergence. Tang et al. (2024) also provide a general framework for deriving DPO
variants with general loss functions, but our algorithm does not appear to be a special case of their
framework.
Offline reinforcement learning theory. The theory of offline reinforcement learning addresses
challenges similar to overoptimization, which is typically describes through the language of distri-
bution shift. Many of these works, using pessimism and related algorithmic techniques, provide
guarantees that are robust to partial coverage of the data collection policy πref , which is reflected in
sample complexity guarantees based on single-policy concentrability and similar coverage conditions.
While this line of work provides efficient algorithms for simple (e.g., tabular or linear) settings (Liu
et al., 2020; Jin et al., 2021; Rashidinejad et al., 2021), existing approaches that support general
function approximation (Xie et al., 2021; Uehara and Sun, 2021; Zhan et al., 2022; Chen and Jiang,
2022) cannot be implemented efficiently for language models without non-trivial modifications. See
also closely related research on policy optimization and evaluation in statistics and econometrics
(Athey and Wager, 2021; Chernozhukov et al., 2019; Kallus and Uehara, 2020).
χ2 -divergence in reinforcement learning. Our work contributes to a growing body of research
that uses χ2 -divergence to derive reinforcement learning algorithms with novel statistical guarantees.4
Notably, our work is inspired by Wang et al. (2024) (see also Gabbianelli et al. (2024)), who use a
regularizer similar to χ2 -divergence to derive single-policy
                                                       h         iconcentrability guarantees for contextual
                              2               π           π(a|x)
bandits. Compared to the χ -regularizer C = Eπ πref (a|x) we use, their regularizer takes the form
   h          i
        1
Eπ πref (a|x)   , which is always larger. As a result of this diference, their regularizer is not suitable for
large action spaces. By addressing this shortcoming, we expect our χ2 -regularization approach to
find further use in offline RL.
Other related works include (i) Duan et al. (2020) show that χ2 -divergence plays a fundamental
role in offline RL with linear function approximation; (ii) Zhan et al. (2022) use χ2 -regularization
to provide guarantees based on single-policy concentrability for an offline RL method based on
weight function learning; and (iii) Amortila et al. (2024) provide online RL algorithms that explore by
directly minimizing an exploration objective based on χ2 -divergence. We mention in passing that a
number of recent empirical works apply χ2 -regularization (Zhu et al., 2020; Lee et al., 2021; Ma et al.,
   4
     More classically, χ2 -divergence is known to play a fundamental role in asymptotic statistics (Tsybakov,
2008; Duchi and Namkoong, 2019).


                                                     18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


2022a;b; Zhu and Zhang, 2024) to reinforcement learning in embodied domains. Lastly, Cesa-Bianchi
et al. (2017) prove lower bounds against the softmax policy distribution, but in the context of online
exploration for online RL. While this is different problem setting than ours, their construction may be
in similar in spirit to our lower bound against KL-regularization in offline reinforcement learning
(Proposition A.1).
Empirical research on offline alignment. Our work uses DPO (Rafailov et al., 2023) as a starting
point. Many prior works have built upon DPO with the aim of addressing specific shortcomings,
including Liu et al. (2023); Tang et al. (2024); Azar et al. (2024); Rosset et al. (2024); Chen et al.
(2024); Wu et al. (2024); Tajwar et al. (2024). Closely related, there is a large body of research that
attempts to understand and mitigate overoptimization in offline alignment from a purely empirical
perspective (Michaud et al., 2020; Tien et al., 2022; Coste et al., 2023; Dong et al., 2023; Eisenstein
et al., 2023; Gao et al., 2023; Moskovitz et al., 2023; Pal et al., 2024; Rita et al., 2024; Rafailov et al.,
2024a; Zhang et al., 2024).
A.1 D ETAILED C OMPARISON TO DPO + SFT
In this section, we give additional background on the suboptimality of the DPO + SFT objective
in Eq. (5). Let β > 0 be the KL-regularization  parameter and α > 0 be an optimism parameter.
Consider the setting in which Π = πr (a | x) = πref (a | x) exp(β −1 (r(x, a) − Zr (x))) | r ∈ R


for a reward class R ⊂ (X × A → R). Liu et al. (2024); Cen et al. (2024); Fisch et al. (2024) propose
solving (variants of) the objective

   bmax-min = argmax min α Ex∼ρ,a∼π(·|x),b∼πref (·|x) [r(a) − r(b)] − βDKL (π ∥ πref ) + L(r) ,
   π
                   π     r∈R
                                                                                                             (18)

  P the max ranges over the space of all policies, and where L(r) :=
where
1
                                                                                                        −
n    (x,a+ ,a− )∈Dpref log σ[r(x, a+ ) − r(x, a− )] is the negative log-likelihood under the Bradley-Terry
model. Liu et al. (2024) show that for general policy classes, this algorithm attains sample complexity
guarantees scaling with single-policy concentrability; Cen et al. (2024) provide similar results for the
special case of linearly parameterized policies.
The objective in Eq. (18) is non-trivial to implement for language models. To derive the DPO + SFT
objective in Eq. (5), Liu et al. (2024) observe that if R is convex, the minimax theorem implies that
the objective value in Eq. (18) is equivalent to the value for the min-max objective

          min max α Ex∼ρ,a∼π(·|x),b∼πref (·|x) [r(a) − r(b)] − βDKL (π ∥ πref ) + L(r) .         (19)
           r∈R    π

This leads to a natural algorithmic strategy adopted by (Liu et al., 2024; Cen et al., 2024; Fisch
et al., 2024): Let rbmin-max be the minimizing reward function in Eq. (19) and let πrbmin-max —the optimal
policy in the KL-regularized MDP with reward function rbmin-max —be the final policy returned by the
algorithm. After standard manipulations, one can then show that πrbmin-max is equivalent to
                                                                                                               
                                                                                                                
                                       1       X                        π(a+ | x)                π(a− | x)
argmax α · Eπref [β log π(a | x)] +                     log σ β log                   − β log                    .
  π∈Π                                  n                               πref (a+ | x)            πref (a− | x) 
                                             (x,a+ ,a− )∈Dpref
                                                                                                             (20)

We call this policy πbDPO+SFT . The sample complexity analyses for the π bDPO+SFT policy (Eq. (20)) in
(Liu et al., 2024; Cen et al., 2024) rely on showing that the objective value in Eq. (19) is equivalent
to the value in Eq. (18), which is not guaranteed to hold if R is non-convex (e.g., if R is a class of
neural networks).5 Indeed, the following proposition shows that, for non-convex reward classes R,
the DPO + SFT objective in Eq. (20) fails to achieve a statistical guarantee based on single-policy
concentrability, even when Eq. (18) succeeds.
Proposition A.1. Let n ∈ N with n ≥ 2 be given. There exists a reward class R with |R| = 2, a
problem instance (ρ, r) satisfying realizability (r ∈ R) and r ∈ [0, 1], a data collection policy πref ,
and universal constants c1 ∈ (0, 1) and c2 , c3 > 0 such that the following hold:
   5
                                                         bmax-min with general reward class R and establish equiva-
     Precisely, Liu et al. (2024) provide guarantees for π
lence of π
         bmax-min and πbmin-max when R is convex, while Cen et al. (2024) consider linear function approximation,
which yields the required convexity.


                                                        19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                         e such that ∥e
1. There exists a policy π            π /πref ∥∞ ≤ 2; yet
2. For any β ≤ (2 log(n))−1 and α ≥ 0, the minimax policy π       bmin-max (Eq. (19)) and DPO+SFT
          bDPO+SFT (Eq. (20)) derived from a dataset Dpref of n samples from πref incur suboptimality
   policy π
                              π ) − J(b
                            J(e                      π ) − J(b
                                      πDPO+SFT ) = J(e       πmin-max ) ≥ c2 ,
   with probability at least c1 .
3. For any β ≥ (2 log(n))−1 and α ≥ 0, the minimax policy π       bmin-max (Eq. (19)) and DPO+SFT
          bDPO+SFT (Eq. (20)) derived from a dataset Dpref of n samples from πref incur suboptimality
   policy π
                                                                           c3
                        J(eπ ) − J(b
                                   πDPO+SFT ) = J(eπ ) − J(bπmin-max ) ≥        ,
                                                                         log(n)
   with probability at least c1 .
On the other√hand, we observe that    for the instance in Proposition A.1, χPO (via Theorem 3.1)
with β ∝ 1/ n and the class Π = π(a | x) = πref (a | x) · ϕ−1 (β −1 (r(x, a) − Zr (x))) | r ∈ R
achieves                                          r            r
                                                    (C πe )2      1
                                   π ) − J(b
                                 J(e         π) ≲            ≲      ,
                                                       n         n
highlighting the fact that χPO meaningfully adapts to single-policy concentrability even when the
technical conditions required by DPO+SFT do not hold; see also Appendix B. We find this conclusion
to be somewhat surprising, as Xie et al. (2024) show that an optimistic counterpart to Eq. (20), which
negates the SFT term, enjoys strong guarantees for online alignment with general policy classes
without requiring convexity.
Although our construction does not establish inconsistency in the β ≥ (2 log(n))−1 regime, in
general, DPO+SFT will incur O(β) bias if one aims to compete with the optimal policy. Due to
restriction that β must be rather large, this results in an exponentially slower rate of convergence than
χPO.
Proof of Proposition A.1. Let n ∈ N with n ≥ 2 be given. We consider a problem instance with
X = {x1 , x2 } and A = {a0 , a1 , a2 , a3 }, so that |A| = 4. We define a reward class with two reward
functions R := {r1 , r2 } as follows. For i ∈ {1, 2}:
                 ri (x1 , a0 ) = ζ, and ri (x1 , a1 ) = ri (x1 , a2 ) = ri (x1 , a3 ) = 0
                 ri (x2 , a0 ) = 1/2, ri (x2 , ai ) = 1, and ri (x2 , aj ) = 0 ∀j ̸= i.
Here ζ ∈ [0, 1] will be chosen at the end of the proof. The context distribution is ρ = unif(X ), and
we define πref for each xi ∈ {x1 , x2 } via
πref (a0 | xi ) = 1/2,   πref (a1 | xi ) = πref (a2 | xi ) = 1/(2n),   and πref (a3 | xi ) = (n − 2)/(2n).
Let r1 be the true reward function. Recall that Dpref = {(x, a+ , a− )} consists of n tuples (x, a+ , a− )
obtained by sampling x ∼ ρ and a pair of actions (a, b) ∼ πref and labeling them as (a+ , a− ) via the
Bradley-Terry model in Eq. (1) with reward r1 . Define a “bad” event under this process:
                                E := {No tuples in Dpref contain a1 or a2 }.
We can lower bound the probability of E as follows:
      P[E c ] ≤ P[a1 in Dpref ] + P[a2 in Dpref ]
            = 2(1 − (1 − 1/2n)n ) ≤ 2(1 − e−1/2 (1 − 1/(4n))) ≤ 2(1 − 7e−1/2 /8) ≤ 0.94,
where the first inequality uses that (1 − x/n)n ≥ e−x (1 − x2 /n) for n ≥ 1 and |x| < n. We conclude
that
                                            P[E] ≥ 0.06 =: c1 .
                     − n1
                            P
Let L(r; Dpref ) :=        (x,a+ ,a− )∈Dpref log σ[r(x, a+ ) − r(x, a− )] denote the DPO loss. Observe
that conditioned on E, we have that L(r1 ; Dpref ) = L(r2 ; Dpref ). Noting that
         max{Eπ [r] − Eπref [r] − βDKL (π ∥ πref )} = Eπr [r] − Eπref [r] − βDKL (πr ∥ πref ),
           π



                                                    20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


is the same for both r ∈ R, we see that both r1 and r2 optimize the minimax objective in Eq. (19).
Thus, breaking ties adversarially, we can choose π   bmin-max = πr2 under E for all values of β > 0 and
α ≥ 0. By the equivalence between the minimax objective in Eq. (19) and the DPO+SFT objective
in Eq. (20) (Liu et al., 2024; Cen et al., 2024; Fisch et al., 2024), for Π = {πr1 , πr2 }, we can choose
bDPO+SFT = πr2 in Eq. (20) under E. Indeed, under E, the DPO+SFT objective is equivalent to
π
argmaxπ∈Π Eπref [log π(a)], and πr1 and πr2 have the same value for this objective.
To conclude we choose πe(·) = a0 , which has ∥e
                                              π /πref ∥∞ = 2. It remains to calculate the suboptimal-
ity gap.
                 J(eπ ) − J(bπDPO+SFT ) = J(eπ ) − J(b                π ) − J(πr2 )
                                                       πmin-max ) = J(e
under E. Note that J(e
                     π ) = ζ/2 + 1/4. We decompose the reward for πr2 on instance r1 into two
components, corresponding to the two contexts x1 , x2 :
          1                                                      1
J(πr2 ) =    Ea∼πr2 [r1 (x1 , a)] + Ea∼πr2 [r1 (x2 , a)] =: (J1 (β) + J2 (β))
          2                                                      2
          r1 (x1 , a0 )πref (a0 | x1 ) exp(r2 (x1 , a0 )/β)          ζ/2 exp(ζ/β)
 J1 (β) =                                                    =
                              Z(r2 , x1 )                       1/2 exp(ζ/β) + 1/2
          r1 (x2 , a0 )πref (a0 | x2 ) exp(r2 (x2 , a0 )/β) + r1 (x1 , a1 )πref (a1 | x2 ) exp(r2 (x2 , a1 )/β))
 J2 (β) =
                                                         Z(r2 , x2 )
                          1/4e1/2β + 1/(2n)
               =                                         ,
                 1/2e1/2β + e1/β /(2n) + (n − 1)/(2n)
                   P
where Z(r2 , x) :=    a∈A πref (a | x) exp(r2 (x, a)/β).

We first consider the small β regime. Here we use the upper bound J1 (β) ≤ ζ and focus on
J2 (β). Note that J2 (β) is increasing with β for β ≤ 1/(2 log(n)). In particular, if we consider
β = 1/(c log(n)) for c ≥ 2, then the expression above is equal to
                     nc/2 /4 + 1/(2n)            nc/2 /4 + 1/(2n)            1
 J2 (β) =                                    ≤                     ≤ 1/4 + c/2+1 ≤ 3/8,
            nc/2 /2 + nc−1 /2 + (n − 1)/(2n)   nc/2 + (n − 1)/(2n)        2n
where the last inequality holds when c ≥ 2 and n ≥ 2. We set c = 2, so that as long as n ≥ 2,
J(πr2 ) ≤ 38 . Thus, the suboptimality is

                                          ζ 1     ζ   3       1
                           π ) − J(πr2 ) ≥ + −
                         J(e                        +     ≥     =: c2 .
                                          2 4     2 16       16

Next consider the regime where β ≥ 1/(2 log(n)). Analogously to before, note that J2 (β) ≤ 1/2.
On the other hand, J1 (β) is monotonically decreasing with β, so using β ≥ 1/(2 log(n)) we obtain
the bound
                                          ζ exp(2ζ log(n))         n2ζ
                              J1 (β) ≤                      = ζ · 2ζ   .
                                         exp(2ζ log(n)) + 1      n +1
So in this case, the suboptimality is
                                                  n2ζ

                                         ζ               ζ  1     log(2)
                     π ) − J(πr2 ) ≥
                   J(e                     · 1 − 2ζ     ≥ · 2ζ =           ,
                                         2      n +1     4 n     16 log(n)
if we set ζ = log(2)/(2 log(n)) which is in [0, 1] under the assumption that n ≥ 2.


B    D ETAILED D ISCUSSION : χPO AND THE B IAS -OVEROPTIMIZATION
     T RADEOFF
Having derived χPO from the mixed χ2 -regularized RLHF objective and analyzed its performance,
we now take a moment to better understand the statistical properties of the policies the algorithm
learns. We focus on the tradeoff between overoptimization and bias (i.e., underoptimization) achieved
by the regularization parameter β > 0, highlighting through examples how this leads to statistical
benefits over naive alignment methods like DPO.


                                                      21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


B.1 P ROPERTIES OF O PTIMAL P OLICY UNDER M IXED χ2 -R EGULARIZATION
We begin by deriving a (nearly) closed form solution for the optimal mixed χ2 -regularized policy in
Eq. (11); recall that we expect χPO to converge to this policy in the limit of infinite data.
We first observe that the link function ϕ(·) is strictly increasing over R+ , and its inverse is given by
ϕ−1 (z) = W0 (exp(z)); here, W0 (y) denotes the Lambert W-function (Corless et al., 1996), defined
for y ≥ − e−1 as the inverse of the function x 7→ xex . Consequently, for any x, the optimal policy
under mixed χ2 -regularization satisfies
                  πβ⋆ (a | x) = πref (a | x) · W0 exp β −1 (r⋆ (x, a) − Zβ,r⋆ (x)) ,


where Zβ,r⋆ (x) is chosen such that a πβ⋆ (a | x) = 1. We can better understand how this
                                          P
policy behaves using the following simple upper and lower bounds on the inverse link function
ϕ−1 (z) = W0 (exp(z)).
Proposition B.1. The link function ϕ(z) = z + log z is strictly increasing over (0, ∞), and its inverse
ϕ−1 (z) = W0 (exp(z)) is strictly increasing over (−∞, ∞). The inverse link function ϕ−1 satisfies
        z
          ≤ ϕ−1 (z) ≤ z ∀z ∈ [1, ∞), and             ez−e ≤ ϕ−1 (z) ≤ ez ∀z ∈ (−∞, 1].
        2
                                                                                    ⋆
Compared to KL-regularization, which leads to softmax policies that satisfy πβ;KL       (a | x) = πref (a |
            −1 ⋆                                                                    −1

x) · exp β (r (x, a) − Zβ,r⋆ ;KL (x)) , we see that the inverse link function ϕ (z) = W0 (exp(z))
for mixed χ2 -regularization satisfies ϕ−1 (z) ≈ z for z ≥ 1, leading to a more heavy-tailed action
distribution for πβ⋆ . On the other hand, for z ≤ 1 the inverse link behaves like the exponential function
(i.e., ϕ−1 (z) ≈ ez for z ≤ 1); see Figure 2 for an illustration. Using these properties, we can derive
the following upper and lower bounds on the density ratio between πβ⋆ and πref .
Proposition B.2 (Proposition 4.1 restated). For all x ∈ X and a ∈ A, the optimal policy πβ⋆ under
mixed χ2 -regularization satisfies
                                              π ⋆ (a | x)

                                   Rmax                        Rmax
                            exp −          ≲ β             ≲1+      .                        (21)
                                     β        πref (a | x)       β
Both inequalities are tight in general (up to absolute constants).
The upper bound in Eq. (21), which arises from the χ2 term in the mixed-χ2 objective, scales inversely
with the regularization parameter β, and reflects the heavy-tailed, pessimistic behavior this regularizer
induces; in contrast, the optimal policy under pure KL-regularization only satisfies
                                                ⋆
                                              πβ;KL  (a | x)

                                  Rmax                                Rmax
                           exp −           ≲                 ≲ exp                                   (22)
                                    β          πref (a | x)             β
in general. The lower bound in Eq. (21) arises from the KL term in the mixed-χ2 objective, but is not
important for our analysis (outside of allowing for DPO-like reparameterization).
B.2 T HE B IAS -OVEROPTIMIZATION T RADEOFF
We are now well equipped to understand how χPO modulates the tradeoff between overoptimization
and bias using the regularization parameter β, and how this tradeoff compares to vanilla DPO. To
showcase this, we take a reward modeling perspective, and consider the setting in which the policy
class Π is induced by a given reward model class R, similar to Example 3.1.
Suppose we start with a reward model class R ⊂ (X × A → [0, Rmax ]) such that r⋆ ∈ R. If we use
the induced policy class
         ΠDPO,β := π(a | x) = πref (a | x) · exp(β −1 (r(x, a) − Zβ,r;KL (x))) | r ∈ R ,

                                                                                           (23)
then DPO can be interpreted as fitting a reward model rb using maximum likelihood (Eq. (3)) and then
                      bDPO (a | x) = πref (a | x) · exp(β −1 (b
outputting the policy π                                       r(x, a) − Zβ,br;KL (x))). Meanwhile, if we
use the induced policy class
            ΠχPO,β := π(a | x) = πref (a | x) · ϕ−1 (β −1 (r(x, a) − Zβ,r (x))) | r ∈ R ,

                                                                                                    (24)
then χPO can be interpreted as fitting a reward model rb with the exact same maximum likelihood
                                             bχPO (a | x) = πref (a | x) · ϕ−1 (β −1 (b
objective, but instead outputting the policy π                                        r(x, a) − Zβ,br (x))).


                                                    22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                       Link functions                                               Inverse link functions
                                                                                                    10
                                 12         y = PO(z)
                                 10         y = DPO(z)                                               8
                                     8
                                                                                                     6
                               y6                                                               z
                                     4                                                               4
                                     2                                                                                                       z = PO1 (y)
                                                                                                     2
                                     0
                                                                                                                                             z = DPO
                                                                                                                                                  1 (y)
                                     2
                                                2          4          6         8          10            2      0     2      4        6          8    10    12
                                                                z                                                                 y

Figure 2: Behavior of the mixed χ2 -regularization link function ϕχPO (z) = z + log z and inverse
ϕ−1
 χPO (z) = W0 (exp(z)), compared to the KL-regularization link function ϕDPO (z) = log z and inverse
ϕ−1                 −1
 DPO (z) = exp(z). ϕχPO (z) ≈ z for z ≥ 1, leading to favorable heavy-tailed, pessimistic behavior.



                              Action a0, high coverage                          Action agood, low coverage                            Action abad, low coverage
                       1.0                                                1.0                                               1.0
 (a)


                       0.8                                                0.8                                               0.8
  Action probability


                       0.6                                                0.6                                               0.6
                       0.4                                                0.4                                               0.4
                       0.2                                                0.2                                               0.2
                       0.0                                                0.0                                               0.0
                              0.05       0.10       0.15       0.20                 0.05    0.10         0.15       0.20                  0.05       0.10    0.15   0.20
                             Regularization parameter                           Regularization parameter                              Regularization parameter
                                                                                    PO               DPO                   ref


Figure 3: Action probabilities for policies learned by χPO and DPO on the example from Appendix B.3,
under the “bad” event E in which the true reward model is r⋆ = r1 but the estimated reward model is
rb = r2 (n = 10). Here, r⋆ (agood ) = 1 and r⋆ (abad ) = 0, but rb(agood ) = 0 and rb(agood ) = 1; both
reward functions have r⋆ (a0 ) = rb(a0 ) = 1/2, and the goal is to compete with a comparator policy
that deterministically plays a0 .
Overoptimization. The DPO policy is greedier with respect to the incorrect reward model and places
                                                              1
much larger mass on the bad action abad for all β ∈ (0, 2 log   n ] (Right). As a result, the DPO policy
places much smaller mass on the baseline action a0 , suffering significantly more overoptimization
error compared to χPO (Left; see also Figure 1).
Bias. Compared to DPO, χPO has a higher probability of taking both the optimal action agood and the
reference action a0 . As a result, it strikes a better bias-overoptimization tradeoff than DPO, and is
competitive with respect to the comparator a0 even when DPO fails to converge.


The policies π bχPO and πbDPO are induced by the same reward model rb, and both use the parameter β
to balance bias and overoptimization. For both policies, large β means the policy avoids overfitting
to errors in the reward model (the extreme case is β → ∞, in which case both policies become
πref ), while small β means the policy has low bias, i.e., low error in the case where the model is
correct in the sense that rb = r⋆ (the extreme case is β → 0, in which case both policies become
x 7→ argmaxa:πref (a|x)>0 rb(x, a)). Yet, for the same choice of β, π
                                                                    bχPO is significantly more heavy-
tailed than πbDPO , a consequence of the pessimism induced by χ2 -regularization; see Figure 3, which
plots the action distribution for both policies as a function of β.

B.3                    A N I LLUSTRATIVE E XAMPLE
We now give a concrete example in which χPO allows the user to tune β to achieve tight statistical
rates, yet no choice of β for DPO leads to comparable performance (effectively, any choice of β is


                                                                                            23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


either susceptible to overoptimization, or has unacceptably high bias). This illustrates the favorable
tradeoff between bias and overoptimization achieved by χPO.
Let n ∈ N with n ≥ 2 be given. We consider a problem instance with X = {∅} and A =
{a0 , a1 , a2 , a3 }. We define πref via
                πref (a0 ) = 21 ,                              1
                                    πref (a1 ) = πref (a2 ) = 2n ,   and   πref (a3 ) = n−2
                                                                                         2n .

We define a reward class with two reward functions R := {r1 , r2 } as follows. For i ∈ {1, 2}:
                          ri (a0 ) = 1/2,    ri (ai ) = 1,    ri (aj ) = 0, ∀j ̸= i.

Let β > 0 be fixed. To compare χPO and DPO, we consider their behavior when invoked with
the induced policy classes ΠχPO,β and ΠDPO,β defined above. Recall that with this choice,
the two algorithms can be interpreted as fitting a reward model rb using maximum likelihood
                                     bχPO (a | x) = πref (a | x) · ϕ−1 (β −1 (b
(Eq. (3)) and returning the policies π                                        r(x, a) − Zβ,br (x))) and
                                   −1
bDPO (a | x) = πref (a | x) · exp(β (b
π                                     r(x, a) − Zβ,br;KL (x))), respectively.
Suppose that r1 is the true reward function. It is hopeless (information-theoretically) to compete
with the unconstrained optimal action a1 , as we are in a sample-starved regime where C a1 = 2n (in
the language of Eq. (13)). Indeed, one can show (see proof of Proposition A.1 in Appendix A) that
with constant probability, none of the examples in the offline dataset Dpref contain actions a1 or a2 .
Under this event, which we denote by E, the value for the maximum likelihood objective in Eq. (3)
is identical for r1 and r2 , so we may obtain rb = r2 (due to adversarial tie-breaking). However, in
spite of the fact that the policies π
                                    bχPO and π
                                             bDPO are induced by the same (incorrect) reward function
rb = r2 , they produce very different action distributions, as highlighted in Figure 3.
To understand this, note that even in the sample-starved regime, we can still hope to compete with the
“baseline” action a0 ; Figure 1 shows that χPO has low regret against this action, while DPO has high
regret. In particular, since C a0 = 2, Theorem 3.1 (Eq. (13)) implies that χPO achieves
                                                     r
                                                       1             1
                                 J(a0 ) − J(b
                                            πχPO ) ≲      + β + β −1 ,
                                                       n             n
                  q                                   q
and setting β ∝ n1 leads to J(a0 ) − J(b     πχPO ) ≲ n1 . This is a consequence of the pessimistic,
                       bχPO (cf. Proposition B.2), which places no more than β −1 /n probability mass
heavy-tailed nature of π
on the (incorrect) greedy action a2 for rb = r2 , thereby correctly capturing the inherent uncertainty in
the reward for this action.
On the other hand, it is straightforward to show that for all possible values β ≤ (2 log n)−1 , the DPO
policy π
       bDPO has regret
                                                                        !
                                     1                   1                    1
              J(a0 ) − J(b  πDPO ) ≥    1−                            1   −     ≥ Ω(1)
                                     2           1 12          1 − 2β        2n
                                             1 + e + (1 − )e
                                                     n               n

whenever n ≥ 2. This is because when β ≤ (2 log n)−1 , π   bDPO assigns excessively high probability to
the incorrect greedy action a2 , an instance of overoptimization. Meanwhile, larger choices for β lead
to excessively large bias in general (see Appendix A.1 for a more sophisticated construction which
extends this lower bound to all possible β). In other words, as illustrated in Figure 1, no choice of β
gives a favorable tradeoff between overoptimization and bias.
To summarize, for DPO, large values of β are required to avoid overfitting to the reward function,
incurring high bias. Meanwhile, χPO avoids overoptimization using comparatively small values
for β, yet has bias no worse than that of DPO, thereby striking a better tradeoff. We mention that
the “DPO+SFT” algorithm of Liu et al. (2024); Cen et al. (2024); Fisch et al. (2024) also fails on the
construction above; see Proposition A.1 in Appendix A.1 for details.
Remark B.1 (DPO decreases probabilities of preferred and rejected responses). Various recent works
have noted an empirical phenomenon in which DPO decreases the probabilities for both preferred
and rejected responses throughout training (Yuan et al., 2024; Pal et al., 2024; Rafailov et al.,
2024b). Interestingly, we observe that the example above exhibits this phenomenon. Notably, if
β < (2 log n)−1 , then under the event E in which the offline dataset Dpref does not contain the actions


                                                      24
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025



                                                                             1
                                                                         1 2β
                                                                         2e
a1 or a2 (so that rb = r2 ), we observe that π
                                             bDPO (a0 ) = 1           1        1        < 12 = πref (a0 ), and for
                                                                     2β + 1 e β + n−1
                                                                  2e      2n       2n
                                 1
                                                 1
all i > 2, π
           bDPO (ai ) = 1   1
                                2n
                                    1         < 2n = πref (ai ). We conclude that for all a ∈ Dpref ,
                           2β + 1 e β + n−1
                        2e     2n        2n


                                              π
                                              bDPO (a) < πref (a).
We emphasize that this behavior arises due to the use of function approximation. When the reward
class R (equivalently, the policy class ΠDPO,β ) is restricted, the algorithm can aggressively (and
incorrectly) extrapolate rewards for actions outside the dataset and, in doing so, inadvertently
decrease the probabilities for preferred responses in the dataset. Meanwhile, in the same parameter
range, χPO satisfies (see Figure 3)
                                          π
                                          bχPO (a0 ) > πref (a0 ),
highlighting that pessimism can mitigate this phenomenon.

B.4    N ONTRIVIALITY AND ROLE OF Vmax PARAMETER
To close this section, we discuss the role of the Vmax parameter (Assumption 3.2) used in the analysis
of χPO (Theorem 3.1) in depth, motivating it from the perspective of the induced policy class ΠχPO,β
from Appendix B.2.
Assumption 3.2 effectively implies that all policies π ∈ Π satisfy ππref ∞ ≲ Vmax      β ; in other words,
the policy class we use in χPO satisfies all-policy L∞ -concentrability with maxπ∈Π C∞       π
                                                                                                ≲ Vmax
                                                                                                    β . At
first glance, this might seem to trivialize the offline alignment problem, since it would suffice to prove
a generalization guarantee based on all-policy concentrability, and then plug this bound in. We will
show that this is not the case, and that this is actually an intrinsic feature of χ2 -regularization.
In more detail, recall that for χPO, we require the realizability assumption that πβ⋆ ∈ Π (As-
                         ⋆                        2                                   ⋆
sumption     where πβ is the optimal mixed χ -regularized policy that satisfies r (x, a) =
         3.1),
      π ⋆ (a|x)                                                                         π⋆

βϕ πrefβ (a|x) + Zβ,r⋆ (x). This policy, via Proposition B.2, satisfies πrefβ ∞ ≲ Rβmax , so from
a statistical perspective, we can take Assumption 3.2 to hold without loss of generality by removing
any policy that violates this bound. In addition, as highlighted by Example 3.1, if we begin from a
class of bounded reward models R with r⋆ ∈ R, Assumption 3.2 holds with Vmax ≲ Rmax for the
induced class ΠχPO,β defined in Eq. (24), even though knowledge of such a reward model class is a
mild statistical assumption that clearly does not trivialize the learning problem.
                                                          ⋆                                   ⋆
On the other hand, for DPO, a minimal assumption is that πβ;KL ∈ Π (Xie et al., 2024), where πβ;KL
                                                                              π⋆   (a|x)
is the optimal KL-regularized policy that satisfies r⋆ (x, a) = β log πβ;KL      + Zβ,r⋆ ;KL (x). Unlike
                                                          ⋆               (a|x)
                                                                        ref
                                                        π      (a|x)        R
the optimal mixed χ2 -regularized policy, πβ;KL
                                             ⋆            β;KL
                                                  has πref (a|x) ≳ exp βmax . This means that it is
                                                                      ⋆
impossible to find a policy class that simultaneously (1) realizes πβ;KL    , and (2) satisfies all-policy

                                π            Rmax
concentrability with maxπ∈Π C∞ ≪ exp β . As the bias of DPO is unacceptably large unless
β = poly(1/n) (the “small-β” regime), this leads to vacuous guarantees.
In view of these observations, our analysis of χPO can be interpreted as (implicitly) showing that
for any bounded reward class R, there exists a policy class Π (precisely, the class ΠχPO,β defined in
Eq. (24)) such that the following properties hold:
1. Bounded bias. For every r ∈ R, there exists πr ∈ Π such that for all policies π ⋆ ,
                                 ⋆
   Jr (π ⋆ ) − Jr (πr ) ≲ β · C π .

2. Bounded overoptimization. For all π ∈ Π,             π
                                                       πref   ∞
                                                                  ≲ Rβmax .

We view this as an interesting and non-trivial contribution in its own right. We mention in passing
that while it is indeed possible to analyze χPO by first proving a sample complexity guarantee based
on all-policy concentrability and then using that maxπ∈Π C∞     π
                                                                   ≲ Vmax
                                                                      β , this would lead to a loose
bound relative to Theorem 3.1.


                                                      25
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Algorithm 2 χ2 -RLHF
    input: Reference policy πref , preference dataset Dpref , unlabeled context dataset Dx , χ2 -
    regularization coefficient β > 0, smoothing parameter η ≥ 0.
 1: Estimate reward model via maximum likelihood:
                                         X
                      rb ← argmax                 log [σ (r(x, a+ ) − r(x, a− ))] .             (26)
                              r∈R
                                       (x,a+ ,a− )∈Dpref


 2: Define χ2 -regularized RLHF objective:
                                                                                            !
                              1 X                                 X           π 2 (a|x)
                 Jbβ,η (π) :=                      r(x, a)] − β
                                        Ea∼π(·|x) [b                                         .
                              nx                                   a
                                                                       πref (a|x) + ηπ(a|x)
                                x∈Dx

                                 b ∈ Π such that
 3: Policy optimization: Compute π

                                              π ) ≥ max Jbβ,η (π) − εopt .
                                       Jbβ,η (b
                                                    π∈Π
 4: return: π
            b.

C    S AMPLE C OMPLEXITY G UARANTEES FOR χ2 -RLHF
The χ2 -regularization framework we consider (Section 3.1) can be used to derive algorithms beyond
just χPO, and we expect it to find broader use. To highlight this, in this section we analyze the
algorithm that directly optimizes a variant of the χ2 -regularized RLHF objective in Eq. (6); this
can be accomplished via policy optimization methods such as PPO, in the vein of classical RLHF
approaches to offline alignment (Christiano et al., 2017; Bai et al., 2022; Ouyang et al., 2022; von
Werra et al., 2020). As we will show, a benefit of directly optimizing the RLHF objective is that it
allows us to provide guarantees that avoid dependence on the Vmax parameter in Theorem 3.1, which
may lead to improvement when Π includes policies with very large or very small density ratios ππref .
Algorithm. Our algorithm, χ2 -RLHF is displayed in Algorithm 2. At the population level, the
algorithm aims to optimize a variant of Eq. (7) that incorporates a small but important modification
that allows us to avoid dependencies on ππref . Given smoothing parameter η > 0, define the smoothed
                                       h                   i
                                                π(a|x)
χ2 -divergence Dχ2 ;η (π ∥ πref ) := Eπ πref (a|x)+ηπ(a|x)  . We aim to find
             argmax Jβ,η (π) := Eπ [r⋆ (x, a)] − βDχ2 ;η (π ∥ πref )                               (25)
                π

                                                                       π(a | x)
                               = argmax Eπ r⋆ (x, a) − β                                 .
                                      π                       πref (a | x) + ηπ(a | x)
The smoothing parameter η effectively clips the policy ratio in Dχ2 ;η (π ∥ πref ) where πref (a|x) ≪
ηπ(a|x); Dχ2 (· ∥ ·) corresponds to the special (non-clipped) case where η = 0. In particular, clipping
ensures a uniform bound of the form Dχ2 ;η (π ∥ πref ) ≤ η −1 , whereas
                                                                  h        the
                                                                            i best bound we can hope
for with the unclipped χ2 -divergence is Dχ2 (π ∥ πref ) = Eπ ππ(a|x)
                                                                 ref (a|x)
                                                                           ≤ C∞π
                                                                                 . For this reason,
smoothing will allow us to obtain guarantees that avoid dependence on all-policy concentrability or
parameters similar to Vmax .
To optimize Eq. (25), Algorithm 2 takes two datasets as input, along with a user-specified reward
model class R and policy class Π. The first dataset, Dpref , is labeled with human preferences, and
is used to learn a reward model rb via maximum likelihood estimation in Line 1. The second, Dx ,
contains only unlabeled contexts sampled from ρ, and is utilized in Line 3 to learn a policy that
approximately maximizes an empirical version of Eq. (25). Importantly, because Line 3 involves an
empirical expectation over only contexts, it is a purely computational problem that we can solve using
algorithms like PPO; we allow for tolerance εopt in Line 3 to accommodate optimization error from
such algorithms. By using unlabeled contexts in Line 3, we can obtain tighter guarantees when Dx is
large. This is often the case in practice, where unlabeled contexts are cheap to obtain, but preferences
can be expensive to query.
Theoretical guarantees. To analyze χ2 -RLHF, we make similar assumptions to those utilized
in Theorem 3.1 for χPO. Since χ2 -RLHF utilizes separate reward and policy classes, we require


                                                      26
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


realizability conditions for both. Namely, R must be able to express the true reward function r⋆ , and
Π must include the optimal policy for the regularized RLHF objective in Eq. (25).
Assumption C.1. The reward function class satisfies r⋆ ∈ R, and is bounded so that r(x, a) ∈
[0, Rmax ] for all r ∈ R and (x, a) ∈ X × A.
                                              ⋆               ⋆
Assumption C.2. The policy class Π satisfies πβ,η ∈ Π, where πβ,η is the optimal policy for Eq. (25).
Below is our main sample complexity guarantee for χ2 -RLHF. While it is stated for a fixed, β-
dependent smoothing parameter for compactness, the general version of this result (Theorem K.1)
allows for general η.
                                                                                      h      i
Theorem C.1. Let β > 0 be given, and suppose Assumptions C.1 and C.2 hold any η ∈ 0, 8Rβmax .
With probability at least 1 − δ, χ2 -RLHF (Algorithm 2) produces a policy π
                                                                          b such that for all policies
π ⋆ simultaneously, we have
J(π ⋆ ) − J(b
            π)
                   r ⋆                                                                  s
                                                          2  4Rmax
          2Rmax     C π log(|R|/δ)           π⋆    −1 Rmax e       log(|R|/δ)              log(|Π|/δ)
 ≲ Rmax e        ·                   +β·C +β ·                                 + Rmax                  + εopt .
                            n                                     n                            nx
In particular, given any comparator policy π ⋆ , we can choose the regularization parameter β to
achieve                                                             s
                                            r ⋆
               ⋆                    2Rmax    C π log(|R|/δ)            log(|Π|/δ)
          J(π ) − J(b  π ) ≲ Rmax e       ·                 + Rmax                 + εopt .       (27)
                                                    n                       nx

Above, we see that χ2 -RLHF, like χPO, has sample complexity that scales only with the single-policy
                                ⋆
concentrability coefficient C π , and holds for all comparator policies π ⋆ simultaneously. Since the
choice of β induces a similar bias-overoptimization tradeoff in the first statement of Theorem C.1
as it did in Theorem 3.1 for χPO, we focus our discussion on the guarantee for a tuned choice of β
(Eq. (27)). The first term in Eq. (27) accounts for the reward estimation error (Line 1) and scales with
   ⋆
C π ; as before, this accounts for how well rewards estimated from πref transfer to other candidate
policies. The second term in Eq. (27) accounts for the statistical error from sampled contexts used in
Line 3 for policy optimization. In particular, it is possible to drive this term to be much smaller than
the first by using a larger unlabeled context dataset, which is typically far cheaper to acquire.
Computationally efficiency. Theorem C.1 bounds the sample complexity of χ2 -RLHF under the
assumption that we can solve Line 3 up to εopt -accuracy. This is a purely computational problem,
and in practice it can be solved using policy gradient methods such as PPO.
Comparison to χPO. Unlike χPO (Theorem 3.1), Theorem C.1 has no dependence on the parameter
Vmax or quantities such as ππref ≤ maxπ C∞  π
                                              . We primarily attribute this to the fact that χ2 -RLHF
uses an explicit reward function class R, and normalizing or clipping it to the reward range Rmax
is both natural and routinely done in practice (Shah et al., 2015; Christiano et al., 2017; Ouyang
et al., 2022). In comparison, the implicit reward models induced by the policy class Π in χPO can
have larger range, and clipping the policy class in χPO directly, e.g., so that |βϕ( ππref )| is bounded,
is misguided, because
                   ⋆      the
                              policy class may lose realizability (Assumption 3.1). This is because
 ⋆                 πβ (a|x)
r (x, a) = βϕ πref (a|x) + Zβ,r⋆ (x), and the normalization factor Zβ,r⋆ cannot be reasonably
accounted for when clipping Π. While the Vmax (Assumption 3.2) parameter involves pairs of action
probabilities, and thereby sidesteps the normalization constant issue, it may not always be practical to
modify Π so that Vmax is bounded, since this would require checking all pairs of each policy’s action
probabilities.
However, using an explicit reward function class alone is not enough. As discussed previously,
when we move from implicit to explicit χ2 -regularization, incorporating the smoothing parameter η
in Eq. (25) is essential to avoid statistical errors due to policies with large density ratios when we
approximate the χ2 -regularizer with empirical data. A careful choice of η = β/Rmax in Theorem C.1
balances the benefits of clipping against the bias it introduces. Without smoothing (i.e., η = 0), a
                                    π
guarantee that depends on maxπ C∞      for χ2 -RLHF would be unavoidable, since the sample complexity
must scale with the range of the problem, which grows with the magnitude of the regularizer. See
Corollary K.2 in Appendix K for a guarantee in the case where η = 0, which highlights this.


                                                   27
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


D     χPO FOR G ENERAL P REFERENCE M ODELS
All of our results so far concern the Bradley-Terry model (Eq. (1)), which, as highlighted in prior
work, is somewhat restrictive. Thus, in this section, we turn our attention to offline alignment under a
general preference model which does not assume transitivity (Munos et al., 2023; Wang et al., 2023b;
Swamy et al., 2024; Rosset et al., 2024; Ye et al., 2024). The setup is the same as Section 2, but we
assume that for a given context x and pair of actions (a, b), the preference y ∈ {0, 1} is generated via
a Bernoulli Distribution
                                       y ∼ Ber(P ⋆ (a ≻ b | x)),                                     (28)
         ⋆                                                                                         ′
where P (a ≻ b | x) ∈ [0, 1] is a general preference distribution. For a pair of policies π, π , let
P ⋆ (π ≻ π ′ ) := Ex∼ρ [P ⋆ (π(x) ≻ π ′ (x) | x)]. Following Wang et al. (2023b); Munos et al. (2023);
Swamy et al. (2024), we consider the minimax winner (Kreweras, 1965; Simpson, 1969; Kramer,
1973; Fishburn, 1984) or von Neumann winner (Dudík et al., 2015) as a solution concept:
                                 πMW := argmax min     ′
                                                          P ⋆ (π ≻ π ′ ).
                                                π∈Π       π ∈Π

It will be useful to slightly reparameterize this formulation by introducing the preference function
ℓ⋆ (x, a, b) := 2P ⋆ (a ≻ b | x) − 1. Note that for any well-defined preference model, we have
P ⋆ (a ≻ b | x) + P ⋆ (b ≻ a | x) = 1 for all x, a, b, which indicates that ℓ⋆ satisfies skew symmetry:
              ℓ⋆ (x, a, a) = 0,     ℓ⋆ (x, a, b) + ℓ⋆ (x, b, a) = 0,        ∀x ∈ X , a, b ∈ A.
Furthermore, the minimax winner above is equivalent to
                                   πMW := argmax min     ′
                                                              ℓ⋆ (π, π ′ ),                        (29)
                                                    π∈Π    π ∈Π
         ⋆      ′                               ⋆
where ℓ (π, π ) := Ex∼ρ,a∼π(x),b∼π′ (x) [ℓ (x, a, b)]. Concretely, our goal is to use the logged
preference data Dpref = {(x, a+ , a− )} (with (a+ , a− ) labeled according to Eq. (28)) to compute a
policy π
       b that is an ε-approximate minimax winner, in the sense that
                           DG(bπ ) := max ℓ⋆ (π, π
                                                 b) − min ℓ⋆ (b π , π) ≤ ε.                     (30)
                                          π∈Π                    π∈Π

D.1 I MPOSSIBILITY OF S INGLE -P OLICY C ONCENTRABILITY UNDER G ENERAL P REFERENCES
While the general preference framework above is more powerful than the Bradley-Terry model, we
now show that there is a statistical cost for this generality. In particular, our first result in this section
shows that in contrast to the Bradley-Terry model, it is not possible to achieve sample complexity
guarantees that scale with single-policy concentrability under general preferences, even when the
learner has access to a small class of preference models P that contains the true preference model P
(i.e., P ⋆ ∈ P).
Theorem D.1 (Impossibility of single-policy concentrability under general preferences). There
exists two problem instances θ1 = (ρ, P1⋆ , Π) and θ2 = (ρ, P2⋆ , Π) differing only in their ground
truth preference model, a data collection policy πref , and a preference model class P = {P1⋆ , P2⋆ }
with |P| = 2 such that the following hold:
1. For both instances, the single-policy L∞ -concentrability coefficient for a minimax winner is
                      πMW
   bounded: minπMW C∞      ≤ 2.6
2. For any n ∈ N and any algorithm Alg which derives a policy π     b from a dataset Dpref of n samples,
   there exists an instance θ ∈ {θ1 , θ2 } such that πref incurs constant suboptimality:
                                                                            1
                             min max EDpref ∼θi [DG(Alg(Dpref ); θi )] ≥ ,
                             Alg i∈{1,2}                                    8
   where DG(π; θ) is the duality gap for policy π on instance θ.
This lower bound is inspired by similar results in the literature on offline RL in two-player zero-sum
Markov games (Cui and Du, 2022). However, the lower bound constructions in Cui and Du (2022)
cannot be directly applied as-is, because they do not satisfy the skew-symmetry property required
by the general preference alignment framework. Our lower bound highlights that even under skew-
symmetry, it is impossible to achieve single-policy concentrability for offline learning in two-player
zero-sum games.
   6
     In general, the minimax winner may not be unique. We compete against the minimax winner with the best
possible single-policy concentrability coefficient.


                                                      28
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Algorithm 3 Iterative χPO for General Preferences
 1: Input: labeled preference dataset Dpref , preference model class L, regularization coefficient β,
    stepsize η, total number of iterations T .
 2: Initialize: π 1 = πref .
 3: Learn a preference model ℓb via least-squares regression:
                                                       X                              2
                                ℓb = argmin                        (ℓ(x, a+ , a− ) − 1) .
                                      ℓ∈L
                                               (x,a+ ,a− )∈Dpref


 4: Collect m samples Dx = {(x, a, b)} where each sample is drawn i.i.d. from x ∼ ρ, a ∼
    πref (x), b ∼ πref (x).
 5: for t = 1, · · · , T do
 6:     Sample bt ∼ π t (x) and let rbt (x, a) = ℓ(x,
                                                 b a, bt ) for all x ∈ X , a ∈ A.
 7:     Compute
                                     X                                                                2
                                                          β,η
              π t+1 = argmin                       clip4 fπ,π t (x, a, b)     rt (x, a) − rbt (x, b)) ,
                                                                           − (b                           (32)
                          π∈Π
                                  (x,a,b)∈Dx

                 β,η
          where fπ,π t (x, a, b) is defined in Eq. (31).

            b = unif({π t }Tt=1 ).
 8: Output: π



D.2 I TERATIVE χPO FOR G ENERAL P REFERENCES
In spite of the hardness in the prequel, we now show that an iterative variant of χPO—based on
self-play—can learn a near-optimal minimax winner under the general preference model under a new
local coverage condition—a condition that is stronger than the single policy concentrability but much
weaker than global/all-policy concentrability and the notion of unilateral concentrability introduced
by Cui and Du (2022).
Our algorithm, Iterative χPO, is described in Algorithm 3, and consists of two main steps.
Preference model estimation via least squares regression on Dpref . We first (Line 3) learn a
preference model from the offline preference dataset Dpref . We assume access to a preference function
class L which is realizable in the sense that ℓ⋆ ∈ L and where all ℓ ∈ L satisfy skew-symmetryc, and
we will estimate ℓ⋆ rather than P ⋆ . We perform least-squares regression on Dpref with L to learn ℓ⋆ :
                                              X                            2
                           ℓb = argmin                 (ℓ(x, a+ , a− ) − 1) .
                                    ℓ∈L
                                            (x,a+ ,a− )∈Dpref


Policy optimization with iterative χPO update. Given the estimated model ℓ,         b we compute an
approximate minimax winner using an iterative regression scheme inspired by Gao et al. (2024). We
proceed in T iterations (Line 5), where at each iteration t, we define an iteration-dependent reward
function rt (x, a) based on the current policy π t as

                         rt (x, a) = Eb∼πt (x) [ℓ(x,
                                                b a, b)],               ∀x ∈ X , a ∈ A.
                                                                    β,η
Then, for all π, π ′ ∈ Π, we define a policy-dependent predictor fπ,π  ′ (x, a, b), whose motivation will

be described in detail momentarily, as follows:

                β,η                    1              π (a | x)               π (b | x)
              fπ,π′ (x, a, b) := 1 +       · βϕ                    − βϕ
                                       η            πref (a | x)            πref (b | x)
                                          ′                         ′
                                   1          π (a | x)              π (b | x)
                                 −     βϕ                   − βϕ                                     (31)
                                   η         πref (a | x)           πref (b | x)
         β,η
Using fπ,π  t (x, a, b) as a policy-parameterized regression function, we (Line 7) compute the next
         t+1
policy π      by solving a least-squares regression problem in which the Bayes optimal solution is the
relative reward rt (x, a) − rt (x, b) for iteration t.


                                                          29
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                             β,η
Let us now explain the intuition behind the the predictor fπ,π  ′ (x, a, b). Suppose that the regression

step in Line 7 learns a predictor that can perfectly model the relative reward, i.e.,
                          ∀x, a, b,   fπβ,η                    t          t
                                         t+1 ,π t (x, a, b) = r (x, a) − r (x, b),


In this case, we can show that the returned policy π t+1 is the optimal policy for the following mixed
χ2 -regularized RL objective:

    t+1
                               t                                    β         t
  π (x) = argmax Ea∼p r (x, a) − βDfχmix (p ∥ πref (x)) − Bx (p, π ) ,                   ∀x ∈ X , (33)
               p∈∆(X )                                              η
where Bx (p, π t ) is the Bregman divergence induced by the regularizer p 7→ Dfχmix (p ∥ πref (x)), i.e.,
Bx (p, q) := Dfχmix (p ∥ πref (x)) − Dfχmix (q ∥ πref (x)) − ∇Dfχmix (q ∥ πref (x)), p − q ,      ∀x ∈ X .
Thus, the algorithm can be understood as running mirror descent on the iteration-dependent loss
function −rt , with p 7→ Dfχmix (p ∥ πref (x)) as a per-context regularizer. This technique draws
inspiration from Chang et al. (2024), in which the authors apply a similar regularized mirror descent
algorithm to learn the optimal policy for the reward-based setting. The motivation for using mixed-χ2
                                                                             t+1
regularization is exactly the same as in χPO: we want to ensure that ππref (a|x) (a|x)
                                                                                       ≤ 1 + β1 , thereby
mitigating overoptimization.
D.3 T HEORETICAL A NALYSIS OF I TERATIVE χPO
We now present our main theoretical guarantees for Iterative χPO. We begin by stating a number
of statistical assumptions. We first assume that the preference model class contains the ground truth
preference function ℓ⋆ .
Assumption D.1 (Preference function realizability). The model class L satisfies ℓ⋆ ∈ L where ℓ⋆
is the ground truth preference function.
In addition, since Algorithm 3 iteratively applies an χPO update, we require that a policy realizability
assumption analogous to Assumption 3.1 holds for each of the sub-problems in Eq. (33). Concretely,
we make the following assumption.
Assumption D.2 (Policy realizability for general preferences). For any policy π ∈ Π and ℓ ∈ L, the
policy class Π contains the minimizer of the following regularized RL objective:

                                                                         β
π(x; ℓ, π) := argmax Ea∼p,b∼π(x) [ℓ(x, a, b)] − βDfχmix (p ∥ πref (x)) − Bx (p, π) ,       ∀x ∈ X .
              p∈∆(X )                                                    η

Finally, we require that the implicit reward functions in Eq. (32) are bounded, analogous to
Assumption 3.2.
Assumption D.3 (Bounded implicit rewards for general preferences). For a parameter Vmax ≥ 2, it
holds that for all π, π ′ ∈ Π, x ∈ X , and a, b ∈ A,
                                          β,η
                                         fπ,π ′ (x, a, b) ≤ Vmax .                                  (34)

Our main guarantee for Algorithm 3 is as follows.
Theorem D.2. Fix any δ ∈ (0, 1]. Suppose Algorithm 3 is invoked with T = nV mn  2      , β = √1T , and
                                                                                max +m
      1
η = T . Then under Assumption D.1, Assumption D.2 and Assumption D.3, we have that probability
at least 1 − δ,

                                                  Vmax log(|Π|/δ) log(|Π||L|/δ)
            DG(bπ ) ≲ min subopt(b π , C) + C           √          +        √             ,
                      C≥1                                 m                   n
where subopt(b  π , C) := maxπ∈Π ℓ⋆ (π, π     b) − maxπ∈ΠC ℓ⋆ (π, π     b) and ΠC := {π :
maxx∈X Dχ2 (π(x) ∥ πref (x)) ≤ C}. In particular, if we define the unilateral concentrability
coefficient as
                                                   π(a | x)πMW (b | x)
                          Cuni :=        max                              ,
                                  π∈Π,x∈X ,a,b∈A πref (a | x)πref (b | x)
then the bound above implies that

                                         Vmax log(|Π|/δ) log(|Π||L|/δ)
                      DG(bπ ) ≲ Cuni ·         √          +       √           .
                                                 m                   n

                                                    30
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


The first result gives a tradeoff between the statistical error and the approximation error subopt(b
                                                                                                   π , C),
which is modulated by the parameter C. This tradeoff is analogous to, but more subtle, than the
one for χPO in the reward-based setting. In the reward-based setting, χPO has low regret to the best
policy covered πref . In the general preference setting, Algorithm 3 has small duality gap if, for any
policy, there is an approximate best response that is covered by πref (this implies that subopt(b  π , C)
is small for small C). Crucially, Algorithm 3 does not require that all policies are covered by πref ,
which is a distinctive feature of mixed χ2 -regularization and reflects the algorithms robustness to
overoptimization.
The second result concerns the setting where all policies are covered by πref and is easier to interpret.
Indeed, if all π ∈ Π satisfy Dχ2 (π ∥ πref ) ≤ C ⋆ , then subopt(bπ , C ⋆ ) = 0, which implies that we
                                                   ⋆ 2
can learn an ε-approximate minimizer using O(C /ε ) samples. Thus, we obtain a guarantee based
                                              e
on unilateral concentrability (Cui and Du, 2022), which is a stronger condition, i.e., we always
have maxπ Dχ2 (π ∥ πref ) ≤ Cuni . However, per the above discussion, the first part of Theorem D.2
is stronger than results based on unilateral concentrability and hints at a new notion p of coverage
for general preferences. Lastly, we remark that the parameter Vmax only affects 1/m term in
Theorem D.2, so dependence on this parameter can be mitigated using unlabeled data.
Theorem D.2 is closely related to recent work of Ye et al. (2024), which uses pessimism to learn
a regularized minimax winner, and achieves polynomial sample complexity with a concentrability
assumption similar to Theorem D.2. However, there are two key differences. First, their learning
objective is the KL-regularized minimax winner, while we study the unregularized objective and use
χ2 -regularization. More importantly, their theoretical algorithm is computationally inefficient as it
constructs an explicit confidence set for the preference model and performs max-min-style policy
optimization. In contrast, our algorithm only requires solving standard supervised learning problems.

E    E XPERIMENTS IN O FFLINE L ANGUAGE M ODEL A LIGNMENT
E.1 TL;DR S UMMARIZATION
We perform preliminary evaluations of χPO for offline language model alignment on the
TL;DR dataset (Stiennon et al., 2020), using DPO as our comparison baseline. The refer-
ence policy πref is the Pythia-1b model (Biderman et al., 2023) pre-trained on SFT data
(cleanrl/EleutherAI_pythia-1b-deduped__sft__tldr from Huang et al. (2022)), and perfor-
mance is measured via winrate against a baseline, as judged by GPT-4o. All parameters that are not
algorithm-specific, such as the learning rate, are shared by both χPO and DPO in order to ensure a fair
comparison (see Appendix E.2 for details).
In Table 1 we display the winrates of χPO and DPO over several choices of training epochs, as well
as regularization parameter β. The winrate corresponds to the final checkpoint learned by each
algorithm for each set of hyperparameters. We consider β = 0.05 and 1 epoch of training to be a
standard setup for DPO (Gao et al., 2024; Guo et al., 2024; Rafailov et al., 2024a), and, as we are
particularly concerned with regimes where overoptimization is of concern, we additionally analyze
performance when epochs are increased, and/or β is decreased (corresponding to less regularization).
Over all choices of β and epochs, χPO achieves a higher average winrate than DPO. While the
difference is not significant for β = 0.05 and 1 epoch, the performance gap grows significantly as
the number of epochs increases, demonstrating the robustness of χPO to overoptimization. Further,
while DPO degrades completely for β = 0.005, χPO is robust over two orders of magnitude of β,
reinforcing trends seen earlier in Figure 1 and the more favorable bias-overoptimization tradeoff from
our theoretical analysis.
In addition, χPO exhibits better performance and robustness longitudinally throughout training, as
shown in Appendix E.1. While DPO peaks early with high variance around 0.5 epochs and degrades
thereafter, χPO continues to improve smoothly then plateaus over the last epoch. Further, for the
same regularization parameter β, the χPO policy has significantly lower KL-divergence relative to
πref , demonstrating that the χ2 -regularization is both a stronger regularizer and one that effectively
mitigates overoptimization.
E.2 E XPERIMENT DETAILS
Dataset and models. For training, we use trl-internal-testing/tldr-preference-trl-style,
with 92.9K train samples and 83.8K validation samples.              The reference pol-


                                                   31
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                             Winrate with = 0.05                                       KL Divergence with = 0.05
                                  60

   Winrate against Baseline (%)
                                  55                                                             30


                                                                                 KL Divergence
                                  50
                                                                                                 20
                                  45
                                                                    DPO                          10                                DPO
                                  40
                                                                     PO                                                             PO
                                       0.5         1.0        1.5         2.0                         0.5       1.0        1.5           2.0
                                                   Epochs                                                       Epochs
Figure 4: (Left) TL;DR Summarization winrate recorded every 250 steps, over 2 epochs of train-
ing. Shaded area displays ±1 standard error over 3 seeds. At 1 epoch χPO already obtains better
performance, and continues to improve over the course of training, while DPO degrades over time.
(Right) KL divergence DKL (b  π ∥ πref ) averaged over 2 of the seeds. For the same β, χPO constrains
the learned policy to be significantly closer to πref , thereby striking a better bias-variance tradeoff.


icy πref is the Pythia-1b model (Biderman et al., 2023) pre-trained on SFT data
(cleanrl/EleutherAI_pythia-1b-deduped__sft__tldr from Huang et al. (2022)), and
performance is measured via winrate against a baseline, as judged by GPT-4o. All parameters that
are not algorithm-specific, such as the learning rate, are shared by both χPO and DPO in order to
ensure a fair comparison.
Training details. Our implementation of χPO is built upon the DPO trainer from Transformer
Reinforcement Learning (TRL) (von Werra et al., 2020). χPO comes with strong robustness and
theoretical properties, but the policy ratios can sometimes introduce instability in training. In practice,
we have observed that better stability
                                     and performance can    be achieved by utilizing the (more general
form) link function ϕ(z)
                     e     := exp clip[−88,20] (α · log z) + γ · log z in Algorithm 1, and performing
a small grid search over additional parameters α = { 14 , 1} and γ = {0.1, 1} for a fixed β.
We briefly discuss each parameter in turn. The mixing parameter γ controls the relative ratios of KL-
and χ2 -regularization, our analysis in Appendix H.1 shows that Theorem 3.1 holds more generally
for γ ∈ (0, 1] (see Theorem H.1). Next, ignoring clipping, α ∈ (0, 1] in ϕe implements regularization
with the (1 + α)-divergence (or Renyi divergence), which is an f -divergence that is stronger than
KL-regularization but weaker than χ2 -regularization (Van Erven and Harremos, 2014), and also
carries single-policy concentrability guarantees (although with a slower-rate dependence on sample
size n). For example, α = 14 corresponds to the link function ϕ(z) = (z)1/4 + γ log z, which is
easier to optimize than the link function ϕ(z) = z + γ log z (corresponding to α = 1) induced by
χ2 -regularization, given the potentially large magnitude of z = ππref . Though we do not write out the
analysis here, the methods used to prove the sample complexity of χPO (Theorem 3.1) can be used to
prove analogous guarantees for regularization with α-divergences, which will have slightly worse
statistical rates.
Lastly, we provide some additional explanation for the clipping operation. We observed that
torch.exp is prone to underflow when log ππref is very negative, and clipping the upper range
to 20 can help reduce numerical instabilities. Clipping in such a manner is supported by our analysis
                                        ⋆
in Proposition 4.1, which shows that ππref ≤ 1 + Rβmax (though technically we do not know Rmax ). The
parameters for all experiments are displayed in Table 2.
Generation details. For winrate evaluation, we use greedy, temperature 0, decoding. For computa-
tion of the KL divergence, we sample from the model with temperature 1. The maximum prompt
length is 512, and the maximum response length is 200. We use the standard generation prompt
“TL;DR:” (Gao et al., 2024).
Evaluation of performance. The performance of each algorithm is measured via win-
rate against responses in the SFT dataset, as measured by GPT-4o (global standard).
The winrate is computed on a subset of 512 prompts from the SFT validation set


                                                                                32
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                         Table 2: Parameter settings in TL;DR summarizion

                            Algorithm                   Parameters
                            DPO                         batch size: 64
                                                        learning rate: 1e-6
                                                        scheduler: cosine
                                                        optimizer: adamw
                            χPO                         batch size: 64
                                                        clip range: [-88, 20]
                                                        learning rate: 1e-6
                                                        scheduler: cosine
                                                        optimizer: adamw
                            β = 0.05, 1 epoch           α : 1.25, γ : 1.0
                            β = 0.05, 2 epochs          α : 2.00, γ : 1.0
                            β = 0.05, 4 epochs          α : 1.25, γ : 0.1
                            β = 0.005, all epochs       α : 1.25, γ : 0.1


(trl-internal-testing/tldr-preference-sft-trl-style), and the order of the model and ref-
erence responses are randomized each round.


Part II

Proofs
F    P RELIMINARIES
Recall that for a pair of probability measures P and Q with a common dominating measure ω,
Hellinger distance is defined via
                                          Z r         r    !2
                                 2              dP      dQ
                              DH (P, Q) =           −         dω.                     (35)
                                                dω      dω

Lemma F.1 (MLE for conditional density estimation (e.g., Wong and Shen (1995); de Geer (2000);
Zhang (2006); Agarwal et al. (2020))). Consider a conditional density p⋆ : X → ∆(Y), where X is
the instance space and Y is the target space. Let D = {(xi , y i )}ni=1 be a dataset in which (xi , y i )
are drawn i.i.d. as xi ∼ ρ ∈ ∆(X ) and y i ∼ p⋆ (y | x). Suppose we have a finite function class P
such that p⋆ ∈ P, where p(· | x) ∈ ∆(Y) for all p ∈ P and x ∈ X . Define the maximum likelihood
estimator
                                               X
                                pb := argmax          log p(y | x).
                                          p∈P
                                                 (x,y)∈D

Then with probability at least 1 − δ,
                                                           2 log(|P|δ −1 )
                          Ex∼ρ DH2 (b
                                    p(· | x), p⋆ (· | x)) ≤

                                                                           .
                                                                  n

G    A NALYSIS OF χPO: P ROOF S KETCH FOR T HEOREM 3.1
In this section, we sketch the proof of the main guarantee for χPO, Theorem 3.1, with the full proof
deferred to Appendix H. A central object in the proof is the implicit reward model induced by the
χPO policy π b, which we define via

                                                     b(a | x)
                                                     π
                                    rb(x, a) := βϕ                 .                            (36)
                                                    πref (a | x)

                                                   33
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


As we will show, this reward model is a natural bridge between χPO and the corresponding mixed
χ2 -regularized RLHF objective in Section 3.1, and allows us to view χPO from a reward-based
perspective. In  particular,  note that if we analogously define an induced reward model class RΠ :=
{r(x, a) = βϕ ππ(a|x)
                   ref (a|x)
                              : π ∈ Π}, then Line 2 of χPO can be viewed as performing maximum
likelihood estimation over this class (in the sense of Eq. (3)) under the Bradley-Terry model. Under
Assumption 3.1, RΠ realizes the true reward function r up to an action-independent shift. As a result,
if we define ∆r (x, a, b) := r(x, a) − r(x, b), then using a fairly standard generalization bound for
maximum likelihood estimation (e.g., Wong and Shen (1995); Zhang (2006); de Geer (2000); see
Lemma H.1), we can show that

                                                    ⋆         2                     log(|Π|/δ)
  ε2stat := Ex∼ρ,a∼πref ,b∼πref ∆rb(x, a, b) − ∆r (x, a, b)       ≤ O Vmax e2Rmax ·              . (37)
                                                                                         n
In other words, the estimated reward model rb is accurate under the action distribution induced by
πref . However, rb may still be inaccurate for policies that select different actions from πref , raising
concerns of overoptimization. To address this issue, we use the following lemma, which shows that
χ2 -divergence bounds the extent to which the accuracy of a reward model rb trained under πref will
transfer to a downstream policy π of interest; this will motivate our use of χ2 -regularization.
Lemma G.1 (Informal version of Lemma H.3). For any policy π : X → ∆(A), it holds that
                             h                 ⋆
                                                         i q
   Ex∼ρ,a∼π(·|x),b∼πref (·|x) ∆rb(x, a, b) − ∆r (x, a, b) ≲ (1 + Dχ2 (π ∥ πref )) · ε2stat .

Going forward, let us abbreviate Eπ,πref [·] = Ex∼ρ,a∼π(·|x),b∼πref (·|x) [·]. Let π ⋆ be an arbitrary policy.
Noting that C π = 1 + 2Dχ2 (π ∥ πref ) and that
                            h                   ⋆
                                                          i             h                      ⋆
                                                                                                          i
 J(π ⋆ ) − J(b
             π ) ≲ Eπ⋆ ,πref ∆rb(x, a, b) − ∆r (x, a, b) + Eπb,πref ∆rb(x, a, b) − ∆r (x, a, b) ,

it follows immediately from Lemma G.1 p     that χPO obtains a crude pguarantee  scaling with all-policy
concentrability, i.e. J(π ⋆ ) − J(b π) ≲      (C π⋆ + C πb )ε2stat ≤  (C π⋆ + maxπ∈Π C π )ε2stat . This
inequality is tight for non-pessimistic algorithms like DPO, which reflects their sensitivity to overop-
timization. To obtain the improved guarantee for χPO in Theorem 3.1, which scales only with
                                 ⋆
single-policy concentrability C π , the crux of the remaining proof will be to show that χPO implicitly
implements pessimism via mixed χ2 -regularization. For this, we appeal to the following central
technical lemma, which we expect to find broader use.
Lemma G.2 (Informal version of Lemma H.2). Let f be a convex function with dom(f ) = R+
                                                                                 : X → ∆(A) with
that is differentiable over its domain. Given any parameter β > 0 and  policy π̄
                                                                                 π(a|x)
π̄(a | x) ∈ dom(f ′ ) for all x, a, define the reward model r̄(x, a) = βf ′     πref (a|x)   . Then

                              π̄ ∈ argmax Eπ [r̄(x, a)] − β · Df (π ∥ πref ).
                                      π


Under Assumption 3.2 we have π     b ∈ dom(fχ′ mix ). Then recalling that rb(x, a) := βϕ ππbref(a|x)
                                                                                                (a|x)   =

   ′      π
          b(a|x)
βfχmix πref (a|x) and that fχmix is convex, Lemma G.2 implies that the policy π     b produced by χPO
satisfies
                            χmix
                b ∈ argmax Jβ,b
                π             r (π)        r] − βDχ2 (π ∥ πref ) − βDKL (π ∥ πref ).
                                    := Eπ [b                                                             (38)
                       π∈Π

In other words,

               b optimizes the mixed χ2 -regularized RLHF objective under its own implicit reward model.
The χPO policy π
This formally justifies the claim that χPO implicitly implements pessimism via χ2 -regularization.
With this result in hand, we are now ready to prove Theorem 3.1. Let π ⋆ be an arbitrary policy. Since
 χmix         χmix   ⋆                                              ⋆
Jβ,b  π ) ≥ Jβ,b
   r (b         r (π ) by Eq. (38), we can decompose the regret J(π ) − J(b  π ) as
                             χmix        χmix
J(π ⋆ ) − J(b
            π ) ≤ J(π ⋆ ) − Jβ,b   ⋆
                               r (π ) + Jβ,b  π ) − J(b
                                           r (b       π)


                                                     34
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                        χmix        χmix           χmix        χmix
                = J(π ⋆ ) − J(πref ) − Jβ,b   ⋆
                                          r (π ) + Jβ,b
                                                      r (πref ) + Jβ,b  π ) − Jβ,b
                                                                     r (b        r (πref ) − J(b
                                                                                               π ) + J(πref ) .
                  |                    {z                    } |                      {z                   }
                                              (I)                                               (II)
                                                                            χmix
In the second line, we have added or subtracted the baselines J(πref ) and Jβ,b
                                                                              r (πref ) to center
the objectives with the performance of the reference policy. Up to statistical errors, the first term
                                             χmix  ⋆                                   ⋆
(I) corresponds to error from how much Jβ,b    r (π ) underestimates the return of π (bias), and
                                                             χmix
the second term (II) corresponds to error from how much Jβ,br (b  π ) overestimates the return of π b
(overoptimization). As we will see shortly, these two sources of error are directly controlled (in
opposing ways) by the strength of the regularization parameter β in Eq. (38).
                                    χmix  ⋆
First, expanding the definition of Jβ,b
                                      r (π ) and centering the returns using the reference policies, we
have
                 χmix                   χmix
(I) = J(π ⋆ ) − Jβ,b   ⋆
                   r (π ) − J(πref ) + Jβ,b
                                          r (πref )
    = Eπ⋆ [r⋆ (x, a)] − Eπ⋆ [b
                             r(x, a)] + βDχ2 (π ⋆ ∥ πref ) + βDKL (π ⋆ ∥ πref ) − Eπb [r⋆ (x, a)] + Eπref [b
                                                                                                           r(x, a)]
                  ⋆
    = Eπ⋆ ,πref [∆r (x, a, b) − ∆rb(x, a, b)] + βDχ2 (π ⋆ ∥ πref ) + βDKL (π ⋆ ∥ πref )
      q
    ≤ (1 + Dχ2 (π ⋆ ∥ πref )) · ε2stat + β · Dχ2 (π ⋆ ∥ πref ) .
                                           |      {z         }
                                                         bias

Above, we have used that DKL (π ∥ πref ) ≤ Dχ2 (π ∥ πref ) for any policy π, along with the bound on
                                                                χmix
reward estimation error from Lemma G.1. Next, expanding Jβ,b     r (bπ ) and centering the returns in a
similar fashion,
                    χmix                χmix
            (II) = Jβ,b  π ) − J(b
                      r (b       π ) − Jβ,b
                                          r (πref ) + J(πref )
                                                     ⋆
                = Eπb,πref [∆rb(x, a, b) − ∆r (x, a, b)] − βDχ2 (b   π ∥ πref ) − βDKL (b
                                                                                        π ∥ πref )
                  q
                ≤ (1 + Dχ2 (b     π ∥ πref )) · ε2stat − β · Dχ2 (b
                                                                  π ∥ πref )
                ≲ εstat +       β −1 ε2stat          .
                                | {z }
                            overoptimization error

Above, the first inequality uses DKL (π ∥ πref ) ≥ 0 and Lemma G.1, while the second inequality
                                        2
p AM-GM. Critically, by using χ -regularization, we are able to cancel the on-policy error
uses                                                                                           term
  (1 + Dχ2 (bπ ∥ πref )) · ε2stat that arises from change-of-measure, leading to a modest β −1 ε2stat
penalty for overoptimization.
Combining these results, and recalling that C π = 1 + 2Dχ2 (π ∥ πref ), we conclude that
                                     q
                                                            ⋆
                  J(π ⋆ ) − J(bπ ) ≲ C π⋆ · ε2stat + β · C π + β −1 · ε2stat .
                                                     | {z }      | {z }
                                                                bias   overoptimization error


The bias and overoptimization errors above arise from how well      p our chosen uncertainty quantifier,
βDχ2 (π ∥ πref ), accounts for the on-policy statistical error (1 + Dχ2 (π ∥ πref )) · ε2stat arising
from Lemma G.1; this is controlled by the magnitude of the regularization parameter β. When β
is too large, the uncertainty quantifier is overly pessimistic about the quality of the reward model rb
under π ⋆ , which increases the bias of χPO. In contrast, the overoptimization error increases when β
is too small. In this regime, π
                              b overfits to rb because the regularizer under-evaluates the statistical error
of the learned policy. In order to obtain tight statistical rates, the choice of regularization parameter
β must carefully balance its opposing effects on bias and overoptimization error. For a fixed π ⋆ ,
                          ⋆
choosing β ∝ (ε2stat /C π )1/2 results in the second claim in Theorem 3.1.

H     P ROOFS FOR S ECTION 3
This section is organized as follows. First, in Appendix H.1, we analyze a more general version of
χPO that mixes KL-regularization with χ2 -regularization using a mixing parameter γ ∈ (0, 1], and
present its sample complexity guarantee in Theorem H.1. χPO is a special case with γ = 1, and
Appendix H.2 shows (with a one-line proof) that Theorem 3.1 follows directly from Theorem H.1
with this parameter choice.


                                                         35
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


H.1 G ENERAL V ERSION OF T HEOREM 3.1
As previously described at the end of Section 3.3, χPO can be applied in a more general form where
the KL-regularization is mixed with χ2 -regularization using a weight parameter γ ∈ (0, 1]. In this
section, we analyze the sample complexity for this form of the algorithm, of which χPO is a special
case with γ = 1, which directly leads to the guarantee in Theorem 3.1.
Concretely, given regularization parameter β > 0 and weight parameter γ ∈ (0, 1], we aim to solve
the mixed χ2 -regularized objective
                    χmix
            argmax Jβ,γ  (π) := Eπ [r⋆ (x, a)] − β · Dχ2 (π ∥ πref ) − βγ · DKL (π ∥ πref ).         (39)
          π:X →∆(A)

The regularization term Dχ2 (π ∥ πref ) + γ · DKL (π ∥ πref ) = Dfχmix ,γ (π ∥ πref ) is an f -divergence
induced by the function fχmix ,γ (z) := 21 (z − 1)2 + γz log z. Correspondingly, we replace the link
function ϕ(·) in χPO with
                                       ϕγ (z) := z + γ log(z),
and output the policy

                    X                                     π(a+ | x)                  π(a− | x)
 b ← argmax
 π                            log σ clip2Rmax βϕγ                       − βϕγ                           .
        π∈Π                                             πref (a+ | x)              πref (a− | x)
               (x,a+ ,a− )∈Dpref
                                                                                                     (40)

To give a sample complexity guarantee for Eq. (40), we require that Π can express the optimal
                                      χmix
regularized policy for the objective Jβ,γ  in Eq. (39). This generalizes Assumption 3.1 for χPO, which
corresponds to the special case where γ = 1.
                                                                     ⋆               ⋆
Assumption H.1 (Policy realizability). The policy class Π satisfies πβ,γ ∈ Π, where πβ,γ is the
                            2
optimal policy under mixed χ -regularization (Eq. (11)).
We also assert that, analogous to Assumption 3.2, the “implicit” reward models induced by the policy
class Π and the link function ϕγ have bounded range.
Assumption H.2 (Bounded implicit rewards). For a parameter Vmax ≥ Rmax , it holds that for all
π ∈ Π, x ∈ X , and a, b ∈ A,

                               π(a | x)               π(b | x)
                        βϕγ                  − βϕγ                  ≤ Vmax .             (41)
                              πref (a | x)           πref (b | x)

We now state the sample complexity guarantee for the policy learned in Eq. (40). The first bound
applies to general β > 0 and γ ∈ (0, 1], while in the second we obtain a tight statistical rate by
choosing the parameter β as a function of the comparator policy π ⋆ .
Theorem H.1 (General version of Theorem 3.1). Suppose Assumptions H.1 and H.2 hold for some
β > 0 and γ ∈ (0, 1]. With probability at least 1 − δ, the variant of χPO in Eq. (40) produces a
       b such that for all policies π ⋆ simultaneously, we have
policy π
                                                                        ⋆
                                    r
                                       2C π⋆ log(|Π|/δ)              Cπ                2
                                                                                   256Vmax e4Rmax log(|Π|/δ)
    ⋆
J(π ) − J(b π ) ≤ 32Vmax e  2Rmax
                                  ·                     + β(1 + γ) ·      + β −1 ·                           .
                                               n                      2                       n
                                                                                     q
In particular, given any comparator policy π ⋆ , we can choose β = 32Vmax e2Rmax 2 log(|Π|/δ)
                                                                                          nC π⋆
                                                                                                    to
achieve
                                                                r ⋆
                         ⋆                              2Rmax    C π log(|Π|/δ)
                    J(π ) − J(b   π ) ≤ (64 + 4γ)Vmax e       ·                  .
                                                                         n

The bias-overoptimization tradeoffs induced by the choice of β in Theorem H.1 are identical to
those for Theorem 3.1 (and described there). Let us briefly discuss the influence of γ on the sample
complexity. We first observe that choice of γ ∈ (0, 1] changes the bound by only a small multiplicative
factor, which implies that γ can be arbitrarily small as long as it is positive. For the analysis, this is
natural because the KL-divergence is dominated by the χ2 -divergence, and, as discussed in Section 3.2,
KL-regularization is only needed to enable the DPO-style reparameterization trick for Eq. (40) (in


                                                   36
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


particular, the χ2 -RLHF algorithm in Appendix C, which does not require reparameterization, obtains
similar guarantees using pure χ2 -regularization). It is worth noting, however, that the γ parameter
can implicitly influence the magnitude of Vmax , as well as the policy realizability condition. As such,
practical consequences of this hyperparameter choice may not be fully captured by Theorem H.1.
Proof of Theorem H.1. Recall that the link function ϕγ induces a correspondence between policies
in the class Π and the implicit reward functions they induce (or, equivalently, between policies and
the Bradley-Terry preference models they express). Our proof centers around the implicit reward
model induced by the learned policy π  b,

                                                         b(a | x)
                                                         π
                                   rb(x, a) := β · ϕγ                  ,
                                                        πref (a | x)
which will allow us to move between the χPO objective (Eq. (40)) and the RLHF objective (Eq. (39)).
In particular, we establish two key facts, which together show that Eq. (40) implicitly solves Eq. (39):
1. (Lemma H.3) The reward model rb is an accurate estimate of r⋆ on the distribution of πref . More-
   over, we can transfer this guarantee to the distribution of any policy π by paying a multiplicative
   (1 + 2Dχ2 (π ∥ πref ))-factor.
2. (Lemma H.2) π
               b maximizes the RLHF objective in Eq. (39) with reward model rb, namely,
               π
               b = argmax Eπ [br(x, a)] − β · Dχ2 (π ∥ πref ) − βγ · DKL (π ∥ πref ).                (42)
                         π∈Π

Establishing these relationships enables us to analyze the χPO policy π
                                                                      b defined in Eq. (40) through
the RLHF formulation in Eq. (42), allowing us to appeal to pessimism-based arguments to show that
χPO is insensitive to overoptimization error that might otherwise be encountered when learning a
policy from off-policy data.
Implicit reward model rb. The χPO objective in Eq. (40) is equivalent to maximum likelihood
estimation with the Bradley-Terry preference model over the induced reward function class

                                                      π(a | x)
                        RΠ := r(x, a) = β · ϕγ                      :π∈Π .
                                                     πref (a | x)
Then, since π
            b is the maximizer in Eq. (40), we can equivalently write
                                  X
                rb = argmax                 log σ clip2Rmax [r(a+ | x) − r(a− | x)] .     (43)
                      r∈RΠ
                               (x,a+ ,a− )∈Dpref

The following lemma, which builds on a standard MLE generalization bound (Lemma F.1) bounds
the error of rb under the action distribution induced by πref . Recall that we use Eπ,π′ [·] as shorthand
for Ex∼ρ,a∼π(·|x),b∼π′ (·|x) [·].
Lemma H.1. Suppose Assumption H.1 holds. Then with probability at least 1 − δ, the policy π             b
output by Eq. (40) satisfies
                                                                                                 2
                     h                                                                   2 i 128Rmax e4Rmax log(|Π|/δ)
ε2stat =: Eπref ,πref clip2Rmax [b
                                 r(x, a) − rb(x, b)] − clip2Rmax [r⋆ (x, a) − r⋆ (x, b)]    ≤                          .
                                                                                                        n
Lemma H.1, along with all further supporting lemmas, is proven in the sequel. This result measures
the error of rb using the clipped differences of rewards for pairs of actions (x, a, b) drawn from πref .
Clipping the range of the implicit/explicit reward functions to 2Rmax ensures that the statistical error
does not depend on Vmax . One minor but important detail in the proof is showing that Assumption H.1
implies RΠ includes the true reward function r⋆ up to an action-independent shift, so that the true
preference model is realizable.
Implicit RLHF policy optimization. Having established the accuracy of rb, we now show that
Eq. (40) finds the optimal policy to the RLHF objective in Eq. (42) when rb is used as the reward
model, i.e.,
                        χmix
         π
         b = argmax Jβ,γ,b   r (π)        r(x, a)] − β · Dχ2 (π ∥ πref ) − βγ · DKL (π ∥ πref ).
                                   := Eπ [b                                                      (44)
                π∈Π
This is a direct consequence of the result in Lemma H.2, which shows that an analogous property
holds for general f -divergences. In particular, for any convex function f and policy π, the policy π is
itself the optimal solution to the f -divergence-regularized RLHF objective under the implicit reward
model induced by π with the link function f ′ .


                                                   37
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Lemma H.2. Let f : (0, ∞) → R be a convex function with f (1) = 0. Further, f is differentiable
almost everywhere and 0 ∈  / dom(f ′ ), where we define f ′ (0) := limx↓0 f (x)−f
                                                                               x
                                                                                  (0)
                                                                                       and f (0) :=
limx↓0 f (x). Given any parameter
                                  β >   0
                                          and valid policy π̄ : X → ∆(A), with π(a  | x) ∈ dom(f ′ )
                                       π̄(a|x)
for all (x, a), let r̄(x, a) = βf ′   πref (a|x)   be the implicit reward model. Then

                              π̄ ∈ argmax Eπ [r̄(x, a)] − βDf (π ∥ πref ).
                                      π:X →∆(A)


Since fχ′ mix ,γ = ϕγ = x + γ log x for γ > 0, clearly 0 ̸∈ dom(ϕγ ). Further, under Assumption H.2,
π(a | x) > 0 for all π ∈ Π (otherwise Vmax would be undefined), thus π(a | x) ∈ dom(ϕγ ) for all
(x, a). The claim in Eq. (44) then directly follows.
Estimation error translation. To proceed, we will use condition on Lemma H.1 and use the event
in this lemma to relate the estimated RLHF objective in Eq. (42) to the “true” RLHF objective that
replaces rb with r⋆ . An immediate challenge is that the RLHF objective in Eq. (42) must evaluate
    r(x, a)] for all π ∈ Π, and accuracy under πref does not immediately imply that rb is accurate
Eπ [b
for other policies. The following bound quantifies the effects of this distribution shift using the
χ2 -divergence, and expresses how the estimation guarantee for rb in Lemma H.1 transfers to other
policies π of interest.
Lemma H.3. Suppose Assumption 3.1 holds. Then for any π : X → ∆(A), under the event in
Lemma H.1, we have
                                                             2Vmax
                                                                     q
            r(x, a) − rb(x, b) − (r⋆ (x, a) − r⋆ (x, b))|] ≤

  Eπ,πref [|b                                                      ·   1 + 2Dχ2 (π ∥ πref ) · ε2stat ,
                                                             Rmax
where ε2stat is the off-policy estimation error defined in Lemma H.1.
It is worth noting that Lemma H.3 bounds the unclipped on-policy estimation error (on the LHS)
in terms of the clipped off-policy estimation error, and in making this translation we pay for Vmax .
As we will see shortly, working with the unclipped rb object is necessary for showing that Eq. (40)
implicitly optimizes Eq. (42).
Pessimism-based regret decomposition. Equipped with the preceding lemmas, we can now bound
                                                                      χmix     ⋆
the regret for χPO. We decompose the regret using the RLHF objective Jβ,γ,br (π ) defined in Eq. (44).
Fixing an arbitrary comparator policy π ⋆ , we have
             J(π ⋆ ) − J(b
                         π ) = Eπ⋆ [r⋆ (x, a)] − Eπb [r⋆ (x, a)]
                                                   χmix           χmix
                              = Eπ⋆ [r⋆ (x, a)] − Jβ,γ,b    ⋆
                                                        r (π ) + Jβ,γ,b
                                                                           ⋆
                                                                       r (π ) − Eπ
                                                                                     ⋆
                                                                                 b [r (x, a)]
                                                   χmix           χmix
                              ≤ Eπ⋆ [r⋆ (x, a)] − Jβ,γ,b    ⋆
                                                        r (π ) + Jβ,γ,b   π ) − Eπb [r⋆ (x, a)],
                                                                       r (b

where the last inequality uses the optimality of π
                                                 b for Eq. (44).
                              χmix
Expanding the expression for Jβ,γ,br , we can further bound this by

         J(π ⋆ ) − J(b
                     π ) ≤ Eπ⋆ [r⋆ (x, a) − rb(x, a)] + βDχ2 (π ⋆ ∥ πref ) + βγDKL (π ⋆ ∥ πref )
                                  r(x, a) − r⋆ (x, a)] − βDχ2 (b
                           + Eπb [b                            π ∥ πref ) − βγDKL (bπ ∥ πref )
                         ≤ Eπ⋆ [r⋆ (x, a) − rb(x, a)] + β(1 + γ)Dχ2 (π ⋆ ∥ πref )
                                  r(x, a) − r⋆ (x, a)] − βDχ2 (b
                           + Eπb [b                            π ∥ πref ).                              (45)
In the last line, we use the fact that 0 ≤ DKL (π ∥ πref ) ≤ Dχ2 (π ∥ πref ) for any policy π to
                                                                                    π ∥ πref ), and
consolidate the f -divergence terms. Specifically, this allows us to eliminate DKL (b
combine DKL (π ⋆ ∥ πref ) and Dχ2 (π ⋆ ∥ πref ).
In order to bound the reward estimation error terms in Eq. (45) using the guarantee we have previously
established (Lemma H.3), we first center them using the return under the reference policy:
Eπ⋆ [r⋆ (x, a) − rb(x, a)] + Eπb [b
                                  r(x, a) − r⋆ (x, a)]
  = Eπ⋆ ,πref [r (x, a) − rb(x, a) − r⋆ (x, b) + rb(x, b)] + Eπb,πref [b
                ⋆
                                                                       r(x, a) − r⋆ (x, a) − rb(x, b) + r⋆ (x, b)]
              h                           i           h                           i
  = Eπ⋆ ,πref ∆⋆ (x, a, b) − ∆(x,
                               b     a, b) + Eπb,πref ∆(x,
                                                        b   a, b) − ∆⋆ (x, a, b) ,


                                                        38
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


where ∆⋆ (x, a, b) := r⋆ (x, a) − r⋆ (x, b) and ∆(x,  b      a, b) := rb(x, a) − rb(x, b). Substituting this
identity back into the regret decomposition in Eq. (45), we apply Lemma H.3 with ε2stat :=
      2
128Rmax  e4Rmax log(|Π|/δ)
                     n     (from Lemma H.1) to obtain
                            h                             i
J(π ⋆ ) − J(b
            π ) ≤ Eπ⋆ ,πref ∆⋆ (x, a, b) − ∆(x,b    a, b) + β(1 + γ)Dχ2 (π ⋆ ∥ πref )
                             h                             i
                   + Eπb,πref ∆(x,
                               b      a, b) − ∆⋆ (x, a, b) − βDχ2 (b   π ∥ πref )
                   2Vmax
                           q
                               1 + 2Dχ2 (π ⋆ ∥ πref ) · ε2stat + β(1 + γ)Dχ2 (π ⋆ ∥ πref )

                ≤
                   Rmax
                      2Vmax
                             q
                   +              1 + 2Dχ2 (b  π ∥ πref ) · ε2stat − βDχ2 (bπ ∥ πref )
                       Rmax
                   2Vmax                      β(1 + γ)   π⋆            2V q                           β
                           q
                                                                             max
                =             C π⋆ · ε2stat +            · C −1 +                      C πb · ε2stat − · C πb − 1
                   Rmax                           2                        Rmax                       2
                   2Vmax                      β(1 +  γ)            2V                          β
                           q                                              q
                                                              ⋆       max
                ≤             C π⋆ · ε2stat +            · Cπ +             C πb · ε2stat − · C πb ,
                   Rmax                           2                 Rmax                       2
since C π = 1 + 2Dχ2 (π ∥ πref ), or equivalently Dχ2 (π ∥ πref ) = 12 (C π − 1). Lastly, we use the
AM-GM inequality to upper bound
                             2Vmax                   2V 2 ε2stat    βC πb
                                   q
                                      C πb · ε2stat ≤ max2 β
                                                                  +       ,
                             Rmax                      Rmax          2
allowing us to conclude that
                             2Vmax                    β(1 + γ) π⋆              V 2 ε2
                                   q
           J(π ⋆ ) − J(b
                       π) ≤           C π⋆ · ε2stat +            · C + 2β −1 · max2 stat .
                             Rmax                         2                      Rmax
Plugging in the expression for ε2stat results in the first statement of Theorem H.1.
Choosingq  β for tight rates. For the second statement, given a comparator policy π ⋆ , choosing
             ε2stat
β = 2V max
    Rmax     C π⋆
                    gives
                          2Vmax                            Vmax                   Vmax
                                q                               q                      q
    J(π ⋆ ) − J(b   π) ≤          C π⋆ · ε2stat + (1 + γ)         C π⋆ · ε2stat +        C π⋆ · ε2stat
                          Rmax                             Rmax                   Rmax
                                 Vmax
                                       q
                       = (4 + γ)           C π⋆ · ε2stat .
                                 Rmax



H.1.1 P ROOFS FOR S UPPORTING L EMMAS
Proof of Lemma H.1. Recall the reward-based MLE objective in Eq. (43),
                               X
             rb = argmax                log σ clip2Rmax [r(x, a+ ) − r(x, a− )] .
                         r∈RΠ
                                 (x,a+ ,a− )∈Dpref

To leverage standard generalization bounds for MLE, we re-interpret this objective as maximum
likelihood over a class of preference distributions under the Bradley-Terry model. For a reward
function r, define for all y ∈ {+1, −1} and (x, a, b) ∈ X × A × A its induced preference distribution:

Pr (y|x, a, b) = I{y = +1}·σ clip2Rmax [r(x, a) − r(x, b)] +I{y = −1}·σ clip2Rmax [r(x, b) − r(x, a)] .
Consider the a class of preference models induced by RΠ under this definition, PΠ :=
{Pr : r ∈ RΠ }. We can equivalently write that
                                           X
                      Prb = argmax             log p(+1 | x, a+ , a− ),
                                   p∈PΠ
                                           (x,a+ ,a− )∈Dpref

or, interpreting each tuple (x, a+ , a− ) in Dpref as being induced by a tuple (x, a, e
                                                                                      a, y) in which
(a+ , a− ) = (a, e                              a, a) if y = −1,
                 a) if y = +1 and (a+ , a− ) = (e
                                                X
                            Prb = argmax                  log p(y | x, a, e
                                                                          a).
                                       p∈PΠ
                                               (x,a,e
                                                    a,y)∈Dpref



                                                       39
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Next, we show that Pr⋆ ∈ PΠ , ie., the induced preference model class realizes the true distribution.
     ⋆
For πβ,γ , define the reward model
                                                    ⋆
                                                   πβ,γ (a | x)

                                     ⋆
                                   re (x, a) = ϕγ                 ,
                                                   πref (a | x)
which is equivalent to r⋆ up to an action-independent shift, namely, the normalization factor λ⋆β,γ
                        ⋆
in Lemma H.4. Since πβ,γ    ∈ Π under Assumption H.1, we have re⋆ ∈ RΠ , and for all (x, a, b) ∈
X × A × A, it holds that
                  r⋆ (x, a) − re⋆ (x, b)] = clip2Rmax [r⋆ (x, a) − r⋆ (x, b)] = r⋆ (x, a) − r⋆ (x, b).
       clip2Rmax [e
The first equality is because action-independent shift between re⋆ and r⋆ is cancelled out when taking
the difference of rewards, and the second equality is because, by assumption, r⋆ ∈ [0, Rmax ]. As a
result, the reward difference is bounded in the same range and never clipped.
From this we conclude that Pre⋆ = Pr⋆ ∈ PΠ , and realizability is satisfied. Further, it is easy to see
that PΠ contains only valid distributions. Thus, having satisfied the necessary preconditions, we can
invoke Lemma F.1, which guarantees that with probability at least 1 − δ, we have
                                                                            2 log(|Π|/δ)
                    Eπref ,πref DH2 (Prb(· | x, a, b), Pr⋆ (· | x, a, b)) ≤

                                                                                                .
                                                                                      n
To conclude, we extract a bound on reward estimation error from this Hellinger distance bound by
using Lemma H.5 with R = V = 2Rmax , giving
                        h                                                                          2 i
             Eπref ,πref clip2Rmax [b r(x, a) − rb(x, b)] − clip2Rmax [r⋆ (x, a) − r⋆ (x, b)]
               ≤ 64e4Rmax Rmax   2
                                      · Eπref ,πref DH2 (Prb(· | x, a, b), Pr⋆ (· | x, a, b))


                                          log(|Π|/δ)
                 ≤ 128e4Rmax Rmax
                              2
                                  ·                  .
                                               n



Proof of Lemma H.2.
First we rewrite the objective as a minimization problem,
                           argmin         − Eπ [r̄(x, a)] + βDf (π ∥ πref )
                               π
                                               X
                                   s.t.   ρ(x)     π(a | x) = ρ(x)          ∀x,
                                                a
                                          ρ(x)π(a | x) ≥ 0                  ∀x, a.
Here, π is the primal variable, and denote the dual variables as λ : X → R and α : X × A → [0, ∞),
which correspond to the first and second constraints, respectively. The Lagrangian form is then
                                                                                  !
                                                 X                X                  X        X
L(π, λ, α) = − Eπ [r̄(x, a)] + βDf (π ∥ πref ) +      ρ(x)λ(x)        π(a | x) − 1 −     ρ(x)   α(x, a)π(a | x).
                                                         x              a                      x         a

Slater’s condition holds since π̄ itself is a strictly feasible solution, and the objective is convex in
π(a | x). Then if (π, λ, α) satisfy the KKT conditions, they are the optimal primal and dual variables,
which, overloading notation, we denote as (π ⋆ , λ⋆ , α⋆ ).
We will demonstrate that setting π ⋆ = π̄, λ⋆ = 0, and α⋆ = 0 satisfies the KKT conditions. First,
we observe that the proposed solutions are primal and dual feasible. Further, we have π̄ > 0 since
  / dom(f ′ ) and π̄(a | x) ∈ dom(f ′ ). As a result, ρ(x)α⋆ (x, a)π(a | x) = 0 for all x, a, and
0 ∈
complementary slackness is satisfied. Lastly, for stationarity,

           ∂L(π, λ, α)                            ′    π̄(a | x)        ⋆       ⋆
                         = ρ(x) −r̄(x, a) + βf                       + λ (x) − α (x, a)
             ∂π(a | x)                                πref (a | x)

                                                       π̄(a | x)
                         = ρ(x) −r̄(x, a) + βf ′
                                                      πref (a | x)

                                                         40
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                        ′    π̄(a | x)          ′    π̄(a | x)
                           = ρ(x) −βf                      + βf
                                            πref (a | x)            πref (a | x)
                           = 0,
where in the second line we substitute λ⋆ = 0 and α⋆ = 0, and in third line we have utilized the
definition of r̄(x, a) from the lemma statement.

Proof of Lemma H.3. For a pair of policies π, π ′ and p ≥ 1, we define the norm ∥·∥p,π×π′ :=
                       1/p
(Eρ,a∼π,b∼π′ [| · |p ]) . In addition, for notational compactness, we abbreviate ∆(x,
                                                                                 b    a, b) :=
                           ⋆             ⋆          ⋆
rb(x, a) − rb(x, b), and ∆ (x, a, b) := r (x, a) − r (x, b).
Recall that our goal is to bound the (unclipped) reward estimation error under π using the (clipped)
reward estimation error πref . We begin by decomposing
                                        h i               h i
  ∆⋆ − ∆b            = ∆⋆ − clip2Rmax ∆  b + clip2R ∆
                                                      max
                                                           b −∆ b
            1,π×πref                                               1,π×πref
                                        h i                         h i        h            h i     i
                           ⋆
                     ≤ ∆ − clip2Rmax ∆   b            + clip2Rmax ∆   b −∆  b · I clip2R ∆
                                                                                        max
                                                                                             b ̸= ∆
                                                                                                  b
                                             1,π×πref                                                 1,π×πref
                                        h i                                     h i
                           ⋆
                     ≤ ∆ − clip2Rmax ∆   b            + Vmax · Pπ,πref clip2Rmax ∆ ̸= ∆ .
                                                                                 b     b
                                             1,π×πref
                       |             {z             } |                  {z              }
                         (I) clipped on-policy estimation error         (II) bias from clipping

This splits our bound into two terms. The first is the on-policy error of the clipped reward differences,
and can be directly bounded by Lemma H.1 using a standard change-of-measure argument. The
second expresses the error of translating the clipped estimates to the unclipped ones in our target
bound. For the first term, using Cauchy-Schwarz gives
                             h i              r                         h i 2
                 ⋆
      (I) = ∆ − clip2Rmax ∆    b            ≤ C π · ∆⋆ − clip2Rmax ∆      b
                                   1,π×πref                                    2,πref ×πref
                                              r                                      h i 2
                                            = C π · clip2R [∆⋆ ] − clip2R ∆
                                                                  max
                                                                                       b
                                                                                         max
                                                                                                  ,
                                                                                                  2,πref ×πref
                                        ⋆
where the last equality uses that ∆ ∈ [−Rmax , Rmax ].
Next, for the second term, we again use Cauchy-Schwarz to change measure onto the offline
distribution,
                                     h i             r                      h i
      (II) = Vmax · Pπ×πref clip2Rmax ∆    b ≤ Vmax · C π · Pπ ,π clip2R ∆
                                      b ̸= ∆                                 b ̸= ∆
                                                                                  b .
                                                              ref ref   max


Further, using Markov’s inequality along with the fact that ∆⋆ ∈ [−Rmax , Rmax ],
                             h i                                h i
                              b ̸= ∆
        Pπref ,πref clip2Rmax ∆    b ≤ Pπ ,π           clip2Rmax ∆
                                                                 b = 2Rmax
                                           ref   ref
                                                                h i
                                       ≤ Pπref ,πref clip2Rmax ∆ b − clip2R [∆⋆ ] ≥ Rmax
                                                                             max

                                           1                 h i                 2
                                       ≤ 2         clip2Rmax ∆b − clip2R [∆⋆ ]                .
                                         Rmax                            max
                                                                                 2,πref ×πref

Combining inequalities, we obtain
                                             r
                                      V                        h i                     2
            ⋆                           max
          ∆ −∆    b           ≤ 1+             C π · clip2Rmax ∆b − clip2R [∆⋆ ]
                     1,π×πref         Rmax                                   max
                                                                                       2,πref ×πref
                                             q
                                      Vmax
                              = 1+              1 + 2Dχ2 (π ∥ πref ) · ε2stat
                                      Rmax
                                2Vmax
                                      q
                              ≤           1 + 2Dχ2 (π ∥ πref ) · ε2stat .
                                Rmax
In the second line we have used C π = 1+2Dχ2 (π ∥ πref ) and the definition of ε2stat from Lemma H.1,
and in the last line we use Vmax ≥ Rmax .


                                                            41
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                                       ⋆
Lemma H.4. When πref (a | x) > 0 for all x ∈ X , the optimal policy πβ,γ for Eq. (39) satisfies
                                           ⋆
                                           πβ,γ (a | x)

                          r⋆ (x, a) = ϕγ                  + λ⋆β,γ (x),
                                           πref (a | x)
where λ⋆β,γ is an optimal dual variable that normalizes πβ,γ
                                                         ⋆
                                                             .
Proof of Lemma H.4. It is easy to see that strong duality holds for Eq. (39), since it is convex and
strictly feasible (e.g., for the policy πref ). Thus, the KKT conditions give the optimal primal and dual
solutions.
Since Eq. (39) is constrained optimization problem (over valid policies), P
                                                                          we first define the dual
variables. Below, λ : X → R corresponds to the equality constraint that a π(a | x) = 1 for all
x ∈ X , and α : X × A → R≥0 corresponds to the inequality constraint that π(a | x) ≥ 0 for all
(x, a) ∈ X × A. After converting Eq. (39) from maximization to minimization, we write Eq. (39) in
Lagrangian form as
                                                                                    !
                                                        X          X                     X         X
                     ⋆
L(π, λ, α) = − Eπ [r (x, a)] + βDfχmix ,γ (π ∥ πref ) +   ρ(x)λ(x)     π(a | x) − 1 −         ρ(x)   α(x, a)π(a | x),
                                                               x               a                    x           a

since multiplying each of the solutions by ρ(x) does not affect the value of the saddle-point problem.
                                            ⋆
We denote the optimal primal variable as πβ,γ , and optimal dual variables as (λ⋆β,γ , αβ,γ
                                                                                        ⋆
                                                                                            ).
From stationarity, the optimal primal and dual variables satisfy
                                        ⋆
                                       πβ,γ (a | x)

                       r⋆ (x, a) = ϕγ                 + λ⋆β,γ (x) − αβ,γ
                                                                     ⋆
                                                                         (x, a).
                                       πref (a | x)

Next, for a function g let g −1 denote its left inverse, such that g −1 (g(x)) = x. Because ϕγ is injective
(see proof of Lemma H.2), it has a left inverse (ϕγ )−1 , and we can write
                 ⋆
                    (a | x) = πref (a | x) · (ϕγ )−1 r⋆ (x, a) − λ⋆β,γ (x) + αβ,γ⋆

               πβ,γ                                                                 (x, a) .
Because ϕγ (z) = z + γ log(z), 0 ∈     / dom(ϕγ ), and therefore 0 ∈   / range((ϕγ )−1 ). Then from the
                                       ⋆
above expression, we observe that πβ,γ (a | x) > 0 since πref (a | x) > 0. It immediately follows that
  ⋆
αβ,γ (x, a) = 0 for all (x, a) from complementary slackness, which states that the optimal solutions
         ⋆              ⋆
satisfy πβ,γ (a | x) · αβ,γ (x, a) = 0 for all x, a. This allows us to reduce the expression for r⋆ to the
stated result, that is,
                                                 ⋆
                                                  πβ,γ (a | x)

                                 ⋆
                                r (x, a) = ϕγ                    + λ⋆β,γ (x).
                                                  πref (a | x)



Lemma H.5. For z ∈ [−R, R] and z ′ ∈ [−V, V ] where V ≥ R ≥ 1, we have
                                   |z − z ′ | ≤ 4e2R V · |σ(z) − σ(z ′ )| .
Additionally, if we define the distribution Pz (y) = I{y = +1}σ(z) + I{y = −1}σ(−z) for
y ∈ {−1, +1} and define Pz′ analogously, then
                                       |z − z ′ | ≤ 4e2R V · DH (Pz , Pz′ ).

Proof of Lemma H.5. We begin with the first statement, and write
                                                |z − z ′ |
                              |z − z ′ | =                    · |σ(z) − σ(z ′ )|.
                                             |σ(z) − σ(z ′ )|
                                                                                          ′
                                                                                |z−z |
Since σ(z ′ ) ∈ (0, 1) but z ′ ∈ [−V, V ], it can be observed that the slope |σ(z)−σ(z ′ )| is smallest where

z ≈ z ′ , and increases as we move away from this region in either direction. To better intuit the
scaling of the slope in terms of V , we expand |σ(z) − σ(z ′ )| in the denominator to write
                                                                   ′
                                       |z − z ′ |(1 + ez )(1 + ez )
                        |z − z ′ | =                                · |σ(z) − σ(z ′ )|.
                                                 |ez − ez′ |

                                                        42
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


This indicates that the slope should scale linearly (not exponentially) with the range of z ′ . For
                             ′          ′
example, as z ′ → ∞, (1 + ez )/|ez − ez | = O(1).
                                                                                            ′     R+z   ′   R+z
                                                                                                     −1
To make this intuition precise, we split into two cases. First, whenever ez ≥ e eR −1
                                                                                    +1
                                                                                       or ez ≤ e eR +1
                                     ′                         z′    R z     z′
(this constitutes the range where “z ≈ z”), we have 1 + e ≤ e |e − e |. Then in this region,
                                                 ′
                     |z − z ′ |(1 + ez )(1 + ez )
      |z − z ′ | =                                |σ(z) − σ(z ′ )| ≤ 2V (1 + eR )eR · |σ(z) − σ(z ′ )|.
                               |ez − ez′ |

               ′     R+z        R+z
                       −1 e
Next, for ez ∈ [ e eR +1       +1
                         , eR −1  ], we apply the mean value theorem. Since σ ′ (x) = ex (1 + e−x )−2 ,
                              |z − z ′ |
                                            ≤           sup                ez̃ (1 + e−z̃ )−2
                           |σ(z) − σ(z ′ )|   z̃∈[min{z,z ′ },max{z,z ′ }]

                                             ≤       h R+z
                                                                  sup         i
                                                                                  ez̃ (1 + e−z̃ )−2
                                                         e       −1 eR+z +1
                                                 ez̃ ∈             , R
                                                             eR +1   e −1

                                             ≤ 4eR .
                                                              ′           R+z         R+z
                                                                 −1 e
In the second inequality, we use the fact that ez , ez ∈ [ e eR +1       +1
                                                                   , eR −1  ], and in the third inequality
                      ′
we use the fact that σ (x) is increasing in x, and that |z| ≤ R. Combining the inequalities for the two
             ′
regions of ez gives the result.
For the second statement, we use the fact that
                                                             X          (Pz (y) − Pz′ (y))2
                               2DH2 (Pz , Pz′ ) ≥                                           .
                                                                         Pz (y) + Pz′ (y)
                                                     y∈{+1,−1}

As a result,
                                   X
                                           (Pz (y) − Pz′ (y))2 ≤ 4DH2 (Pz , Pz′ ).
                                y∈{+1,−1}

Since Pz (y) = 1 − Pz (−y) and Pz (+1) = σ(z),
                          X
                                (Pz (y) − Pz′ (y))2 = 2(σ(z) − σ(z ′ ))2 ,
                             y∈{+1,−1}

and therefore (σ(z) − σ(z ′ ))2 ≤ 2DH2 (Pz , Pz′ ). The result follows from taking the square root of
both sides and combining with the first statement in the lemma.


H.2 P ROOF OF T HEOREM 3.1
Proof of Theorem 3.1. The policy optimization in Line 2 of Algorithm 1 is a special case of Eq. (40)
with γ = 1. As a result, Theorem 3.1 follows directly from Theorem H.1 when instantiated with
γ = 1.


H.3 P ROOF OF C OROLLARY 3.1
Proof of Corollary 3.1. Recall that for any β > 0, Theorem 3.1 (Eq. (13)) with the policy class ΠR
ensures that with probability at least 1 − δ, for all π ⋆ ,
                                     r ⋆
                                        C π log(|R|/δ)               ⋆         R2 e4Rmax log(|R|/δ)
      ⋆
  J(π ) − J(b π ) ≤ c1 Rmax e2Rmax
                                   ·                        + c2 βC π + c3 β −1 max
                                               n                                       n
                                                                                                 (46)
for absolute constants c1 , c2 , c3 > 0. Let us invoke this result with
                   (                               r ⋆                                                          )
                                                                                         2     4Rmax
  ⋆                        ⋆              2Rmax     C π log(|R|/δ)           π⋆      −1 Rmax e       log(|R|/δ)
β = argmax max       J(π ) − c1 Rmax e           ·                    − c2 βC − c3 β                              .
        β>0     π⋆                                          n                                      n


                                                                  43
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Then Eq. (46) implies that
    (                                       r                                                                    )
                                                C π⋆ log(|R|/δ)             ⋆             R2 e4Rmax log(|R|/δ)
max             ⋆
    J(π ) − c1 Rmax e           2Rmax
                                        ·                       − c2 β ⋆ C π − c3 (β ⋆ )−1 max                       − J(b
                                                                                                                         π ) ≤ 0,
 ⋆  π                                                   n                                         n

so that by the definition of β ⋆ ,
          (                                         r                                                             )
                                                        C π⋆ log(|R|/δ)          ⋆         R2 e4Rmax log(|R|/δ)
max max             ⋆
        J(π ) − c1 Rmax e               2Rmax
                                                ·                       − c2 βC π − c3 β −1 max                       − J(b
                                                                                                                          π ) ≤ 0,
β>0  ⋆      π                                                   n                                  n

or equivalently
                                                r
                                                    C π⋆ log(|R|/δ)          ⋆         R2 e4Rmax log(|R|/δ)
        ⋆
J(π ) − J(b
          π ) ≤ c1 Rmax e         2Rmax
                                            ·                       + c2 βC π + c3 β −1 max                      ∀π ⋆ , ∀β > 0.
                                                            n                                  n
It follows that for all comparator policies π ⋆ , we have
                                                                               r
                                    ⋆                             2Rmax            C π⋆ log(|R|/δ)
                                J(π ) − J(b
                                          π ) ≲ Rmax e                     ·
                                                                                           n
                        q
                             2 e4Rmax log(|R|/δ)
                            Rmax
by choosing β ∝                   C π⋆ n
                                                 above.


I       P ROOFS FOR A PPENDIX B
Proof of Proposition B.1. To see that ϕ and ϕ−1 are strictly increasing, we note that ϕ′ (z) =
1 + z1 > 0 for all z > 0.
We now bound the inverse function ϕ−1 . We will use the fact that z 7→ W0 (z) is increasing over
z ≥ 0 throughout. We first consider the regime where z ≥ 1. Since W0 (·) is increasing, we have that
ϕ−1 (z) = W0 (ez ) ≤ z if and only if ez ≤ zez , which is clearly true for z ≥ 1. On the other hand,
for c > 0 we have ϕ−1 (z) = W0 (ez ) ≥ c · z if and only if ez ≥ czecz ; setting c = 1/2 is clearly
sufficient.
We now consider the regime where z ≤ 1. Here, we see that ϕ−1 (z) = W (ez ) ≤ ez if and only if
          z
ez ≤ ez ee , which holds for all z ∈ R. On the other hand have that ϕ−1 (z) = W (ez ) ≥ e−e ez if
                          −e z
and only if ez ≥ e−e ez ee e . Since z ≤ 1, we have
                                                    −e z               z
                                   e−e ez ee          e
                                                           ≤ e−e ez ee ≤ e−e ez ee = ez ,
which establishes the result.



Proof of Proposition B.2. Recall that the optimal policy satisfies
                                             ⋆
                                              πβ (a | x)

                            r(x, a) = βϕ                    + Zβ,r (x),                                       (47)
                                             πref (a | x)
where Zβ,r (x) is a normalization constant chosen such that πβ⋆ (· | x) is a valid probability distribution.
We begin by bounding Zβ,r (x). We will use that r(x, a) ∈ [0, Rmax ]. Let x ∈ X be fixed. By
averaging Eq. (47) over a ∼ πβ⋆ (x), we have
                                          ⋆
                                         π (a | x)

                                                        + βDKL πβ⋆ ∥ πref + Zβ,r (x) ≥ Zβ,r (x),

     Ea∼πβ⋆ (x) [r(x, a)] = β Ea∼πβ⋆ (x) β
                                         πref (a | x)
so Zβ,r (x) ≤ Rmax . On the other hand, averaging over a ∼ πref (x), we have
                                                  ⋆
                                                 πβ (a | x)

                                                                − βDKL πref ∥ πβ⋆ + Zβ,r (x)

           Ea∼πβ⋆ (x) [r(x, a)] = β Ea∼πref (x)
                                                 πref (a | x)

                                                                  44
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                     ≤ β + Zβ,r (x),
so Zβ,r (x) ≥ − β.
                                                                                        ⋆
                                                                                      πβ  (a|x)
Having established that Zβ,r (x) ∈ [−β, Rmax ], we will use that ϕ                    πref (a|x)       = β −1 (r(x, a) −
Zβ,r (x)), so that our bound on Zβ,r implies that
                                           ⋆
                                            πβ (a | x)

                             −1
                          −β Rmax ≤ ϕ                      ≤ 1 + β −1 Rmax ,
                                            πref (a | x)
or, since ϕ−1 is increasing,
                −1                         πβ⋆ (a | x)
    e−e · e−β        Rmax
                            ≤ ϕ−1 (−β −1 Rmax ) ≤      ≤ ϕ−1 (1 + β −1 Rmax ) ≤ 1 + β −1 Rmax ,
                                          πref (a | x)
where we have used that ϕ−1 (z) ≤ z for z ≥ 1 and ϕ−1 (z) ≥ ez−e for z ≤ 1 (by Proposition B.1).


J   P ROOFS FOR A PPENDIX D
J.1 P ROOF OF T HEOREM D.1
Proof of Theorem D.1. We consider a family of instances in which there is a single context (prompt)
X = {∅} and four actions (responses) A = {a, b, c, d}. We consider the reference policy πref given
by
                                                    if a′ = a or a′ = b,
                                         1
                                           ,
                         πref (a′ | x) = C 2
                                         1 − C , if a′ = c.

We consider a preference model class P = P 1 , P 2 in which


                                  P i (a0 ≻ a1 | x) = (1 + ℓi (x, a0 , a1 ))/2
for a function ℓi (x, a0 , a1 ) ∈ [−1, +1]. The functions ℓ1 and ℓ2 are defined as follows (we omit the
dependence on x, since there is a single context):
                        ℓ1 (a0 , a1 ) = ℓ2 (a0 , a1 ) = 0, ∀a0 ∈ A, a1 ∈ {a, b, c},
                             ℓ1 (a, d) = 0,    ℓ1 (b, d) = −1,    ℓ1 (c, d) = 1
                             ℓ2 (a, d) = −1,     ℓ2 (b, d) = 0,   ℓ2 (c, d) = −1.
Note that both functions are skew-symmetric in the sense that ℓ(x, a′ , a′ ) = 0 and ℓ(x, a0 , a1 ) +
ℓ(x, a1 , a0 ) = 0 for all x ∈ X and a0 , a1 ∈ A.
                                                              1               2
It is straightforward to see that the deterministic policies πMW (x) = a and πMW (x) = b are minimax
               1      2
winners for ℓ and ℓ respectively. Observe that for both policies, we have
                                                   π1       π2
                                       C∞MW = C∞MW = C.
To proceed, we compute duality gap an arbitrary policy π under P 1 and P 2 . Let DG(π; P) denote
the value of DG(π) when P is the true preference model. Then we have:
              max l(q, π) = max −q(b)π(d) + q(c)π(d) + q(d)π(b) − q(d)π(c),
            q∈∆(A)                   q∈∆(A)

                min l(π, q) = min −π(b)q(d) + π(c)q(d) + π(d)q(b) − π(d)q(c),
            q∈∆(A)                   q∈∆(A)

                                  = − max −q(b)π(d) + q(c)π(d) + q(d)π(b) − q(d)π(c).
                                        q∈∆(A)
Therefore we know
                DG(π; P 1 ) = 2 max q(d)(π(b) − π(c)) − π(d)(q(b) − q(c))
                                          q∈∆(A)
Following similar computations, we have
                 DG(π; P 2 ) = 2 max q(d)(π(a) + π(c)) − π(d)(q(a) + q(c)).
                                         q∈∆(A)

We aim to show that for all policies π, DG(π; P 1 ) + DG(π; P 2 ) ≥ 12 . To do so, we consider two
cases. Going forward, we will use that DG(π; P i ) ≥ 0.


                                                          45
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Case (1): π(a) + π(c) ≥ 12 . In this case, we have DG(π; P 2 ) ≥ 12 , and thus DG(π; P 1 ) +
DG(π; P 2 ) ≥ 21 .
Case (2): π(a) + π(c) < 14 . In this case, let θ := π(b) − π(c). Then we have DG(π; P 1 ) ≥
2 max{θ, π(d)}. We observe that θ + π(d) = π(b) + π(d) − π(c) > 34 − 14 = 12 . This implies that
DG(π; P 1 ) > 21 , and thus DG(π; P 1 ) + DG(π; P 2 ) ≥ 12 .
Having established that all π satisfy DG(π; P 1 ) + DG(π; P 2 ) ≥ 12 we can apply the Le Cam two-
point method (specifically, the variant based on the Bretagnolle-Huber inequality (e.g., Theorem 14.2
in Lattimore and Szepesvári (2020))), which leads to the following inequality
                                   1
                         π ; P)] ≥ exp −n · DKL ρ ⊗ πref ⊗ πref ⊗ P 1 ∥ ρ ⊗ πref ⊗ πref ⊗ P 2 .

   inf sup EDpref [DG(b
   Alg P∈P                         8

It can be observed that DKL ρ ⊗ πref ⊗ πref ⊗ P 1 ∥ ρ ⊗ πref ⊗ πref ⊗ P 2 = 0, since ℓ1 (a0 , a1 ) =
ℓ2 (a0 , a1 ) = 0 for all a0 , a1 ∈ {a, b, c}, and πref is supported on {a, b, c}. We conclude that any
policy derived from Dpref must have
                                                             1
                                                   π; P i ) ≥

                                            E DG(b
                                                               8
for some i.

J.2 P ROOF OF T HEOREM D.2
Proof of Theorem D.2. Let π
                          e be the global best response of π
                                                           b:
                              e = argmax Ex∼ρ,a∼π(x),b∼bπ(x) [ℓ⋆ (x, a, b)] ,
                              π
                                        π∈Π

and let π
        eC be the best response within ΠC of π  b where C ≥ 1 (recall that ΠC := {π :
maxx∈X Dχ2 (π(x) ∥ πref (x)) ≤ C} denotes the set of policies with bounded χ2 -divergence w.r.t.
πref ):
                             eC = argmax Ex∼ρ,a∼π(x),b∼bπ(x) [ℓ⋆ (x, a, b)] .
                             π
                                        π∈ΠC
             t
Recall that r (x, a) := Eb∼πt (x) [ℓ(x,
                                   b a, b)]. Then we know
                                       T                             T
                                     1X t                        1X
     ℓ⋆ (e
         π, π
            b) =subopt(b
                       π , C) +               πC ) − rbt (π t ) +
                                          rb (e                          ℓ⋆ (e
                                                                             πC , π t ) − ℓ(e
                                                                                          b πC , π t )
                                    T t=1                         T t=1
                                    |         {z               } |               {z                    }
                                                 (1)                                       (2)
                      T                                  T
                     1X                                 1X
                 +           (rt (e
                                  πC ) − rbt (e
                                              πC )) +            rt (π t ) − rt (π t )),
                                                                (b                                         (48)
                     T t=1                              T t=1
                     |            {z             }      |            {z              }
                                  (3)                                (4)

where r(π) := Ex∼ρ,a∼π(x) [r(x, a)]. The decomposition utilizes the fact that rt (π t ) = 0 and
rt (e      b πC , π t ). This implies that we only need to bound term (1)(2)(3)(4) in Eq. (48) to upper
    πC ) = ℓ(e
bound the gap of π b.
Bounding term (1). Let gx (p) to denote the mixed divergence βDfχmix (p(x) ∥ πref (x)). Then we
have the following guarantee on regularized policy mirror descent:
Lemma J.1. For any C ≥ 0, we have for all policy π ∈ ΠC that
    T                                     T +1
 1X t                       2βC         1 X
       rb (π) − rbt (π t ) ≤    + 2βC −        Ex∼ρ [gx (π t )]
 T t=1                       ηT         T t=1
                                          T
                                η   1X
                                              Ex∼ρ rbt (x, ·) − Gt (π t+1 , x, ·), π(x) − π t+1 (x) ,

                                + +
                               2β   T t=1
                                                        t
where Gt (π, x, a) := β (1 + η1 )ϕ ππ(a|x)
                                    ref (a|x)   − 1
                                                  η ϕ  π (a|x)
                                                       π ref (a|x)    for all π ∈ Π, x ∈ X , a ∈ A.


                                                        46
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


To simplify writing, we use π t+1 to denote the minimizer of the following regularized RL objective:
                                                                                      β
     π t+1 (x) := arg min               rt (x, ·), p + βDfχmix (p ∥ πref (x)) +
                                       −b                                               Bx (p, π t ),      ∀x ∈ X .
                            p∈∆(X )                                                   η
Then Assumption D.2 indicates that π t+1 ∈ Π for all t ∈ [T ]. In addition, by introducing Lagrangian
multipliers into the above optimization problem and following similar arguments in the proof of
Lemma H.4, we know
                    fπβ,η                    rt (x, a) − rbt (x, b)) = 0,
                       t+1 ,π t (x, a, b) − (b                                     ∀x ∈ X , a, b ∈ A.                 (49)
                            β,η                 t            t
Recall that by definition fπ,π  t (x, a, b) = G (π, x, a) − G (π, x, b) for all policies π ∈ Π. This

implies that we have
  Ex∼ρ rbt (x, ·) − Gt (π t+1 , x, ·), π(x) − π t+1 (x)


=Ex∼ρ rbt (x, ·) − Gt (π t+1 , x, ·), π(x) − πref (x) + Ex∼ρ rbt (x, ·) − Gt (π t+1 , x, ·), πref (x) − π t+1 (x)


= (fπβ,η          β,η                           β,η           β,η
      t+1 ,π t − fπ t+1 ,π t )(ρ, π, πref ) + (fπ t+1 ,π t − fπ t+1 ,π t )(ρ, π
                                                                                t+1
                                                                                    , πref ),
  |                 {z                   } |                      {z                      }
                      (5)                                           (6)

where we use f (ρ, π, π ′ ) to denote the expectation Ex∼ρ,a∼π(x),b∼π′ (x) [f (x, a, b)] and the last step
utilizes Eq. (49). Therefore, to bound term (1), we need to bound term (5) and (6) respectively. To
simplify writing, we define L(π, π ′ , π ′′ ) as follows:
                                                                                                       2
           ′   ′′                                         β,η                      β,η
     L(π, π , π ) := Ex∼ρ,a∼πref (x),b∼πref (x) clip4 (fπ,π′′ (x, a, b)) − clip4 (fπ′ ,π′′ (x, a, b))      ,


Note that we have the following guarantee of least squares regression from the literature (Lemma 15
in Song et al. (2022))
Lemma J.2 (least squares regression). Let {(yi , zi )}K    i=1 be a dataset of K points where each point
are independently sampled from yi ∼ µ and zi ∼ p(·|yi ) := h∗ (yi ) + εi . Let H : Y → [−R, R] be a
real valued functions where h∗ ∈ H and R > 0. Then if {εi }K       i=1 are independent random variables
                                                                             PK
such that E[zi |yi ] = h∗ (yi ), the least squares solution b
                                                            h = argminh∈H i=1 (h(yi ) − zi )2 satisfies
with probability at least 1 − δ that
                                                                          2
                                                                 R log(|H|/δ)
                                             h(y) − h∗ (y))2 ] ≲
                                      Ex∼µ [(b                                .
                                                                      K

The proof of the above lemma is omitted. Applying Lemma J.2 to the least sqaures solution π t+1 , we
have the following concentration lemma:
Lemma J.3 (concentration in optimization). Suppose Assumption D.2 and Assumption D.3 hold.
Then with probability at least 1 − δ/4, we have for all policy t ∈ [T ] that
                                                             Ccon log(|Π|/δ)
                                 L(π t+1 , π t+1 , π t ) ≤                   := ε2md ,
                                                                    m
where Ccon > 0 is a universal constant.
In the following discussion, we use E1 to denote the event in Lemma J.3. Then under E1 , by following
the same arguments in the proof of Lemma H.3, we have the following bound on ∥fπβ,η          t+1 ,π t −

fπβ,η
   t+1 ,π t ∥1,π×πref :

                                                   q
    ∥fπβ,η          β,η
        t+1 ,π t − fπ t+1 ,π t ∥1,π×πref ≤ Vmax         1 + 2Dχ2 (π ∥ πref ) ε2md ,             ∀π ∈ Π, t ∈ [T ].     (50)

Therefore, with Eq. (50) we know that conditioned on E1 , for any policy π ∈ ΠC we have
                                                                        V 2 ε2    1
           q                       q
                                       1 + 2Dχ2 (π t+1 ∥ πref ) ε2md ≤ max md + Ex∼ρ [gx (π t+1 )] + Vmax εmd ,

(5) ≤ Vmax 3Cε2md , (6) ≤ Vmax
                                                                           β      2

                                                             47
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


where we use AM-GM inequality in the last step, the definition of gx (π) :=
βDfχmix (π(·|x) ∥ πref (·|x)), and Dfχmix (p(x) ∥ πref (x)) ≥ Dχ2 (p(x) ∥ πref (x)) since KL is non-
negative

In summary, conditioned on E1 , we have
                                 T +1
                  2βC          1 X                        η                V 2 ε2
                                                                  q
          (1) ≤       + 2βC −         Ex∼ρ [gx (π t )] +    + Vmax 4Cε2md + max md .                      (51)
                   ηT         2T t=1                     2β                   β

Bounding term (2). From Cauchy-Schwartz’s inequality, we have
ℓ⋆ (e
    πC , π t ) − ℓ(e
                 b πC , π t )
          q
      ≤ Ex∼ρ,a∼πref (x),b∼πref (x) [(ℓ⋆ (x, a, b) − ℓ(x,
                                                    b a, b))2 ] 1 + 2Dχ2 (ρ ⊗ π
                                                                              eC ⊗ π t ∥ ρ ⊗ πref ⊗ πref ) ,

where ρ ⊗ π1 ⊗ π2 denotes the joint distribution of (x, a, b) where x ∼ ρ, a ∼ π1 (x), b ∼ π2 (x) for
all π1 , π2 ∈ Π. Applying the guarantee of least squares regression (Lemma J.2) to the least squares
solution ℓ,b we have under Assumption D.1, with probability at least 1 − δ/4, the following event
holds:
                                                                       2
                                    b y 0 , y 1 ) − ℓ⋆ (x, y 0 , y 1 )          ln(|L|/δ)
   Ex∼ρ,y0 ∼πref (x),y1 ∼πref (x) ℓ(x,                                     ≤O               := ε2general . (52)
                                                                                    n
Denote the event in Eq. (52) by E2 . On the other hand, we can obtain that:
                                         X       X (eπC (a|x))2 X (π t (b|x))2
             eC ⊗ π t ∥ ρ ⊗ πref ⊗ πref =
1 + 2Dχ2 ρ ⊗ π                              ρ(x)
                                          x      a
                                                     πref (a|x)       πref (b|x)
                                                                  b
                                          X
                                                             πC (x) ∥ πref (x)) 1 + 2Dχ2 π t (x) ∥ πref (x)

                                        =   ρ(x) 1 + 2Dχ2 (e
                                                          x
                                                    ≤ 6C Ex∼ρ Dχ2 π t (x) ∥ πref (x) + 1


where the last step is due to π eC ∈ ΠC . Therefore, conditioned on E2 , we have
                                     q                                             q
       ℓ⋆ (e
           πC , π t ) − ℓ(e
                        b π , π t ) ≤ 6CEx∼ρ Dχ2 (π t (x) ∥ πref (x)) ε2

                                                                         general +  6Cε2general
                   1                    3Cε2general q
               ≤     Ex∼ρ [gx (π t )] +            + 6Cε2general .
                   2                       β
In summary, we have
         T                                  T
      1X ⋆                                                        3Cε2general q
                            b π, πt ) ≤ 1
                                           X
               πC , π t ) − ℓ(e
            ℓ (e                               Ex∼ρ [gx (π t )] +            + 6Cε2general .              (53)
      T t=1                             2T t=1                       β

Bounding term (3). Recall that rbt (x, a) = ℓ(x,
                                            b a, bt ) where bt ∼ π t (x) is an unbiased estimator
of rt . Fix any policy π ∈ Π, then from Azuma-Hoeffding’s inequality, we have with probability at
least 1 − δ ′ that
                                T
                                X                  T
                                                   X                 p
                                       rbt (π) −         rt (π) ≲        T log(1/δ ′ ).
                                 t=1               t=1

By union bound, with probability at least 1 − δ/4 we have that for all π ∈ Π:
                                T
                                X                 T
                                                  X                 p
                                      rbt (π) −          rt (π) ≲       T log(|Π|/δ).
                                t=1                t=1

Therefore, specifically for π
                            eC , we have
                                                         r
                                                              log(|Π|/δ)
                                             (3) ≲                       .                                (54)
                                                                  T

                                                              48
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Bounding term (4). From Azuma-Hoeffding’s inequality, we have with probability at least 1 − δ/4
that
                        XT              T
                                        X            p
                           rbt (π t ) −   rt (π t ) ≲ T log(1/δ ′ ).
                                 t=1             t=1
Therefore, we have
                                                       r
                                                           log(1/δ)
                                               (4) ≲                .                               (55)
                                                              T
Putting everything together. Substituting Eq. (51)(53)(54)(55) into (48), we have with probability
at least 1 − δ that
                                        Cβ          η                  V 2 ε2
                                                               q
         ℓ⋆ (e
             π, π
                b) ≲ subopt(b π , C) +      + Cβ + + Vmax Cε2md + max md
                                        ηT          β                      2β
                                                                                  s
                                                             2
                                                          Cεgeneral  q
                                                                         2
                                                                                    log |Π|
                                                                                         δ
                                                      +             + Cεgeneral +           .
                                                             β                        T
By selecting
                                       mn                  1           1
                             T =       2 +m
                                               ,    β=√ ,           η= ,
                                   nVmax                    T          T
we have with probability at least 1 − δ that

                                                   Vmax log(|Π|/δ) log(|Π||L|/δ)
                  ℓ⋆ (e
                      π, π
                         b) ≲ subopt(bπ , C) + C         √          +    √
                                                           m                n

Note that due to the skew symmetry of ℓ⋆ , we have:
   min Ex∼ρ,a∼bπ(x),b∼π(x) [ℓ⋆ (x, a, b)] = − max Ex∼ρ,a∼π(x),b∼bπ(x) [ℓ⋆ (x, a, b)] = −ℓ⋆ (e
                                                                                            π, π
                                                                                               b).
   π∈Π                                                 π∈Π
                                  ⋆
                     π ) ≤ 2ℓ (e
This implies that DG(b         π, π
                                  b), which concludes our proof.

J.3 P ROOFS FOR S UPPORTING L EMMAS
Proof of Lemma J.1. First for all t ∈ [T ], s ∈ S and any policy π ∈ ΠC , we have
                rt (x), π(x) − π t (x) + ηgx (π t ) − ηgx (π)
               ηb
              rt (x) − (1 + η)∇gx (π t+1 ) + ∇gx (π t ), π(x) − π t+1 (x)
           = ηb
              + ∇gx (π t+1 ) − ∇gx (π t ), π(x) − π t+1 (x) + ηb
                                                               rt (x), π t+1 (x) − π t (x)
               |                   {z                      } |             {z              }
                                        (7)                                    (8)
                           t+1                 t+1                 t
              + η∇gx (π          ), π(x) − π      (x) + ηgx (π ) − ηgx (π),
               |                                {z                       }
                                                (9)

Note that we have
  rt (x) − (1 + η)∇gx (π t+1 ) + ∇gx (π t ), π(x) − π t+1 (x) = η rbt (x, ·) − Gt (π t+1 , x, ·), π(x) − π t+1 (x)
 ηb
Next we bound the term (7)(8)(9) respectively.
Bounding term (7). Note that we have the following three point lemma:
Lemma J.4 (three point lemma). For any p1 , p2 , p3 : X 7→ ∆(Y), we have for all x ∈ X
     1
       ⟨∇gx (p1 ) − ∇gx (p2 ), p3 (x) − p1 (x)⟩ = Bx (p3 , p2 ) − Bx (p3 , p1 ) − Bx (p1 , p2 ).
     β
Proof. By definition, we know
                          βBx (p, p′ ) = gx (p) − gx (p′ ) − ⟨∇gx (p′ ), p − p′ ⟩.
Substitute the definition into Lemma J.4 and we can prove the lemma.
From Lemma J.4, we can rewrite (7) as follows:
                        (7) = β Bx (π, π t ) − Bx (π, π t+1 ) − Bx (π t+1 , π t ) .



                                                         49
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Bounding term (8). From Cauchy-Schwartz inequality, we have
              X β(π t+1 (a|x) − π t (a|x))2                πref (a|x)η 2 (b
                                                                          rt (x, a))2                        η2
      (8) ≤                                            +                              ≤ βBx (π t+1 , π t ) +    ,
                            2πref (a|x)                               2β                                     2β
              a∈A

where the last step comes from the definition of Bx .
Bounding term (9). Since gx is convex, we know
                             η∇gx (π t+1 ), π − π t+1 ≤ ηgx (π) − ηgx (π t+1 ).
This implies that
                                         (3) ≤ η gx (π t ) − gx (π t+1 ) .



In summary, for all t ∈ [T ], s ∈ S and any policy π ∈ ΠC , we have
         rt (x), π(x) − π t (x) + ηgx (π t ) − ηgx (π) ≤ β Bx (π, π t ) − Bx (π, π t+1 )

        ηb
                                          η2
             + η gx (π t ) − gx (π t+1 ) +    + η rbt (x, ·) − Gt (π t+1 , x, ·), π(x) − π t+1 (x) .
                                           2β

This implies that for any policy π ∈ ΠC :
     T                                           T +1
     X                                           X                      β                   ηT
         rbt (π) − rbt (π t ) ≤T Ex∼ρ [gx (π)] −      Ex∼ρ [gx (π t )] + Ex∼ρ Bx (π, π 1 ) +

     t=1                                         t=1
                                                                        η                    2β
                                     T
                                     X
                                                       rbt (x, ·) − Gt (π t+1 , x, ·), π(x) − π t+1 (x)

                                 +         Ex∼ρ
                                     t=1
                                              T +1
                                              X                              2Cβ   ηT
                               ≤2T Cβ −              Ex∼ρ [gx (π t )] +          +
                                              t=1
                                                                              η    2β
                                     T
                                     X
                                                       rbt (x, ·) − Gt (π t+1 , x, ·), π(x) − π t+1 (x)

                                 +         Ex∼ρ
                                     t=1

Here the last step uses the fact that Bx (·, πref ) = β1 gx (·) and π ∈ ΠC . This concludes our proof.

Proof of Lemma J.3. Let L(π,b π ′ , π ′′ ) denote the empirical squared loss:
                              X                                                                  2
            b π ′ , π ′′ ) :=                  β,η                         β,η
            L(π,                       clip4 (fπ,π ′′ (x, a, b)) − clip4 (fπ ′ ,π ′′ (x, a, b))    .
                                  (x,a,b)


Fix any π ′ , π ′′ ∈ Π and consider the following LSR problems:

                                      π(π ′ , π ′′ ) := argmin L(π,
                                                               b π ′ , π ′′ ).
                                                             π∈Π

Then from Lemma J.2, we know with probability at least 1 − δ ′ that
                                                                        log(|Π|/δ ′ )
                                     L(π(π ′ , π ′′ ), π ′ , π ′′ ) ≲                 .
                                                                            M
Therefore, by union bound, we know with probability at least 1 − δ ′ that for all π ′ , π ′′ ∈ Π:
                                                                        log(|Π|/δ ′ )
                                     L(π(π ′ , π ′′ ), π ′ , π ′′ ) ≲                 .
                                                                            M
                                                          b π t+1 , π t ) under Assump-
The proof is concluded by noticing that π t+1 = argminπ∈Π L(π,
tion D.2.



                                                             50
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


K    P ROOFS FOR A PPENDIX C
The section contains the proofs for the main guarantee χ2 -RLHF in Appendix C (Theorem C.1). We
first prove two results, Theorem K.1 and Corollary K.1, which correspond to exact (i.e., including
precise constants) versions of the two statements in Theorem C.1. We also analyze χ2 -RLHF with
η = 0 in Corollary K.2.
Throughout this section, we make use of the following η-smoothed version of the L1 concentrability
coefficient:

                               π                    π(a | x)
                              Cη :=  Eπ                              .
                                           πref (a | x) + ηπ(a | x)
It is easy to see that for any η ≥ 0 we have Cηπ ≤ C π , as well as Cηπ ≤ η −1 .
Theorem K.1 (General regret bound for   Algorithm
                                                 2). Suppose Assumption C.1 and Assumption C.2
hold for parameters β > 0 and η ∈ 0, 8Rβmax . Then with probability at least 1 − δ, the policy π
                                                                                               b
produced by χ2 -RLHF (Algorithm 2) satisfies
                          q                        ⋆
                   π ) ≤ 2 Cηπ⋆ · ε2stat + 2β · Cηπ + 4β −1 · ε2stat
       J(π ⋆ ) − J(b
                                       n ⋆        o
                                          π    −1                    π −1
                         + 4β · min C∞ , η           + min max C∞ , η        ε2x + 2Rmax εx .
                                                                       π∈Π

                    2
                                                        q
                 32Rmax e4Rmax log(3|R|/δ)                  log(3|Π|/δ)
where ε2stat =              n                and εx =           2nx     .
The following results are immediate consequences of Theorem K.1.
Corollary K.1 (Smoothed χ2 -regularization). Given π ⋆ , let η = 8Rβmax and β =
 q
        2 e4Rmax log(3|R|/δ)
    32Rmax
2            nC π⋆
                             . Then under the preconditions of Theorem K.1, with probability at least
1 − δ, the policy πb produced by χ2 -RLHF (Algorithm 2) satisfies
                                   r                           s
    ⋆                        2Rmax   2C π⋆ log(3|R|/δ)           2 log(3|Π|/δ) 32Rmax log(3|Π|/δ)
J(π ) − J(b π ) ≤ 20Rmax e                             + Rmax                  +                      .
                                              n                        nx                  nx

Corollary
 q           K.2 (Non-smoothed χ2 -regularization). Given π ⋆ , let η = 0 and β =
        2 e4Rmax log(3|R|/δ)
    32Rmax
2            nC π⋆
                             . Then under the preconditions of Theorem K.1, with probability at least
1 − δ, the policy πb produced by χ2 -RLHF (Algorithm 2) satisfies
                                              r                           s
                ⋆                       2Rmax   2C π⋆ log(3|R|/δ)            2 log(3|Π|/δ)
           J(π ) − J(b  π ) ≤ 20Rmax e                             + Rmax
                                                         n                         nx
                                                                        r
                                       π⋆           π     log(3|Π|/δ)     2 log(3|R|/δ)
                               + 32 C∞    + max C∞      ·             ·                 .
                                              π∈Π              nx                n

Proof of Theorem K.1. The proof follows largely the same lines of analyses as the proof of
Theorem H.1. One difference is that in Algorithm 2, we approximate the RLHF objective using
contexts are sampled from Dx , so we require additional concentration arguments to show that the
empirical objective approximates its population counterpart.
Basic concentration results. We begin by stating the two concentration inequalities, which, given
                                                                    r
the reward model rb produced in Eq. (26), bound the error between Jbβ,η
                                                                    b
                                                                        and its the population version
  r
Jβ,η .
  b

We will handle the return and regularization terms separately, which will later allow us to obtain
tighter bounds. Define
                               1 X
                      J(π)
                       b   :=              r(x, a) | x],
                                       Eπ [b
                               nx
                                       x∈Dx



                                                        51
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


and
                                                      "                                  #
                                     1    X               X           π 2 (a | x)
                         Cbηπ (π) :=             Eπ                                    |x ,
                                     nx                   a
                                                              πref (a | x) + ηπ(a | x)
                                          x∈Dx

          r         b − β Cbπ (π).
so that Jbβ,η
          b
              (π) = J(π)    η

Fix δ ′ ∈ (0, 1], which we will specify at the end of this proof. Since maxx Eπ [b
                                                                                 r(x, a) | x] ≤ Rmax , a
straightforward application of Hoeffding’s inequality guarantees that with probability at most 1 − δ ′ ,
for all π ∈ Π we have that
                                                             s
                             b − Eπ [b                         log(2|Π|/δ ′ )
                            J(π)          r(x, a)] ≤ Rmax                     .                   (56)
                                                                    2nx

                                                             π 2 (a|x)        π
                                                                                , η −1 } for any
                                                     P
Next, we consider the regularization term. Since a πref (a|x)+ηπ(a|x)  ≤ min{C∞
x ∈ X , we use Bernstein’s inequality to derive the following result.
Lemma K.1. With probability at least 1 − δ, for any π ∈ Π, we have
                                          Cπ          π
                                               2 min{C∞ , η −1 } log(2|Π|/δ)
                             Cbηπ − Cηπ ≤    +                               .
                                           2                nx
               q
                   log(2|Π|/δ ′ )
Define εx :=           2nx        . The above lemma implies that for all π ∈ Π, we have
                     π                                                      π
                3C                                             C
         Cbηπ ≤      + 4 min{C∞  π
                                   , η −1 } · ε2x , and Cbηπ ≥             π
                                                                  − 4 min{C∞ , η −1 } · ε2x .
                 2                                              2
Together with Eq. (56), this implies that for all π ∈ Π,
                                                               βCηπ
          r
        Jbβ,η
          b         b − β Cbηπ ≤ Eπ [b
              (π) = J(π)             r(x, a)] −                               π
                                                                    + 4β min{C∞ , η −1 }ε2x + Rmax εx ,    (57)
                                                                2
and
                                                               3βCηπ
          r
        Jbβ,η
          b         b − β Cbηπ ≥ Eπ [b
              (π) = J(π)             r(x, a)] −                                π
                                                                     − 4β min{C∞ , η −1 }ε2x − Rmax εx .   (58)
                                                                 2

Estimation error bounds. Next, we state the following off- and on-policy reward estimation error
bounds for the reward model rb, analogous to Lemma H.1 and Lemma H.3 for χPO.
Lemma K.2. Suppose Assumption C.1 holds. Then with probability at least 1 − δ, the reward model
rb learned in Eq. (26) satisfies
                        h                                                  i 32R2 e4Rmax log(|Π|/δ)
                                                                         2      max
   ε2stat =: Eπref ,πref ((b
                           r(x, a) − rb(x, b)) − (r⋆ (x, a) − r⋆ (x, b))) ≤                         .
                                                                                     n

Lemma K.3. Under the event in Lemma K.2, we have that for all π : X → ∆(A),
                                                                    q
                 r(x, a) − rb(x, b)) − (r⋆ (x, a) − r⋆ (x, b))|] ≤ 2 Cηπ ε2stat + 2Cηπ Rmax η,
      Eπ,πref [|(b

where ε2stat is defined in Lemma K.2.
Regret decomposition. Equipped with these concentration and estimation error bounds, we now
bound the regret of Algorithm 2 using a pessimism-based analysis similar to the proof of Theorem H.1.
Condition on the events in Eq. (56), Lemma K.1, and Lemma K.2, which hold together with probability
at least 1 − 3δ ′ . We decompose the regret of π         r
                                               b using Jbβ,η
                                                         b
                                                             , then leverage the inequalities in Eq. (57)
and Eq. (58):

J(π ⋆ ) − J(b
            π ) = J(π ⋆ ) − Jbβ,η
                              r
                              b
                                  (π ⋆ ) + Jbβ,η
                                             r
                                             b
                                                 (π ⋆ ) − J(b
                                                            π)
                ≤ J(π ⋆ ) − Jbβ,η
                              r
                              b
                                  (π ⋆ ) + Jbβ,η
                                             r
                                             b
                                                  π ) − J(b
                                                 (b       π)


                                                              52
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025



                                                         ⋆
                                                 3βCηπ           π⋆
               ≤ J(π ⋆ ) − Eπ⋆ [b
                                r(x, a)] +             + 4β min{C∞  , η −1 }ε2x + Rmax εx
                                                   2
                                     βCηπb
                        r(x, a)] −
                 + Eπb [b                  + 4β min{C∞ π
                                                       b
                                                         , η −1 }ε2x + Rmax εx − J(b  π)
                                       2
                                                                ⋆
                                                         3βCηπ                                             βCηπb
               = Eπ⋆ ,πref [∆⋆ (x, a, b) − ∆(x,
                                           b    a, b)] +          + Eπb,πref [∆(x,
                                                                              b    a, b) − ∆⋆ (x, a, b)] −
                                                             2                                              2
                                     ⋆
                              π
                 + 4βε2x min{C∞ , η −1 } + min{C∞
                                                π
                                                b
                                                  , η −1 } + 2Rmax εx .

In the last line above, we have introduced the notation ∆⋆ (x, a, b) = r⋆ (x, a) − r⋆ (x, b) and
∆(x,
b    a, b) = rb(x, a) − rb(x, b), and centered the returns. Next, applying Lemma K.3 to bound the
reward estimation error above, we have
                                                                     ⋆

                 ⋆
                                 q
                                     π ⋆ 2              π⋆
                                                               3βCηπ
             J(π ) − J(b π ) ≤ 2 Cη εstat + 2ηRmax Cη +
                                                                 2
                                                                  π
                                    q                          βC b
                                                                  η
                               + 2 Cηπb ε2stat + 2ηRmax Cηπb −
                                                                2
                                                     ⋆
                               + 4βε2x min{C∞
                                            π
                                              , η −1 } + min{C∞
                                                              π
                                                              b
                                                                , η −1 } + 2Rmax εx .

                                   q                  h         i
Applying the AM-GM inequality to 2 Cηπb ε2stat for η ∈ 0, 4Rβmax , we have
                                   s
                     q                                          4ε2stat
                    2 Cηπb ε2stat = (β − 4ηRmax )Cηπb ·
                                                           (β − 4ηRmax )
                                           βCηπb                    2ε2stat
                                         ≤       − 2ηRmax Cηπb +
                                            2                    β − 4ηRmax
                                              π
                                           βCη b
                                                                 4ε2
                                         ≤       − 2ηRmax Cηπb + stat ,
                                            2                      β
where in the last line we use the fact that η ≤ 8Rβmax so 4ηRmax ≤ β2 . Then plugging this back into
our regret decomposition cancels out the Cηπb terms to give
                                                                      ⋆
                               q                            ⋆   3βCηπ       4ε2
            J(π ⋆ ) − J(b
                        π ) ≤ 2 Cηπ⋆ ε2stat + 2ηRmax Cηπ +               + stat
                                                                  2            β

                                    2          π⋆      −1           π      −1
                              + 4βεx min{C∞ , η } + min{C∞ , η } + 2Rmax εx
                                                                    b

                               q                       ⋆    4ε2
                            ≤ 2 Cηπ⋆ ε2stat + 2βCηπ + stat
                                                              β
                                                 ⋆

                              + 4βε2x min{C∞   π
                                                   , η −1 } + min{C∞π
                                                                    b
                                                                       , η −1 } + 2Rmax εx ,
                                             ⋆
where in the last line we consolidate Cηπ terms by again using 4ηRmax ≤ β2 . Plugging in δ ′ = δ/3
and the values for ε2stat and εx results in the theorem statement.



Proof of Corollary K.1. When η = 8Rβmax , Theorem K.1 states that
                                        4ε2stat
                  q                                           n ⋆       o
   ⋆                 π ⋆ 2           π⋆              2            π  −1              π     −1
J(π ) − J(bπ ) ≤ 2 Cη εstat + 2βCη +            + 4βεx · min C∞ , η       + min max C∞ , η       + 2Rmax εx
                                           β                                     π∈Π
                  q                   ⋆ 4ε2
               ≤ 2 Cηπ⋆ ε2stat + 2βCηπ + stat + 8βε2x · η −1 + 2Rmax εx
                                           β
                  q                   ⋆ 4ε2
               = 2 Cηπ⋆ ε2stat + 2βCηπ + stat + 64Rmax ε2x + 2Rmax εx .
                                           β

                                                         53
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025



             q 2
              ε
Setting β = 2 Cstat
                π ⋆ , we obtain

                                                        q
                          J(π ⋆ ) − J(b
                                      π) ≤ 5             Cηπ⋆ ε2stat + 64Rmax ε2x + 2Rmax εx .



Proof of Corollary K.2. When η = 0, Theorem K.1 states that
                                            4ε2stat
                        q
         ⋆                  π ⋆ 2       π⋆               2    π⋆       π
     J(π ) − J(b
               π ) ≤ 2 C εstat + 2βC +              + 4βεx · C∞ + max C∞ + 2Rmax εx
                                              β                    π∈Π
             q 2
               ε
Setting β = 2 Cstat
                 π ⋆ , we obtain

                                q
               ⋆                  π ⋆ 2           2    π⋆        π
            J(π ) − J(b π ) ≤ 5 C εstat + 8εstat εx · C∞ + max C∞ + 2Rmax εx .
                                                                                      π∈Π


Proof of Lemma K.2. We use similar reasoning and notation to the proof of Lemma H.1. Since
r⋆ ∈ R under Assumption C.1, Lemma F.1 guarantees that with probability at least 1 − δ we have
                                                                         2 log(|R|/δ)
                  Eπref ,πref DH2 (Prb(· | x, a, b), Pr⋆ (· | x, a, b)) ≤

                                                                                             .
                                                                                    n
Since |r(x, a) − r(x, b)| ≤ Rmax for all r ∈ R under Assumption C.1, we then apply Lemma H.5
with R = V = Rmax .
                            h                                                    i
                                                                               2
                              r(x, a) − rb(x, b) − (r⋆ (x, a) − r⋆ (x, b)))
                 Eπref ,πref (b
                   ≤ 16e4Rmax Rmax  2
                                        · Eπref ,πref DH2 (Prb(· | x, a, b), Pr⋆ (· | x, a, b))


                                                      log(|R|/δ)
                      ≤ 32e4Rmax Rmax
                                  2
                                      ·                          .
                                                           n



Proof of Lemma K.3.          Abbreviate ∆⋆ (x, a, b) = r⋆ (x, a) − r⋆ (x, b), and ∆(x,
                                                                                    b     a, b) =
                                                 ′
rb(x, a) − rb(x, b). For a pair of policies
                                      h     π, π   and p ≥  1, we
                                                                i define  the  norm ∥·∥p,π×π  ′ :=

                  p 1/p                   ⋆                             ⋆
(Eρ,a∼π,b∼π [| · | ]) , so that Eπ,π
             ′                          ∆ (x, a, b) − ∆(x, a, b) = ∆ − ∆
                                                ref
                                                       b                      b        . Then via
                                                                                                          1,π×πref
Cauchy-Schwarz,
                        v                                                          
                        u
                        u    X                                    2 (b | x)
                                                      π 2 (a | x)πref
 ∆⋆ − ∆               ≤ tEρ 
      b                 u                                                           
           1,π×πref                          (πref (a | x) + ηπ(a | x))πref (b | x)
                                      a,b
                            v                                                                      
                            u
                            u
                            u X                                                                  2
                          · tEρ  (πref (a | x) + ηπ(a | x))πref (b | x) ∆⋆ (x, a, b) − ∆(x,
                                                                                       b    a, b) 
                                       a,b
                          s
                                                           2                            2
                      =       Cηπ ·         ∆⋆ − ∆
                                                 b                        +η   ∆⋆ − ∆
                                                                                    b
                                                           2,πref ×πref                 2,π×πref
                          r                                               r
                                                       2
                      ≤       Cηπ · ∆⋆ − ∆
                                         b                            +       2ηRmax Cηπ · ∆⋆ − ∆
                                                                                                b                 .
                                                       2,πref ×πref                                    1,π×πref

Applying the AM-GM inequality to the second term, we obtain
                          r
                                           2                          1
          ⋆
       ∆ −∆   b          ≤ Cηπ · ∆⋆ − ∆ b               + ηRmax Cηπ +   ∆⋆ − ∆
                                                                             b          .
                1,π×πref                   2,πref ×πref               2        1,π×πref



                                                                    54
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Rearranging,
                                           r
                                                          2
                   ⋆
                 ∆ −∆
                    b                 ≤2   Cηπ · ∆⋆ − ∆
                                                      b                  + 2ηRmax Cηπ .
                           1,π×πref                       2,πref ×πref


                                               55
