Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


L ANGUAGE G UIDED S KILL D ISCOVERY
 Seungeun Rho                                                    Laura Smith
 Georgia Institute of Technology                                 University of California, Berkley
 srho31@gatech.edu                                               smithlaura@berkeley.edu

 Tianyu Li                                                   Sergey Levine
 Georgia Institute of Technology                             University of California, Berkley
 tli471@gatech.edu                                           svlevine@eecs.berkeley.edu

 Xue Bin Peng                                    Sehoon Ha
 Simon Fraser University                         Georgia Institute of Technology
 xbpeng@sfu.ca                                   sehoonha@gatech.edu



                                            A BSTRACT

         Skill discovery methods enable agents to learn diverse emergent behaviors with-
         out explicit rewards. To make learned skills useful for downstream tasks, obtain-
         ing a semantically diverse repertoire of skills is crucial. While some approaches
         use discriminators to acquire distinguishable skills and others focus on increasing
         state coverage, the direct pursuit of ‘semantic diversity’ in skills remains underex-
         plored. We hypothesize that leveraging the semantic knowledge of large language
         models (LLM) can lead us to improve semantic diversity of resulting behaviors.
         In this sense, we introduce Language Guided Skill Discovery (LGSD), a skill dis-
         covery framework that aims to directly maximize the semantic diversity between
         skills. LGSD takes user prompts as input and outputs a set of semantically dis-
         tinctive skills. The prompts serve as a means to constrain the search space into a
         semantically desired subspace, and the generated LLM outputs guide the agent to
         visit semantically diverse states within the subspace. We demonstrate that LGSD
         enables legged robots to visit different user-intended areas on a plane by simply
         changing the prompt. Furthermore, we show that language guidance aids in dis-
         covering more diverse skills compared to five existing skill discovery methods in
         robot-arm manipulation environments. Lastly, LGSD provides a simple way of
         utilizing learned skills via natural language.


1   I NTRODUCTION

One of the key capabilities of intelligent agents is to autonomously learn useful skills applicable to
downstream tasks without task-specific objectives. Consider how human infants acquire manipula-
tion skills through simple play with toys, which can later be applied to a broader set of tasks, such
as using a spoon or holding a bottle. Our research aims to emulate this process of skill learning.
Prior works in unsupervised skill discovery suggest that maximizing diversity of behaviors can be
a way to develop such skills (Gregor et al., 2016; Eysenbach et al., 2018; Kwon, 2020). These ap-
proaches operate under the assumption that acquiring a wide range of diverse behaviors may lead to
the development of useful skills for downstream tasks. Building on this premise, studies like Sharma
et al. (2019); Hansen et al. (2019); Liu & Abbeel (2021a); Laskin et al. (2022) have associated be-
haviors with random vectors by maximizing Mutual Information between them to acquire diverse
skills. Additionally, there are other approaches aimed at increasing coverage of the state space (Liu
& Abbeel, 2021b; Yarats et al., 2021; Park et al., 2021), or exploration-based strategies that leverage
errors in predictive models to enhance learning (Burda et al., 2018; Pathak et al., 2019; Park et al.,
2023a).
However, we contend that these measures are proxies for what we term “semantic diversity” and
they do not necessarily reflect the semantic diversity of a repertoire of skills. For instance, in high

                                                  1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 1: We proposed LGSD which can discover a semantically distinctive set of skills. We
showcase four sample skills acquired from a single training run. Our approach successfully learned
skills that manipulate only ‘edible’ objects (banana and meat can) from a total of four objects.


degrees of freedom (DOF) systems, such as robot-arm manipulation tasks, unstructured movements
of each DOF might exhibit high diversity in terms of state coverage or distinctiveness from a neural
discriminator, but nonetheless lack meaningful semantic diversity. To more accurately measure
semantic diversity, we propose the use of Large Language Models (LLM) as they are well-suited
for understanding and assessing the semantic significance of different behaviors in a way that better
aligns with human judgment.
In this work, we present Language Guided Skill Discovery (LGSD), a skill discovery algorithm
that utilizes the guidance of LLMs to learn semantically diverse skills. LGSD aims to fulfill three
desiderata for skill discovery. (i) Firstly, we want to discover skills that have diverse semantic mean-
ings. We use LLMs to generate descriptions for each of agent states. Based on these descriptions,
we measure the semantic difference between states using language-distance, and train skills to max-
imize this distance. Because LLMs are equipped with a semantic understanding of the world, this
provides a way to maximizing semantic differences between skills. Fig. 1 illustrates skills learned
from LGSD, showcasing the semantic diversity of resultant behaviors. (ii) Secondly, we seek to
restrict the search space for skills into a desired semantic subspace. Intuitively, restricting the skill
space is akin to enforcing an infant to grab toys only with their hands, and not with their mouth or
feet. We implement this desideratum by utilizing language prompts. Humans provide prompts to
LLMs, and the generated descriptions are then constrained by these prompts. This will allow our
method to ignore differences outside the intended semantic space. (iii) Lastly, we aim for the learned
skills to be easy to use. When the skill space is continuous, merely selecting the best skills for target
tasks becomes non-trivial. LGSD supports a zero-shot language instruction-following capability by
training separate network ψ for skill inference. Humans can provide a natural language description
of the desired state, and then LGSD can infer which skill should be used to reach that goal state.
The primary contributions of this work are as follows. 1) We propose a skill discovery framework
that enables the discovery of semantically diverse skills by utilizing language guidance from LLMs.
To the best of our knowledge, this is the first work to incorporate semantic diversity into skill dis-
covery. 2) We present a method of constraining the skill search space to a user-defined semantic
space using language prompts. This allows users to control the resulting skills by simply specifying
different prompts. We emphasize that, prior to training, existing methods only offer limited control
over the skills to be learned. 3) We provide a theoretical proof of how language-distance, a proxy for
semantic distance, can be employed as a valid pseudometric. 4) We propose a method that enables
an agent to reach a goal state specified by natural language, facilitating the convenient use of learned
skills. 5) We demonstrate that our method can train semantically diverse skills. Through extensive
experiments, we show that LGSD outperforms five different skill discovery baseline methods on
both locomotion and manipulation tasks, in terms of both diversity and sample efficiency.


2     R ELATED WORK

2.1   U NSUPERVISED SKILL DISCOVERY

Mutual information based approach Common approaches to associate skills with corresponding
behaviors are based on maximizing the mutual information (MI) between states S and skills Z, or
I(S; Z) (Gregor et al., 2016; Eysenbach et al., 2018; Sharma et al., 2019; Hansen et al., 2019; Liu &
Abbeel, 2021a; Laskin et al., 2022). MI can be viewed as a dependency measure that quantifies the
association between two random variables. To maximize this quantity, a popular early formulation


                                                   2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


utilizes the decomposition I(S; Z) = H(Z)−H(Z|S), where H[·] refers to Shannon entropy. Since
directly computing H(Z|S) is intractable, Eysenbach et al. (2018) introduce a variational posterior
qϕ (z|s) to optimize the lower bound. Similarly, CIC (Laskin et al., 2022) maximizes I((s, s′ ); Z),
promoting distinct state transitions across different skills. However, a significant limitation of using
MI as the objective arises from the use of Kullback–Leibler (KL) divergence to define MI:
                                       def
                              I(S; Z) = DKL (P (S, Z)||P (S)P (Z)).

Maximization of MI using KL divergence often results in skills with less distinctive behaviors. This
is because KL divergence is fully maximized when two densities have no overlap, posing a problem
as there is no further incentive to distinguish the densities beyond this point. This is problematic
because having no overlap between two densities does not necessarily mean two skills are noticeably
distinctive. In practice, this becomes a severe shortcoming of DIAYN (Eysenbach et al., 2018),
where its objective can be fully optimized as long as the discriminator qϕ can distinguish them
perfectly. Neural networks can easily distinguish minor numerical differences, so the skills learned
with this objective often have only these minute differences.
Distance maximization approach To overcome these shortcomings, recent skill discovery works
(He et al., 2022; Park et al., 2021; 2023a;b) propose using the Wasserstein Dependency Measure
(WDM, Ozair et al. (2019)):
                                             def
                               IW (S; Z) = W(P (S, Z)||P (S)P (Z))
WDM is defined using the Earth-Mover (EM) distance and retains the advantage of always pro-
viding an incentive to maximize the distance between distributions, even when they are already
distinguishable.
An essential characteristic of IW is that it must be defined within a metric space. Therefore, the
choice of metric to measure the difference between skills comes to the gist of the algorithm since
it ultimately governs the resulting behavior of each skills. LSD (Park et al., 2021) employs the Eu-
clidean distance in state space as its metric. Maximizing IW under this metric encourages agents
to visit states that are are far apart in terms of Euclidean distances. Conversely, CSD (Park et al.,
2023a) points out the problem of using Euclidean distance as the metric. They argue that maxi-
mizing Euclidean distance tends to focus on “easy” changes in the state space, such as moving the
robot arm itself rather than the target object. Thus, CSD proposed to maximize “controllability-
aware distance” instead. This metric measures the negative log likelihood of a transition dynamics
− log p(s′ |s). Using this metric means the algorithm favors visiting rare transitions. LGSD adopts a
similar approach but differentiates itself by employing a language-based distance metric within the
WDM framework, to maximize the semantic difference.

2.2   U SING LANGUAGE AS GUIDANCE FOR BEHAVIOR LEARNING

Recent work has studied using semantic knowledge in large pre-trained models for control tasks
in several ways. A popular approach is to use the common-sense reasoning capabilities of LLMs
to produce high-level plans over known, existing skills through the interface of natural language
(Sharma et al., 2021; Ahn et al., 2022; Singh et al., 2023; Huang et al., 2022; Ha et al., 2023) or
generated programs (Liang et al., 2022; Zeng et al., 2022; Vemprala et al., 2024). In addition, LLMs
have also been shown to be effective in directly producing low-level actions that can be executed
by an agent (Wang et al., 2023; Kwon et al., 2023; Driess et al., 2023; Brohan et al., 2023). Our
work does not use LLMs to generate actions at any level of abstraction but to provide a meaningful
distance measure to guide learning towards discovering semantically meaningful skills.
Several works have used LLMs to guide agents to learn semantically meaningful behavior by using
them to design reward functions for either a given desired task (Yu et al., 2023; Ma et al., 2023). This
showcases LLMs’ capacity to understand specific physical embodiments assorting it with semantic
knowledge to reason about given tasks. We note that these works aim to solve a single specific task,
whereas our method aims to learn a repertoire of diverse behaviors without explicit supervision.
The work most related to ours is Du et al. (2023), which employs an LLM to guide exploration.
Their approach uses the LLM to suggest plausible set of goals for the agent, maximizing the cosine
similarity between the language embeddings of the goals and the current state. While they focus


                                                   3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 2: Overview of how LGSD works. Given a prompt, the LLM generates the description for
each state. We then measure the difference between these descriptions and denote it as dlang . Based
on dlang , we constrain the latent space by enforcing the 1-Lipschitz condition on ϕ. Then the agent
is encouraged to visit states that make the vector ϕ(s′ ) − ϕ(s) aligns well with a randomly sampled
vector z from an isotropic Gaussian prior. This makes the agent explore the latent space in diverse
directions depending on the sampled z.

on using an LLM to reason with a low-dimensional, discrete set of high-level actions in complex
environments like Crafter and Housekeep, our work focus on discovering meaningful behaviors in
complex, continuous control spaces where actions (e.g. joint targets) are not as readily interpretable.
Furthermore, their reward function, based on language similarity, lacks theoretical support as it is
not a valid metric. In contrast, our method effectively handles the language-distance measure and
provides a theoretical framework for its use. We elaborate on this in Section 4.3.

3     P RELIMINARIES
Unsupervised skill discovery can be formalized within the framework of a reward-free Markov De-
cision Process (MDP), denoted as M ≡ {S, A, P}. Here, S represents the state space, A denotes
the action space, and P : S × A × S → [0, ∞) defines the transition dynamics. During training, a
latent vector z is sampled from a prior distribution z ∼ p(z) at the start of each episode and remains
fixed throughout the episode. This vector informs the policy π(a|s, z), guiding the generation of
corresponding rollouts through π. The training procedure aims to foster a dependency of the latent
vector z on its resultant behavior, allowing it to function effectively as a skill. It is referred to as the
skill because being conditioned on different skill z aims to behave differently by encouraging agents
to visit distinct distributions of states s, transitions (s, s′ ), or trajectories τ . A common approach to
training skills involves defining intrinsic rewards rint : S × A → R and optimizing   h P the accumulation
                                                                                                     i
                                                                                          ∞    t int
of discounted intrinsic rewards with the following objective: J = Eπ,P                    t=0 γ rt . Various
off-the-shelf reinforcement learning (RL) algorithms can be employed to optimize π to maximize
this objective. Notably, this process does not utilize any task-related explicit rewards.

4     L ANGUAGE G UIDED S KILL D ISCOVERY
In this section, we begin by providing an overview of our algorithm, followed by in-depth explana-
tions of the prompting, language distance measurement, and how we can utilize the acquired skills
using language prompts.

4.1   A LGORITHM

Our goal is for an agent to learn a corpus of skills that visits semantically different states. Discov-
ering semantically distinct states requires 1) a way of measuring the semantic difference between
states, and 2) a means of maximizing this difference measure. To evaluate the semantic differences
between different behaviors, we leverage the power of LLMs. We will consider two states as sub-
stantially distinct if the language descriptions produced by LLMs are semantically different. As


                                                     4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


illustrated in Fig. 2, an LLM is queried to produce a natural language description for each state.
This description links the state to its semantic meaning. We then measure the difference between
these language descriptions. To measure the difference between two language descriptions, we lever-
age a pre-trained natural language embedding model, Sentence-Transformer (Reimers & Gurevych,
2019), to map the language descriptions into fixed-dimension real-valued vectors. This allows us
to measure the difference between these vectors using cosine similarity. We refer to this difference
measure as language-distance and denote it as dlang .
Given a measure of the difference between language descriptions dlang , which acts as a proxy for
the semantic differences between states, the next step is to incentivize an agent to maximize this
distance in order to discover diverse skills. We utilize existing distance maximization skill discovery
algorithms, discussed in Section 2.1. Intuitively, we aim for agents to spread out from the origin in
the latent space, which is constrained under dlang . This constraint ensures that spreading out in the
latent space leads to maximizing sum of dlang along the path in the state space. More specifically, we
train a representation function ϕ : S → Z that maps state space S onto a latent space Z. Here, we
enforce that ϕ is 1-Lipschitz continuous under dlang , meaning that ∀(s, s′ ) ∈ S, ∥ϕ(s′ ) − ϕ(s)∥ ≤
dlang (s, s′ ). Thus, the Euclidean distance between s and s′ in latent space is always less than or
equal to dlang (s, s′ ). Hence, simply maximizing the Euclidean distance in the latent space results in
maximizing dlang in the state space.
Spreading out in the latent space can be achieved by aligning the vector ϕ(s′ ) − ϕ(s) with a latent
skill vector z sampled from a Gaussian distribution z ∼ N (0, I). Because the vector z is sampled
isotropically, aligning ϕ(s′ ) − ϕ(s) with z fosters a diversity of behaviors depending on the sampled
z. We use the reward r(s, z, s′ ) = (ϕ(s′ ) − ϕ(s))T z and maximize the cumulative reward to achieve
this objective. Here, Park et al. (2023b) showed that maximizing the cumulative reward r(s, z, s′ )
with a 1-Lipschitz continuous ϕ is equivalent to maximizing the WDM between the terminal state
ST and Z:
                                                             "T −1                       #
                                                               X
                                                                                      T
              arg max IW (ST ; Z) ≈ arg max Eπ,z∼p(Z)              (ϕ(st+1 ) − ϕ(st )) z
                π,ϕ                      π,ϕ                 t=0
                                        s.t. ∀(s, s ) ∈ S, ∥ϕ(s ) − ϕ(s)∥ ≤ dlang (s, s′ )
                                                  ′             ′
                                                                                                   (1)

We provide the proof in Appendix B. Therefore, the meaning of maximizing traveled language-
distance is equivalent to maximizing the WDM between sT and z under language-distance. Any
off-the-shelf model-free RL algorithms can then be used to maximize the sum of rewards. We used
PPO (Schulman et al., 2017) for as our primary RL algorithm because of its stable convergence. To
ensure ϕ is 1-Lipschitz continuous under a distance metric d, we use dual gradient descent with a
with a Lagrange multiplier λ (Boyd & Vandenberghe, 2004).

4.2   C ONSTRAINING THE SEARCH SPACE VIA PROMPTS

The potential space for skills is vast, yet only a narrow region
possesses semantic meanings. We want to explore only within
a subspace which has inherent semantic meanings. To achieve
this desiderata, we use language prompts to constrain the entire
search space into the desired semantic subspace.
Fig. 3 shows a manipulator environment that aims to move an
object. In this environment, we can consider skills enabling
object interactions as semantically meaningful while consid-
ering unstructured robot-arm movements not. Our language-
based distance allows us to capture such delicate semantics of
skills. For instance, we prompted an LLM to describe the dis-
tance d1 between the robot arm and the object unless the object
is moved already. Therefore, the scene description remains the
same unless there is a change in the robot-object distance d1 .     Figure 3: By prompting the LLM
Because dlang becomes positive only when the description of         to generate different descriptions
a state is changed, our distance maximization algorithm en-         depending on the state, LGSD can
courages an agent to visit states that can change descriptions,     adapt its focus during training.
which makes a robot arm to approach the object.


                                                  5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Moreover, we highlight that we can induce the LLM to not only focus on a single semantic aspect
of the scene but also to adapt its focus onto different semantic aspects throughout the training. For
instance, when the robot arm finally reaches the cube, the LLM is then asked to describe the object’s
moved distance d2 . This additional prompt shifts the focus of the semantics to the object’s traveled
distance and any other changes in the states are ignored by the LLM. This leads to the robot arm
pushing the object to its maximum extent. Note that existing skill discovery algorithms have limited
capability to constrain its focus by feeding subset of observations (Eysenbach et al., 2018; Park et al.,
2023a). In contrast, LGSD enables not only focusing on semantic dimensions but also adapting its
focus across different semantics during training.

4.3   L ANGUAGE DISTANCE AS A VALID METRIC

In Section 4.1, we stressed that dlang establishes a criterion for determining the distance between any
two points in the latent space. Therefore, maintaining a coherent criterion is crucial for building the
latent space. In this sense, dlang should be a valid distance metric. In this section, we present how
dlang can be employed as a valid (pseudo-) metric, despite not satisfying the triangle inequality.
We begin with defining dlang formally. Let us denote a user prompt as lprompt , and a rule-based state
annotator as g : S → lstate . The annotator g is a pre-defined function that translates state vector
into corresponding natural language sentence without any addition or loss of information. Then, we
denote the output description of an LLM for state s as ldesc (s) = LLM (·|lprompt , lstate ). We configure
the LLM to be deterministic with zero temperature during generation, thus treating it as a function.
Next, we employ a pre-trained language embedding model fembd : ldesc → RN . Using this setup, we
can now define the language distance dlang as follows:

                                           def         fembd (ldesc (s))T · fembd (ldesc (s′ ))
                ∀(s, s′ ) ∈ S, dlang (s, s′ ) = 1 −                                             .     (2)
                                                      ∥fembd (ldesc (s))∥∥fembd (ldesc (s′ ))∥

However, to be considered as a pseudometric, a function d : S × S → R must satisfy three con-
ditions: ∀x, y, z ∈ S, (i) d(x, x) = 0, (ii) d(x, y) = d(y, x), and (iii) d(x, z) ≤ d(x, y) + d(y, z).
In our case, dlang satisfies conditions (i) and (ii), but does not meet the condition (iii), the triangle
inequality.
To overcome this problem, we propose to impose the constraint in Eq. 1, only for adjacent pairs
of states ∀(s, s′ ) ∈ Sadj , where two states s and s′ are considered adjacent if s′ can be reached
from s within a single state transition. Therefore, every encountered transition sample of (s, s′ )
during training is adjacent. We claim that this modification to Eq. 1 will implicitly induce a valid
pseudometric d˜ for all state pairs ∀(s, s′ ) ∈ S.
Claim 1. For any function dlang : S × S → R+ , there exists a valid pseudometric d˜ : S × S → R+
that imposing the Eq. 1 on adjacent pairs of states lead to imposing the same equation on every
                           ˜ i.e.,
possible state pairs under d,
                                                                                ˜ y).
      ∀x, y ∈ Sadj , ∥ϕ(x) − ϕ(y)∥ ≤ dlang (x, y) =⇒ ∀x, y ∈ S, ∥ϕ(x) − ϕ(y)∥ ≤ d(x,

We provide a proof of the claim in Appendix C. Applying this modification, we came to the final
objective function as follows:
                     "T −1                      #
                       X
JLGSD = Eπ,z∼p(Z)          (ϕ(st+1 ) − ϕ(st )) z , s.t. ∀(s, s′ ) ∈ Sadj , ∥ϕ(s′ )−ϕ(s)∥ ≤ dlang (s, s′ ).
                                              T

                       t=0


Consequently, this objective encourages agents to explore diverse and distant states in latent space,
resulting in a greater language-distance traveled along the trajectory within the state space.

4.4   U TILIZING LEARNED SKILLS USING NATURAL LANGUAGE

After training is complete, we need a way of selecting specific z values to utilize the behaviors
associated with each skill to solve concrete tasks. However, we lack knowledge about which z
leads to the desired behavior. We can sweep over the skill space at fixed intervals (Laskin et al.,


                                                      6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 4: Trajectories of different skills trained with different prompts. For the Ant (top row), we
recorded the base’s x, y coordinates. For the Franka robot-arm agent (bottom row), we recorded the
x, y coordinates of the object on the table.

2022), or sample a number of skills and evaluate each with hundreds of rollout trajectories (Park
et al., 2023a). To overcome these challenges, Park et al. (2021; 2023b) have suggested using z =
(ϕ(g) − ϕ(s))/|ϕ(g) − ϕ(s)|2 for continuous skills, when we have Lipschitz continuous ϕ. Yet, in
many cases, we cannot fully specify the desired goal state. For instance, consider an agent using a
robotic arm to move a cube. The state includes the end-effector’s rotation and position, as well as
the cube’s coordinates. While you can specify the cube’s position, the required rotation and position
of the end-effector to achieve that position may not be known.
To address the challenge of goal state specification, we propose training a separate network ψ :
fembd (ldesc (s)) → Z to infer the skill. Intuitively, ψ takes the embedding of the language description
of the state s as input and infers which z was used to reach that specific state. Since we are gathering
pairs of state s and the corresponding skill z during the training of π, we can train ψ using the same
data. After training, we can use ψ and sgoal to produce zgoal , which enables the agent to reach sgoal .
We then feed zgoal into π, allowing the agent to reach the goal state as described in natural language
in a zero-shot manner. The full algorithm, including the training of ψ, is presented in Appendix E.


5     E XPERIMENTS

In this section, we evaluate our proposed LGSD by conducting a series of experiments on continuous
control environments, encompassing both locomotion and manipulation setups. We aim to answer
four questions: (1) Can prompting constrain the skill space into a desired semantic subspace? (2)
Can language guidance lead to obtaining more diverse skills compared to unsupervised skill discov-
ery baselines? (3) Can we utilize learned skills for solving downstream tasks? (4) Can we employ
learned skills using natural language?

Experimental setup We trained our algorithm and baselines using Isaac Gym (Makoviychuk
et al., 2021), a high-throughput GPU-based physics simulator. For the language model, we em-
ployed gpt-4-turbo-2024-04-09(Achiam et al., 2023). We set the temperature parameter of
the language model to 0 to get a consistent, low-variance measure of dlang . To reduce the number
of unique queries, we discretized states and cached the input and output of these queries and reused
them during training. We provide the exact prompts used for each experiments in Appendix G.

5.1   C ONSTRAINING THE SKILL SPACE INTO A DESIRED SEMANTIC SUBSPACE

We first explored how LGSD constrains the skill search space into a desired semantic subspace using
prompts. To visually present this concept, we designed experiments where agents visit mutually
exclusive states depending on the prompts. We tested this idea in two environments, Ant and


                                                   7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


               (a) Object moved distance                      (b) Object state coverage

Figure 6: Comparison of the object’s moved distance and state coverage by LGSD against baselines.
LGSD moved the object (a) further and toward (b) more diverse directions. Additionally, it is more
sample-efficient with the aid of language guidance.


FrankaCube. In the Ant environment, we required the agent to traverse only half of the plane.
For instance, we allowed an agent to visit any location in the northern part of the plane but restricted
it from entering the southern area. We repeated these experiments for each cardinal direction: North,
South, East, and West (NSEW). Similarly, in the FrankaCube environment, we intended for the
robot arm to move the object to only half of the plane for each of the NSEW directions starting
from the origin. We trained four agents, each with its own unique prompt, encouraging the agent to
explore only within the intended semantic subspace.
Fig. 4 (and Fig. 10 in Appendix) shows the discovered skills trained with each prompt. For each
plot, we sampled z ∼ N (0, I) 150 times independently and then generated trajectories using a
skill-conditioned policy. As shown in Fig. 4, LGSD effectively constrained the skill space into the
desired subspace, especially in the Ant environment. For the Franka agent, the robot arm was
able to move the object into the intended region, but it could not fully cover all skills within the
constrained subspace. We believe this limitation is due to the inherent nature of the exploration
problem. In the Ant environment, the dynamics of the agent is invariant to horizontal translation,
which allows effective control at any location. On the other hand, moving the cube along a long
trajectory often requires changes in pushing strategies with different contacts and force profiles.


5.2   L ANGUAGE GUIDANCE AIDS DISCOVERING DIVERSE SKILLS

To observe the effect of language guidance, we evaluate the diversity measure
of the skills learned using LGSD against unsupervised skill discovery base-
lines. For the baselines, we take two classical mutual information-based skill
discovery algorithms: DIAYN (Eysenbach et al., 2018) and DADS (Sharma
et al., 2019), as well as three state-of-the-art distance maximization based ap-
proaches: LSD (Park et al., 2021), CSD (Park et al., 2023a), and METRA (Park
et al., 2023b).
Although METRA was originally designed for pixel-based input tasks, it can
also handle vector-based inputs. Therefore, we used vector-based state inputs
for all methods to facilitate direct comparison. For all methods, we utilized Figure 5: Initial
no human prior knowledge in selecting parts of the state dimension to induce state of robot arm.
desired behaviors; instead, we passed full observations directly to the skill dis-
covery algorithms. Detailed information about the observations is provided in Appendix F.2.1.
We set up a challenging manipulation task as illustrated in Fig. 5. Here, we expect to discover
skills that can manipulate the object toward diverse directions. The challenge arises from the initial
distance between the robot arm and the object, which is set to the maximum possible value. We
believe this task can confirm the validity of the two-stage prompt suggested in section 4.2. After
training, we randomly sampled 200 skills and measured both the average moved distance of the
object and the state coverage that counts the total number of visited horizontal grids, each sized 1cm
x 1cm.


                                                   8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 7: Paths of objects moved on a horizontal table by LGSD and five baseline algorithms,
illustrated using the best-performing checkpoint from four runs for each algorithm.


Figure 9: The training curve of the high-level controller in locomotion tasks, using the low-level
controller trained with LGSD and five state-of-the-art unsupervised skill discovery methods. LGSD
is able to achieve better returns and exhibits better sample efficiency.

We present the results in Fig. 6. As shown in Fig. 6, LGSD discovers more diverse states compared
to all baseline algorithms. Skills trained using LGSD moved the object an average of 0.5m, which
is five times greater than the value achieved by the second-best algorithm. This result confirms that
language guidance from an LLM aids in discovering both diverse and meaningful skills. Notably,
all distance-maximization methods (CSD, METRA, LSD) could manipulate the object, whereas MI-
based methods could not. Fig. 7 shows qualitative results of the learned behaviors by each method,
where LGSD demonstrated the ability to manipulate objects to cover more grid areas. Additionally,
visualizations and an analysis of the agent’s movements in latent space are provided in Appendix D.


5.3   H ARNESSING LEARNED SKILLS

Zero-shot task solving via natural
language We first demonstrate
how our agent can solve a down-
stream task in a zero-shot manner
via natural language instruction. As
discussed in Section 4.4, we utilize
ψ(z|fembed (ldesc )) to infer a skill to
reach the goal state. For instance,
our instruction can be a description
of the desired state, "The object
is located at [0.3,0.2]",
which does not contain information
regarding the robot-arm’s position or
orientation. The learned ψ allows an Figure 8: Users can specify goals in natural language. Blue
agent to translate the given language dots represent the desired position of the object, while red
instruction into an effective skill for dots indicate the object’s trajectory.
reaching the goal state.
Fig. 8 illustrates scenarios that a robot-arm moves the object to the six different goal positions
described in natural language. This experiment showcased that the agent can understand the desired
goal state with the help of ψ, execute the skill accurately, and successfully move the cube to the
target positions in a zero-shot manner. We also provide the results of the zero-shot goal-following
agent in the locomotion domain in Appendix, Fig. 11.


                                                 9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Training high-level controller with learned skills Although our method enables training a de-
sired set of skills to some extent using tailored prompts, it can be challenging for users to specify
exact prompts that produce behaviors for more complex tasks. In such scenarios, our method can act
as a pre-training module, which trains a low-level controller πlow (a|s, z), which can then be lever-
aged by a high-level controller πhigh (z|s, g) to select the appropriate skills for new downstream
task, represented by g.
We evaluate the performance of high-level controllers that leverage a pre-trained LGSD low-level
controller on two downstream tasks: AntSingleGoal and AntMultiGoal. Details of the
downstream tasks are available in Appendix F.1. Fig. 9 shows that by using the set of skills trained
with our method, the high-level controller can achieve higher returns and better sample complexity
compared to prior skill discovery methods. We hypothesize that these improvements comes from
the fact that the skills discovered through LGSD can better focus on more semantically meaningful
changes in the x, y positions by leveraging guidance from the LLM, while other methods simply
seek changes in all 39 dimensions of the states equally.


6   C ONCLUSION

Our work introduced Language Guided Skill Discovery (LGSD), a novel framework for skill dis-
covery that leverages the semantic understanding capabilities of large language models (LLMs) to
guide the learning of semantically diverse skills. By incorporating language as a tool for both con-
straining the skill space and measuring semantic diversity, LGSD offers a novel approach to learning
diverse skills. We have demonstrated through various experiments that LGSD not only constrains
skills within semantically meaningful subspaces but also enhances the diversity and applicability of
the skills learned.
Despite these advancements, there are areas for further exploration and improvement. The approach
could benefit from a more nuanced understanding of the scene, potentially by incorporating vision-
language models (VLMs). We conjecture that some semantics can be more easily captured through
vision. VLMs would effectively help to utilize these dimensions. Furthermore, we suggest that
incorporating trajectory-level semantic differences, instead of state-level, could be an interesting
future direction. We could provide entire trajectories to LLMs/VLMs and query them to associate
them with semantic meanings.
Overall, we believe our work marks the beginning of a series of efforts that capture semantic diver-
sity between skills. We hope this work facilitates further research endeavors in discovering seman-
tically meaningful skills with the aid of external knowledge sources, including LLMs.

Reproducibility Statement We have made significant efforts to ensure the reproducibility of our
work across various aspects.

      • Detailed information about the observations used in our experiments is provided in Ap-
        pendix F.2.1.
      • A comprehensive pseudo-code of our algorithm is available in Appendix E.
      • A rigorous proof of Claim 4.3 is included in Appendix C.
      • Visualizations of the learned representation space can be found in Appendix D.
      • Details of the high-level tasks training are provided in Appendix F.1.
      • The exact version of the LLM used and all prompts are documented in Appendix G.

Acknowledgements This research has been funded by the Industrial Technology Innovation Pro-
gram (P0028404, development of a product-level humanoid mobile robot for medical assistance
equipped with bidirectional customizable human-robot interaction, autonomous semantic naviga-
tion, and dual-arm complex manipulation capabilities using large-scale artificial intelligence mod-
els) of the Ministry of Industry, Trade and Energy of Korea.


                                                 10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


R EFERENCES
Josh Achiam, Steven Adler, Sandhini Agarwal, Lama Ahmad, Ilge Akkaya, Florencia Leoni Ale-
  man, Diogo Almeida, Janko Altenschmidt, Sam Altman, Shyamal Anadkat, et al. Gpt-4 technical
  report. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.08774, 2023.
Michael Ahn, Anthony Brohan, Noah Brown, Yevgen Chebotar, Omar Cortes, Byron David, Chelsea
 Finn, Chuyuan Fu, Keerthana Gopalakrishnan, Karol Hausman, et al. Do as i can, not as i say:
 Grounding language in robotic affordances. arXiv e-prints, pp. arXiv–2204, 2022.
Stephen P Boyd and Lieven Vandenberghe. Convex optimization. Cambridge university press, 2004.
Anthony Brohan, Noah Brown, Justice Carbajal, Yevgen Chebotar, Xi Chen, Krzysztof Choroman-
  ski, Tianli Ding, Danny Driess, Avinava Dubey, Chelsea Finn, et al. Rt-2: Vision-language-action
  models transfer web knowledge to robotic control. arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.15818, 2023.
Yuri Burda, Harrison Edwards, Amos Storkey, and Oleg Klimov. Exploration by random network
  distillation. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2018.
Djork-Arné Clevert, Thomas Unterthiner, and Sepp Hochreiter. Fast and accurate deep network
  learning by exponential linear units (elus). arXiv preprint arXiv:1511.07289, 2015.
Danny Driess, Fei Xia, Mehdi S. M. Sajjadi, Corey Lynch, Aakanksha Chowdhery, Brian Ichter,
  Ayzaan Wahid, Jonathan Tompson, Quan Vuong, Tianhe Yu, Wenlong Huang, Yevgen Chebotar,
  Pierre Sermanet, Daniel Duckworth, Sergey Levine, Vincent Vanhoucke, Karol Hausman, Marc
  Toussaint, Klaus Greff, Andy Zeng, Igor Mordatch, and Pete Florence. Palm-e: An embodied
  multimodal language model. In arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.03378, 2023.
Yuqing Du, Olivia Watkins, Zihan Wang, Cédric Colas, Trevor Darrell, P. Abbeel, Abhishek
  Gupta, and Jacob Andreas. Guiding pretraining in reinforcement learning with large language
  models. In International Conference on Machine Learning, 2023. URL https://api.
  semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:256846700.
Benjamin Eysenbach, Abhishek Gupta, Julian Ibarz, and Sergey Levine. Diversity is all you need:
  Learning skills without a reward function. In International Conference on Learning Representa-
  tions, 2018.
Karol Gregor, Danilo Jimenez Rezende, and Daan Wierstra. Variational intrinsic control. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:1611.07507, 2016.
Huy Ha, Pete Florence, and Shuran Song. Scaling up and distilling down: Language-guided robot
  skill acquisition. In Conference on Robot Learning, pp. 3766–3777. PMLR, 2023.
Steven Hansen, Will Dabney, Andre Barreto, David Warde-Farley, Tom Van de Wiele, and
  Volodymyr Mnih. Fast task inference with variational intrinsic successor features. In Interna-
  tional Conference on Learning Representations, 2019.
Shuncheng He, Yuhang Jiang, Hongchang Zhang, Jianzhun Shao, and Xiangyang Ji. Wasserstein
  unsupervised reinforcement learning. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intel-
  ligence, volume 36, pp. 6884–6892, 2022.
Wenlong Huang, Fei Xia, Ted Xiao, Harris Chan, Jacky Liang, Pete Florence, Andy Zeng, Jonathan
 Tompson, Igor Mordatch, Yevgen Chebotar, Pierre Sermanet, Noah Brown, Tomas Jackson, Linda
 Luu, Sergey Levine, Karol Hausman, and Brian Ichter. Inner monologue: Embodied reasoning
 through planning with language models. In arXiv preprint arXiv:2207.05608, 2022.
Diederik P Kingma and Jimmy Ba. Adam: A method for stochastic optimization. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1412.6980, 2014.
Taehwan Kwon. Variational intrinsic control revisited. In International Conference on Learning
  Representations, 2020.
Teyun Kwon, Norman Di Palo, and Edward Johns. Language models as zero-shot trajectory gener-
  ators. In 2nd Workshop on Language and Robot Learning: Language as Grounding, 2023. URL
  https://openreview.net/forum?id=Vg1M513djv.


                                               11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Michael Laskin, Hao Liu, Xue Bin Peng, Denis Yarats, Aravind Rajeswaran, and Pieter Abbeel.
 Unsupervised reinforcement learning with contrastive intrinsic control. In Advances in Neural
 Information Processing Systems, 2022.
Jacky Liang, Wenlong Huang, Fei Xia, Peng Xu, Karol Hausman, Brian Ichter, Pete Florence, and
  Andy Zeng. Code as policies: Language model programs for embodied control. In arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2209.07753, 2022.
Hao Liu and Pieter Abbeel. Aps: Active pretraining with successor features. In International
  Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 6736–6747. PMLR, 2021a.
Hao Liu and Pieter Abbeel. Behavior from the void: Unsupervised active pre-training. Advances in
  Neural Information Processing Systems, 34:18459–18473, 2021b.
Yecheng Jason Ma, William Liang, Guanzhi Wang, De-An Huang, Osbert Bastani, Dinesh Jayara-
  man, Yuke Zhu, Linxi Fan, and Anima Anandkumar. Eureka: Human-level reward design via
  coding large language models. In The Twelfth International Conference on Learning Representa-
  tions, 2023.
Viktor Makoviychuk, Lukasz Wawrzyniak, Yunrong Guo, Michelle Lu, Kier Storey, Miles Macklin,
  David Hoeller, Nikita Rudin, Arthur Allshire, Ankur Handa, et al. Isaac gym: High performance
  gpu-based physics simulation for robot learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2108.10470, 2021.
Sherjil Ozair, Corey Lynch, Yoshua Bengio, Aaron Van den Oord, Sergey Levine, and Pierre Ser-
  manet. Wasserstein dependency measure for representation learning. Advances in Neural Infor-
  mation Processing Systems, 32, 2019.
Seohong Park, Jongwook Choi, Jaekyeom Kim, Honglak Lee, and Gunhee Kim. Lipschitz-
  constrained unsupervised skill discovery. In International Conference on Learning Represen-
  tations, 2021.
Seohong Park, Kimin Lee, Youngwoon Lee, and Pieter Abbeel. Controllability-aware unsupervised
  skill discovery. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 27225–27245. PMLR,
  2023a.
Seohong Park, Oleh Rybkin, and Sergey Levine. Metra: Scalable unsupervised rl with metric-aware
  abstraction. In The Twelfth International Conference on Learning Representations, 2023b.
Deepak Pathak, Dhiraj Gandhi, and Abhinav Gupta. Self-supervised exploration via disagreement.
  In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 5062–5071. PMLR, 2019.
Nils Reimers and Iryna Gurevych. Sentence-bert: Sentence embeddings using siamese bert-
  networks. In Proceedings of the 2019 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language
  Processing and the 9th International Joint Conference on Natural Language Processing (EMNLP-
  IJCNLP). Association for Computational Linguistics, 2019.
John Schulman, Philipp Moritz, Sergey Levine, Michael Jordan, and Pieter Abbeel. High-
  dimensional continuous control using generalized advantage estimation.  arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1506.02438, 2015.
John Schulman, Filip Wolski, Prafulla Dhariwal, Alec Radford, and Oleg Klimov. Proximal policy
  optimization algorithms. arXiv preprint arXiv:1707.06347, 2017.
Archit Sharma, Shixiang Gu, Sergey Levine, Vikash Kumar, and Karol Hausman. Dynamics-aware
  unsupervised discovery of skills. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2019.
Pratyusha Sharma, Antonio Torralba, and Jacob Andreas. Skill induction and planning with latent
  language. arXiv preprint arXiv:2110.01517, 2021.
Ishika Singh, Valts Blukis, Arsalan Mousavian, Ankit Goyal, Danfei Xu, Jonathan Tremblay, Dieter
   Fox, Jesse Thomason, and Animesh Garg. Progprompt: Generating situated robot task plans using
   large language models. In 2023 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation
   (ICRA), pp. 11523–11530. IEEE, 2023.


                                               12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Sai H Vemprala, Rogerio Bonatti, Arthur Bucker, and Ashish Kapoor. Chatgpt for robotics: Design
  principles and model abilities. IEEE Access, 2024.
Cédric Villani et al. Optimal transport: old and new, volume 338. Springer, 2009.
Yen-Jen Wang, Bike Zhang, Jianyu Chen, and Koushil Sreenath. Prompt a robot to walk with large
  language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2309.09969, 2023.
Denis Yarats, Rob Fergus, Alessandro Lazaric, and Lerrel Pinto. Reinforcement learning with pro-
  totypical representations. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 11920–11931.
  PMLR, 2021.
Wenhao Yu, Nimrod Gileadi, Chuyuan Fu, Sean Kirmani, Kuang-Huei Lee, Montserrat Gonzalez
 Arenas, Hao-Tien Lewis Chiang, Tom Erez, Leonard Hasenclever, Jan Humplik, et al. Language
 to rewards for robotic skill synthesis. In 7th Annual Conference on Robot Learning, 2023.
Andy Zeng, Maria Attarian, Brian Ichter, Krzysztof Choromanski, Adrian Wong, Stefan Welker,
  Federico Tombari, Aveek Purohit, Michael Ryoo, Vikas Sindhwani, et al. Socratic models: Com-
  posing zero-shot multimodal reasoning with language. arXiv preprint arXiv:2204.00598, 2022.


                                                13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A PPENDIX

A    A DDITIONAL R ESULT F IGURES


    (a) Moving North           (b) Moving East         (c) Moving South          (d) Moving West

Figure 10: LGSD constrains different prompts into different semantic subspace of skills. Each
yellow line indicates a trajectory generated using a randomly sampled skill learned with each
prompt. Using different prompts, each set of skills is constrained to visit the (a)Northern, (b)Eastern,
(c)Southern, and (d)Western areas of the plane.


Figure 11: Ant agents move toward the goal. Red dots indicate the actual path of the agent’s base,
while the blue dot represents ths goal. Each goal is specified using natural language.


B    P ROOF OF MAXIMIZING WASSERSTEIN D EPENDENCY M EASURE

We begin with the alternative form of Wasserstein distance using Kantorovich-Rubenstein duality
following Villani et al. (2009), to make IW tractable.

                    IW (S; Z) =     sup Ep(S,Z) [f (S, Z)] − Ep(S)p(Z) [f (S, Z)]
                                  f ∈LS×Z


where LS×Z is a set of all 1-Lipschitz function defined in S × Z → R under the distance metric d.
For the remainder, we follow the proof outlined in Park et al. (2023b), but we provide a simplified
version.


                                                  14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


We first parameterize f (S, Z) = ϕ(S)T ψ(Z) using ϕ : S → RD and ψ : Z → RD , which
are 1-Lipschitz constrained functions. This is safe decomposition because the expressive power of
ϕ(S)T ψ(Z) is universal. Please refer to Park et al. (2023b) for more detail.

          IW (S; Z) ≈         sup         Ep(S,Z) [ϕ(S)T ψ(Z)] − Ep(S) [ϕ(S)]Ep(Z) [ψ(Z)]
                        ∥ϕ∥L ≤1,∥ψ∥L ≤1

Then we use Z instead of ψ(Z) to earn simplicity at the cost of expressiveness. Also we choose
the prior distribution p(Z) to have zero-mean. This makes the second term Ep(S) [ϕ(S)]Ep(Z) [Z] to
0. Finally, similar to VIC, we measure WDM between the final state ST and the skill, insteaf of all
states.

                             IW (ST ; Z) ≈ sup Ep(S,Z) [ϕ(ST )T Z]
                                              ∥ϕ∥L ≤1

Next, we utilize Ep(S,Z) [ϕ(S0 )T Z] = Ep(S) [ϕ(S0 )]Ep(Z) [Z] = 0 because the distribution of the
initial state S0 and p(Z) are mutually independent, and p(Z) has a zero-mean. So subtracting it
from the right-hand side doesn’t change the equation. Now we have the final objective:


                  IW (ST ; Z) ≈ sup Ep(S,Z) [ϕ(ST )T Z] − Ep(S,Z) [ϕ(S0 )T Z]
                                 ∥ϕ∥L ≤1
                                             "T −1                     #
                                              X
                                                                     T
                               ≈ sup Ep(τ,z)      (ϕ(St+1 ) − ϕ(St )) Z .
                                 ∥ϕ∥L ≤1            t=0


Therefore, we can use RL with the reward function r(s, z, s′ ) = (ϕ(s′ ) − ϕ(s))T z to maximize
IW (ST ; Z).

C    P ROOF OF C LAIM 1
Our goal is to prove the following two claims.
                                                                                  ˜ y)
  (i) ∀(x, y) ∈ Sadj , ∥ϕ(x) − ϕ(y)∥ ≤ dlang (x, y) =⇒ ∀x, y ∈ S, ∥ϕ(x) − ϕ(y)∥ ≤ d(x,
      ˜ y) is a valid pseudometric.
 (ii) d(x,

We follow the proof of CSD (Park et al., 2023a) similarly, but it has significant differences which
will be covered in later of this section.

Proof of (i) We begin with introducing P (x, y) as the set of all finite path from state x to state y,
for ∀x, y ∈ S. Here, we only consider existing path p = (s0 = x, s1 , ..., sT −1 , sT = y) ∈ P (x, y).
The term existing indicates that for every consecutive state pairs (si , si+1 ) in p, si+1 should be
reachable from si . More concretely,

                         ∀(si , si+1 ) ∈ p, ∃a ∈ A, s.t., P(si , a, si+1 ) > 0
where, P is a transition probability. Then, for a path p, we denote the sum of the language distance
                                               def PT −1                                   ˜ y) as
along the path p as Dlang (p), i.e., Dlang (p) = t=0 dlang (st , st+1 ). Now we can define d(x,
follows:

                          ˜ y) def        inf p∈P (x,y) Dlang (p) if x ̸= y
                          d(x, =
                                          0                       if x = y.

Now we are ready to move on to the main proof. We assume that ∀(x, y) ∈ Sadj , ∥ϕ(x) − ϕ(y)∥ ≤
dlang (x, y). Also, note that ∀x, y ∈ S, both dlang (x, x) = 0 and dlang (x, y) = dlang (y, x) holds


                                                  15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


trivially. We denote the optimal path as p∗ = (x, s∗1 , s∗2 , ..., s∗T −1 , y) ∈ P (x, y) which satisfy
 ˜ y) = Dlang (p∗ ). Then,
d(x,


  ∀x, y ∈ S, ∥ϕ(x) − ϕ(y)∥ = ∥ϕ(x) − ϕ(s∗1 ) + ϕ(s∗1 ) − ϕ(s∗2 ) + ... + ϕ(s∗T −1 ) − ϕ(y)∥
                                ≤ ∥ϕ(x) − ϕ(s∗1 )∥ + ∥ϕ(s∗1 ) − ϕ(s∗2 )∥ + ... + ∥ϕ(s∗T −1 ) − ϕ(y)∥
                                                                                             ˜ y).
                                ≤ dlang (x, s∗ ) + dlang (s∗ , s∗ ) + ... + dlang (s∗ , y) = d(x,
                                            1                  1   2                      T −1


This concludes the proof of (i).

Proof of (ii) To show that d˜ is a valid pseudometric, we need to prove following three conditions:
              ˜ x) = 0, d(x,
∀x, y, z ∈ S, d(x,       ˜ y) = d(y,  ˜ x), and d(x,
                                                 ˜ y) ≤ d(x,˜ z) + d(z,
                                                                      ˜ y).
                                                ˜ x) = 0 holds trivially.
At first, given that ∀x ∈ S, dlang (x, x) = 0 , d(x,
                                                             ˜ y) = d(y,
Secondly, given that ∀x, y ∈ S, dlang (x, y) = dlang (y, x) ,d(x,   ˜ x) also holds trivially.
                               ˜
For the triangle inequality of d,


                                 ˜ y) =
                   ∀x, y, z ∈ S, d(x,              inf      Ds (p)
                                                p∈P (x,y)

                                          ≤                inf            Ds (p1 ) + Ds (p2 )
                                                p1 ∈P (x,z),p2 ∈P (z,y)

                                          =        inf        Ds (p1 ) +      inf        Ds (p2 )
                                                p1 ∈P (x,z)                p2 ∈P (z,y)
                                            ˜ z) + d(z,
                                          = d(x,   ˜ y).

This completes the proof of (ii).

Difference from CSD The primary distinction is that we focus exclusively on the existing path
p ∈ P (x, y) only. Here, we refer a path “exists” between state x and y only if state y is reachable
from x within a finite number of transitions. During the actual optimization process, our agents
encounter existing path only, so we believe this constraints align our theory more closely with the
actual training scenario. Due to this specific focus, unlike from CSD, d˜ can no longer serves as a
lower bound for dlang .
Another notable difference is that we update only with the adjacent pairs of states. Thanks to our
claim 1., we still can induce a valid pseudo-metric across all pairs of states within the state space.
This approach aims to bridge the gap between our theoretical model and the training data used for
model updates.


                                                      16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


D    L ATENT SPACE VISUALIZATION


                        (a)                                                 (b)


                        (c)                                                 (d)


                        (e)                                                (f)


Figure 12: Each sub-figure corresponds to a trajectory drawn from a policy conditioned on six
different skills sampled randomly. In each subfigure, the left figure displays the actual paths of
both the end-effector (blue) and the object (red) in the real world while the right figure illustrates
the corresponding trajectory in latent space, generated using the learned ϕ function. A black arrow
indicates the skill vector used to produce the trajectory. The numbers indicate transition step in each
of the episode.

As discussed in Section 4.1, LGSD encourages the agent to spread out evenly in the latent space. The
distance between two consecutive points in the latent space is regulated by the language distance,
dlang . Fig. 12 demonstrates that the orientation of the agent’s trajectory in latent space aligns well
with the sampled skill vector. Since the skill vector is sampled isotropically, agent effectively spread
out in the latent space. Additionally, it is noteworthy that the distance between two consecutive
points in the latent space increases especially when the cube is moved. On the other hand, when the
cube is stationary, there is no further extension in the latent space as can be seen in the Fig. 12 (a).
This indicates that our language distance dlang serves as a meaningful proxy for semantic distance.


                                                  17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


E    F ULL ALGORITHM OF LGSD

Algorithm 1 Language Guided Skill Discovery
 1: Initialize skill-conditioned policy π(a|s, z), representation function ϕ(s), prompt lprompt , LLM
    function LLM , language embedding model fembed , skill inference network ψ, Lagrange multi-
    plier λ, and data buffer D
 2: for i ← 1 to # of epochs do
 3:    for j ← 1 to # of episodes per epoch do
 4:       Sample skill z ∼ N (0, I)
 5:       while episode not terminates do
 6:          Sample action a ∼ π(a|s, z)
 7:          Execute a and receive s′
 8:          Query LLM (·|s, lprompt ) to produce ldesc (s) and ldesc (s′ )
 9:          Compute reward r = (ϕ(s′ ) − ϕ(s))T z
10:          Compute dlang (s, s′ ) using eq. (2)
11:          Compute embedding vector es = fembed (ldesc (s))
12:          Add {s, a, r, s′ , dlang (s, s′ ), es , z} to buffer D
13:       end while
14:    end for
15:    for {s, a, r, s′ , dlang (s, s′ ), es , z} in D do
          Update ϕ to maximize E(s,z,s′ )∼D (ϕ(s′ ) − ϕ(s))T z + λ · min(ϵ, dlang (s, s′ ) − ∥ϕ(s) − ϕ(s′ )∥22 )

16:

          Update λ to minimize E(s,z,s′ )∼D λ · min(ϵ, dlang (s, s′ ) − ∥ϕ(s) − ϕ(s′ )∥22 )

17:
18:       Update π using PPO with reward r
19:       Update ψ to minimize Mean Squared Error between ψ(es ) and z
20:    end for
21: end for


                                                  18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


F     I MPLEMENTATION DETAILS
F.1     D ETAILS OF DOWNSTREAM TASKS

We used similar settings for the downstream tasks in the locomotion domain as those used in Metra
(Park et al., 2023b). For AntSingleGoal, a single goal is sampled for every episode within a
range of [−50, 50], centered at the origin. The task is considered complete when the agent reaches
within a radius of 3 units around the goal, at which point the agent receives a reward of 1 and the
episode terminates. For AntMultiGoal, there are four sequential goals in total. When the first
goal is reached, the next goal is sampled randomly within a range of [−7.5, 7.5], centered at the
agent’s current location. Reaching each goal gives a reward of 1.
On the other hand, we have two differences from the task used in Metra. The first difference is in the
termination condition. When the agent’s torso height drops below the threshold height of 0.31 m,
the episode is instantly terminated. This threshold is the default value used in the Ant environment
from the official IsaacGymEnvs library. We believe this condition encourages the agent to walk
rather than “roll”, which often occurs when attempting to maximize all possible state dimensions
without constraints. Another difference is that we use a higher-dimensional observation space, as
detailed in F.2.1. Our observation space has 39 dimensions, whereas the original Metra work has 26
dimensions, as it is based on the MuJoCo Ant environment.
We trained the low-level controller five times with different seeds for reporting final performance.
We used 20,000 updated checkpoints from each training runs of low-level controller to train the
high-level controller.

F.2     O BSERVATIONS AND HYPERPARAMETERS

F.2.1    O BSERVATIONS


                              Table 1: Ant Environment Observations
            Name                 Description                                        Dimension
            Base position        x,y,z position of the robot’s base                 3
            Base velocity        velocity of robot’s base in x,y,z direction        3
            Base angvel          angular velocity of robot’s base                   3
            Base rotation        Yaw, Pitch, Roll of robot’s base                   3
            Gravity projection   Vector indicates direction of the gravity          3
            DOF position         Current angle of each DOF                          8
            DOF velocity         Angular velocity of each DOF                       8
            Previous action      Action executed in previous step                   8
            Sum                                                                     39



                     Table 2: Franka Manipulator Environment Observations
              Name         Description                                Dimension
              Cube pos      x,y,z coordinate of the target cube                3
              Cube quat     Rotation of the target cube                        4
              EEF pos       x,y,z coordinate of robot arm’s end-effector       3
              EEF quat      Rotation of the Robot arm’s end-effector           4
              Gripper q     Gripper width                                      2
              Sum                                                              16


F.2.2    H YPERPARAMETERS


                                                 19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                              Table 3: Hyperparameters of LGSD
                 Name                                                    Value
                 Learning rate                                          0.0001
                 Optimizer                          Adam(Kingma & Ba, 2014)
                 Minibatch size                     32768(Ant) , 16384(Franka)
                 Horizon length                                              32
                 PPO clip threshold                                         0.2
                 PPO number of epochs                                         5
                 GAE λ (Schulman et al., 2015)                             0.95
                 Discount factor γ                                         0.99
                 Entropy coefficient                                    0.0001
                 Initial Lagrange coefficient λ                             300
                 Dim. of skill z                             2(Ant), 3(Franka)
                 Policy network π                    MLP with [256, 256, 128],
                 Activaion of π                       ELU(Clevert et al., 2015)
                 Representation function ϕ            MLP with [256, 256, 128]
                 Activaion of ϕ                                           ReLU
                 Skill inference network ψ            MLP with [256, 256, 128]
                 Activaion of ψ                                           ReLU


G     P ROMPTS USED FOR EACH OF THE EXPERIMENTS

In this section, we share the prompts used for each of the experiments, and the examplary outputs
from the LLM. One key detail is that we prompted LLM to finalize its sentence with a keyword of
"Description:", so that we can parse the final description out of whole generated sentences.

G.1   P ROMPTS FOR ENFORCING A NT AGENT TO MOVE N ORTH

Input You will describe a given robot’s state where the robot is
moving on a plane. The state of the robot is as follows:
Robot’s x, y, z coordinates: [6.5, -0.5, -0.3] Robot’s rotation:
[0.9770, 0.1942, 0.0884, 0.0012]
If the y-coordinate is less than 0, we consider the area as south-
ern. Conversely, if the y-coordinate of the robot is greater than
or equal to 0, we consider the area as northern.
If the robot is in the northern area relative to the origin, pro-
vide the robot’s [x, y] position. Please conclude your answer
with the final description in the format: ’Description: The
robot’s x, y position is   ’.
If the robot is in the southern area relative to the origin,
just state that ’Description:The robot is located in the south-
ern area.’

Output Since the y-coordinate of the robot is -0.5, which is less
than 0, the robot is located in the southern area.
Description:        The robot is located in the southern area.

G.2   P ROMPTS FOR ENFORCING F RANKA AGENT TO PUSH OBJECTS TOWARD N ORTH

Input You will describe a scene where a robot arm is approaching
an object. The state of the robot arm is as follows:


                                               20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Robot’s end effector’s x, y, z coordinates: [6.5, -0.5, -0.3],
Object’s x, y, z coordinates: [0, 1.0, 0.2], Origin’s x, y, z
coordinates: [0, 0, 0]
If the object’s y coordinate is less than 0, tell me ’Description:
The object is located in southern area.’
If the object’s y coordinate greater than or equal to 0, tell
me the object’s x, y coordinates. You can use any introductory
words, but please conclude your answer with the final description
in the format: ’Description: The object’s x, y position is     .’
If the object’s coordinates match the origin’s, tell me the dis-
tance between the robot’s end effector and the object. Again,
conclude with the final description in the format: ’Description:
the distance is    units.’

Output1 - when object is moved In this scene, the object’s y coordinate
is 1.0, which is greater than 0. Thus, the x and y coordinates of
the object are 0 and 1.0 respectively.
Description:       The object’s x, y position is 0, 1.0.

Output2 - When object is not moved In this scene, we observe a robot’s
end effector positioned at coordinates [6.5, -0.5, -0.3] aiming to
approach an object. The object itself is found at the coordinates
[0, 0, 0], which are identical to the origin’s coordinates.
To analyze this setup, we calculate the distance between the
robot’s end effector and the object. Using the Euclidean distance
formula:
                               p
                    Distance = (x2 − x1 )2 + (y2 − y1 )2 + (z2 − z1 )2
                        p
                      = (0 − 6.5)2 + (0 − (−0.5))2 + (0 − (−0.3))2
                                  p
                                = 6.52 + 0.52 + 0.32
                                  √
                               = 42.25 + 0.25 + 0.09
                                         √
                                      = 42.59
                                       ≈ 6.53 units

Description:       The distance is 6.53 units.

G.3   P ROMPTS FOR F RANKA AGENT MANIPULATES OBJECT IN GENERAL

Input You will describe a scene where a robot arm is approaching
an object. The state of the robot arm is as follows:
Robot’s end effector’s x, y, z coordinates: [6.5, -0.5, -0.3],
Object’s x, y, z coordinates: [0, 1.0, 0.2], Origin’s x, y, z
coordinates: [0, 0, 0]
If the object’s coordinates differ from the origin’s, tell me the
object’s x, y coordinates. You can use any introductory words,
but please conclude your answer with the final description in the
format: ’Description: The cube’s x, y position is     .’
If the object’s coordinates match the origin’s, tell me the dis-
tance between the robot’s end effector and the object. Again,
conclude with the final description in the format: ’Description:
the distance is    units.’


                                               21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Output In the scene, a robot arm’s end effector is positioned at
coordinates [6.5, -0.5, -0.3], while an object is located at [0,
1.0, 0.2]. The origin of the coordinate system is at [0, 0, 0].
Since the object’s coordinates do not match the origin’s coordi-
nates, we focus on the object’s position relative to the origin.
Description:       The object’s x, y position is [0, 1.0].


                                               22
