Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


D ISENTANGLING 3D A NIMAL P OSE DYNAMICS WITH
S CRUBBED C ONDITIONAL L ATENT VARIABLES
 Joshua H Wu1,∗ Hari Koneru1 J Russell Ravenel1 Anshuman Sabath1 James M Roach1
 Shaun SX Lim1 Michael R Tadross1 Alex H Williams2,3,∗ Timothy W Dunn1∗
 1
   Duke University 2 New York University 3 Flatiron Institute



                                              A BSTRACT

            Methods for tracking lab animal movements in unconstrained environments have
            become increasingly common and powerful tools for neuroscience. The prevailing
            hypothesis is that animal behavior in these environments comprises sequences of
            discrete stereotyped body movements ("motifs" or "actions"). However, the same
            action can occur at different speeds or heading directions, and the same action
            may manifest slightly differently across subjects due to, for example, variation in
            body size. These and other forms of nuisance variability complicate attempts to
            quantify animal behavior in terms of discrete action sequences and draw meaningful
            comparisons across individual subjects. To address this, we present a framework for
            motion analysis that uses conditional variational autoencoders in conjunction with
            adversarial learning paradigms to disentangle behavioral factors. We demonstrate
            the utility of this approach in downstream tasks such as clustering, decodability,
            and motion synthesis. Further, we apply our technique to improve disease detection
            in a Parkinsonian mouse model.


1       I NTRODUCTION

Animal behavior is largely expressed through movement (Musall et al., 2019; Bernstein, 1967). Thus,
the ability to identify variation in animal movement is critical for understanding neural (dys)function
(McCullough & Goodhill, 2021). In recent years, pose estimation has become popular for behavioral
measurement (Dunn et al., 2021; Nath et al., 2019; Zimmermann et al., 2020; Bala et al., 2020;
Pereira et al., 2022), enabling more objective and comprehensive kinematic profiling. Given the
increasing throughput and dimensionality of behavioral measurement assays (Nourizonoz et al., 2020;
Bialek, 2022; Marshall et al., 2022), the ability to learn meaningful and interpretable representations
of behavior is essential (Datta et al., 2019).
A common analysis goal is to cluster or segment recurring and stereotyped pose sequences—such
as running, turning, and rearing—and compare their frequencies and transition statistics across
experimental conditions (Berman et al., 2014; Weinreb et al., 2023; Wiltschko et al., 2020; 2015b;
Marshall et al., 2022). Currently, most approaches are purely unsupervised and can be sensitive
to nuisance variability, such as animal individuality, or over-segment due to continuous variability,
such as speed (Van Dam et al., 2023; Costacurta et al., 2022). As a result, these methods often
produce action spaces in which true biological signals are uninterpretably entangled with confounding
variables or uninformative features. For example, the same fundamental action (e.g., walking) can
be performed with different levels of vigor (fast vs. slow) and with different directionality (walking
straight vs. slightly turning left or right). All of these variants are typically split into different action
clusters (see Marshall et al., 2022), introducing extraneous statistical structure that may obscure more
meaningful biological signals.
In principle, action spaces could be made invariant to nuisance variables via disentanglement of
specified factors (Shu et al., 2019), thus permitting the identification and analysis of meaningful
behavioral dynamics (Shi et al., 2021; Whiteway et al., 2021; Yi & Saxena, 2022). However, existing
disentanglement approaches have shortcomings. The increasingly common conditional variational
autoencoder (C-VAE) approach learns accurate disentangled representations of the conditional
    ∗
        Correspondence to: {joshua.wu,timothy.dunn}@duke.edu, alex.h.williams@nyu.edu


                                                     1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


variable, such that changing it while holding the other latent variables fixed generates outputs varying
only in the conditional factor (Petrovich et al., 2021b; Guo et al., 2020; Khemakhem et al., 2020).
However, we will show that the other latent variables are not necessarily, nor typically, invariant
to the conditional factor. Adversarial approaches can be used to learn disentangled subspaces
with specific invariances (Ding et al., 2020; Sanchez et al., 2020; Zhao et al., 2021; Brakel &
Bengio, 2017), but these methods rely on secondary neural networks that can be difficult to train
and sensitive to architectural and hyperparameter choices (Arjovsky & Bottou, 2017; Radford,
2015). Furthermore, adversarial neural networks often target fully disentangled representations,
e.g., via mutual information minimization (Belghazi et al., 2018; Cheng et al., 2020), but certain
nuisance variables, like speed, have some dependencies with action understanding (e.g., a subject will
always move farther during locomotion than when grooming). Fully disentangling such variables into
invariant subspaces would destroy relevant behavioral variation. Ideally, the degree of disentanglement
could be easily specified and controlled.
To address these challenges, we present scrubbed C-VAEs (SC-VAE) for learning disentangled
motion features from 3D pose sequences (Fig. 1a). Given a variable to disentangle (calculated
deterministically or known a priori), SC-VAE seeks to learn a latent representation in which the
variable cannot be decoded by specified linear or nonlinear functions, called "scrubbers". SC-VAE
achieves this by conditioning a VAE on disentanglement variables while adversarially penalizing the
encoder based on a scrubber’s ability to estimate variable information from the latent representation.
As a result, we obtain a variational distribution with direct control over the level of contribution from
nuisance variability (Fig. 1b).
We show that scrubbing enhances latent representations by encouraging nuisance-invariant clusters
and improving the consistency of the conditional generative model. We also demonstrate SC-VAE’s
ability to enhance and disentangle biological phenotypes from nuisance factors in a mouse model
of Parkinson’s disease, illustrating how SC-VAE can be used to further neurobehavioral inquiry.
When examining different choices of scrubbing, we find that: 1) neural network scrubbers built from
existing adversarial disentanglement methods are less reliable than scrubbers with explicit parametric
assumptions, and 2) assumptions of linear or nonlinear disentanglement can impact downstream
analyses due to the level of dependence between disentangled variables and behavioral understanding.


Figure 1: Overview of SC-VAE. (a) SC-VAE encourages disentangled representations by directly
concatenating known factors to latent variables in a conditional VAE. (b) A "scrubber" removes
information about these factors from the latent variables, such that factors are unable to be explained
by specified linear or nonlinear functions.

2    P RIOR W ORK
Models of animal movement Finescale manual annotation (e.g., rears, turns) of animal behaviors
is time-intensive and subjective. Further, many experimental manipulations—such as new phar-
macological treatments—induce unknown behavioral phenotypes (Nestler & Hyman, 2010). Thus,
most research has gravitated towards unsupervised, data-driven methods. Popular approaches apply
dimensionality reduction and clustering to wavelet-transformed pose sequences (Berman et al., 2014;
Marshall et al., 2021) or auto-regressive hidden Markov models (ARHMMs) to model action motifs
as discrete states with intra-state linear dynamics (Wiltschko et al., 2015a; Weinreb et al., 2023).


                                                   2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


More recently, deep neural networks have been leveraged to learn low-dimensional representations
of behavior. Due to challenging perspective and illumination effects in videos, many behavioral
analysis methods use pose trajectories—and increasingly 3D poses (Marshall et al., 2022)—as input
(Dunn et al., 2021; Nath et al., 2019; Zimmermann et al., 2020; Bala et al., 2020; Pereira et al., 2022).
For example, VAME generates single-frame pose embeddings from variational autoencoders as a
nonlinear feature-learning step before fitting an ARHMM (Luxem et al., 2022). BAMS, on the other
hand, generates representations by predicting distributions of future kinematics (Azabou et al., 2024).
Our study builds on these works by applying constraints on representational spaces to reduce the
contribution of nuisance effects and provide control over these behavioral representations. Our
motivation is perhaps most similar to previous work by Costacurta et al. (2022), who developed
time-warped extensions to the ARHMM to separate changes in speed from other behavioral factors.
Despite similar motivations, our method aims to be a more general tool for disentanglement which
learns low-dimensional feature spaces robust to a wider range of factors and that could be used for
additional tasks beyond time series clustering.
Disentangled representations Although deep networks have the capacity to capture complex
nonlinear dynamics, the feature spaces identified by deep networks are not always immediately
interpretable and prone to learning undesirable representations due to dataset-specific idiosyncrasies.
This unpredictability in learning deep representations has limited their use in the exploratory manner
required by experimental research (von Ziegler et al., 2021).
A broad literature on the use of deep networks to extract disentangled representations of complex,
high-dimensional datasets seeks to address these challenges (Gilpin et al., 2018). While many
have investigated the possibility of fully unsupervised disentanglement with VAE-like architectures
(e.g., β-VAE and its variants) (Higgins et al., 2017; Chen et al., 2018; Esmaeili et al., 2019), doing
so is challenging in practice. Further assumptions are usually needed to theoretically guarantee
identifiability and disentanglement (Locatello et al., 2019), leading to increasing popularity in weakly
supervised disentanglement (Shu et al., 2019; Khemakhem et al., 2020).
Neuroscientists have applied and adapted ideas from this literature to account for nuisance variability
in raw video data, such as changes in illumination or slight differences in camera angles over
days (Whiteway et al., 2021; Shi et al., 2021; Yi & Saxena, 2022). Here we focus on 3D pose data and
aim to disentangle additional forms of nuisance variation, such as speed and angular heading, which
are cheaply computable from the inferred pose tracks, and animal identity (a type of batch effect).
While we focus on these specific variables here, our approach should generalize to other nuisance
factors in the future. Prior neuroscience applications of disentanglement have shown success in
identifying subspaces for factors. However, they have not explored the invariance over those factors
in opposing subspaces.
Our approach is in line with the formalization of disentanglement by Shu et al. (2019) as both the
ability of: 1) a disentangled dimension to accurately represent a factor, and 2) the corresponding null
space to be invariant to that factor. Although there exist disentanglement methods in other application
fields that apply both properties (Zhao et al., 2021; Sanchez et al., 2020; Ding et al., 2020), these
methods rely on the specification of secondary networks to remove residual factor information in a
representation space, often via adversarial training (Ganin & Lempitsky, 2015b; Brakel & Bengio,
2017; Cheng et al., 2020). Here, we contribute novel strategies that: 1) bypass the need for specifying
architectures or hyperparameters for adversarial networks, and 2) are more specific about the degree
of disentanglement when variables are not perfectly independent of behavioral understanding.


3     M ETHODS

3.1   P OSE PREPROCESSING

We apply our method to 3D body pose sequences extracted from raw videos. This preprocessing
step removes several confounding variables, such as differences in illumination across recording
sessions. However, some residual sources of variability remain, such as differences in body size
across subjects. Typical methods of pose preprocessing involve translating and rotating all postures
to a root position and direction (i.e., "pointing north") (Marshall et al., 2021; Luxem et al., 2022).
However, important trajectory and turning information are lost when this alignment is performed on


                                                   3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


each frame independently. To avoid this loss of information, we apply a single rotation and translation
to all frames in a pose sequence to align the pose at a central time point. That is, given a window
of time around a central reference frame, we translate and rotate each posture such that the central
frame is at a specified position and orientation (Fig. 4). In a subset of experiments, we refrained
from rotating the pose entirely to demonstrate the ability of our method to disentangle the heading
direction and recapitulate a representation commensurate with the fully processed data.
In contrast to some existing methods (e.g., Luxem et al., 2022), we represent pose using joint angles
between keypoints positioned at fixed distances from their neighbors. Intuitively, this representation
forces any pose dynamics model to obey the physical constraints of the body skeleton, leading to
cleaner generative samples (see discussion in Marshall et al., 2021; Huang et al., 2017; Vemulapalli
et al., 2014). Optimizing over raw angular variables is complicated by discontinuities; thus, we follow
a well-established protocol from the computer vision community for lifting 3D rotation matrices
into a continuous 6D space (Zhou et al., 2019). Each posture composed of K joint angles is then
represented as a (6K + 3)-dimensional vector, where the three additional dimensions come from the
global position of the root keypoint. Altogether, each pose sequence is denoted xt ∈ RL×(6K+3) for
a sequence over L frames centered at frame t.

3.2   D ISENTANGLED REPRESENTATIONS AND CONDITIONAL VAE ARCHITECTURE

Disentangled variables Our core goal is to learn a low-dimensional representation of behavior
where simple factors (e.g., speed, heading direction, and animal identity) are put into orthogonal
dimensions from factors that are learned in a data-driven, unsupervised fashion. In essence, this
would separate the semantic content of actions—whether the animal is running, digging, rearing,
etc.—from the character of these actions—whether the animal is running fast vs. slow or oriented
differently when turning.
We formalize this goal as follows. We assume that for any pose sequence xt we can compute a vector
of nuisance factors vt ∈ RN . Loosely, we will say that a latent representation z̃t taking values in RD
is disentangled with respect to vt when one can identify two orthogonal subspaces zt and z′t such
that vt can be reliably inferred from z′t but not reliably inferred from zt . In other words, the goal is
to have z′t capture known behavioral factors, while zt reflects unknown behavioral factors that are
learned from the data with minimal redundancies to z′t .
Variational autoencoders (VAEs) The backbone of our method is a VAE with 1D convolutional
layers (Kingma & Welling, 2013). Adopting standard notation, we use an encoder network qϕ to
map pose sequences onto a distribution over latent variables sampled via a reparameterization trick,
zt ∼ qϕ (· | xt ). The pose sequence is then reconstructed by a decoding network which evaluates
the likelihood pθ (x | zt ). In a standard VAE, the parameters {ϕ, θ} are adjusted with respect to the
evidence lower bound (ELBO):

                 LELBO (ϕ, θ) = −Ext Ezt ∼qϕ (·|xt ) [log pθ (xt , zt ) − log qϕ (zt | xt )]       (1)
Conditional VAEs (C-VAEs) An established way to promote disentanglement in a supervised
fashion is to use a conditional VAE (Sohn et al., 2015; Khemakhem et al., 2020). C-VAEs are a
popular approach for controllable human motion synthesis, as they can generate realistic body pose
sequences that correspond to categorical actions (e.g., throwing, kicking, or lunging, Guo et al., 2020;
Petrovich et al., 2021a; Gu et al., 2024). C-VAEs have also been exploited within neuroscience (Wu
et al., 2020), but to our knowledge, have not been leveraged for behavioral representation learning.
Here, latent variables are sampled from a conditional prior distribution that depends on another
variable vt , which is observed separately or derived deterministically from xt . In our case, vt will
correspond to a vector representation of the animal’s running speed, heading direction, or one hot
encoding of the animal’s identity. Exact implementations for C-VAEs vary. We choose a simple
approach of concatenating vt onto the sampled output of the encoder network. That is, we sample
                                                                                   ⊤
zt ∼ qϕ (· | xt ) while z′t is strictly defined by vt . A new vector z̃t = [zt vt ] is passed to the
decoding network. The C-VAE is then trained with respect to the same ELBO loss, which is now
interpreted as a lower bound of the expected conditional marginal likelihood, conditioning with
respect to vt . For full details on model architectures, see C.1.
Intuitively, since zt and vt are both passed to the decoder, any information about vt that is encoded by
zt is redundant and inefficient. Thus, if the latent dimension D is small, one expects that the C-VAE


                                                   4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


will learn a disentangled representation. While this intuition is borne out to a certain extent in practice,
our experience (documented below in Sec. 4) shows that a C-VAE will often learn a distribution over
zt that is only partly disentangled from vt . Further, choosing a smaller latent dimension D can be
expected to result in more efficient coding and disentanglement but less expressivity and trainability.
Thus, a vanilla C-VAE seems to impose a trade-off between faithful modeling of the data and learning
disentangled latents.

3.3   S CRUBBING OUT RESIDUAL INFORMATION

A core component of our approach is to augment the C-VAE loss function to reduce depen-
dence between zt and vt . This is analogous to minimizing mutual information (MI), I(zt , vt ) =
Ezt ,vt [log(p(zt , vt )/p(zt )p(vt ))]. Although MI maximization is commonly used to generate repre-
sentations with shared features between paired samples (Hjelm et al., 2018; Bachman et al., 2019;
Zhao et al., 2021; Sanchez et al., 2020), there are generally no tractable upper bounds for minimization
(Poole et al., 2019). In the context of behavioral analysis, our objective is to create a representation
space in which vt is "hidden" from downstream analyses with constrained expressiveness (e.g., linear
regression or clustering via a Gaussian mixture model). We therefore substitute MI with predictive
information (Xu et al., 2020b):

                     If (zt , vt ) = max Ext ,vt Ezt ∼qϕ (·|xt ) [ log p(vt | fψ (zt )) ]             (2)
                                    ψ

where fψ (·) is a potentially nonlinear function family parameterized by ψ, and log p(vt | fψ (zt )) is
the log-likelihood of vt conditioned on sufficient statistics fψ (zt ). Given an approximate maximizer ψ̂
of eq. (2), we promote disentanglement by introducing an adversarial penalty LScrub (ϕ) = Iˆf (zt , vt ).
We then seek to jointly minimize LELBO (ϕ, θ) + λLScrub (ϕ) over the model parameters {ϕ, θ} for
some user-specified hyperparameter λ > 0.
Thus, fˆψ (·) is an adversarial decoder that aims to maximize the log-likelihood of vt given zt . This
penalty term is minimized when the encoder network, parameterized by ϕ, encodes a variational dis-
tribution over zt with no decodable information about vt . This would imply perfect disentanglement
with respect to the class of functions parameterized by ψ. Mutual information is recovered in the
limit that fψ (·) defines an arbitrarily complex probability density (see Xu et al., 2020b), but we will
see that it can be advantageous to constrain fψ (·) to a more limited class of functions (e.g., linear).
The effect of the penalty term λLScrub (ϕ) is to "scrub out" information about vt contained in zt ,
and we therefore call fψ (·) a "scrubber." The overall model architecture is diagrammed in Fig. 1a.
However, it is challenging to efficiently solve the inner maximization problem over ψ in eq. (2). We
now describe several strategies to overcome this challenge.

3.4   S CRUBBING WITH ADVERSARIAL NEURAL NETWORKS

A classic approach to adversarial training is to define fψ to be a neural network trained jointly with
the C-VAE. We implement two such methods here for disentangling behavioral representations.
Scrubbing with gradient reversal layers (SC-VAE-GR) First, we apply an existing method that
is popular in the context of domain adaptation in deep networks (Ganin & Lempitsky, 2015a) and
applied to disentanglement (Ding et al., 2020). Where fψ (·) is a multi-layer perception (MLP)
ensemble, the idea is to estimate the gradient of:

                              Ext ,vt Ezt ∼qϕ (·|xt ) [ log p(vt | fψ (zt )) ]              (3)
with respect to ψ and ϕ over a minibatch of pose sequences. Then, we simultaneously perform
gradient ascent and descent updates on ψ and ϕ, respectively. This is akin to jointly training the
model over {ψ, ϕ, θ} but with the gradients reversed for ψ.
Scrubbing with neural discriminators (SC-VAE-ND) An alternative approach investigated by
Sanchez et al. (2020), Brakel & Bengio (2017), and Kim & Mnih (2018) draws inspiration from
                                                                                                  ⊤
generative adversarial networks (GANs; Goodfellow et al., 2020). Given a latent sample [zi vi ] ,
                                       ⊤
we generate a "fake" sample [zi vj̸=i ] and define an adversarial discriminator, fψ (·), to classify
real from fake representations. By minimizing the cross-entropy loss of this classifier, the mutual


                                                     5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


information between zt and vt is minimized (Brakel & Bengio, 2017). Unlike for the rest of the
methods in this paper, fˆψ (·) and the C-VAE are trained in alternation for SC-VAE-ND.
Challenges These strategies can work if one carefully tunes separate learning rates for ψ and {ϕ, θ}.
However, we found that fine-tuning these hyperparameters was, perhaps unsurprisingly, challenging
in practice (Shen et al., 2020; Scaramuzzino et al., 2023). When not delicately tuned, ψ̂ fails to
track the distribution of zt induced by parameter updates to the encoder qϕ . Thus, fˆψ (·) will be a
suboptimal adversary, and Iˆf (·) will not be tight to If (·). Furthermore, these approaches have strong
assumptions of nonlinear disentanglement, which may not be appropriate in cases where the scrubbed
variable is not independent (see Sec. 4.2 and 4.4). In the following methods, we navigate these
challenges by: 1) adaptively tuning learning rates, 2) applying more direct estimations of ψ or If (·)
which do not require specifying network architectures and their hyperparameters, and 3) introducing
scrubbers with more constrained (e.g., linear or quadratic) assumptions of scrubbing.

3.5   S CRUBBING UNDER PARAMETRIC CONSTRAINTS

Linear scrubbing by moving average least squares (SC-VAE-MALS) If we constrain fψ (zt ) to
be a linear function and use a Gaussian likelihood to model vt , then the maximization over ψ is
simply an ordinary least squares problem. The optimal prediction can be calculated in closed-form
by the normal equations (see e.g., Murphy, 2012, Ch. 7):
                                                               −1
                              fψ (zt ) = E[vz⊤ ] E[zz⊤ ] + βI     zt                           (4)
where β is the L2-regularization constant. Thus, to evaluate LScrub (ϕ) for a linear model, we simply
need to keep a running estimate of two matrices: ψ 0 = E[vz⊤ ] and ψ 1 = E[zz⊤ ]. We do this by
computing exponential moving averages (EMA) of these quantities, replacing expectations with
empirical averages. Given a single data instance xt , we sample vt , zt ∼ qϕ (· | xt ), and update our
estimate of the sufficient statistics accordingly:
                                     ψ̂ 0 ← [(1 − α)vt z⊤      0
                                                        t + αψ̂ ]                                     (5)

                                     ψ̂ 1 ← [(1 − α)zt z⊤      1
                                                        t + αψ̂ ]                                     (6)
where α is the smoothing factor of this EMA filter. In practice, we compute these updates over a
minibatch with multiple data samples. We forgo manual tuning of α by running two EMA filters in
parallel with separate smoothing factors at a small, fixed difference. On each minibatch, we increment
or decrement the smoothing factors based on which filter provides a better fit to the minibatch
statistics (see A.2 for details).
Extension to scrubbing by polynomial regression The method above immediately extends to
polynomial regression by augmenting zt to include higher-order polynomial features to obtain
quadratic (-MAQS) and cubic (-MACS) scrubbing. This enables progressive nonlinear scrubbing.
Categorical scrubbing with adaptive quadratic discriminators (SC-VAE-QD) The EMA filter
can also be readily applied to other scrubbing models beyond ordinary least squares. When vt
is a categorical variable encoding animal identity, we treat fψ (zt ) as a prediction of the class
label. A simple approach is to keep a running estimate of the class-conditional means, Ev=c [z],
and covariances, Covv=c [z, z], and then use a quadratic discriminant analysis (QDA) classifier
fˆψ (z) = p̂(vt = c|zt ) (see A.2). We update the mean and covariance estimates in the same way as
eq. (5) and eq. (6) with the self-tuning smoothing factor.
Nonlinear scrubbing with kernel density mutual information estimators (SC-VAE-MI) The
constrained adversarial maximization over fψ (·) is related to classical quantities in information
theory. In particular, if the class of functions parameterized by ψ contains all possible models,
then minimizing LScrub (ϕ) is equivalent to minimizing the mutual information between zt and
vt (Xu et al., 2020a). Above, we built scrubbers assuming a parametric form for fψ (·) (e.g.,
linear or quadratic), but we can also develop a scrubber that estimates the mutual information in a
nonparametric fashion. We investigated a simple approach of using Gaussian kernel density estimation
to approximate the joint probability density p̂(zt , vt ). Given this approximation of the density,
ˆ t , vt ) = Ez ,v [log(p̂(zt , vt )/p̂(zt )p̂(vt ))] provides an estimate of the mutual information (Moon
I(z              t  t
et al., 1995). It is well-known that mutual information estimators suffer a curse of dimensionality;


                                                    6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


to combat this, we use a large batch size (2048 pose sequences) and tune the bandwidth parameter
of the Gaussian kernel to compromise between estimator bias and variance. This results in a biased
estimate of mutual information, which we identify with LScrub (ϕ).


4     R ESULTS

4.1   DATA

We used data from n = 4 C57BL/6 mice freely exploring a 30 cm2 open field (324k frames per mouse,
1 hour at 90 fps). For applications, we used n = 36 C57BL/6 mice recorded in 1-hour sessions (90
fps) in this same open field before and after Parkinson’s disease (PD) induction (6-OHDA unilateral
injection model). 3D poses were tracked with DANNCE (Dunn et al., 2021). In each animal, we
also performed fluorescent immunostaining of the striatum bilaterally and quantified the extent of
dopaminergic neurodegeneration as the ratio of integrated fluorescence between the lesioned to
non-lesioned hemispheres (more details in D).

4.2   D ISENTANGLING NUISANCE VARIABLES

For all results, we trained separate models to isolate the effects of each scrubber on each nuisance
variable. For implementation details, see B and C.
Heading direction We first tested heading direction disentanglement in models trained without
rotationally processed data as described in Section 3.1. As the optimal representation can be derived
by fitting a VAE to fully processed pose sequences (VAE Processed), heading disentanglement serves
as an ideal baseline to validate our scrubbing methods. When examining a vanilla VAE trained on raw
(not rotationally-processed) data, heading direction was, unsurprisingly, linearly decodable from the
latents (Fig. 2a). Conditioning the latent variable was not sufficient to disentangle heading direction
from other latent factors; a C-VAE conditioned on heading direction formed representations that
were structured with heading direction in a similar way to the vanilla VAE, despite being redundant
with the conditioned variable. Although SC-VAE-GR and -ND use nonlinear adversaries (i.e., an
MLP), we found they were unreliable in producing representations that were even linearly invariant
to heading. SC-VAE-MALS was found to be more reliable in achieving linear disentanglement by
directly estimating a linear adversary.
Although SC-VAE-MALS was successful in linear disentanglement, an optimal representation
arguably should have near complete disentanglement (beyond linear) of heading direction since the
facing direction of a behavior does not affect its semantic label.1 Scrubbing by quadratic regression
(SC-VAE-MAQS) or mutual information estimation (SC-VAE-MI) reached nonlinear decodability
commensurate with the rotationally preprocessed optimum (VAE Processed). Thus, both SC-VAE-
MI and -MAQS exhibit strong linear and nonlinear disentanglement. We then tested SC-VAE
disentanglement on speed and animal identity: nuisance variables whose influences on behavioral
representations cannot be trivially removed via data preprocessing.


Figure 2: Decoding nuisance variables from scrubbed latents. R2 for linear and nonlinear (MLP)
regression on (a) speed and (b) heading from latents. (c) Classification accuracy for animal identity
using logistic regression and quadratic discriminants.
    1
      Importantly, we will argue below that this logic does not apply to some other behavioral variables, such as
the animal’s speed, which are not independent of action categories. In these cases, fully nonlinear scrubbing may
lead to undesirable performance, but a constrained (e.g., linear) scrubber can provide partial disentanglement.


                                                       7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Speed Unlike with heading direction, speed is naturally entangled with behavioral factors—e.g.,
rearing and running exhibit inherently different speed profiles. The generative model defined by
the VAE ought to reflect this dependence, so some nonlinear dependence between speed and the
unsupervised latents should be preserved and not "scrubbed out". On the other hand, the same
action can be performed at different speeds, so it would be desirable to at least partially disentangle
speed from other variables. Trends for linear and nonlinear disentanglement across models for
speed scrubbing were similar to our heading results (Fig. 2b). SC-VAE-MAQS was the exception
where it did not affect speed disentanglement. Although SC-VAE-MI continued to exhibit strong
disentanglement, this came at the expense of having interpretable clusters of actions within the latent
space. We further explore the subtleties of linear vs. nonlinear speed disentanglement in Section 4.4.
Animal identity Small differences in subject limb proportions or sizes can affect behavioral kine-
matics and postures in complex nonlinear ways, even in pose preprocessing without explicit notions
of limb lengths (e.g., ours described in Sec. 3.1). These differences cause trivial separations of the
same behaviors across individuals. When scrubbing animal identity, SC-VAE representations were
also the most linearly and nonlinearly invariant (Fig. 2c). As with heading direction and speed,
neural network scrubbers (SC-VAE-GR and -ND) were less effective than using a specified nonlinear
scrubber (SC-VAE-QD) for identity disentanglement.
Scrubbing effects were evident when visualizing latent representations (Fig. 1b, 6). Vanilla VAE and
C-VAE representations were highly entangled with nuisance variables across principal axes, with
regions dominated by specific speeds, heading directions, or animal identities. The scrubbing models
showed representations with more mixing across nuisance variables. SC-VAE-MI, for heading and
speed, and SC-VAE-QD, for identity, produced the most "salt and pepper" representations.

Table 1: Effects of scrubbing on motion synthesis. R2 of heading or speed of generated behaviors
with respect to random heading or speed conditioned inputs to the decoder.
               Model             Heading Direction R2 ↑ Average Speed R2 ↑
               C-VAE                       0.502                     0.635
               SC-VAE-GR                   0.957                     0.654
               SC-VAE-ND                   0.079                     0.626
               SC-VAE-MALS                 0.983                     0.683
               SC-VAE-MAQS                 0.989                     0.648
               SC-VAE-MI                   0.994                     0.607

4.3   C ONSISTENT MOTION SYNTHESIS

To evaluate whether our models in Section 4.2 maintained valid representations when scrubbing
heading or speed decodability, we conditioned their decoders on random speeds and heading directions
and evaluated the resulting speeds and headings of the generated sequences (Table 1). We found that
scrubbing improved the consistency of conditionally generated sequences, suggesting new strategies
for improving conditional motion synthesis.

4.4   C LUSTERING DISENTANGLED REPRESENTATIONS

When clustering with Gaussian mixture models (GMMs), we found that the anisotropies due to
nuisance variability in vanilla VAE and C-VAE representations determined the makeup of behavioral
clusters, as they were comprised largely of behaviors with similar speeds or heading directions (Fig.
3a, e) as opposed to typical behaviorally relevant clusters (Fig. 7). Thus, these nuisance variables
drive a trivial segmentation of behavioral space that obscures biologically meaningful behavioral
identification. Scrubbing the C-VAE representations progressively reduced the influence of nuisance
variables, increasing the variance of heading direction and speed within GMM clusters (Fig. 3b, f
top). In the heading direction test case, SC-VAE-MI completely eliminated nuisance clustering and
produced fully heading-mixed behavioral clusters. (Fig. 3d).
However, we found that MI scrubbing for speed was too strong and produced clusters no longer
associated with typical coarse behavioral labels (e.g., walking, rearing, grooming). To further investi-
gate, we trained a second vanilla VAE and labeled six walking clusters with differing distributions of
speed (Fig. 3e). When comparing the latents in other models associated with these labeled walking
clusters, the distributions of walking behaviors in the SC-VAE-MALS and SC-VAE-GR representa-


                                                   8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 3: Examining the effects of scrubbing on clustering. (a) Heading direction distribution
in walking GMM (k = 50) clusters identified from a separate VAE trained on not rotationally
preprocessed data. (b) (top) Weighted average circular variance of heading by cluster. (bottom)
5-fold cross log-likelihood of a diagonal Gaussian component on the normalized latents of each
model corresponding to the clusters in (a). (c) Histograms of heading in GMM clusters of VAE,
SC-VAE-MALS, -MI, and VAE Processed latents corresponding to the clusters in (a). (d) Example
walking clusters in VAE (left) and SC-VAE-MI (right) after scrubbing heading. (e) Speed distribution
in walking GMM (k = 50) clusters identified from a separate VAE. (f) (top) Weighted average
variance of speed by cluster. (bottom) 5-fold cross log-likelihood of a diagonal Gaussian component
on the normalized latents per model corresponding to the clusters in (e). (g) Histograms of average
speed in GMM (k = 3) clusters of VAE, SC-VAE-GR, -MALS, and -MI latents corresponding to the
clusters in (e).

tions were better captured by a single cluster than other models (Fig. 3f bottom), demonstrating how
scrubbing can combine behaviors previously distinguished only by nuisance variation (see B.6 for
details on this metric). Further clustering of these walking behaviors in SC-VAE-MALS revealed
completely speed-mixed clusters, whereas the separation was still clearly present in vanilla VAE.
Repeating this with heading scrubbing (separately identifying six walking clusters with different
heading distributions), SC-VAE-MI was found to have the most ideal walking representation (Fig. 3c,
d). These results suggest the need for disentanglement methods with weaker (-MALS) and stronger
(-MI) assumptions for disentanglement which reflect the level of independence between nuisance
variables and behavioral understanding.

4.5   N EUROLOGICAL DISEASE ANALYSIS

Subject-specific idiosyncrasies increase variability in behavioral expression across animals, potentially
obscuring the effects of neurobehavioral perturbations. In our PD dataset, we found that scrubbing


                                                   9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


animal identity attenuated this variability, enhancing the detection of behavioral shifts in disease
(PD) sessions. Using maximum mean discrepancy (MMD; B.6; Gretton et al., 2012; Goffinet et al.,
2021) to measure behavioral distribution similarity between recording sessions, we observed a large
increase in similarity within conditions and a decrease between conditions for the SC-VAE-QD model
(Fig. 9). That is, a given disease session moved closer to the other disease sessions and farther from
the healthy sessions, suggesting improved discriminability of disease-associated behavioral changes.
We quantified this using an effect size metric, d, calculated as the MMD between a subject’s healthy
and disease sessions relative to the MMD between healthy sessions across animals (Table 2 left, B.6).
We also used a k-NN classifier to predict the type of session (healthy vs. disease) given a behavioral
representation (Table 2 middle). SC-VAE-QD outperformed other models on these metrics. As a
control, we also scrubbed the healthy vs. disease session label itself (‘Reverse Control’), which
resulted in a significant decrease in all disease discriminability metrics.
Striatal immunostaining revealed another potential source of PD phenotype variability: not all animals
experienced the same degree of dopaminergic denervation. More intact dopaminergic circuity should
be associated with fewer behavioral changes between healthy and PD sessions (Boix et al., 2015;
Slézia et al., 2023). Thus, we expect behavioral representations better capturing these changes to be
more correlated with the extent of denervation. While the healthy-disease MMD was correlated for
all models, SC-VAE-QD strengthened the correlation (Table 2 right).


Table 2: Scrubbing identity in a Parkinsonian mouse dataset. Impact of identity scrubbing
quantified as effect size (d) mean ± SEM across animals, healthy vs. disease classification accuracy
(%), and the correlation (Pearson r) of MMD behavioral change to dopamine denervation extent.
        Model               Effect Size d ↑ Accuracy (%) ↑ Denervation correlation (r) ↑
       VAE                    1.07 ± 0.05        81.3                     0.208
       C-VAE                  1.11 ± 0.05        82.2                     0.221
       SC-VAE-GR              1.17 ± 0.06        83.3                     0.249
       SC-VAE-QD              1.71 ± 0.11        85.8                     0.406
       Reverse Control        0.68 ± 0.03        65.2                     0.086


5    C ONCLUSION AND L IMITATIONS

This study presents a novel framework for disentangling nuisance behavioral or experimental variables
by removing (i.e., "scrubbing") variable information from latent spaces via adversarial learning
objectives. Our adaptive moving average, quadratic, and mutual information scrubbers are successful
in producing behavioral representations that are linearly or nonlinearly invariant to nuisance variables,
reducing behavioral over-segmentation and enhancing the interpretability of latent spaces. Existing
approaches based on gradient reversal and adversarial networks generally only assume nonlinear
scrubbing and, in our experience, are difficult to fine-tune. In contrast, our scrubbing approach using
exponential moving averages of sufficient statistics is hyperparameter-free.
A limitation of our convolutional encoder-decoder architecture is that it represents fixed-length pose
sequences as a single latent code, which constrains feature timescales and does not scale efficiently to
long sequences. This issue could be addressed in future work by adopting a dynamic latent variable
model. Additionally, our nuisance variable scope can be expanded to include factors on finer spatial
and temporal scales, such as per frame or individual body part kinematics. Although all of the models
presented in this paper were trained while scrubbing one nuisance variable at a time, SC-VAE can, in
principle, be trained to jointly condition on multiple nuisance variables. This could increase the purity
of behavioral representations, enable multifactor motion synthesis, and permit direct comparisons of
nuisance variable effects within a common space. Future work should explore the effects of scrubbing
multiple nuisance variables, either jointly or individually.
Finally, we have focused on scrubbing out nuisance variables that are easily available (e.g., speed,
heading direction, and animal identity), but it may not be obvious how to identify analogous variables
or determine the correct level of disentanglement in more complex datasets (e.g., social). Future work
could focus on scrubbing in exploratory analyses, such as to fine-tune fully-unsupervised models.
This work and future work seek to address the growing necessity for predictable and interpretable
deep representation learning methods for neuroscientific research.


                                                   10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


6   ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
J.H.W. acknowledges support from the National Science Foundation Graduate Research Fellowship
under Grant No. DGE 2139754 and the supplemental INTERN Grant No. DGS 2139754 Amendment
007. M.R.T. acknowledges support from the National Institutes of Health (NIH) grant R34DA059512,
and T.W.D. from NIH grants R34DA059512 and R01GM136972.

7   E THICS S TATEMENT
Animal care and use: The care, procedures, and experimental manipulation of all animals were
reviewed and approved by Duke University Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee. See D for
further details. Declaration of interests statement: T.W.D. is a co-founder of dannce.ai.

R EFERENCES
Martin Arjovsky and Léon Bottou. Towards principled methods for training generative adversarial
 networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:1701.04862, 2017.
Mehdi Azabou, Michael Mendelson, Nauman Ahad, Maks Sorokin, Shantanu Thakoor, Carolina
 Urzay, and Eva Dyer. Relax, it doesn’t matter how you get there: A new self-supervised approach
 for multi-timescale behavior analysis. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 36,
 2024.
Philip Bachman, R Devon Hjelm, and William Buchwalter. Learning representations by maximizing
  mutual information across views. Advances in neural information processing systems, 32, 2019.
Praneet C Bala, Benjamin R Eisenreich, Seng Bum Michael Yoo, Benjamin Y Hayden, Hyun Soo
  Park, and Jan Zimmermann. Automated markerless pose estimation in freely moving macaques
  with openmonkeystudio. Nature communications, 11(1):4560, 2020.
Mohamed Ishmael Belghazi, Aristide Baratin, Sai Rajeswar, Sherjil Ozair, Yoshua Bengio, Aaron
 Courville, and R Devon Hjelm. Mine: mutual information neural estimation. arXiv preprint
 arXiv:1801.04062, 2018.
Gordon J Berman, Daniel M Choi, William Bialek, and Joshua W Shaevitz. Mapping the stereotyped
  behaviour of freely moving fruit flies. Journal of The Royal Society Interface, 11(99):20140672,
  2014.
Nicholas Bernstein. The coordination and regulation of movements. (No Title), 1967.
William Bialek. On the dimensionality of behavior. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences,
 119(18):e2021860119, May 2022. Publisher: Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences.
Jordi Boix, Thomas Padel, and Gesine Paul. A partial lesion model of parkinson’s disease in mice–
  characterization of a 6-ohda-induced medial forebrain bundle lesion. Behavioural brain research,
  284:196–206, 2015.
Philemon Brakel and Yoshua Bengio. Learning independent features with adversarial nets for
  non-linear ica. arXiv preprint arXiv:1710.05050, 2017.
Ricky TQ Chen, Xuechen Li, Roger B Grosse, and David K Duvenaud. Isolating sources of
  disentanglement in variational autoencoders. Advances in neural information processing systems,
  31, 2018.
Pengyu Cheng, Weituo Hao, Shuyang Dai, Jiachang Liu, Zhe Gan, and Lawrence Carin. Club: A
  contrastive log-ratio upper bound of mutual information. In International conference on machine
  learning, pp. 1779–1788. PMLR, 2020.
Julia Costacurta, Lea Duncker, Blue Sheffer, Winthrop Gillis, Caleb Weinreb, Jeffrey Markowitz,
  Sandeep R Datta, Alex Williams, and Scott Linderman. Distinguishing discrete and continuous
  behavioral variability using warped autoregressive hmms. In Advances in Neural Information
  Processing Systems, volume 35, pp. 23838–23850. Curran Associates, Inc., 2022.


                                                11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Sandeep Robert Datta, David J Anderson, Kristin Branson, Pietro Perona, and Andrew Leifer.
  Computational neuroethology: a call to action. Neuron, 104(1):11–24, 2019.

Zheng Ding, Yifan Xu, Weijian Xu, Gaurav Parmar, Yang Yang, Max Welling, and Zhuowen Tu.
  Guided variational autoencoder for disentanglement learning. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF
  conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, pp. 7920–7929, 2020.

Timothy W Dunn, Jesse D Marshall, Kyle S Severson, Diego E Aldarondo, David GC Hildebrand,
  Selmaan N Chettih, William L Wang, Amanda J Gellis, David E Carlson, Dmitriy Aronov, et al.
  Geometric deep learning enables 3d kinematic profiling across species and environments. Nature
  methods, 18(5):564–573, 2021.

Babak Esmaeili, Hao Wu, Sarthak Jain, Alican Bozkurt, Narayanaswamy Siddharth, Brooks Paige,
  Dana H Brooks, Jennifer Dy, and Jan-Willem Meent. Structured disentangled representations. In
  The 22nd International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics, pp. 2525–2534. PMLR,
  2019.

Yaroslav Ganin and Victor Lempitsky. Unsupervised domain adaptation by backpropagation. In
  Francis Bach and David Blei (eds.), Proceedings of the 32nd International Conference on Machine
  Learning, volume 37 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pp. 1180–1189, Lille, France,
  07–09 Jul 2015a. PMLR.

Yaroslav Ganin and Victor Lempitsky. Unsupervised domain adaptation by backpropagation. In
  International conference on machine learning, pp. 1180–1189. PMLR, 2015b.

Leilani H Gilpin, David Bau, Ben Z Yuan, Ayesha Bajwa, Michael Specter, and Lalana Kagal.
  Explaining explanations: An overview of interpretability of machine learning. In 2018 IEEE 5th
  International Conference on data science and advanced analytics (DSAA), pp. 80–89. IEEE, 2018.

Jack Goffinet, Samuel Brudner, Richard Mooney, and John Pearson. Low-dimensional learned feature
  spaces quantify individual and group differences in vocal repertoires. Elife, 10:e67855, 2021.

Ian Goodfellow, Jean Pouget-Abadie, Mehdi Mirza, Bing Xu, David Warde-Farley, Sherjil Ozair,
  Aaron Courville, and Yoshua Bengio. Generative adversarial networks. Communications of the
  ACM, 63(11):139–144, 2020.

Arthur Gretton, Karsten M Borgwardt, Malte J Rasch, Bernhard Schölkopf, and Alexander Smola. A
  kernel two-sample test. The Journal of Machine Learning Research, 13(1):723–773, 2012.

Chunzhi Gu, Jun Yu, and Chao Zhang. Learning disentangled representations for controllable human
  motion prediction. Pattern Recognition, 146:109998, 2024.

Chuan Guo, Xinxin Zuo, Sen Wang, Shihao Zou, Qingyao Sun, Annan Deng, Minglun Gong, and
  Li Cheng. Action2motion: Conditioned generation of 3d human motions. In Proceedings of the
  28th ACM International Conference on Multimedia, pp. 2021–2029, 2020.

Chengan He, Jun Saito, James Zachary, Holly Rushmeier, and Yi Zhou. Nemf: Neural motion fields
  for kinematic animation. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 35:4244–4256,
  2022.

Irina Higgins, Loic Matthey, Arka Pal, Christopher P Burgess, Xavier Glorot, Matthew M Botvinick,
   Shakir Mohamed, and Alexander Lerchner. beta-vae: Learning basic visual concepts with a
   constrained variational framework. ICLR (Poster), 3, 2017.

R Devon Hjelm, Alex Fedorov, Samuel Lavoie-Marchildon, Karan Grewal, Phil Bachman, Adam
  Trischler, and Yoshua Bengio. Learning deep representations by mutual information estimation
  and maximization. arXiv preprint arXiv:1808.06670, 2018.

Zhiwu Huang, Chengde Wan, Thomas Probst, and Luc Van Gool. Deep learning on lie groups for
  skeleton-based action recognition. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and
  pattern recognition, pp. 6099–6108, 2017.


                                                12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Ilyes Khemakhem, Diederik Kingma, Ricardo Monti, and Aapo Hyvarinen. Variational autoencoders
   and nonlinear ica: A unifying framework. In International Conference on Artificial Intelligence
   and Statistics, pp. 2207–2217. PMLR, 2020.

Hyunjik Kim and Andriy Mnih. Disentangling by factorising. In International conference on machine
  learning, pp. 2649–2658. PMLR, 2018.

Diederik P Kingma and Max Welling.          Auto-encoding variational bayes.      arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1312.6114, 2013.

Francesco Locatello, Stefan Bauer, Mario Lucic, Gunnar Raetsch, Sylvain Gelly, Bernhard Schölkopf,
  and Olivier Bachem. Challenging common assumptions in the unsupervised learning of disentan-
  gled representations. In international conference on machine learning, pp. 4114–4124. PMLR,
  2019.

Ilya Loshchilov and Frank Hutter.     Decoupled weight decay regularization.       arXiv preprint
   arXiv:1711.05101, 2017.

Kevin Luxem, Petra Mocellin, Falko Fuhrmann, Johannes Kürsch, Stephanie R Miller, Jorge J Palop,
  Stefan Remy, and Pavol Bauer. Identifying behavioral structure from deep variational embeddings
  of animal motion. Communications Biology, 5(1):1267, 2022.

Jesse D Marshall, Diego E Aldarondo, Timothy W Dunn, William L Wang, Gordon J Berman, and
  Bence P Ölveczky. Continuous whole-body 3d kinematic recordings across the rodent behavioral
  repertoire. Neuron, 109(3):420–437, 2021.

Jesse D. Marshall, Tianqing Li, Joshua H. Wu, and Timothy W. Dunn. Leaving flatland: Advances
  in 3D behavioral measurement. Current Opinion in Neurobiology, 73:102522, April 2022. ISSN
  1873-6882.

Michael H McCullough and Geoffrey J Goodhill. Unsupervised quantification of naturalistic animal
 behaviors for gaining insight into the brain. Current Opinion in Neurobiology, 70:89–100, 2021.

Young-Il Moon, Balaji Rajagopalan, and Upmanu Lall. Estimation of mutual information using
  kernel density estimators. Physical Review E, 52(3):2318, 1995.

Kevin P Murphy. Machine learning: a probabilistic perspective. MIT press, 2012.

Simon Musall, Matthew T. Kaufman, Ashley L. Juavinett, Steven Gluf, and Anne K. Churchland.
  Single-trial neural dynamics are dominated by richly varied movements. Nature Neuroscience,
  22(10):1677–1686, October 2019. ISSN 1546-1726. Number: 10 Publisher: Nature Publishing
  Group.

Tanmay Nath, Alexander Mathis, An Chi Chen, Amir Patel, Matthias Bethge, and Mackenzie Wey-
  gandt Mathis. Using DeepLabCut for 3D markerless pose estimation across species and behaviors.
  Nature Protocols, 14(7):2152–2176, July 2019. ISSN 1750-2799.

Eric J Nestler and Steven E Hyman. Animal models of neuropsychiatric disorders. Nature neuro-
  science, 13(10):1161–1169, 2010.

Ali Nourizonoz, Robert Zimmermann, Chun Lum Andy Ho, Sebastien Pellat, Yannick Ormen,
  Clément Prévost-Solié, Gilles Reymond, Fabien Pifferi, Fabienne Aujard, Anthony Herrel, and
  Daniel Huber. EthoLoop: automated closed-loop neuroethology in naturalistic environments.
  Nature Methods, 17(10):1052–1059, October 2020. ISSN 1548-7105.

Talmo D Pereira, Nathaniel Tabris, Arie Matsliah, David M Turner, Junyu Li, Shruthi Ravindranath,
  Eleni S Papadoyannis, Edna Normand, David S Deutsch, Z Yan Wang, et al. Sleap: A deep
  learning system for multi-animal pose tracking. Nature methods, 19(4):486–495, 2022.

Mathis Petrovich, Michael J. Black, and Gül Varol. Action-conditioned 3d human motion synthesis
 with transformer vae. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer
 Vision (ICCV), pp. 10985–10995, October 2021a.


                                               13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Mathis Petrovich, Michael J Black, and Gül Varol. Action-conditioned 3d human motion synthesis
 with transformer vae. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer
 Vision, pp. 10985–10995, 2021b.

Ben Poole, Sherjil Ozair, Aaron Van Den Oord, Alex Alemi, and George Tucker. On variational
  bounds of mutual information. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 5171–5180.
  PMLR, 2019.

Alec Radford. Unsupervised representation learning with deep convolutional generative adversarial
  networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:1511.06434, 2015.

Eduardo Hugo Sanchez, Mathieu Serrurier, and Mathias Ortner. Learning disentangled representations
  via mutual information estimation. In Computer Vision–ECCV 2020: 16th European Conference,
  Glasgow, UK, August 23–28, 2020, Proceedings, Part XXII 16, pp. 205–221. Springer, 2020.

Giovanna Scaramuzzino, Federico Becattini, and Alberto Del Bimbo. Attribute disentanglement with
  gradient reversal for interactive fashion retrieval. Pattern Recognition Letters, 172:203–212, 2023.

Jiayi Shen, Xiaohan Chen, Howard Heaton, Tianlong Chen, Jialin Liu, Wotao Yin, and Zhangyang
   Wang. Learning a minimax optimizer: A pilot study. In International Conference on Learning
   Representations, 2020.

Changhao Shi, Sivan Schwartz, Shahar Levy, Shay Achvat, Maisan Abboud, Amir Ghanayim, Jackie
  Schiller, and Gal Mishne. Learning disentangled behavior embeddings. Advances in neural
  information processing systems, 34:22562–22573, 2021.

Rui Shu, Yining Chen, Abhishek Kumar, Stefano Ermon, and Ben Poole. Weakly supervised
  disentanglement with guarantees. arXiv preprint arXiv:1910.09772, 2019.

Andrea Slézia, Panna Hegedüs, Evgeniia Rusina, Katalin Lengyel, Nicola Solari, Attila Kaszas,
  Diána Balázsfi, Boris Botzanowski, Emma Acerbo, Florian Missey, et al. Behavioral, neural and
  ultrastructural alterations in a graded-dose 6-ohda mouse model of early-stage parkinson’s disease.
 Scientific Reports, 13(1):19478, 2023.

Kihyuk Sohn, Honglak Lee, and Xinchen Yan. Learning structured output representation using deep
  conditional generative models. Advances in neural information processing systems, 28, 2015.

Elsbeth A. Van Dam, Lucas P. J. J. Noldus, and Marcel A. J. Van Gerven. Disentangling rodent
  behaviors to improve automated behavior recognition. Frontiers in Neuroscience, 17, July 2023.
  ISSN 1662-453X. Publisher: Frontiers.

Raviteja Vemulapalli, Felipe Arrate, and Rama Chellappa. Human action recognition by representing
  3d skeletons as points in a lie group. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision
  and pattern recognition, pp. 588–595, 2014.

Lukas von Ziegler, Oliver Sturman, and Johannes Bohacek. Big behavior: challenges and op-
  portunities in a new era of deep behavior profiling. Neuropsychopharmacology, 46(1):33–44,
  2021.

Caleb Weinreb, Jonah Pearl, Sherry Lin, Mohammed Abdal Monium Osman, Libby Zhang, Sidharth
  Annapragada, Eli Conlin, Red Hoffman, Sofia Makowska, Winthrop F Gillis, et al. Keypoint-
  moseq: parsing behavior by linking point tracking to pose dynamics. BioRxiv, 2023.

Matthew R Whiteway, Dan Biderman, Yoni Friedman, Mario Dipoppa, E Kelly Buchanan, Anqi Wu,
 John Zhou, Niccolò Bonacchi, Nathaniel J Miska, Jean-Paul Noel, et al. Partitioning variability in
 animal behavioral videos using semi-supervised variational autoencoders. PLoS computational
 biology, 17(9):e1009439, 2021.

Alexander B. Wiltschko, Matthew J. Johnson, Giuliano Iurilli, Ralph E. Peterson, Jesse M. Katon,
  Stan L. Pashkovski, Victoria E. Abraira, Ryan P. Adams, and Sandeep Robert Datta. Mapping
  sub-second structure in mouse behavior. Neuron, 88(6):1121–1135, 2015a. ISSN 0896-6273.


                                                 14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Alexander B. Wiltschko, Matthew J. Johnson, Giuliano Iurilli, Ralph E. Peterson, Jesse M. Katon,
  Stan L. Pashkovski, Victoria E. Abraira, Ryan P. Adams, and Sandeep Robert Datta. Mapping
  Sub-Second Structure in Mouse Behavior. Neuron, 88(6):1121–1135, December 2015b. ISSN
  0896-6273.
Alexander B. Wiltschko, Tatsuya Tsukahara, Ayman Zeine, Rockwell Anyoha, Winthrop F. Gillis,
  Jeffrey E. Markowitz, Ralph E. Peterson, Jesse Katon, Matthew J. Johnson, and Sandeep Robert
  Datta. Revealing the structure of pharmacobehavioral space through motion sequencing. Nature
  Neuroscience, 23(11):1433–1443, November 2020. ISSN 1546-1726.
Anqi Wu, Estefany Kelly Buchanan, Matthew Whiteway, Michael Schartner, Guido Meijer, Jean-Paul
  Noel, Erica Rodriguez, Claire Everett, Amy Norovich, Evan Schaffer, et al. Deep graph pose: a
  semi-supervised deep graphical model for improved animal pose tracking. Advances in Neural
  Information Processing Systems, 33:6040–6052, 2020.
Yilun Xu, Shengjia Zhao, Jiaming Song, Russell Stewart, and Stefano Ermon. A theory of usable infor-
  mation under computational constraints. In International Conference on Learning Representations,
  2020a.
Yilun Xu, Shengjia Zhao, Jiaming Song, Russell Stewart, and Stefano Ermon. A theory of usable
  information under computational constraints. arXiv preprint arXiv:2002.10689, 2020b.
Daiyao Yi and Shreya Saxena. Modeling the behavior of multiple subjects using a cauchy-schwarz
  regularized partitioned subspace variational autoencoder (cs-ps-vae). In 2022 44th Annual Interna-
  tional Conference of the IEEE Engineering in Medicine & Biology Society (EMBC), pp. 497–503.
  IEEE, 2022.
Long Zhao, Yuxiao Wang, Jiaping Zhao, Liangzhe Yuan, Jennifer J Sun, Florian Schroff, Hartwig
  Adam, Xi Peng, Dimitris Metaxas, and Ting Liu. Learning view-disentangled human pose
  representation by contrastive cross-view mutual information maximization. In Proceedings of the
  IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 12793–12802, 2021.
Yi Zhou, Connelly Barnes, Jingwan Lu, Jimei Yang, and Hao Li. On the continuity of rotation
  representations in neural networks. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer
  vision and pattern recognition, pp. 5745–5753, 2019.
Christian Zimmermann, Artur Schneider, Mansour Alyahyay, Thomas Brox, and Ilka Diester.
  Freipose: a deep learning framework for precise animal motion capture in 3d spaces. BioRxiv, pp.
  2020–02, 2020.


                                                15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A     M ETHOD D ETAILS
A.1   P OSE PREPROCESSING


Figure 4: Aligning pose trajectories. All pose sequences are translated and aligned so that the central
frame is globally centered and rotated to face in a standard direction. This representation preserves
important trajectory information. We decompose our pose sequences into local joint rotations and
global root position as is commonly done in 3D deep pose methods (e.g., Petrovich et al., 2021b; He
et al., 2022).


A.2   S CRUBBERS

Scrubbing by adaptive moving average least square (SC-VAE-MALS)
Consider a linear decoder:
                                           fψ (z) = ψz = v̂                                         (7)
             0   1       −1
where ψ = ψ (ψ + βI)          , which can be evaluated using the loss:
                                     L(z, v; ψ) = ||v − fψa (z)||22                                 (8)


Algorithm 1 SC-VAE-MALS
  Initialize network parameters
  ϕ, θ
  Initialize linear estimator parameters
  ψ̂ ∈ RN ×D
  Initialize forgetting factor
  α ∈ (0, 1)
  Initialize L2-regularization coefficient
  β∈R
  repeat
      Draw batch with K samples
      {xk , vk ∈ RN , zk ∼ qϕ (· | xk ) ∈ RD }K
                                              k=1
      Calculate decoder   loss:
                 1
                    P  K
      LScrub = K       k=1 L(zk , vk ; ψ)
      Update ψ based on the normal equations for ordinary least squares regression:
                         PK
        0
      ψ̂k+1  = (1 − α) k=1 (vk zk ⊤ ) + αψk0
                         PK
        1
      ψ̂k+1  = (1 − α) k=1 (zk zk ⊤ ) + αψk1
      Update network parameters:
      ϕ ← ϕ + ∇[LScrub + LELBO + LRecon ]
      θ ← θ + ∇[LRecon ]
  until convergence



                                                  16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Scrubbing by adaptive quadratic discriminators (SC-VAE-QD)
Consider the class-conditional Bayes classifier:
                                         fψ (z) = p(v = c|z)                                         (9)
with likelihood:
                                     p(z|v = c) = N (z|µc , Σc )                                    (10)
                                                                                           ′    ′
For multi-class problems, we maintain a one vs. rest estimator per class, ψ = {µc , Σc , µc , Σc ∀ c ∈
C}. This estimator can be evaluated based on the Gaussian log-likelihood:
                                                                 ′    ′
                      L(z, v; ψ c ) = ℓ(µc , Σc |z, v = c) + ℓ(µc , Σc |z, v ̸= c)                  (11)


Algorithm 2 SC-VAE-QD
  Initialize network parameters
  ϕ, θ
  Initialize parameters of two classifers
  ψa , ψb
          →
          −
  λ ← α 1 C , α ∈ (0, 1)
  repeat
       Draw minibatch of {xk , vk , zk } as in Alg 1
       LScrub = 0
       for c ∈ C do
           Evaluate the GaussianPlog-likelihood ratio for each classifier and average scrubbing loss:
                              1                     c
           LScrub = LScrub + K       K L(zk , vk ; ψ )
           Update class means and covariances for both estimators:
           µc = (1 − αc )Evk =c [zk ] + αc µc
           Σc = Covvk =c [zk , zk ]
             ′           ′                    ′   ′
           µc = (1 − αc )Evk ̸=c [zk ] + αc µc
              ′
           Σc = Covvk ̸=c [zk , zk ]
       end for
       Update network parameters as in Alg 1
  until convergence

Automatically tuning forgetting factor
One of the core features of the moving average scrubbing methods (SC-VAE-MALS and -QD)
is the automatic tuning of the forgetting factor, λ. Given a discriminator function, fψ (z), and a
minimization objective, L(z, v; ψ), we simultaneously estimate two discriminators from the same
function family, fψa (z) and fψb (z). The estimators use distinct forgetting factors, αa and αb , with a
fixed offset ϵ. We tune both αa and αb in the direction of the better-performing discriminator.


                                                   17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Algorithm 3 Automatically tuning forgetting factor (λ)
  ψa , ψb ← Initialize parameters of two discriminators
  Initialize forgetting factors with fixed offset: ϵ
  αa ∈ (0, 1 − ϵ)
  αb ← αa + ϵ
  repeat
       Draw batch with K samples:
       (xk , vk ), zk ∼ qϕ (· | xk ) ∈ RD×K
       Average the losses of the two discriminators to obtain the scrubbing loss
       LScrub = 12 [L(zk , vk ; ψa ) + L(zk , vk ; ψb )]
       Forgetting factors step by ∆ in the direction of the better decoder between fψa and fψb
       if L(zk , vk ; ψa ) > L(zk , vk ; ψb ) then
           αa = max(αa − ∆, 0)
           αb = αa + ϵ
       else
           αb = min(αb + ∆, 1)
           αa = αb − ϵ
       end if
       Continue with updating ψa , ψb , ϕ, and θ as described in Algorithms 1 and 2.
  until convergence


Scrubbing by kernel density mutual information estimation (SC-VAE-MI)
In the previous objectives, we used adversarial parametric functions fψ (·) as proxies to estimate
and minimize the maximum predictive information in eq. (2). Here we consider a nonparametric
estimator of the mutual information between z and v as an alternative scrubbing objective. The
mutual information between these random variables is defined as:

                                 p(z, v)
            I(z, v) = Ez,v log             = Ev,z [log p(v, z) − log p(v) − log p(z)]         (12)
                                p(v)p(z)
We approximate the densities of the joint and marginal distributions using a kernel density estimator,
as done in prior work (e.g., Moon et al., 1995). Given a set of samples from the joint distribution,
{zj , vj }Jj=1 , we approximate the joint density function as being proportional to:
                                                     J
                                                     X
                              p(v, z) ≈ p̂(v, z) ∝         k([z, v], [zj , vj ])                   (13)
                                                     j=1

where [z, v] denotes vector concatenation, and k(·, ·) denotes Gaussian kernel with a user-defined
bandwidth parameter h:
                                                     ||x − x′ ||2

                                       ′
                                k(x, x ) = exp −                                               (14)
                                                         2h
We approximate the marginal distributions over z and v in a similar fashion:
                                                       J
                                                       X
                                     p(v) ≈ p̂(v) ∝          k(v, vj )                             (15)
                                                       j=1
                                                       J
                                                       X
                                     p(z) ≈ p̂(z) ∝          k(z, zj )                             (16)
                                                       j=1

Therefore, we can approximate the term appearing inside the expectation of eq. (12) as:
                         J                               J                   J
          p(z, v)       X                               X                   X
     log          ≈ log     k([z, v], [zj , vj ]) − log     k(v, vj ) − log     k(z, zj ) + C      (17)
         p(v)p(z)       j=1                             j=1                 j=1

where C is a constant that does not depend on the distribution of z and v. Now, given a second batch
of samples from the joint distribution {z̃k , ṽk }K
                                                   k=1 , we can approximate the expectation appearing in
eq. (12) with the empirical mean. Thus, we obtain:


                                                  18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                      K
                    ˆ v) = 1                      p̂(z̃k , ṽk )
                                      X
          I(z, v) ≈ I(z,                    log                                                          (18)
                           K                      p̂(v)p̂(z)
                                      k=1
                                    K      J
                                  1 X     X
                              =       log     k([z̃k , ṽk ], [zj , vj ])                                (19)
                                  K       j=1
                                      k=1
                                        K      J                   K      J
                                      1 X     X                  1 X     X
                                  −       log     k(ṽk , vj ) −     log     k(z̃k , zj ) + C            (20)
                                      K       j=1
                                                                 K       j=1
                                        k=1                            k=1

as our estimate of the mutual information (up to an additive constant C). Importantly, this estimator
is differentiable with respect to z̃1 , . . . , z̃K , allowing us to compute gradients to update the network’s
learned representations. We caution that this estimator suffers a well-known curse of dimensionality
and must be used with care. We expect it to work best when the VAE representation is low-dimensional
and large batches of data (i.e., large K and J) are used to form the estimate. The choice of bandwidth
parameter in the Gaussian kernel function is also critical; smaller choices of h will require larger
batches of data to form a stable estimate.

Algorithm 4 SC-VAE-MI
  Initialize network parameters
  ϕ, θ
  Initialize bandwidth parameter
  h∈R
  repeat
      Draw batch with K samples
      {xk , vk ∈ RN , zk ∼ qϕ (· | xk ) ∈ RD }K  k=1
      Draw batch with J samples
      {xj , vj ∈ RN , zj ∼ qϕ (· | xj ) ∈ RD }Jj=1
      Using eq. (18)
                ˆ v)
      LScrub = I(z,
      Update network parameters as in Alg 1
  until convergence


                                                           19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


B     E XPERIMENT D ETAILS
B.1   C ONDITIONAL MOTION GENERATION


Figure 5: Enabling conditional motion generation. By manually adjusting the value of the
conditioned variable, vt , we enable granular control over this variable in the generated output without
changing the gross behavioral category. Here we change the conditioned speed and are able to adjust
the speed of a behavior.


B.2   L ATENT VISUALIZATIONS


Figure 6: PCA visualizations. Projections of vanilla and scrubbed model representations to the top
principal component dimensions, colored by heading (top), speed (mid), and identity (bottom).


                                                  20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


B.3   O BTAINING BEHAVIORAL MOTIFS


Figure 7: Example motifs from GMM clustering. Motifs extracted from our models’ deep
representations qualitatively reveal interpretable behavioral motifs.


B.4   N UISANCE VARIABLE DETAILS

Average speed Average speed is a 3-dimensional vector corresponding to: (1) the average displace-
ment of the root keypoint during a window (51 frames here), (2) the average speed of the spine and
head relative to the root keypoint, and (3) the average speed of the limbs relative to the attached spine
keypoint.
Heading direction Given a pose sequence, we calculate the yaw, α, of the mid-spine → front-spine
segment for the central frame of a pose sequence (i.e., the 26th frame of a 51 frame sequence in this
paper). The final heading direction used by the scrubber is [sin α cos α] ⊤.
Animal identity We represent all categorical nuisance variables with one-hot encoding vectors.

B.5   S CRUBBING IDENTITY IN VAE WITHOUT CONDITIONING


Figure 8: Decoding identity from scrubbed latents. (a) Classification accuracy for animal identity
using logistic regression and quadratic discriminates. (b) Paired inter-individual MMD.
Given the need to maintain a reasonable reconstruction error when learning a scrubbed variational
distribution, it follows that conditioning would be required when disentangling variables such as speed
or heading. However, conditioning does not seem to be as intuitively necessary when disentangling
variables, such as animal identity, which do not directly contribute to the reconstruction error. Despite


                                                   21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


this, we find that conditioning with one-hot encodings on animal identity improves the scrubbing
performance, as the linear and quadratic decodability of identity is reduced compared to scrubbing
identity in a standard VAE (VAE-GR and VAE-QD in Fig. 8a). SC-VAE representations also reduced
the paired maximum mean discrepancy (MMD) (Gretton et al., 2012) between individuals (Fig. 8b).

B.6   M ETRIC DEFINITIONS

One-component Gaussian log-likelihood Given a mean-centered and standardized latent represen-
tation over a dataset, we split the walking behaviors Zwalk into Zwalk       walk
                                                                  train and Ztest . We use the mean
µ and diagonal covariance σ I of Ztrain to calculate the Gaussian log-likelihood of Zwalk
                               2      walk
                                                                                       test :


                                   1
             ln p(z | µ, σ 2 I) = −   d ln 2π + ln |σ 2 I| + (z − µ)⊤(σ 2 I)−1 (z − µ)

                                                                                                  (21)
                                   2
Thus, we quantify the level at which walking clusters of different speeds or heading directions can be
represented by a single, merged Gaussian distribution. We cross-validated this over five folds.


Figure 9: Pairwise maximum mean discrepancy. For each session (healthy or diseased) of
each animal, we calculated the maximum mean discrepancy between their behavioral distribution.
Qualitatively, the difference in the cross-condition MMD (top-right and bottom-left quadrants) vs.
the in-condition MMD (top-left and bottom-right quadrants) is more pronounced in SC-VAE-QD
compared to other models. This demonstrates the enhanced disease discriminability in our scrubbed
models.
Maximum mean discrepancy We use maximum mean discrepancy (MMD) (Gretton et al., 2012) to
define a distance between two latent behavioral distributions with M and N samples, X ∈ RM ×D
and Y ∈ RN ×D . Given a radial basis kernel function
                                                   with bandwidth      h:
                                                      ||z − z′ ||2

                                       ′
                                 k(z, z ) = exp −                                             (22)
                                                           h
MMD is defined as:
                                         M XM                             N X N
                                1       X                            1    X
          DM M D (X, Y) =                       k(xi , xj ) +                     k(yi , yj )
                           M (M − 1) i=1                       N (N − 1) i=1
                                           j̸=i                              j̸=i
                                                                                              (23)
                                     M N
                                2 XX
                           +                k(xi , yj )
                              M N i=1 j=1


                                                 22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Following the heuristic in Gretton et al. (2012), we define h to be the median Euclidean distance
in the aggregate sample [X, Y]. When visualizing the paired MMD between all available sessions
(72 total) in Fig. 9, we qualitatively find increased differences across conditions compared to within
conditions. We describe our quantification of this effect below.
In Sec. 4.5, we compare the healthy-disease discrepancy to the inter-individual discrepancy. Given
a dataset of I individuals where Hi is the healthy behavioral distribution and Di is the diseased
behavioral distribution of animal i, we calculate two metrics akin to statistical effect size:

                                           (I − 1) ∗ DM M D (Hi , Di )
                                [dH ]i =     P                                                   (24)
                                               j̸=i DM M D (Hi , Hj )

                                           (I − 1) ∗ DM M D (Hi , Di )
                                [dD ]i =     P                                                   (25)
                                               j̸=i DM M D (Di , Dj )
Cohen’s effect size is more similar to the cross-condition distance normalized to the variance within
the control condition (healthy). Thus, we report dH in Table 2. Both metrics are reported in Table
3. Finally, we construct a k-nearest neighbor classifier (k = 35) to classify behavioral distributions
using our MMD distance to quantify the changes in decoding accuracy of the disease label due to
scrubbing.


Table 3: Maximum mean discrepancy metrics. We quantify the difference in an animal’s cross-
condition representations compared to the average in-condition difference.
                                                     Effect Size
                           Model
                                                dH ↑            dD ↑
                           VAE               1.07 ± 0.05 2.69 ± 0.20
                           C-VAE             1.11 ± 0.05 2.82 ± 0.22
                           SC-VAE-GR         1.17 ± 0.06 3.07 ± 0.24
                           SC-VAE-QD         1.71 ± 0.11 5.55 ± 0.44
                           Reverse Control 0.68 ± 0.03 1.51 ± 0.14


                                                  23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


C     M ODEL T RAINING D ETAILS
C.1   M ODEL ARCHITECTURES


                              Table 4: Residual block architecture.
    Layer            Kernel   Stride Padding Activation Normalization      Channels out
    Input              -         -        -        None           None      in_channel
       Conv1D 1        3        2        1        PReLU          Batch    out_channel//2
       Conv1D 2        3        1        1         None           None     out_channel
    Conv1D skip        3        2        1         None           None     out_channel
    Add                -         -        -       PReLU          Batch     out_channel


                        Table 5: Residual block transpose architecture.
    Layer             Kernel Stride Padding Activation Normalization       Channels out
    Input               -        -        -         None          None      in_channel
       Conv1D⊤ 1        3        1        1        PReLU          Batch    in_channel//2
       Conv1D⊤ 2        3        2        1         None          None      out_channel
    Upsample by 2       -        -        -         None          None      out_channel
    Conv1D skip         4        1        1         None          None      out_channel
    Add                 -        -        -        PReLU          Batch     out_channel


                         Table 6: Representation encoder architecture.
          Layer       Kernel Stride Padding Activation Normalization       Output
          Input         -         -       -         None          None     51×111
         Conv1D         7         1       3        PReLU          None     51×128
        Residual 1      3         2       1        PReLU          Batch    26×256
        Residual 2      3         2       1        PReLU          Batch    13×512
         Flatten        -         -       -         None          None      6656
        Dense (µ)       -         -       -        PReLU          None       64
        Dense (σ)       -         -       -        PReLU          None       64


                                               24
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Table 7: Representation decoder architecture. c is the dimension of the disentanglement variable
          Layer       Kernel Stride Padding Activation Normalization Output
      Encoded input      -       -         -          None           None          64 + c
          Dense          -       -         -         PReLU           None          6656
         Unflatten       -       -         -          None           None         13×512
       Residual⊤ 1       3       2        1          PReLU           Batch        25×256
       Residual⊤ 2       3       2        1          PReLU           Batch        49×128
         Conv1D⊤         9       1        3            Tanh          None         51×111


Table 8: Gradient reversal scrubber. Uses ReLU activation for all dense layers. c is the dimension
of the disentanglement variable
                                     Layer          Input Output
                                Gradient reversal      -         -
                            (before MLP Ensemble)
                                    MLP 1
                                        Dense 1       64        64
                                        Dense 2       64        64
                                        Dense 3       64         c
                                    MLP 2
                                        Dense 1       64        64
                                        Dense 2       64         c
                                    MLP 3
                                        Dense 1       64        64
                                        Dense 2       64        32
                                        Dense 3       32         c
                                    MLP 4
                                        Dense 1       64       128
                                        Dense 2      128       128
                                        Dense 3      128         c


C.2   T RAINING DETAILS AND HYPERPARAMETERS

We standardized training such that the following are true across all models.

       • Models were trained on NVIDIA A100 and V100 GPUs.
       • Models were trained using AdamW optimizer (Loshchilov & Hutter, 2017) with a learning
         rate of 0.0001 and gradient clipping at 10,000.
       • Losses for models had the same weights for joint position error and the VAE ELBO loss.
       • Models were trained for 400 iterations over the training dataset with batch sizes of 2048.
       • The model architecture described in Section C.1 was not changed across tasks.
       • We used a pose sequence window size of 51 frames.
       • The size of the latent dimension zt was 64 for the results in Sections 4.4-4.2 and 32 for the
         results in Section 4.5.

To ensure fair comparison across models, we limited hyperparameter-tuning to only method-relevant
hyperparameters. General hyperparameters and optimizers were chosen to improve the joint position
error in vanilla VAE reconstructions. These hyperparameters, as described above, were held constant
across all VAE, C-VAE, and SC-VAE models.
Parameter tuning for SC-VAE scrubbers largely revolved around tuning the λ of the LScrub (ϕ) loss.
In most cases, increasing lambda increased the strength of the scrubber up to its linear or nonlinear
assumptions. However, when λ was too large, we found some cases of posterior collapse or mode
collapse, primarily in the neural network scrubbing models (SC-VAE-GR and -ND). For SC-VAE-GR,
we were additionally required to tune the scaling factor of the gradient reversal layer α. For SC-VAE-
ND, we found performance changes due to the number of discriminator training iterations in between


                                                 25
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


C-VAE iterations. If too few iterations were taken, the discriminator would underfit and vice versa.
Due to our increment strategy for forgetting factors (Algorithm A.2), in training SC-VAE-MALS and
SC-VAE-QD, λ was the only required parameter to tune. In the polynomial extensions to the moving
average algorithm (SC-VAE-MAQS), we found better performance with non-zero L2 regularization,
β. Finally, for SC-VAE-MI, we additionally tuned the h parameter determining the spherical width
of the kernel.
Models were evaluated on a held-out validation set. Hyperparameters were selected based on the level
of nonlinear invariance in the model latent representations to the scrubbed nuisance variable (i.e.,
the "MLP and "QDA" metrics in Fig. 2), filtering out models with posterior collapse. All reported
metrics are calculated on a test set separate from the training and validation dataset. The results in
Sections 4.4-4.2 were all calculated on the same set of models. Consequently, there were models
not selected with better performance in the conditional motion synthesis task in Table 4.2. While
increased invariance usually led to better performance in motion synthesis, we observed an inverse
correlation in SC-VAE-ND models trained to scrub heading direction where the least invariant models
had an R2 of up to 0.859. Models were re-trained from scratch on the Parkinsonian dataset to obtain
the results in Section 4.5.

Table 9: Hyperparameter search. We list the hyperparameters and values over which we trained
models for our experiments. We applied grid search for methods with more than one hyperparameter.
                     Model               Hyperparameters          Values
                                                 λ           10, 20, 50, 100
                     SC-VAE-GR
                                                 α             0.8, 1.0, 1.2
                                                 λ             10, 50, 100
                     SC-VAE-ND
                                               n_iter         1, 10, 50, 100
                     SC-VAE-MALS                 λ              10, 20, 50
                                                 λ               5, 10, 20
                     SC-VAE-MAQS
                                                 β           0.25, 0.5, 0.75
                                                 λ            250, 500, 750
                     SC-VAE-MI
                                                 h           0.25, 0.5, 0.75
                     SC-VAE-QD                   λ             5, 10, 20, 50


                                                 26
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


D     PARKINSON ’ S DATASET

D.1    I MPACT AND ANIMAL CARE STATEMENT

Phenotyping animal behavior is an early and essential step in drug discovery, and analyses of high-
resolution 3D pose measurements provide a sensitive, reproducible, and scalable avenue for such
preclinical assays. By releasing datasets and benchmarks for 3D pose analyses, we are supporting the
continued development and acceleration of new phenotyping methods. We thus are facilitating the
development of new therapeutics for neuropsychiatric disorders. All animal data were collected at
AAALAC-accredited animal facilities. The care and experimental manipulation of all animals were
reviewed and approved by Duke University Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee.


D.2    L ICENSES

Our dataset is released under a CC BY 4.0 Attribution International license, which permits sharing
and adapting the datasets without restrictions except for providing attribution to the dataset when
used or adapted in a new medium.


D.3    DATASET SPLITS AND ACCESS

We used a 50-25-25 train-validation-test split for our datasets. All hour-long videos were split into
1-minute long sections and randomized across each dataset while ensuring equal distribution of
animal identity. Additionally, as animal behavior can change across the length of a recording session,
we ensured that each dataset received an even distribution for each third of the recording session. Our
datasets, train-validation-test splits, Python code, and documentation for running all benchmarks can
be found on our Github repository. See https://github.com/tdunnlab/scrubvae.


D.4    E THICS

Please see D.1 for a discussion of animal ethics. We acknowledge that by aiding the development of
behavioral activity analysis approaches, bad actors could potentially use developed approaches for
unethical purposes. However, we believe that the benefits behavioral analysis approaches offer for
society, in terms of the potential to alleviate human disease burden, outweigh the (minimal) risks of
misuse.


Figure 10: Dopamine denervation in PD mouse brain. Example fluorescent immunostaining for
tyrosine hydroxylase (TH) in two mice after inducing Parkinson’s disease via 6-hydroxy dopamine
(6-OHDA) lesioning. TH (bright green) indicates the presence of dopamine neurons. (left) Example
complete lesion. (right) Example incomplete lesion.



                                                  27
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


D.5   DATASET COLLECTION

Adult Drd1a-Cre (8 females, 8 males, 18-20 weeks old) and Adora2a-Cre (10 females, 10 males,
18-20 weeks old) mice were anesthetized and implanted with a metal cannula (P1 tech) targeting the
left medial forebrain bundle (from bregma: -0.7mm AP, -1.2mm ML, -4.75mm DV). Custom-built
headbars were then affixed to the skull using UV glue and dental cement.
After allowing 1 week for the mice to recover, mice were habituated to head fixation and to the open
field (30 cm x 30 cm) arena, then a 1-hour baseline recording was performed in the arena another
1 week later. Immediately following the ‘baseline’ session, mice were head-fixed, and 0.9 µL of
a freshly made solution of 3.6mg/ml 6-hydroxy dopamine (6-OHDA) and 1mg/ml ascorbic acid
was infused through the cranial cannula at a rate of 0.1 µL/min, allowing an additional 6 minutes
for diffusion before removing the infusion cannula. 6-OHDA lesioned mice were provided with
supportive care including daily subcutaneous saline injections and hand feeding with a mash made
from a high-calorie diet supplement (Stat, ground-up macal) and ground up rodent feed (LabDiet
5001) until their weight stabilized. Two weeks after the lesion, mice were again placed in the
open-field arena for 1 hour to collect their ‘lesion’ behavioral data.
At the conclusion of the experiment, mice were deeply anesthetized with isoflurane and underwent a
transcardial perfusion with 15 mL of 0.1M phosphate buffered saline (PBS) followed by 50 mL of
cold 4% paraformaldehyde (PFA) in 0.1M phosphate buffer (PB), pH 7.4 for fixation. Brains were
then dissected from the skull and soaked overnight at 4o C in the PFA solution, followed by 3 washes
with 0.1M PBS. Each brain was then embedded in a mold in 5% agarose in order to collect 50 µM
coronal sections with a vibratome (Leica VT1200S) into wells containing 0.1M PBS.
The next day, brain sections were immunostained for tyrosine hydroxylase (TH), a marker for
dopamine neurons. Briefly, sections were washed in PBS before a 2-hour incubation in a blocking
solution consisting of 5% goat serum, 3% bovine serum albumin, and 0.3% trition-x. Sections were
then transferred to a half-block solution containing 1:1000 Rabbit α-TH (PelFreez, P40101) overnight
at 4o C with agitation. Sections were then washed in 0.1M PBS containing 0.1% tween before a
4-hour incubation in a half-block solution containing 1:1000 goat α-rabbit 488 (Invitrogen, A11008).
Finally, sections were washed in PBS containing tween, then PBS prior to mounting on glass slides
(VWR) and coverslipping with Vectashield Vibrance with DAPI (Vector Labs).
Fluorescent images of each immunostained coronal section were then collected on a VS200 slide
scanner. Analysis of pixel intensity of the fluorescent signal for TH was performed using a custom
MATLAB script. For each brain, 4 sections were analyzed that evenly span the anterior to posterior
axis of the striatum. On each section, the striatum was manually segmented in both hemispheres, and
the fluorescent signal was summed across the sections for both the healthy and lesioned hemispheres.
The value for the fluorescence in the lesioned hemisphere was then divided by the value for the
fluorescence in the healthy hemisphere to yield the ‘integrated fluorescence’ for each animal.


                                                28
