Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


X-D RIVE :                                     C ROSS - MODALITY CONSISTENT MULTI -
SENSOR DATA SYNTHESIS FOR DRIVING SCENARIOS

 Yichen Xie1∗ , Chenfeng Xu1∗ , Chensheng Peng1 , Shuqi Zhao1 , Nhat Ho2 ,
 Alexander T. Pham3 , Mingyu Ding1† , Masayoshi Tomizuka1 , Wei Zhan1
 1
   UC Berkeley 2 UT Austin 3 Toyota North America

                           Mismatched
                           Mismatched                                                                             Matched
                                                                                                                 Matched
                                                 noisycamera
                                                noisy  cameraimage
                                                              image    noisypoint
                                                                      noisy  pointclouds
                                                                                   clouds                                     noisycamera
                                                                                                                                    cameraimage
                                                                                                                                           image    noisypoint
                                                                                                                                                          pointclouds
                                                                                                                                                                 clouds
                                                                                                                             noisy                 noisy


                           BBuus                       Diffusion                                              BuBus                                  Diffusion
                                                                                                                                                    Diffusion
                              s                       Diffusion                                                  s
                                                                                                                                      Diffusion
                                                        Model                                                                        Diffusion         Model
                                                                                                                                                     Model
                                                       Model               Diffusion                                                    Model
      BBuui                                                               Diffusion                                                   Model
                                           s                                Model               BuBui
         ildldi                       rasr                                 Model
             inng
                g                  CCa                                                             ildldin
                                                                                                      ing g         rsar
                                                                                                                         s
                                                                                                                  CaC
                                                               independent
                                                              independent                                                                   consistent
                                                                                                                                           consistent


                                                   cameraimage
                                                  camera  image          pointclouds
                                                                        point  clouds                                          cameraimage
                                                                                                                              camera  image          pointclouds
                                                                                                                                                    point   clouds


(a) Single-modality images and point clouds synthesized (b) Multi-modality images and point clouds jointly
by separate models (Gao et al., 2023; Hu et al., 2024a) generated by our proposed X-D RIVE.
Figure 1: X-D RIVE simultaneously generates high-quality multi-view images and point clouds with
cross-modality consistency, which is impossible for previous single-modality generative models.

                                                                             A BSTRACT
                    Recent advancements have exploited diffusion models for the synthesis of either
                    LiDAR point clouds or camera image data in driving scenarios. Despite their
                    success in modeling single-modality data marginal distribution, there is an under-
                    exploration in the mutual reliance between different modalities to describe com-
                    plex driving scenes. To fill in this gap, we propose a novel framework, X-D RIVE,
                    to model the joint distribution of point clouds and multi-view images via a dual-
                    branch latent diffusion model architecture. Considering the distinct geometrical
                    spaces of the two modalities, X-D RIVE conditions the synthesis of each modality
                    on the corresponding local regions from the other modality, ensuring better align-
                    ment and realism. To further handle the spatial ambiguity during denoising, we
                    design the cross-modality condition module based on epipolar lines to adaptively
                    learn the cross-modality local correspondence. Besides, X-D RIVE allows con-
                    trollable generation through multi-level input conditions, including text, bounding
                    box, image, and point clouds. Extensive results demonstrate the high-fidelity syn-
                    thetic results of X-D RIVE for both point clouds and multi-view images, adhering
                    to input conditions while ensuring reliable cross-modality consistency. Our code
                    will be made publicly available at https://github.com/yichen928/X-Drive.


1    I NTRODUCTION
Autonomous driving vehicles perceive the world with multiple sensors of different kinds, where
LiDAR and cameras play crucial roles by capturing point clouds and multi-view images. They
provide complementary geometric measurements and semantic information about the surrounding
environment, significantly benefiting tasks such as object detection (Liu et al., 2023c; Xie et al.,
2023), motion planning (Sobh et al., 2018), scene reconstruction (Huang et al., 2024; Zhou et al.,
2024), and self-supervised representation learning (Yang et al., 2024a; Xie et al., 2024b). However,
these advancements hinge on access to large amounts of aligned multi-modality data, specifically
well-calibrated LiDAR and multi-view camera inputs that describe the same scene.
Scaling up the collection of such high-quality multi-modality data is costly and a non-trivial effort.
The high-quality sensors are expensive, and the calibration process demands intensive human ef-
forts. Additionally, real-world driving data suffers from the severe long-tailed distribution problem,
making it an obstacle for corner case collection such as in extreme weather conditions. This raises a
natural question: Can we use a controllable way to synthesize aligned multi-modality data?


                                                                                            1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Given the success in other fields (Rombach et al., 2022; Blattmann et al., 2023; Liu et al., 2023a),
generative models offer a promising solution. Current research focuses either on synthesizing point
clouds (Zyrianov et al., 2022; Hu et al., 2024a; Ran et al., 2024) or multi-view images (Gao et al.,
2023; Wang et al., 2023; Wen et al., 2024), with limited attention paid to generating multi-modality
data. A simple combination of these single-modality algorithms results in serious cross-modality
mismatches in the synthetic scenes (Fig. 1a). Such inconsistencies create ambiguities and even
contradictory inputs or supervision signals, thus hindering the performance of downstream tasks.
Cross-modality consistency serves as the key desiderata of multi-modality data generation. However,
there are several challenges in the generation of consistent LiDAR and camera data. Firstly, synthetic
point clouds and multi-view images must be spatially aligned in all the local regions since they
describe the same driving scene, i.e. the shapes and layouts of both foregrounds and backgrounds
must be matched. Secondly, unlike those 2D pixel-level tasks (Zhang et al., 2023), point clouds
and multi-view images have distinct geometrical spaces and data formats. Multi-view images are
represented by RGB values in camera perspective views, while point clouds are XYZ coordinates
in the 3D space. Thirdly, the 3D spatial information is ambiguous during generation for both point
clouds and multi-view images without reliable point location or pixel depth in the denoising process.
In this paper, we fill in this gap by proposing X-D RIVE, a novel framework for the joint generation of
LiDAR and camera data, as demonstrated in Fig. 1b. We design a dual-branch architecture with two
latent diffusion models separately dedicated to the synthesis of point clouds and multi-view images,
while a key cross-modality condition module enhances cross-modality consistency between them.
To model the joint distribution and ensure local spatial alignment, we perform the cross-modality
conditions locally with only corresponding regions from the other modality considered. An explicit
transform bridges the two different geometrical spaces, converting the cross-modality condition to
match each other’s noisy latent space. To handle the positional ambiguity, we resort to a 3D-aware
design based on epipolar lines on range images and multi-view images, allowing the cross-attention
module to adaptively determine the cross-modality correspondence without explicit 3D positions. In
consequence, X-D RIVE is able to exploit existing single-modality data as conditions to seamlessly
generate data in the other modality. Additionally, X-D RIVE enhances controllability by introducing
3D bounding boxes for geometrical layout control and text prompts for attribute control (e.g. weather
and lighting), enabling more flexible, fine-grained, and precise control over both modalities.
Extensive experiments demonstrate the great ability of X-D RIVE in generating realistic multi-
modality sensor data. It notably outperforms previous specialized single-modality algorithms in
the quality of both synthetic point clouds and multi-view images. More importantly, for the first
time, it demonstrates reliable cross-modality consistency in synthetic scenes with comprehensive
and flexible conditions. Our contributions are summarized as follows.
• We introduce X-D RIVE, a dual-branch multi-modality latent diffusion framework that, for the first
  time, enables controllable and reliable synthesis of aligned LiDAR and multi-view camera data.
• Our cross-modality epipolar condition module bridges the geometrical gap under spatial ambigu-
  ity between point clouds and multi-view images, significantly enhancing modality consistency.
• Extensive experimental results demonstrate the effectiveness of X-D RIVE, with notable MMD
  (for point cloud generation) and FID (for multi-view generation) improvements, establishing a
  new state-of-the-art for remarkable cross-modality consistency.

2   R ELATED W ORKS
Conditional generation with diffusion models. Diffusion models (Ho et al., 2020; Dhariwal &
Nichol, 2021; Podell et al., 2023; Peebles & Xie, 2023) exhibit remarkable ability in generating
diverse images by learning a progressive denoising process. They yield state-of-the-art results in
various tasks such as text-to-image generation (Rombach et al., 2022; Nichol et al., 2021), text-to-
video generation (Singer et al., 2022; Yu et al., 2022), and instructional image editing (Brooks et al.,
2023; Meng et al., 2022). Beyond text condition, several work emerges with the competence in
managing additional forms of control signals. Zhang et al. (2023) integrates spatial conditions to a
pretrained text-to-image diffusion model via efficient finetuning. Li et al. (2023); Zheng et al. (2023)
condition the image synthesis on the fine-grained geometrical annotations to facilitate downstream
tasks like 2D object detection. Liu et al. (2023a); Sargent et al. (2024); Liu et al. (2023b); Yang
et al. (2024b) introduce 3D-aware diffusion models for novel view synthesis based on single-view


                                                   2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


image inputs, while Shi et al. (2023) explores text-conditioned multi-view image generation. Unlike
these prior work for the image domain, our framework simultaneously generates point clouds and
multi-view images conditioned on text prompts and 3D bounding boxes.
Cross-modality data generation. Beyond image domain, generative models are extended to the
synthesis of multi-modality data. Hu et al. (2024b); Shao et al. (2024) leverage video diffusion
models to estimate sequential depths. Bai et al. (2024) formulates various vision tasks as next token
prediction by extracting diverse visual information as unified visual tokens. The cross-modality
synthesis between videos and audios also draws great attention. Efforts are devoted to video-to-
audio (Zhu et al., 2022), audio-to-video (Chatterjee & Cherian, 2020), bi-directional (Chen et al.,
2017; Hao et al., 2018), and joint multi-modality (Ruan et al., 2023) generation. However, in all the
cases mentioned above, there exists clear cross-modality alignments, such as pixel-to-pixel spatial
correspondence for depth estimation and frame-to-frame temporal alignment between audios and
videos. In contrast, point clouds and multi-view images are in different geometrical spaces without
clear one-to-one local correlation between noisy multi-modality samples.
Generation of vehicle sensor data. Panoramic driving environment is usually perceived by the
multi-view cameras and LiDARs on the ego-vehicle. Alternative to the laborious collection and
annotation process, many works resort to the fast-growing generative models for the synthesis of
either cameras (Swerdlow et al., 2024; Yang et al., 2023; Gao et al., 2023; Lu et al., 2024; Singh
et al., 2024) or LiDAR (Zyrianov et al., 2022; Hu et al., 2024a; Zyrianov et al., 2024) sensor data.
For multi-view images (Yang et al., 2023; Wang et al., 2023; Gao et al., 2023) or videos (Wen
et al., 2024; Lu et al., 2023), previous work leverages pretrained image diffusion models (Rombach
et al., 2022) by incorporating extra inter-view modules to ensure the multi-view consistency. For
point clouds, Zyrianov et al. (2022); Ran et al. (2024); Hu et al. (2024a) adapt latent diffusion
models for the generation of range images (Fan et al., 2021; Li et al., 2016) since this range-view
representation shares a similar format with RGB images. However, all above methods concentrate
on the single-modality data, either LiDAR or camera sensors. Despite various control signals, there
exists no guarantee for the cross-modality consistency between point clouds and multi-view images
generated by independent single-modality models. To this end, we propose to synthesize consistent
multi-modality data in a joint manner.

3    P RELIMINARY
Latent Diffusion Models. Diffusion models (Ho et al., 2020; Sohl-Dickstein et al., 2015) learn to
approximate a data distribution p(x0 ) by iteratively denoising a random Gaussian noise for T steps.
Typically, diffusion models construct a diffused input xt through a forward process, which gradually
adds Gaussian noise to the data according to a variance schedule β1 , . . . , βT .
                                 T
                                 Y                                                p
                q(x1:T |x0 ) =         q(xt |xt−1 ),     q(xt |xt−1 ) = N (xt ;       1 − βt xt−1 , βt I).       (1)
                                 t=1

Then, the reverse process learns to recover the original inputs by fitting pθ (xt−1 |xt ).
                                 T
                                 Y
          pθ (x0:T ) = p(xT )          pθ (xt−1 |xt ),   pθ (xt−1 |xt ) = N (xt−1 ; µθ (xt , t), Σθ (xt , t)).   (2)
                                 t=1


Latent diffusion models (Rombach et al., 2022) perform the diffusion process on the latent space
instead of the input space to handle the high dimensional data. Specifically, it maps input x with an
encoder E into the latent space as z = E(x). The latent code z can be reconstructed to the input as
x̂ = D(z) through a decoder D. The forward and reverse processes of latent diffusion models are
similar with the original diffusion models by substituting x with latent z in Eq. 1 and Eq. 2.
Range Image Representation. Compatible with the sampling process of LiDAR sensor, range
image R ∈ RHr ×Wr ×2 is a dense rectangular representation for LiDAR point clouds, where Hr
and Wr are the numbers of rows and columns with one channel representing the range and the other
representing intensity. The rows reflect the laser beams while the columns indicate the yaw angles.
For each point with Cartesian coordinate (x, y, z), it can be transformed to the spherical coordinates
(r, θ, ϕ) through the following projection.
                      p                                                                    p
                 r=    x2 + y 2 + z 2 ,         θ = arctan(y, x),      ϕ = arctan(z,        x2 + y 2 )           (3)


                                                            3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                                            a) Range image
                                                                                 block                                         Range Image Diffusion Model
                                                                               🔥         🔥
                                                                 🔥     🔥    …                …       🔥       🔥
                                                                                                                         VAE
                                                                                                                        decoder
                                                                                                                                                              Synthetic range image
            Noisy range image latent
                                                                             Repeat 𝑻 times

                                                                             Cross-modality
                                                                            Epipolar Condition

                                                                             Repeat 𝑻 times
                                                                                                                       Multi-view Image Diffusion Model


                                                                 🔥     🔥    …                …       🔥       🔥
                                                                                                                         VAE
                                                                                                                        decoder

                                                                                                                                                                                           Synthetic Cross-modality Consistent Data
                                                                           b) Multi-view image                                                          Synthetic multi-view image
         Noisy multi-view image latent                                            block



         a) Range Image Block                                                                                       b) Multi-view Image Block


                                                                                                                                                                                                                Inter-view 🔥
          A driving scene image at Boston-seaport. Rain,                                                             A driving scene image at Boston-seaport. Rain,


                                                                                                                                                                                                              Cross Attention
            parked cars, turn left, peds, bus, truck, ped     CLIP
                                                                                                                       parked cars, turn left, peds, bus, truck, ped       CLIP


                                                                                                                                                                                                   Cross 🔥
                                                                                                  Cross 🔥
                                                                                  Cross 🔥


                                                                                                                                                                                       Cross 🔥
                                                                                                                           crossing crosswalk, suitcase, cones.


                                                                                                                                                                                                  Attention
                                                                                 Attention


                                                                                                 Attention


                                                                                                                                                                                      Attention
                crossing crosswalk, suitcase, cones.

                       Text prompt                                                                                                  Text prompt
                              project                        🔥                                                                             project                        🔥
                                                             RV box                                                                                                       PV box
                                                             encoder                                                                                                      encoder
                                     Range-view boxes
          3D boxes                                                                                                     3D boxes               Perspective view boxes

                                                                                                             Cross-modality Epipolar Condition

Figure 2: Overview of our proposed X-D RIVE framework. We design a dual-branch diffusion model
architecture to generate multi-modality data. Cross-modality epipolar condition modules (Fig. 3) are
inserted between branches to enhance the cross-modality consistency.

where r is the range, θ is the inclination, and ϕ is the azimuth. Inversely, the 3D point clouds are
recovered from range images by x = r cos(ϕ) cos(θ), y = r cos(ϕ) sin(θ), z = r sin(ϕ).
The range image is produced by quantizing the θ and ϕ with factors sθ and sϕ . For each point with
spherical coordinate (ri , θi , ϕi ), we have R(⌊θi /sθ ⌋, ⌊ϕi /sϕ ⌋) = (ri , ii ). The range ri and intensity
ii are normalized to (0, 1).

4     M ETHODOLOGY
In this section, we present our novel framework, X-D RIVE, for joint generation of point clouds and
multi-view images. The overall architecture is depicted in Fig. 2. We extend the vanilla diffusion
models to model the joint distribution of multi-modality data in Sec. 4.1. Practically, it is achieved
by our proposed framework with dual-branch diffusion models in Sec. 4.2. For the cross-modality
consistency, we propose a cross-modality epipolar condition module in Sec. 4.3 . Our method can
also be tailored for cross-modality conditional generation in a zero-shot manner as in Sec. 4.4.

4.1     J OINT M ULTI - MODALITY G ENERATION

Beyond single-modality diffusion models in Sec. 3, we give a formulation to our proposed X-D RIVE
for multi-modality data generation. It aims to approximate a joint distribution for paired data (r0 , C0 )
that describes a specific driving scene, where r0 is the range image representation of point clouds
and C0 = {xv0 }Vv=1 denotes multi-view images from V cameras at different perspective views.
Given their similar rectangular latent formats, we set a shared noise schedule β1 , . . . , βT for range
images and multi-view images. The forward processes of either range image or multi-view images
only depend on its own modality, equivalent with independent forward processes for each modality.
                                                            √                                                                                √
                                                                                                                 q(Ct |Ct−1 ) = N {xvt }v ; { 1 − βt xvt−1 }v , {βt I}v .

      q(rt |rt−1 ) = N rt ;                                  1 − βt rt−1 , βt I ,                                                                                                                                                     (4)

In contrast, the reverse process exploits models ϵθr , ϵθc to predict the noise ϵr and ϵc added to the
range image and multi-view images separately. Given the requirements for cross-modality consis-
tency, the noise prediction for each modality should take each other into consideration, so the reverse
process for either range image or multi-view images would depend on both modalities.
                                                            pθr (rt−1 |rt , Ct ) = N (rt−1 ; µθr (rt , Ct , t), Σθr (rt , Ct , t)),
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      (5)
                                                            pθc (Ct−1 |Ct , rt ) = N (Ct−1 ; µθc (Ct , rt , t), Σθc (Ct , rt , t)).
Intuitively, we can implement two diffusion models as ϵθr and ϵθc separately for range images and
multi-view images, equipped with encoders cCR and cRC for the other modality as extra conditions.
                                                            ϵ̂r = ϵθr (rt , cCR (Ct , t), t),                                         ϵ̂c = ϵθc (Ct , cRC (rt , t), t).                                                               (6)


                                                                                                                               4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Instead of training separate condition encoders, we can directly treat diffusion models themselves
as strong encoders for each modality. Thus, ϵθc and ϵθr are adapted as the condition encoders
ϵ′θc (Ct , t) and ϵ′θr (rt , t) correspondingly in each block. Compared to text-to-image condition, a
notable characteristic of LiDAR-camera mutual condition lies in the local spatial correspondence.
For example, a car captured by LiDAR should share the consistent shape and location with the same
car captured by cameras but has little direct relationship with other parts in the images. Due to their
different geometrical space, we should rely on a spatial transformation T (·) to explicitly align the
geometrical space for cross-modality correspondence. Concretely, TCR transforms the multi-view
image conditions to the range image space, while TRC transforms the range image conditions to the
multi-view image space. As a result, the condition encoders cCR , cRC can be formulated as follows.
                          cCR (Ct , t) = TCR (ϵ′θc (Ct , t)),         cRC (rt , t) = TRC (ϵ′θr (rt , t)).                      (7)
In this case, we rewrite the denoising models in Eq. 6 as follows.
                       ϵ̂r = ϵθr (rt , TCR (ϵ′θc (Ct , t)), t),       ϵ̂c = ϵθc (Ct , TRC (ϵ′θr (rt , t)), t).                 (8)
They can be trained with a joint multi-modality objective function LDM −M .
      LDM −M = LDM −R + LDM −C ,              LDM −R = Er,t,ϵr ||ϵr − ϵ̂r ||22 ,         LDM −C = EC,t,ϵc ||ϵc − ϵ̂c ||22 .    (9)

4.2     D UAL -B RANCH J OINT G ENERATION F RAMEWORK

Our framework is developed following Eq. 8, which consists of two denoising models, i.e., ϵθr (·)
and ϵθc (·) respectively tailored for range images (Sec. 4.2.1) and multi-view images (Sec. 4.2.2).

4.2.1    D IFFUSION M ODEL FOR R ANGE I MAGES
Architecture. We adapt existing latent diffusion model (LDM) (Rombach et al., 2022) to learning
the distribution of range image r0 ∈ RHr ×Wr ×2 given its similar representation format with RGB
images. In the first stage, the range image is compressed into latent feature zr0 ∈ Rhr ×wr ×cr by
a downsampling factor fr = Hr /hr = Wr /wr . In the second stage, we train an LDM for range
images from scratch to learn the latent distribution of zr0 . Range image reflects the panoramic view
of the ego-vehicle, so its left-most and right-most sides are connected. Considering this constraint,
we follow LiDARGen (Zyrianov et al., 2022) and RangeLDM (Hu et al., 2024a) to replace all the
convolutions in both VAE and LDM with horizontally circular convolutions (Schubert et al., 2019)
where the left and right sides of the range image are treated as neighbors.
In the first stage, we follow the standard protocol to train the VAE including both encoder Er and
decoder Dr by maximizing the ELBO (Rezende et al., 2014). In addition, we attach an adversarial
discriminator (Isola et al., 2017; Rombach et al., 2022) to mitigate the blurriness brought by the
reconstruction loss. In the second stage, the LDM conditions the synthesis of range images on the
cross-modality information from the multi-view image branch (elaborated in Sec. 4.3) as well as the
text prompt and 3D boxes. The model is trained with loss function in Eq. 9.
Range-view bounding box condition. Given a 3D bounding box (bi , ci ), bi = {(xj , yj , zj )}8j=1 ∈
R8×3 represents the 3D coordinates of box corners and ci denotes its semantic category. We project
each box corner to the range view using Eq. 3 as bri = {(rj , θj , ϕj )}8j=1 . These range-view corner
coordinates are passed through a Fourier embedder. Then, the concatenated position embeddings of
eight corners are encoded by MLPrp as hrp,i . For category label ci , we follow (Isola et al., 2017; Gao
et al., 2023) to pool the CLIP embedding (Radford et al., 2021) of the category name as hrl,i . The
box and label embeddings are combined and encoded by another MLPrb as a hidden vector hrb,i .
         hrb,i = MLPrb ([hrl,i , hrp,i ]),   hrl,i = Avg(CLIP(ci )),           hrp,i = MLPrp (Concat(Fourier(bri )))          (10)
We concatenate box hidden vectors {hrb,i }i from this range-view box encoder with text prompt
hidden vectors, which guide the synthesis the latent diffusion model via a cross-attention module.

4.2.2    D IFFUSION M ODEL FOR M ULTI - VIEW I MAGES
Architecture. To model the distribution of multi-view images C0 = {xv0 }Vv=1 , xv0 ∈ RHc ×Wc ×3 ,
we tailor the latent diffusion model by introducing extra bounding box and inter-view conditions
apart from the cross-modality signals from range images (details in Sec. 4.3). Following standard


                                                                  5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                      Camera-to-LiDAR Condition                           LiDAR-to-Camera Condition
                                                                                                                                         𝐶→𝑅            different
                                                                                                                                                         depths
        different               𝑅→𝐶                  Epipolar line                     range image                                       project                               multiview image
         ranges                                                                                                                                                                    features
                                project                                                  features
                                                                                                           Epipolar line
                                                                              Cross Attention                                                                           Cross Attention
                                                                                                             range image features
                                             multiview image features
                                                                          Q          K                                                                              Q          K          V
                                                                                                V
                                                                                                                                         multiview image features
         range image features                                                                                    LiDAR
                                                      Camera            range image multiview image                                                            multiview image range image
          LiDAR                 condition                                                                                                               Camera     features      features
                                                                          features      features                             condition


Figure 3: Cross-modality epipolar condition module. We perform mutual conditions locally between
LiDAR and camera modalities based on epipolar lines on multi-view image and range image latents.
LDM (Rombach et al., 2022), each image xv0 is first compressed by a pretrained VAE to the latent
space as zc,v
          0 . In the training process, we sample the Gaussian noise for each view independently
and the denoising model is trained with the objective function in Eq. 9.
Multi-view bounding box condition. The 3D box condition module is similar with Sec. 4.2.1, but
the box positions are transformed to the perspective view of each camera. For each 3D bounding
box (bi , ci ), we project its 3D corner coordinates bi = {(xj , yj , zj )}8j=1 to corresponding cam-
era perspective view as bci = {(uj , vj , dj )}8j=1 , where uj , vj are the corner location in the pixel
coordinate and dj is the depth. For each camera view v, its synthesis is only conditioned on the
3D bounding boxes with at least one corner projected into the range of its perspective view image.
Then, we formulate this perspective-view box encoder similar with Eq. 10.
  hcb,i = MLPcb ([hcl,i , hcp,i ]),                            hcl,i = Avg(CLIP(ci )),                                 hcp,i = MLPcp (Concat(Fourier(bci )))                                     (11)
For each camera view, the box embeddings {hcb,i }i are concatenated with the text prompt hidden
vectors, which together guide the image generation through a cross-attention module.
Inter-view condition. It is critical to enhance the consistency across different views in the gen-
eration of multi-view images C0 = {xv0 }Vv=1 , so we inject inter-view cross-attention module to
condition the generation of each camera view v on its left and right adjacent views vl and vr. Given
the small overlapping between field-of-views of adjacent cameras, we split each image latent zc,v        in
into left and right halves. For each view v, its left half zc,v                             c,vl
                                                            in,l attends to the right half zin,r of its left
neighbor view vl, while its right half zc,v                              c,vr
                                        in,r depends on the left half zin,l of its right neighbor vr.
                                                                                       h                                                                                           i
      zc,v    c,v
       out = zin + tanh (αv ) · Concatwidth                                                 CrossAttn(zc,v     c,vl               c,v     c,vr
                                                                                                       in,l , zin,r ); CrossAttn(zin,r , zin,l )                                                 (12)

where αv is a zero-initialization gate (Zhang et al., 2023) for stable optimization. Compared to full
cross-attention in MagicDrive (Gao et al., 2023), our split strategy significantly reduces the per-scene
GPU memory cost of inter-view condition from 11GB to 3GB with better multi-view consistency.

4.3   C ROSS -M ODALITY E PIPOLAR C ONDITION M ODULE

The key to multi-modality data synthesis is to boost the cross-modality consistency, which poten-
tially relies on cross-modality conditions. Ideally, there is an explicit point-to-pixel correspondence
between point clouds and multi-view images through camera projection. However, in the denoising
process, we are not aware of either the range values of range images or the depths of the multi-view
images. Instead, we propose to warp the local features from range images and multi-view images
based on epipolar lines through spatial transforms TRC and TCR (Eq. 7) to provide control signals
for the synthesis of the other modality, illustrated in Fig. 3.
Camera-to-LiDAR condition. For each position (ϕ, θ) on the range image latent zrin , we sample R
points along the range axis following the linear-increasing discretization (LID) (Reading et al., 2021;
                                                                                                    R
Liu et al., 2022) with range value rk , k = 1, 2, . . . , R. We transform these points {(ϕ, θ, rk )}k=1 to
                                      R
their 3D coordinates {(xk , yk , zk )}k=1 .
                        xk = rk · cos(ϕ) · sin(θ),                                    yk = rk · cos(ϕ) · cos(θ),                          zk = rk · sin(ϕ).                                      (13)
They can be projected to the camera perspective view v with the camera parameters (Rv , tv , Kv ) as
                                                             T                                                              T
                     dk uk                  vk      1                = Kv Rv xk                           yk        zk          + tv ,        k = 1, 2, . . . , R                                (14)

where (uk , vk ), k = 1, 2, . . . , R are the pixel coordinates for the R points along the LiDAR ray.
They form the epipolar line on the camera image xv corresponding to position (ϕ, θ) of the LiDAR


                                                                                                      6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


range image. We bilinearly sample the corresponding local features from the image latent zc,v       in of
view v at location (uk , vk ). If a 3D point (xk , yk , zk ) is projected into more than one camera view,
we would simply adopt the average local features. Extra Fourier embedding of rk is added to each
sampled feature as an indicator for the range value along the ray. As a result, the entire spatial
transform TCR makes the camera image features spatially aligned to the range image features.
                                                                                           R
                TCR (zc,v                           c,v
                      in )(ϕ,θ) = {Bilinear-Sample(zin ; (uk , vk )) + MLPr (Fourier(rk ))}k=1 .                         (15)

We apply a cross-attention module to condition the range image feature zrin,(ϕ,θ) at coordinate (ϕ, θ)
on the corresponding transformed local image features TCR (zcin )(ϕ,θ) on the epipolar line.
                     zrout,(ϕ,θ) = zrin,(ϕ,θ) + tanh(αcr ) · CrossAttn zrin,(ϕ,θ) , TCR (zc,v

                                                                                          in )(ϕ,θ)                      (16)

where αcr is a zero-initialization gate for the camera-to-LiDAR condition. The model learns the
adaptive local correspondence between range image and multi-view images under range ambiguity.
LiDAR-to-camera condition. Inversely, we condition the synthesis of multi-view images on the Li-
DAR range images using a similar module. For each position (u, v) on the camera image latent zc,v       in
from view v, D points are sampled at different depths following the linear-increasing discretization
with depth value dk , k = 1, 2, . . . , D. Each point (u, v, dk ) in the pixel coordinate is transformed to
3D coordinate (xk , yk , zk ) via the corresponding camera parameters (Rv , tv , Kv ).
                                  T                                                  T
                                      = RTv Kv−1 uk · dk

                xk    yk    zk                                    v k · dk     dk        − tv ,    k = 1, 2, . . . , D   (17)

The 3D point coordinate is then projected to the LiDAR range view using Eq. 3 as (ϕk , θk , rk ). The
D points (ϕk , θk ), k = 1, 2, . . . , D form the epipolar line on the LiDAR range image corresponding
to the pixel coordinate (u, v) of camera view v. The local range image features are extracted at each
coordinate (ϕk , θk ) from range image latent zrin through bilinear sampling with additional Fourier
embedding for the depth value dk , k = 1, 2, . . . , D attached. We can write the spatial transform
TRC aligning the range view features to multi-view image features as follows.
                TRC (zrin )(u,v) = {Bilinear-Sample(zrin ; (θk , ϕk )) + MLPd (Fourier(dk ))}D
                                                                                             k=1 .                       (18)

Similar with camera-to-LiDAR condition, a cross-attention module conditions the local camera im-
age feature zc,v                                                                            c,v
             out,(u,v) at coordinate (u, v) on spatially aligned range image features TRC (zin )(u,v) .

                     zc,v
                      out,(u,v) = zc,v
                                   in,(u,v) + tanh(αrc ) · CrossAttn   z c,v
                                                                         in,(u,v) , TRC (z r
                                                                                           in )(u,v)                     (19)

where αrc is a zero-initialization gate. The cross-attention module adaptively learns the local re-
liance of camera multi-view images on LiDAR range images without explicit depth cues.

4.4   C ROSS -M ODALITY C ONDITIONAL G ENERATION

Besides multi-modality joint generation, X-D RIVE can work as a camera-to-LiDAR or LiDAR-to-
camera conditional generation model in a zero-shot manner without targeted training. Given either
one of ground-truth LiDAR range image r0 or multi-view images C0 , we change Eq. 8 separately
for camera-to-LiDAR or LiDAR-to-camera generation to synthesize the other modality data.
                       ϵ̂r = ϵθr (rt , TCR (ϵ′θc (C0 , 0)), t),       ϵ̂c = ϵθc (Ct , TRC (ϵ′θr (r0 , 0)), t).           (20)

In this case, the trained diffusion model for the input modality serves as a strong encoder for the
condition to enhance the adherence of generation to the input LiDAR or camera conditions.

5     E XPERIMENTS

5.1   E XPERIMENTAL S ETUPS

Dataset. We evaluate our method using nuScenes dataset (Caesar et al., 2020). It provides point
clouds from a 32-beam LiDAR and multi-view images from 6 cameras. We follow the official setting
to employ 700 driving scenes for training and 150 scenes for validation. The generation of X-D RIVE
is conditioned on bounding boxes from 10 semantic classes as well as scene descriptions.


                                                                  7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Evaluation Metrics. For joint multi-modality data synthesis, we evaluate both single-modality data
realism and cross-modality consistency. For image modality, we report Fréchet Inception Distance
(FID) for image synthesis realism. We also utilize View Consistency Score (VSC) (Swerdlow et al.,
2024) to evaluate multi-view consistency, which reflects the keypoints correspondence on overlap-
ping regions between adjacent camera views (Fig. 5), and we normalize the VSC of real images to
1.0 for clarity. For point clouds modality, we measure the distribution gap between synthetic and
real point clouds with Maximum Mean Discrepancy (MMD) and Jensen-Shannon divergence (JSD)
following RangeLDM (Hu et al., 2024a). For cross-modality consistency, we propose a novel metric
called Depth Alignment Score (DAS). We project the synthetic point clouds to multi-view images as
sparse depth values and also estimate the image depth using DepthAnythingV2 (Yang et al., 2024d).
The mean absolute error between the projected and estimated disparities is used as DAS metric.
Baselines. To our best knowledge, we are the first to work on the joint generation of point clouds and
multi-view images. For single-modality generation, we compare with state-of-the-art generation al-
gorithms for point clouds, i.e. LiDAR VAE (Caccia et al., 2019), LiDARGen (Zyrianov et al., 2022),
RangeLDM (Hu et al., 2024a), and multi-view images, i.e. BEVGen (Swerdlow et al., 2024), BEV-
Control (Yang et al., 2023), MagicDrive (Gao et al., 2023), with released code or quantitative results
on nuScenes dataset. Furthermore, we combine MagicDrive (Gao et al., 2023) and RangeLDM (Hu
et al., 2024a) respectively for images and point clouds as a multi-modality baseline.
Training Setup. Our X-D RIVE has a dual-branch architecture. We utilize the Stable-Diffusion
pretrained weight to initialize the multi-view image branch with other newly added parameters ran-
domly initialized. We follow a three-stage pipeline for the training. In the first stage, the VAE is
trained from scratch for range images. In the second stage, we train the latent diffusion model in
range image branch without cross-modality conditions using the frozen VAE. In the last stage, the
entire multi-modality model is trained in an end-to-end manner with only the Stable-Diffusion parts
frozen. The first two stages can also be replaced with pretrained point clouds diffusion model. We
follow MagicDrive (Gao et al., 2023) and RangeLDM (Hu et al., 2024a) to synthesize 224 × 400
multi-view camera images and 32 × 1024 point cloud range images.
                                         Table 1: Quantitative comparison with driving data gener-
5.2   Q UANTITATIVE R ESULTS             ation algorithms. For each column, the best value is high-
                                         lighted by bold, and the second best is denoted by underline.
We report the quantitative results                                           (b) Point clouds quality.
for both multi-modality generation as            (a) Image quality.           Methods     MMD↓        JSD↓
well as LiDAR-to-camera or camera-                                           LiDAR VAE   1.1 × 10−3     -
                                              Methods        FID↓     VSC↑   LiDARGen    1.9 × 10−3   0.160
to-LiDAR cross-modality generation.                                          RangeLDM    1.9 × 10−4   0.054
                                           LayoutDiffusion   29.64     -
                                                                                                 −4
                                                                       X-D RIVEC→L 1.0 × 10       0.052
Joint multi-modality generation.           WoVoGen     27.60    -
                                                                       X-D RIVEL+C    1.2 × 10−4  0.052
As shown in Tab. 1, compared to spe-      BEVControl   25.54    -
                                           BEVGen      24.85 0.439
cialized single-modality generation       MagicDrive   16.20 0.633 (c) Cross-modality alignment.
methods, X-D RIVEL+C , as a multi-       X-D RIVEL→C   16.01 0.721
                                                                               Methods           DAS↓
modality algorithm, achieves compa-      X-D RIVEL+C   17.37 0.675     MagicDrive + RangeLDM      2.32
rable or even better quality in both                                         X-D RIVEL+C          1.69
synthetic point clouds and multi-view
images. Our FID metric is outperformed by MagicDrive (Gao et al., 2023), since we do not have
map condition which offers strong control signals. Unlike simple combination of single-modality
methods, we can generate point clouds and images with cross-modality alignment, reflected by our
superior DAS metric, thanks to our proposed cross-modality epipolar condition module.
Conditional cross-modality generation. As mentioned in Sec. 4.4, X-D RIVE can also work as a
LiDAR-to-camera or camera-to-LiDAR conditional generation model. In Tab. 1, for single-modality
data generation, X-D RIVE can outperform previous baselines for both point clouds and multi-view
images, demonstrating the flexibility of our proposed algorithm for cross-modality data synthesis.
                                                                 Table 2: Object-level control.
Object-level controllable generation. X-D RIVE can ad-
here to the 3D bounding box conditions in the gener-                Methods       mAP NDS
ative process. Since previous LiDAR generation meth-                 Oracle        70.5   72.8
ods do not show this ability (Hu et al., 2024a; Ran et al.,       MagicDrive       65.2   69.2
2024), we only compare our methods with multi-view im-          X-D RIVE (ours) 65.4      69.6
age generation algorithm (Gao et al., 2023). For fair comparison with single-modality method, we
employ synthetic multi-view images and real point clouds from nuScenes validation set to run a


                                                   8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


       synthetic point clouds
         synthetic images
          Multi-modality
       synthetic point clouds
        Camera-to-LiDAR

            real images
       LiDAR-to-Camera
        real point clouds
        synthetic images


Figure 4: Qualitative results for multi-modality and conditional cross-modality generation. Colors
of projected point clouds refer to depths. Well-matched regions are highlighted with red circles.


Figure 5: Key points correspondence between adjacent synthetic camera images. Our proposed
method (bottom) can bring higher multi-view consistency than the baseline (top).
pretrained SparseFusion (Xie et al., 2023) multi-sensor object detection algorithm. Tab. 2 shows
X-D RIVE outperforms MagicDrive (Gao et al., 2023) w.r.t. the object-level fidelity.
                                                               Table 3: Object detection training.
Training support for downstream task. X-D RIVE can
produce synthetic multi-modality data to enhance the               Training data     mAP     NDS
training for downstream perception models. We train a             real data only     56.28 51.54
multi-sensor 3D object detection model using SparseFu-         real + synthetic data 57.60 52.23
sion method (Xie et al., 2023) with a combination of 1.4k
real scenes from nuScenes dataset (Caesar et al., 2020) and 1.4k synthetic scenes. Tab. 3 shows that
the model trained with mixed data can notably outperform the model trained only with real data.
This reflects both single-modality quality and cross-modality alignment of our synthetic data.

5.3   Q UALITATIVE A NALYSIS

Cross-modality consistency. We show some multi-modality generation examples to exhibit the
cross-modality consistency qualitatively. As in Fig. 4, the projected point clouds overlap with multi-
view image contents properly for both foregrounds and backgrounds. We also show the results of
conditional camera-to-LiDAR and LiDAR-to-camera generation in Fig. 4, where the synthetic data
adheres to the cross-modality LiDAR or camera conditions well.
Multi-view consistency. In our multi-modality generation, point clouds provide a natural 3D-aware
geometrical guidance for the multi-view images, benefiting the multi-view consistency. In Fig. 5,
we visualize the keypoints matching results (Sun et al., 2021) between adjacent synthetic camera
images, where better correspondence is witnessed for X-D RIVE than MagicDrive (Gao et al., 2023).
Scene-level and object-level control. Given the text and bounding box conditions, X-D RIVE gen-
erates diverse results using different control signals, as illustrated in Fig. 6. For scene-level control,
we can target for various lighting and weathers through the text prompts. Synthetic images still
remain realistic and adhere to the object layouts, and synthetic point clouds become noisy in rainy
weather due to the water in the air or on the ground. For object-level control, we can edit the scene by
deleting objects or inserting objects at desired locations with specific sizes and semantic categories.


                                                    9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                          ☀Sunny
                                          🌔Night
                          3D box inputs


                                                                                                                                              Noisy reflectance
          ☔Rainy
        🚗 Remove objects


                                                                                  Remove        Remove                                                            Remove
       🚗 Insert objects


                                                   Add two cars                                                                                               Add two cars


    Figure 6: Scene-level and object-level controllable generation by changing the input conditions.

 Table 4: Ablations of conditions and training.                                                 Table 5: Ablations of cross-modality module.
                                                                                                                 Methods              FID↓    JSD↓                    DAS↓
                                Methods                           FID↓    JSD↓    DAS↓
                                                                                                             w/o cross-modality       24.41   0.081                    1.95
        w/o 3D box condition                                      29.60   0.091   1.76
                                                                                                              w/o epipolar line       25.35   0.074                    2.23
      w/o text prompt condition                                   25.76   0.070   1.73
                                                                                                         average epipolar condition   20.70   0.098                    2.23
       w/o two-stage training                                     23.65   0.113   1.84
                                                                                                            half sampling points      22.31   0.072                    1.93
                               full model                         20.17   0.070   1.67
                                                                                                                full model            20.17   0.070                    1.67


5.4              A BLATION S TUDIES

Due to limited resources, we employ shorter training schedule for ablation studies.
Two-stage training. X-D RIVE benefits from the two-stage training pipeline that trains the LiDAR
range image branch and cross-modality modules in a sequential manner. In Tab. 4, there is a notable
performance drop in point clouds quality if we merge the two training stages, since the two-stage
training can make the optimization more simple and stable for the LiDAR range image branch.
Bounding box and text prompt input conditions. Although X-D RIVE also supports unconditional
generation, these input conditions provide multi-level control signals to generate diverse outputs.
Tab. 4 shows that text and box conditions improve the quality of synthetic point clouds and images.
Cross-modality condition module. The cross-modality condition module is critical for cross-
modality consistency. As shown in Tab. 5, removing it significantly hurts the cross-modality align-
ment although the shared bounding boxes and text prompts can provide some constraints.
Epipolar-line cross-attention. Tab. 5 justifies our design of epipolar-line cross-attention module to
solve the spatial ambiguity (Eq. 16 and Eq. 19). Alternatively, randomly sampling same number of
local features from the other modality feature map without epipolar lines cannot ensure the cross-
modality alignment. If we reduce the number of sampling points along the epipolar line, the per-
formance would also be severely hurt. Besides, the cross-attention is also important for adaptively
learning the local correspondence. Simple averaging along epipolar lines instead of cross-attention
is quite noisy and poses severe damage to the point clouds quality and cross-modality consistency.


6     C ONCLUSIONS

We present X-D RIVE, a novel framework for the multi-modality generation of aligned LiDAR point
clouds and multi-view camera images. By leveraging a dual-branch diffusion model, X-D RIVE
captures the joint distribution of multi-modality data, ensuring mutual dependence between modal-
ities. A key feature is the cross-modality condition module, which uses epipolar lines on LiDAR
range images and camera views to address spatial ambiguity during the denoising process. Addi-
tionally, X-D RIVE supports multi-level control, enabling synthesis based on text prompts and object
bounding boxes. Extensive experiments show that X-D RIVE generates high-quality, geometrically
and semantically aligned point clouds and images, maintaining fidelity to the input conditions while
accurately describing the same driving scene together.


                                                                                           10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Acknowledegements This work was supported in part by Berkeley DeepDrive and NSF Grant.
2235013.

R EFERENCES
Yutong Bai, Xinyang Geng, Karttikeya Mangalam, Amir Bar, Alan L Yuille, Trevor Darrell, Jitendra
  Malik, and Alexei A Efros. Sequential modeling enables scalable learning for large vision models.
  In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp.
  22861–22872, 2024.
Andreas Blattmann, Robin Rombach, Huan Ling, Tim Dockhorn, Seung Wook Kim, Sanja Fidler,
  and Karsten Kreis. Align your latents: High-resolution video synthesis with latent diffusion mod-
  els. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition,
  pp. 22563–22575, 2023.
Tim Brooks, Aleksander Holynski, and Alexei A Efros. Instructpix2pix: Learning to follow image
  editing instructions. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
  Recognition, pp. 18392–18402, 2023.
Lucas Caccia, Herke Van Hoof, Aaron Courville, and Joelle Pineau. Deep generative modeling of
  lidar data. In 2019 IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS),
  pp. 5034–5040. IEEE, 2019.
Holger Caesar, Varun Bankiti, Alex H Lang, Sourabh Vora, Venice Erin Liong, Qiang Xu, Anush
  Krishnan, Yu Pan, Giancarlo Baldan, and Oscar Beijbom. nuscenes: A multimodal dataset for
  autonomous driving. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern
  recognition, pp. 11621–11631, 2020.
Moitreya Chatterjee and Anoop Cherian. Sound2sight: Generating visual dynamics from sound
 and context. In Computer Vision–ECCV 2020: 16th European Conference, Glasgow, UK, August
 23–28, 2020, Proceedings, Part XXVII 16, pp. 701–719. Springer, 2020.
Lele Chen, Sudhanshu Srivastava, Zhiyao Duan, and Chenliang Xu. Deep cross-modal audio-visual
  generation. In Proceedings of the on Thematic Workshops of ACM Multimedia 2017, pp. 349–357,
  2017.
Prafulla Dhariwal and Alexander Nichol. Diffusion models beat gans on image synthesis. Advances
  in neural information processing systems, 34:8780–8794, 2021.
Alexey Dosovitskiy. An image is worth 16x16 words: Transformers for image recognition at scale.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2010.11929, 2020.
Lue Fan, Xuan Xiong, Feng Wang, Naiyan Wang, and Zhaoxiang Zhang. Rangedet: In defense of
  range view for lidar-based 3d object detection. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF international
  conference on computer vision, pp. 2918–2927, 2021.
Ruiyuan Gao, Kai Chen, Enze Xie, Lanqing Hong, Zhenguo Li, Dit-Yan Yeung, and Qiang
  Xu. Magicdrive: Street view generation with diverse 3d geometry control. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2310.02601, 2023.
Wangli Hao, Zhaoxiang Zhang, and He Guan. Cmcgan: A uniform framework for cross-modal
 visual-audio mutual generation. In Proceedings of the AAAI conference on artificial intelligence,
 volume 32, 2018.
Jonathan Ho, Ajay Jain, and Pieter Abbeel. Denoising diffusion probabilistic models. Advances in
  neural information processing systems, 33:6840–6851, 2020.
Qianjiang Hu, Zhimin Zhang, and Wei Hu. Rangeldm: Fast realistic lidar point cloud generation.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.10094, 2024a.
Wenbo Hu, Xiangjun Gao, Xiaoyu Li, Sijie Zhao, Xiaodong Cun, Yong Zhang, Long Quan, and
 Ying Shan. Depthcrafter: Generating consistent long depth sequences for open-world videos.
 arXiv preprint arXiv:2409.02095, 2024b.


                                                11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Nan Huang, Xiaobao Wei, Wenzhao Zheng, Pengju An, Ming Lu, Wei Zhan, Masayoshi Tomizuka,
  Kurt Keutzer, and Shanghang Zhang. S3 gaussian: Self-supervised street gaussians for au-
  tonomous driving, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2405.20323.
Phillip Isola, Jun-Yan Zhu, Tinghui Zhou, and Alexei A Efros. Image-to-image translation with
  conditional adversarial networks. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and
  pattern recognition, pp. 1125–1134, 2017.
Bo Li, Tianlei Zhang, and Tian Xia. Vehicle detection from 3d lidar using fully convolutional
  network. arXiv preprint arXiv:1608.07916, 2016.
Yuheng Li, Haotian Liu, Qingyang Wu, Fangzhou Mu, Jianwei Yang, Jianfeng Gao, Chunyuan Li,
  and Yong Jae Lee. Gligen: Open-set grounded text-to-image generation. In Proceedings of the
  IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 22511–22521, 2023.
Ruoshi Liu, Rundi Wu, Basile Van Hoorick, Pavel Tokmakov, Sergey Zakharov, and Carl Vondrick.
  Zero-1-to-3: Zero-shot one image to 3d object. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF international
  conference on computer vision, pp. 9298–9309, 2023a.
Yingfei Liu, Tiancai Wang, Xiangyu Zhang, and Jian Sun. Petr: Position embedding transformation
  for multi-view 3d object detection. In European Conference on Computer Vision, pp. 531–548.
  Springer, 2022.
Yuan Liu, Cheng Lin, Zijiao Zeng, Xiaoxiao Long, Lingjie Liu, Taku Komura, and Wenping Wang.
  Syncdreamer: Generating multiview-consistent images from a single-view image. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2309.03453, 2023b.
Zhijian Liu, Haotian Tang, Alexander Amini, Xinyu Yang, Huizi Mao, Daniela L Rus, and Song
  Han. Bevfusion: Multi-task multi-sensor fusion with unified bird’s-eye view representation. In
  2023 IEEE international conference on robotics and automation (ICRA), pp. 2774–2781. IEEE,
  2023c.
Jiachen Lu, Ze Huang, Jiahui Zhang, Zeyu Yang, and Li Zhang. Wovogen: World volume-aware dif-
   fusion for controllable multi-camera driving scene generation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2312.02934,
   2023.
Jiachen Lu, Ze Huang, Zeyu Yang, Jiahui Zhang, and Li Zhang. Wovogen: World volume-aware
   diffusion for controllable multi-camera driving scene generation. In European Conference on
   Computer Vision, pp. 329–345. Springer, 2024.
Chenlin Meng, Yutong He, Yang Song, Jiaming Song, Jiajun Wu, Jun-Yan Zhu, and Stefano Ermon.
  Sdedit: Guided image synthesis and editing with stochastic differential equations. In International
  Conference on Learning Representations, 2022.
Alex Nichol, Prafulla Dhariwal, Aditya Ramesh, Pranav Shyam, Pamela Mishkin, Bob McGrew,
  Ilya Sutskever, and Mark Chen. Glide: Towards photorealistic image generation and editing with
  text-guided diffusion models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2112.10741, 2021.
William Peebles and Saining Xie. Scalable diffusion models with transformers. In Proceedings of
 the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision, pp. 4195–4205, 2023.
Dustin Podell, Zion English, Kyle Lacey, Andreas Blattmann, Tim Dockhorn, Jonas Müller, Joe
  Penna, and Robin Rombach. Sdxl: Improving latent diffusion models for high-resolution image
  synthesis. arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.01952, 2023.
Alec Radford, Jong Wook Kim, Chris Hallacy, Aditya Ramesh, Gabriel Goh, Sandhini Agarwal,
  Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, Pamela Mishkin, Jack Clark, et al. Learning transferable visual
  models from natural language supervision. In International conference on machine learning, pp.
  8748–8763. PMLR, 2021.
Haoxi Ran, Vitor Guizilini, and Yue Wang. Towards realistic scene generation with lidar diffusion
  models. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recogni-
  tion, pp. 14738–14748, 2024.


                                                 12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Cody Reading, Ali Harakeh, Julia Chae, and Steven L Waslander. Categorical depth distribution
  network for monocular 3d object detection. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on
  Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 8555–8564, 2021.
Danilo Jimenez Rezende, Shakir Mohamed, and Daan Wierstra. Stochastic backpropagation and ap-
  proximate inference in deep generative models. In International conference on machine learning,
  pp. 1278–1286. PMLR, 2014.
Robin Rombach, Andreas Blattmann, Dominik Lorenz, Patrick Esser, and Björn Ommer. High-
  resolution image synthesis with latent diffusion models. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF confer-
  ence on computer vision and pattern recognition, pp. 10684–10695, 2022.
Ludan Ruan, Yiyang Ma, Huan Yang, Huiguo He, Bei Liu, Jianlong Fu, Nicholas Jing Yuan, Qin
  Jin, and Baining Guo. Mm-diffusion: Learning multi-modal diffusion models for joint audio and
  video generation. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
  Recognition, pp. 10219–10228, 2023.
Kyle Sargent, Zizhang Li, Tanmay Shah, Charles Herrmann, Hong-Xing Yu, Yunzhi Zhang,
  Eric Ryan Chan, Dmitry Lagun, Li Fei-Fei, Deqing Sun, et al. Zeronvs: Zero-shot 360-degree
  view synthesis from a single image. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer
  Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 9420–9429, 2024.
Stefan Schubert, Peer Neubert, Johannes Pöschmann, and Peter Protzel. Circular convolutional neu-
  ral networks for panoramic images and laser data. In 2019 IEEE intelligent vehicles symposium
  (IV), pp. 653–660. IEEE, 2019.
Jiahao Shao, Yuanbo Yang, Hongyu Zhou, Youmin Zhang, Yujun Shen, Matteo Poggi, and Yiyi
   Liao. Learning temporally consistent video depth from video diffusion priors. arXiv preprint
   arXiv:2406.01493, 2024.
Yichun Shi, Peng Wang, Jianglong Ye, Mai Long, Kejie Li, and Xiao Yang. Mvdream: Multi-view
  diffusion for 3d generation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2308.16512, 2023.
Uriel Singer, Adam Polyak, Thomas Hayes, Xi Yin, Jie An, Songyang Zhang, Qiyuan Hu, Harry
  Yang, Oron Ashual, Oran Gafni, et al. Make-a-video: Text-to-video generation without text-video
  data. In The Eleventh International Conference on Learning Representations, 2022.
Bharat Singh, Viveka Kulharia, Luyu Yang, Avinash Ravichandran, Ambrish Tyagi, and Ashish
  Shrivastava. Genmm: Geometrically and temporally consistent multimodal data generation for
  video and lidar. arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.10722, 2024.
Ibrahim Sobh, Loay Amin, Sherif Abdelkarim, Khaled Elmadawy, Mahmoud Saeed, Omar Ab-
   deltawab, Mostafa Gamal, and Ahmad El Sallab. End-to-end multi-modal sensors fusion system
   for urban automated driving. 32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems, 2018.
Jascha Sohl-Dickstein, Eric Weiss, Niru Maheswaranathan, and Surya Ganguli. Deep unsupervised
  learning using nonequilibrium thermodynamics. In International conference on machine learn-
  ing, pp. 2256–2265. PMLR, 2015.
Jiaming Sun, Zehong Shen, Yuang Wang, Hujun Bao, and Xiaowei Zhou. Loftr: Detector-free local
   feature matching with transformers. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer
   vision and pattern recognition, pp. 8922–8931, 2021.
Alexander Swerdlow, Runsheng Xu, and Bolei Zhou. Street-view image generation from a bird’s-
  eye view layout. IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters, 2024.
Xiaofeng Wang, Zheng Zhu, Guan Huang, Xinze Chen, and Jiwen Lu. Drivedreamer: Towards
  real-world-driven world models for autonomous driving. arXiv preprint arXiv:2309.09777, 2023.
Yuqing Wen, Yucheng Zhao, Yingfei Liu, Fan Jia, Yanhui Wang, Chong Luo, Chi Zhang, Tiancai
  Wang, Xiaoyan Sun, and Xiangyu Zhang. Panacea: Panoramic and controllable video generation
  for autonomous driving. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and
  Pattern Recognition, pp. 6902–6912, 2024.


                                               13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Enze Xie, Junsong Chen, Junyu Chen, Han Cai, Haotian Tang, Yujun Lin, Zhekai Zhang, Muyang
  Li, Ligeng Zhu, Yao Lu, et al. Sana: Efficient high-resolution image synthesis with linear diffu-
  sion transformers. arXiv preprint arXiv:2410.10629, 2024a.
Yichen Xie, Chenfeng Xu, Marie-Julie Rakotosaona, Patrick Rim, Federico Tombari, Kurt Keutzer,
  Masayoshi Tomizuka, and Wei Zhan. Sparsefusion: Fusing multi-modal sparse representations
  for multi-sensor 3d object detection. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference
  on Computer Vision, pp. 17591–17602, 2023.
Yichen Xie, Hongge Chen, Gregory P Meyer, Yong Jae Lee, Eric M Wolff, Masayoshi Tomizuka,
  Wei Zhan, Yuning Chai, and Xin Huang. Cohere3d: Exploiting temporal coherence for
  unsupervised representation learning of vision-based autonomous driving. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2402.15583, 2024b.
Honghui Yang, Sha Zhang, Di Huang, Xiaoyang Wu, Haoyi Zhu, Tong He, Shixiang Tang, Heng-
  shuang Zhao, Qibo Qiu, Binbin Lin, et al. Unipad: A universal pre-training paradigm for au-
  tonomous driving. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
  Recognition, pp. 15238–15250, 2024a.
Jiayu Yang, Ziang Cheng, Yunfei Duan, Pan Ji, and Hongdong Li. Consistnet: Enforcing 3d consis-
   tency for multi-view images diffusion. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer
   Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 7079–7088, 2024b.
Kairui Yang, Enhui Ma, Jibin Peng, Qing Guo, Di Lin, and Kaicheng Yu. Bevcontrol: Accurately
  controlling street-view elements with multi-perspective consistency via bev sketch layout. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2308.01661, 2023.
Lihe Yang, Bingyi Kang, Zilong Huang, Xiaogang Xu, Jiashi Feng, and Hengshuang Zhao. Depth
  anything: Unleashing the power of large-scale unlabeled data. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF
  Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 10371–10381, 2024c.
Lihe Yang, Bingyi Kang, Zilong Huang, Zhen Zhao, Xiaogang Xu, Jiashi Feng, and Hengshuang
  Zhao. Depth anything v2. arXiv:2406.09414, 2024d.
Sihyun Yu, Jihoon Tack, Sangwoo Mo, Hyunsu Kim, Junho Kim, Jung-Woo Ha, and Jinwoo Shin.
  Generating videos with dynamics-aware implicit generative adversarial networks. In International
  Conference on Learning Representations, 2022.
Lvmin Zhang, Anyi Rao, and Maneesh Agrawala. Adding conditional control to text-to-image
  diffusion models. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision,
  pp. 3836–3847, 2023.
Guangcong Zheng, Xianpan Zhou, Xuewei Li, Zhongang Qi, Ying Shan, and Xi Li. Layoutdiffusion:
  Controllable diffusion model for layout-to-image generation. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF
  Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 22490–22499, 2023.
Xiaoyu Zhou, Zhiwei Lin, Xiaojun Shan, Yongtao Wang, Deqing Sun, and Ming-Hsuan Yang. Driv-
  inggaussian: Composite gaussian splatting for surrounding dynamic autonomous driving scenes.
  In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp.
  21634–21643, 2024.
Ye Zhu, Yu Wu, Kyle Olszewski, Jian Ren, Sergey Tulyakov, and Yan Yan. Discrete contrastive
  diffusion for cross-modal music and image generation. In The Eleventh International Conference
  on Learning Representations, 2022.
Vlas Zyrianov, Xiyue Zhu, and Shenlong Wang. Learning to generate realistic lidar point clouds. In
  European Conference on Computer Vision, pp. 17–35. Springer, 2022.
Vlas Zyrianov, Henry Che, Zhijian Liu, and Shenlong Wang. Lidardm: Generative lidar simulation
  in a generated world. arXiv preprint arXiv:2404.02903, 2024.


                                                14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


In this appendix, we first give an extra ablation study about the classifier-free guidance in Ap-
pendix A. Then, we elaborate our implementation details in Appendix B. Afterwards, we discuss
the limitation of our framework and future works in Appendix C. Finally, more qualitative results of
multi-modality data generation are demonstrated in Appendix D.


A    A BLATION S TUDY OF C LASSIFIER -F REE G UIDANCE S CALES

We employ classifier-free guidance (CFG) during inference for box and text conditions. Illustrated
in Fig. 7, it improves the realism of synthetic data. However, higher CFG scale would hurt the image
and point cloud quality by increasing the contrast and sharpness.


B    I MPLEMENTATION D ETAILS

In this part, we explain details in the implementation of
X-D RIVE including network architecture, training sched-


                                                                                                            Point Clouds Quality (JSD)
                                                                                     24                0.0825


                                                               Image Quality (FID)
ule, and evaluation metrics. Our code will be made pub-                              23
                                                                                                       0.0800
                                                                                                       0.0775
licly available upon the acceptance of this paper.                                   22                0.0750
                                                                                     21          FID   0.0725
                                                                                     20
                                                                                                 JSD   0.0700
                                                              2    3   4          5        6        7 8 9
Network architecture. Given the small height dimen-                    Classifier-Free Guidance Scale
sion of LiDAR range images and limited data amount,
we employ smaller sizes for the VAE and latent diffusion      Figure 7: Effect of CFG scales.
model (LDM) for LiDAR range images. Specifically, the
VAE includes three encoder blocks and three decoder blocks with channels [32, 64, 128] separately.
There are downsampling modules in the first two encoder blocks. The latent zr for range image has
a size of 8×256×8. The range image LDM is composed of three downsampling blocks, one middle
block, and three upsampling blocks with attention modules in all the blocks. The channel numbers
for three downsampling and upsampling blocks are [128, 256, 512] respectively. The cross-modality
epipolar condition modules are inserted between each pair of corresponding blocks in point cloud
and multi-view image diffusion model branches. For these seven cross-modality modules, we set
the sampling number R and D along range and depth axes as [24, 24, 12, 6, 12, 24, 24] separately
with both maximal depth and range as 60m.

Training schedule. The training of X-D RIVE on nuScenes dataset (Caesar et al., 2020) includes
three stages. Since there are no publicly available pretrained weights for LiDAR diffusion models,
we train the VAE and LDM for LiDAR range image in the first two stages separately. Afterwards,
we train the entire multi-modality generation framework together. Before training, we initialize our
multi-view image diffusion model branch with pretrained Stable-Diffusion V1.5 weights, while all
the other modules except the zero-initialization gates are initialized randomly. In all the stages, our
model is trained using NVIDIA RTX A6000 GPUs.
In the first stage, VAE for LiDAR range image is trained using batch size 96 and learning rate 4e-4
for 200 epochs. The discriminator takes effect after 1000 iterations. In the second stage, we train the
LiDAR LDM from scratch using batch size 96 and learning rate 1e-4 for 2000 epochs. The model
includes the text prompt and 3D range-view bounding box condition modules with drop-rate 0.25
for either condition during training. In the last stage, we train the entire framework in an end-to-
end manner with module trainable states illustrated in Fig. 2 using condition drop-rate 0.25 as well.
The entire model is trained for 250 epochs with learning rate 8e-5 and batch size 24 in our main
experiments. For ablation studies, we reduce the epoch number to 80 for efficiency.

Evaluation metrics. In our quantitative evaluation, we apply the FID metric from Magic-
Drive (Gao et al., 2023), VSC metric from BEVGen (Swerdlow et al., 2024), MMD and JSD met-
rics from LiDARGen (Zyrianov et al., 2022). For our proposed DAS metric, we run pretrained
DepthAnythingV2 model (Yang et al., 2024d) with ViT-B backbone (Dosovitskiy, 2020) on the syn-
thetic images to estimate the disparity (Yang et al., 2024c). Then, we project the synthetic point
clouds to multi-view images to get sparse disparity. We normalize the projected sparse disparity to
the same scale as the estimated disparity. The mean absolute error is fetched as our DAS metric.


                                                   15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


C    L IMITATION AND F UTURE W ORKS
This paper concentrates on the joint generation of consistent multi-modality data. In this case, due
to the limitation of accessible computational resources, we do not include some natural extensions
of our X-D RIVE framework. Firstly, our method is limited to the generation of single-frame point
clouds and multi-view images. In fact, it is intuitive to combine existing temporal attention modules
like Wen et al. (2024) with our X-D RIVE. Secondly, we can also incorporate some extra conditions
for data synthesis such as HD maps (Gao et al., 2023) into our framework for more controllable
generation. Lastly, due to the distribution of nuScenes training set (Caesar et al., 2020), we cannot
synthesize some specific scenarios such as snowy weathers. We will try to extend our framework to
deal with above limitations.
Our proposed X-D RIVE is orthogonal to other efforts in improving single-modality generative model
performance such as transformer-based image generation framework (Peebles & Xie, 2023), high
image resolutions (Xie et al., 2024a), or point clouds representation for LiDAR sensor data. We
will combine the cross-modality condition module of X-D RIVE with these advanced techniques to
further enhance its performance in multi-modality data generation.

D    Q UALITATIVE R ESULTS
In this section, we demonstrate additional examples of our synthetic multi-modality data in Fig. 8.
X-D RIVE can generate realistic point clouds and multi-view images with cross-modality consistency
based on the input conditions.


                                                 16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


         Input conditions                       Synthetic multi-view images   Synthetic point clouds

                A driving scene image at
                boston-seaport. Rain,
                parked cars, turn left,
                peds, bus, truck, ped
                crossing crosswalk,
                suitcase, cones.

                A driving scene image at
                boston-seaport. Parked
                vans, switch lane,
                construction zone in the
                right, bike following in
                rear, passed by active
                motorcycle.



                A driving scene image at
                boston-seaport. Parked
                cars, stop at red light,
                jaywalker, peds, bus.


                A driving scene image at
                boston-seaport. Rain,
                ped, cones, parked cars,
                construction site,
                construction vehicle,
                parking lot, barriers.



                A driving scene image at
                boston-seaport. Change
                lane and stop, slight traffic
                congestion due to traffic
                light, ped on overpass,
                parked cars, cyclist.


                 A driving scene image at
                 boston-seaport. Rain, turn
                 right, parked trucks.


    Figure 8: Additional multi-modality data synthesis results using our proposed X-D RIVE.


                                                      17
