Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


AI AS H UMANITY ’ S S ALIERI :
Q UANTIFYING L INGUISTIC C REATIVITY OF L AN -
GUAGE M ODELS VIA S YSTEMATIC ATTRIBUTION OF
M ACHINE T EXT AGAINST W EB T EXT
 Ximing Lu♡♠          Melanie Sclar♡       Skyler Hallinan♡             Niloofar Mireshghallah♡
 Jiacheng Liu  ♡♠
                    Seungju Han  ♠
                                     Allyson Ettinger  ♠
                                                            Liwei Jiang♡ Khyathi Chandu♠
 Nouha Dziri♠         Yejin Choi♡
 ♡
   University of Washington     ♠
                                  Allen Institute for Artificial Intelligence
 {lux32,yejin}@cs.washington.edu



                                           A BSTRACT

         Creativity has long been considered one of the most difficult aspect of human in-
         telligence for AI to mimic. However, the rise of Large Language Models (LLMs),
         like ChatGPT, has raised questions about whether AI can match or even surpass
         human creativity. We present C REATIVITY I NDEX as the first step to quantify the
         linguistic creativity of a text by reconstructing it from existing text snippets on
         the web. C REATIVITY I NDEX is motivated by the hypothesis that the seemingly
         remarkable creativity of LLMs may be attributable in large part to the creativ-
         ity of human-written texts on the web. To compute C REATIVITY I NDEX effi-
         ciently, we introduce DJ S EARCH, a novel dynamic programming algorithm that
         can search verbatim and near-verbatim matches of text snippets from a given doc-
         ument against the web. Experiments reveal that the C REATIVITY I NDEX of pro-
         fessional human authors is on average 66.2% higher than that of LLMs, and that
         alignment reduces the C REATIVITY I NDEX of LLMs by an average of 30.1%. In
         addition, we find that distinguished authors like Hemingway exhibit measurably
         higher C REATIVITY I NDEX compared to other human writers. Finally, we demon-
         strate that C REATIVITY I NDEX can be used as a surprisingly effective criterion for
         zero-shot machine text detection, surpassing the strongest existing zero-shot sys-
         tem, DetectGPT, by a significant margin of 30.2%, and even outperforming the
         strongest supervised system, GhostBuster, in five out of six domains.


1   I NTRODUCTION

Creativity has long been considered one of the most challenging “holy grail” of human intelligence
for AI to mimic (Hasselberger & Lott, 2023). However, Large Language Models (LLMs) such as
ChatGPT have taken the world by storm with their creative power. From generating poetry (Sawicki
et al.; Deng et al., 2024b; Sawicki et al., 2023) and composing music (Ding et al., 2024; Deng et al.,
2024a; Liang et al., 2024) to designing artwork (Makatura et al., 2024; Jignasu et al., 2023; Lim
et al., 2024) and crafting compelling narratives (Yuan et al., 2022; Mirowski et al., 2023a; Ippolito
et al., 2022), LLMs take only seconds to produce outputs that would rival or even surpass the work
of human creators. This proficiency has even sparked a growing trend of using LLMs for content
creation in industrial settings. For example, major studios in Hollywood have integrated LLMs
into production processes such as movie scriptwriting (Carnevale, 2023). While studio executives
are optimistic about using LLMs to streamline production and reduce costs, Hollywood writers are
deeply concerned about being replaced by the rapid integration of LLMs in the industry, leading to
a five-month writers’ strike (Koblin & John, 2023).
While science fiction writer Ted Chiang characterizes LLMs as a blurry JPEG of the web (Hubert
et al., 2024), many others wonder whether AI can indeed match or surpass the creativity of humanity.
After all, LLMs have consumed orders of magnitude more works of writing than any single human


                                                  1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


could ever read, thus it may seem possible that LLMs could consequently reach a new level of
literary sophistication and creativity beyond that of humanity at large.
To answer this question, the first step is to assess the level of creativity in machine texts compared
to human texts. Creativity is a complex and ambiguous process that is challenging to define and
quantify (Csikszentmihalyi, 1997; Glaveanu et al., 2020; Eagleman & Brandt, 2017; Paeth). Several
previous studies have attempted to quantify creativity in writing by developing specific rubrics and
asking human evaluators to score the writing based on these criteria. Vaezi & Rezaei (2018) devel-
oped a comprehensive rubric to assess fiction writing, while Biggs & Collis (1982) used a taxonomy
of structural complexity to categorize creative writing. More recently, Chakrabarty et al. (2024) ap-
plied the Torrance Test of Creative Thinking to evaluate the creativity of short stories generated by
LLMs in terms of fluency, flexibility, originality and elaboration. While these rubric-based methods
are valuable, scaling them up to evaluate large amounts of texts generated by LLMs is impractical
due to the reliance on human evaluators.
In this work, we propose C REATIVITY I NDEX, a novel statistical measure of creativity in text. The
key intuition underlying C REATIVITY I NDEX is to quantify the degree of linguistic creativity of
a given text by reconstructing that text via mixing and matching of a vast amount of existing text
snippets on the web (See Figure 1a; 24 additional examples in Appendix Fig. 5 to Fig. 30). The
underlying premise of our work is that the seemingly remarkable creativity of LLMs may be in large
part attributable to the remarkable creativity of human-written texts on the web. This contrasts with
distinguished human authors such as Hemingway, whose original content and unique writing style
cannot be easily replicated by simply assembling snippets from other works. To test this, we provide
a novel computational approach to systematically attribute machine text to web texts. Specifically,
we introduce DJ S EARCH,1 a novel dynamic programming algorithm that can efficiently search for
verbatim and near-verbatim matches of text snippets from a given document against the web. Here,
near-verbatim matches are defined as close paraphrases, characterized by high semantic similarity.
Our algorithm combines strict verbatim matching using Infini-gram (Liu et al., 2024), which allows
for fast retrieval of any existing sequence of words, with near-verbatim semantic matching achieved
through a novel application of Word Mover’s Distance (WMD) (Kusner et al., 2015) computed on
the word embeddings of text snippets.
The contribution of our work is threefold: First, we introduce the C REATIVITY I NDEX to reveal
novel insights about machine creativity and human creativity. We find that the C REATIVITY I NDEX
of human authors—specifically professional writers and historical figures—is on average 66.2%
higher than that of LLMs. This creativity gap is consistent across various domains—novel snippets,
modern poems, and speech transcripts—at both verbatim and semantic levels. Moreover, we notice
that Reinforcement Learning from Human Feedback (RLHF), a widely used alignment method,
dramatically reduces the C REATIVITY I NDEX of LLMs, by an average of 30.1%. This reduction
is more significant at the verbatim level than the semantic level, indicating that LLMs may have
converged to certain linguistic style preferred by humans during alignment. Furthermore, we explore
creativity differences among various groups of humans. Despite in-group variance, famous authors
of classic literature, like Hemingway and Dickens, exhibit the highest levels of creativity, consistent
with their levels of renown.
Second, we introduce DJ S EARCH as an efficient algorithmic tool to trace the usage of existing text
snippets from the web that LLMs incorporate to compose new generations. The power of LLMs
arises from training exhaustively on existing human-written texts on the web, and it is meaningful to
trace back and acknowledge the human writers whose work empowers these models’ outputs—just
as we credit original composers when enjoying a DJ’s remix.
Finally, we demonstrate a novel use of C REATIVITY I NDEX as a surprisingly effective criterion for
zero-shot black-box machine text detection. Our method is ready to deploy out-of-the-box, requiring
no training or prior knowledge of the text generator. It not only surpasses the strongest zero-shot
baseline, DetectGPT (Mitchell et al., 2023a), by a significant margin of 30.2%, but also outperforms
the strongest supervised baseline, GhostBuster (Verma et al., 2024)—which requires expensive data
collection for supervised training—in five out of six domains.
We believe that our study will enhance the understanding of LLMs and guide informed usage of con-
tent created by LLMs, by providing an interoperable and scalable measurement to assess creativity
   1
       The name DJ S EARCH is inspired by the way a DJ creates a remix by blending pieces of existing music.


                                                       2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


  a                                                   Please draft an abstract for a paper with the                                                        … with Qualcomm for the ZenFone 5Z.
                                                      following title: “Poetry Will Not Optimize;     or, What
                                                                                               End Position                                                That partnership led to the integration of
            Reference Corpus                          Is Literature to AI?”                                                                                artificial   intelligence (AI) in various apps,
            Verbatim Match
                                                                          Language models have  shown outstanding level
                                                                                                                           End Position                   of   performance
                                                                                                                                                           making them smarter and easier to use …
                                                                                               Language   models    have    shown   outstanding   level   of   performance

                    [[[               ]     ]     ]
                                                                                  Language
            Near-Verbatim Match
                                                     The advancement of technology has led to the                                                          … there has been a significant increase in
                    [[[               ]     ]     ]
                                                                 Language
                                                     integrationmodels
                                                                    of artificial intelligence (AI) in various                                             the use of artificial intelligence (AI) in
                               [[                 ]      ] including literature. However, the
                                                     fields,                                                                                               various fields, including language
                                                                                                                                                           generation. One such AI language model …
                               [[                 ]      ]
                                                                  models
                                                     question   remains:      can AI truly understand and


                                                                      Position
                                      [
                                    ChatGPT              ] poetry? This paper delves into the
                                                                   have

                                                     create


                                                                   Position
                                      [                  ]
                                                                   have
                                                     complexities       of poetry and the limitations of AI                                                … Artificial Intelligence (AI), such as chat
 … current generation of people with a
                                            [            ] ability to comprehend and replicate the
                                                                  shown
                                                                                                                                                           GPT-3 to assist in the process. However,
 more intellectual brain. The advancement            in its
                                                                                                                                                           the question remains: can AI fully replace
                                            [            ]
                                                                  shown
 of technology has led to the creation of an         nuanced    emotions and intricacies of language.



                                                                Start
                                                                                                                                                           human recruiters? The answer is no …
 electronic device which is capable of …         [ [ Through ]aoutstanding
                                                                  critical] analysis of the relationship

                                                             Start
                                                 [ [ between]poetrylevel
                                                                          ]
                                                                outstanding
                                                                            and AI, this paper argues that
                                                                                                                                                           … but it is too far narrowly limited and
 … but there is a more important point here          while AI may be able to generate text that
 about the perception of poetry and the                            level
                                                                                                                                                           inflexible in its ability to comprehend and
 limitations that critics and readers impose
                                                     resembles poetry,
                                                                     of       it lacks the ability to truly …                                              apply all the relevant facts in order to serve
 upon it if they understand poetry as …                                                                                                                    the process of selection, which is better …
                                                                                     of
                                                                                 performance
                                                      Literature, poetry, and other forms of                                                               … maneuvering a billion-piece puzzle of
 … existing research in the field of family
 migration. Through a critical analysis of the        noncommercial
                                                                performance
                                                                            creative expression challenge                                                  psychology and emotion, spirituality and
 relationship between family and (in)security         the techno-instrumentalist approaches to                                                             intricacies of language. Even though my
 the article offers nuanced insight into …                                                                                                                 puzzle keeps changing as I change and …
                                                      language, the predictive language generation,
                                                      informing NLP (large natural language
                                                      processing models) such as GPT-3 or -4 as well                                                       … examination of the role of human
                                                      as, more generally, generative AI (text to image,                                                    creativity in the age of AI. He argues that
                                                                                                                                                           while AI may be able to produce creative
                                                      video, audio). Claims that AI systems automate                                                       works on its own, it is ultimately humans …
                         Prof. Michele Elam           and expedite creativity reflect industry and
                                                      research priorities of speed, scale, optimization,
 … continue to search for similar examples                                                                                                                 … because the ability of automated
 of wisdom in art, literature, poetry, and            and frictionlessness driving much artificial                                                         systems to be able to generate text that
 other forms of human discourse. As a                 intelligence design and application. But …                                                           resembles what a human might say is
 result, when I ran across the address of …                                                                                                                huge. If we can just improve question …



  b                                                                                                            b

                                                                                                              ∑
                                                         CREATIVITY INDEX =                                         L-uniqueness
                                                                                                              L=a
                                          number of words outside of n-grams (n ≥ L) that occur in the reference corpus
                  L-uniqueness =
                                                                                               number of words in the text


Figure 1: a: Example outputs from DJ S EARCH. We asked ChatGPT to generate an abstract
based on the title of Prof. Michele Elam’s paper, ”Poetry Will Not Optimize; or, What Is Literature
to AI?” (Elam, 2023) The abstract generated by ChatGPT contains significantly more verbatim
and near-verbatim matches with existing texts on the web compared to the original abstract written
by Prof. Elam. b: Definition of C REATIVITY I NDEX. C REATIVITY I NDEX is mathematically
equivalent to the area under the L-uniqueness curve across a range of minimum n-gram lengths
L. The L-uniqueness of ChatGPT is noticeably lower than that of proficient human writers across
various context granularities (i.e., n-gram lengths) in all domains, leading to a significantly higher
C REATIVITY I NDEX for human writers compared to ChatGPT.


                                                                                                          3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


in machine texts. Additionally, we hope that the out-of-the-box machine text detection enabled by
the C REATIVITY I NDEX can empower individuals to discern between human texts and machine
texts, fostering a more informed and critical engagement with information in the digital age.

2   M ETHOD
C REATIVITY I NDEX The key intuition underlying C REATIVITY I NDEX is to quantify the degree
of linguistic creativity of a given text by estimating how much of that text can be reconstructed by
mixing and matching a vast amount of existing text snippets on the web, as shown in Figure 1a.
Specifically, C REATIVITY I NDEX assesses the extent to which the content of the text can be traced
back to similar or identical contexts found in other existing texts. This metric is grounded in the
notion of originality from creative thinking in psychology literature, which is defined as the statistic
rarity of a response or an idea (Torrance, 1966; Crossley et al., 2016).
Concretely, let x be a text whose creativity we aim to quantify, such as a speech transcript or a poem,
either human written or machine generated. Let an n-gram of x be any contiguous sequence of n
words of x, and let xi:i+n be the n-gram of x starting in the i-th word. Let C be a massive reference
corpus of publicly available texts on the web , and let f be a binary function that determines whether
an n-gram xi:i+n occurs anywhere in the corpus C. We define the L-uniqueness of a text x as
the proportion of words w ∈ x such that none of the n-grams in x that include w occur in the
corpus C for n ≥ L—denoted uniq(x, L). Intuitively, L-uniqueness measures the proportion of
x’s words that are used in novel contexts (here, n-grams), unseen across a vast text collection C.
Thus, a higher L-uniqueness implies a higher level of originality of x. Formally, uniq(x, L) =
   k=1 1{f (xi:i+n , C) = 0 ∀ i ∈ (k − n, k], n ≥ L}/∥x∥, where trivially uniq(x, L) ∈ [0, 1].
P∥x∥

                 P x, the function uniq(x, L) is monotonically increasing as L grows. Its im-
Note that when fixing
proper integral— n≥L uniq(x, n)—is an indicator of the overall uniqueness of x across various
context granularities (i.e., n-gram lengths), and because of uniq(x, L)’s monotonicity   it indirectly
measures uniqueness growth speed. We thus define C REATIVITY I NDEX as n≥L uniq(x, n), with
                                                                            P
higher C REATIVITY I NDEX indicating greater linguistic originality with respect to the corpus C, as
shown in Figure 1b.
When a text x is part of the reference corpus C, its C REATIVITY I NDEX would trivially become zero.
This issue often arises with works from famous authors, as their writings are widely available online.
To address this, for human texts written before the cutoff date of the reference corpus, we exclude
any document d ∈ C that contains copies, quotations, or citations of x and compute C REATIVITY
I NDEX using this filtered corpus, detailed in Appendix A.3.

DJ S EARCH To enable the use of our C REATIVITY I NDEX it is vital to compute it efficiently. For
the efficient computation, we introduce DJ S EARCH, a dynamic programming algorithm designed
to radpily identify the set of all x’s n-grams (n ≥ L) that occur in the corpus C.
A brute force approach would independently check if every n-gram of x occurs in C, performing a
quadratic number of f evaluations with respect to x’s length, and thus making it too computationally
expensive. Instead, we design a two-pointer method (Laaksonen, 2020) that takes only a linear
number of f evaluations, as illustrated in Figure 2. The key idea is to reduce finding all n-grams
occurring in C to identifying the longest n-gram occurring in C starting at each index i: once
those have been found, it is trivial to deduce all the n-gram occurring in C by computing their
subsequences. Concretely, we progressively analyze the whole document x by iteratively searching
for the longest n-gram that starts at each index i and occurs in C, using f as the assessment. Once
we have found such longest n-gram starting at i, we crucially reuse computations for i + 1 by noting
that f (xi:i+n , C) = 1 implies f (xi+1:i+n , C) = 1. Thus, we always analyze n-grams starting
and/or ending at a later endpoint than before, which upper bounds the number of analyzed n-grams
(i.e., the number of f calls) to at most 2∥x∥. The implementation is detailed in Appendix A.1.
In addition to minimizing the number f evaluations, DJ S EARCH optimizes the time complexity of
each evaluation. f determines whether a n-gram xi:i+n occurs in the corpus C either exactly or in
a semantically similar way—e.g., a paraphrase of xi:i+n exists in C. Semantic similarity is often
computed using text embeddings, which are fixed-length vector representations of text meanings.
This reduces measuring text similarity to computing vector distance. Text embeddings, typically


                                                   4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                           … this paper argues that while AI may be able to generate text that resembles …         Algorithm 5 DJ S EARCH (x, C)
                                                                                                                     Input: text x, reference corpus C,
                                                            End Position
                              while    AI     may     be     able     to   generate   text    that resembles
                                                                                                                             n-gram matching function f (xi: j ,C)
                                                                                                                             minimum n-gram length L
                   this       ✓        ✘                                                                             Output: set of matched n-gram S
                                                                                                                     i 0, j L, S ?
                  paper                ✘                                                                             while j  ||x|| do
 Start Position


                  argues                      ✘                                                                         if f (xi: j ,C) = 1 then
                                                                                                                             S S [ {xi: j }
                   that                               ✘                                                                       j      j+1
                                                                                                                        else
                  while                                       ✓       ✓       ✘                                              i i+1
                    AI                                                        ✘                                               j max(i + L, j)
                                                                                                                        end if
                   may                                                        ✓       ✓       ✓       ✓              end while

                           Matched n-gram         ✓ Found n-gram matches from start to end position          ✘ No n-gram matches from start to end position
                                                                                                             599Acknowledgements (not compulsory)
Figure 2: An illustration of DJ Search algorithm. A brute force        approach would
                                                                   Acknowledgements      should independently
                                                                                                 be brief, and should not include thanks to anonymous refere
                                                                                                             600

                                                                    effusiveofcomments.
check if every n-gram of x occurs in C, performing a quadratic number                    Grant or contribution
                                                                                f evaluations       with respect
                                                                                                             601numbers may be acknowledged.

to x’s length (i.e., checking every cell in the grid). DJ S EARCH is a two-pointer method that takes
                                                                    Author contributions statement
only a linear number of f evaluations. By progressively analyzing n-grams starting and/or ending
                                                                                                             602



at a later endpoint than before, DJ S EARCH limits the total numberMust
                                                                    and   finclude
                                                                     ofB.A.        all authors, identified by initials, for example: A.A. conceived the exp
                                                                             evaluations      to 2||x||. InC.A.
                                                                               conducted the experiment(s),
                                                                                                             603

                                                                                                             604
                                                                                                                 thisand D.A. analysed the results. All auth
example, the minimum n-gram length L is set to 5.                   manuscript.                              605


generated by complex models (e.g., BERT (Devlin et al., 2019), RoBERTa (Liu et al., 2019), Span-
BERT (Joshi et al., 2020)) lack linearity, requiring independent computation for each n-gram in x
and C. To alleviate this issue we use Word Mover’s Distance (WMD) (Kusner et al., 2015), an
optimal transport-inspired metric that measures distance between two n-grams by combining word
embedding distances between each n-gram’s words. WMD enables optimizing f ’s computation, as
pairwise distances between word embeddings can be pre-computed for every pair of words, and then
be reused in every function call of f to identify n-grams in C that are semantically similar to the
ones in x. The implementation is detailed in Appendix A.2.
To further boost efficiency, and given that occurrences of xi:i+n are more likely in texts similar
to x, we estimate f by computing WMD only for the texts in C most similar to x, as identified
by BM25 (Robertson & Walker, 1994). Moreover, exact occurrences of xi:i+n in C represent
a less costly special case in computing f . We further optimize f ’s computation by using Infini-
gram (Liu et al., 2024), which finds exact matches of xi:i+n in C in milliseconds; WMD is com-
puted only if no matches are found by Infini-gram.

3                  E VALUATION

How does the creativity of language models compare to humans? We compute the C REATIV-
ITY I NDEX for machine texts and human texts across three creative writing tasks: novel writing,
poetry composition, and speech drafting. For human texts, we use book snippets in the Book-
MIA (Shi et al., 2024) dataset, popular modern poems collected by PoemHunter.com, and famous
speeches from the American Rhetoric speech bank. For machine texts, we prompt LLMs to generate
several paragraphs of novels, poems, or speeches, starting with an initial sentence from existing hu-
man writings in each category (see Appendix B.1 for details). We experiment with state-of-the-art
LLMs, including GPT-3 (Brown et al., 2020), ChatGPT (Ouyang et al., 2022), LLaMA 2 Chat (Tou-
vron et al., 2023), Tulu 2 (Ivison et al., 2023), and OLMo Instruct (Groeneveld et al., 2024). For
open-source and open-weight models, we use the largest model size available from each model
family. We use RedPajama (Computer, 2023), a large-scale English corpus with 900 million web
documents, as the reference corpus. The models we analyze are primarily pre-trained on the web
data available before the cutoff date of the reference corpus RedPajama. We will discuss later how
to handle newer models, such as GPT-4 (OpenAI et al., 2023), given that it was largely trained on
more recent web data and third-party private data, both of which fall outside the reference corpus.
We restrict the matching criteria to verbatim matches only in the first experiment. We will ablate the
effect of different matching criteria, prompt formats, decoding strategies, context length, and model
sizes in later experiments.


                                                                                      5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


   a                               b                               c


   d                              e                                 f


   g                               h                                i


   j                               k                                l


  m                                                 n


Figure 3: a-c: C REATIVITY I NDEX in novel writing (a), poetry composition (b) and speech writing
(c) based solely on verbatim matches. d: C REATIVITY I NDEX in novel writing considering both
verbatim and semantic matches. e: L-uniqueness in novel writing with respect to the minimum
n-gram length L for humans and OLMo. f-g: C REATIVITY I NDEX of LLMs before and after RLHF
in novel writing, based solely on verbatim matches (f) and based on both verbatim and semantic
matches (g). h: L-uniqueness in novel writing with respect to number of documents in the reference
corpus. i: L-uniqueness when search over the top 50 documents in novel writing. j: The number of
reference documents required to keep L-uniqueness below 50% in novel writing. k-l: C REATIVITY
I NDEX of GPT-4 compared to humans in novel writing based on verbatim matches, using a machine-
generated reference corpus sourced from the instruction-aligned version of Gemma-7B, Llama3-8B,
and Mixtral-7B, as well as a combination of all three. m: C REATIVITY I NDEX of different groups
of human writers. n: Detection AUROC across various domains: our approach sets a new state-of-
the-art for zero-shot detection, even surpassing supervised baselines.



                                                6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


  a                                                               b


  c                                                               d



Figure 4: a-c: C REATIVITY I NDEX of ChatGPT in novel writing based on verbatim matches, with
different prompt formats (a), p values in top-p decoding (b) and prompt length (c). d: C REATIVITY
I NDEX of LLaMA 2 Chat and Tulu 2 with different model sizes.


Our primary finding is that humans consistently exhibit a much higher level of creativity compared
to any LLM across all tasks (Fig. 3a-c). Averaged across all models, the C REATIVITY I NDEX of
humans is 52.2% higher2 than LLMs in novel writing (p = 6.9 × 10−27 , by Mann-Whitney U test
unless otherwise specified; N = 600), 31.1% higher in poetry composition (p = 1.5 × 10−15 ; N =
600) and 115.3% higher in speech drafting (p = 6.1 × 10−31 , N = 600). This suggests that human
writings are composed of far more unique combinations of words and phrases compared to model
generations. On the other hand, the differences in model creativity are much smaller and show very
low statistical significance (p = 0.09; N = 1500).
Furthermore, we experiment with different prompt formats on top of ChatGPT, intentionally encour-
aging creativity in the model’s generations by incorporating instructions such as ‘push for creative
ideas, unique emotions, and original twists,’ ‘be bold and creative,’ or ‘you are a creative writer.’
(Fig. 4a) For a full list of the prompts we used, please see Appendix B.1. We found that the
difference in the C REATIVITY I NDEX of ChatGPT across different prompts is minimal, with no
statistical significance (p = 0.23; N = 600). We also experimented with different decoding strate-
gies by varying the p value in top-p decoding (Fig. 4b). Although a higher p value resulted in a
marginally higher C REATIVITY I NDEX, the difference was minimal and not statistically significant
(p = 0.23; N = 600). Moreover, we ablate the effect of prompt length by varying the number
of sentences from human writings included in the prompt (Fig. 4c). We found that longer prompts
tended to result in a slightly higher C REATIVITY I NDEX, likely due to the model copying more from
the longer human text in the prompt. However, the statistical significance of these differences is very
low (p = 0.13; N = 600). Lastly, we analyze the effect of different model sizes for LLaMA 2 Chat
and Tulu 2, but do not observe a consistent trend (p = 0.12; N = 600) (Fig. 4d).

How do different matching criteria affect creativity measurement? We experiment with re-
stricting valid matches to verbatim only, and with allowing both verbatim and semantic matches.
First, the creativity gap between humans and LLMs becomes even larger when considering semantic
matches in addition to verbatim matches (Fig. 3d). Averaged across all models, the C REATIVITY
I NDEX of human, based on both verbatim and semantic matches, is 102.5% higher than LLMs in
novel writing (p = 2.6 × 10−12 ; N = 600), whereas based on verbatim matches alone, the C RE -
ATIVITY I NDEX of human is 52.2% higher than LLMs. Second, semantic matches provide more
signal for analyzing the uniqueness of longer n-grams (Fig. 3e). For example, while the gap in
L-uniqueness at L = 11 between human text and machine text from OLMo Instruct is 3.7% based
on verbatim matches alone, this gap widens to 16.3% when considering both verbatim and semantic
matches (p = 3.1 × 10−7 ; N = 600). This indicates that although some of the longer n-grams in
machine text may appear unique at the verbatim level, they are similar to certain text snippets in the
reference corpus at the content level.

What impact does RLHF have on model creativity? RLHF aims to align model’s outputs with
human preferences, enhancing LLMs’ ability to follow instructions and improving their safety and
adaptability. To understand the impact of RLHF on model creativity, we compare the C REATIVITY
I NDEX of the LLMs before and after RLHF alignment. Specifically, we experiment with GPT
Base (Brown et al., 2020), LLaMA 2 Base (Touvron et al., 2023), and OLMo Base (Groeneveld
et al., 2024) and compare their creativity with their counterparts post-RLHF alignment. Our main
   2
       The percentage difference computed using the formula: C REATIVITY I NDEX  (human) − C REATIVITY I NDEX (model)
                                                                             C REATIVITY I NDEX (model)



                                                              7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


finding is that the C REATIVITY I NDEX of models after RLHF alignment is much lower than those
before RLHF (Fig. 3f-g). Based on verbatim match alone, the C REATIVITY I NDEX of LLMs reduces
by an average of 30.1% after RLHF (p = 1.3 × 10−12 ; N = 600). Based on both verbatim
and semantic matches, the C REATIVITY I NDEX of LLMs decreases by an average of 8.9% after
RLHF (p = 0.01; N = 600). We notice that the reduction of C REATIVITY I NDEX after RLHF is
noticeably larger when considering verbatim matches alone. We speculate that models might have
learned certain linguistic styles preferred by humans during RLHF, leading to a decreased surface
form diversity in its outputs.

How do overlapped n-grams distribute in the reference corpus? In addition to measuring the
amount of matched n-grams in a given text, we also investigate the distribution of these n-grams in
the reference corpus. We aim to understand whether these matched n-grams are spread across many
documents or concentrated in a few. Specifically, we identify the top N documents that contain
the highest amount of matched n-grams and result in the minimum L-uniqueness for a given text.
This problem can be reduced to the maximum coverage problem (Nemhauser et al., 1978) and
approximated using a greedy algorithm. Here, we consider both verbatim and semantic matches.
Our main finding is that the matched n-grams in machine texts are concentrated in fewer documents
compared to human texts (Fig. 3h-j). When searching over the top 50 documents, the averaged
L-uniqueness (L = 5) for machine texts is 32.8%, which is 73.4% lower than human texts (mean:
56.6%; p = 3.9 × 10−19 ; N = 600). Conversely, keeping L-uniqueness below 50% requires
searching through an average of 41.2 documents for human texts, which is 213.7% more than for
machine texts (mean: 13.4; p = 1.6 × 10−22 ; N = 600). This implies that it’s more likely to find
some existing documents resemble models’ generations than human writings.

How to measure creativity in LLMs trained on data outside of the reference corpus? The
C REATIVITY I NDEX of GPT-4 would be significantly inflated if computed using the RedPajama
corpus, as RedPajama’s cutoff date is two years earlier than GPT-4’s knowledge cutoff, and GPT-
4 is additionally trained on third-party private data that we don’t have access to. We hypothesize
that LLMs pre-trained on similar web data are likely to memorize and replicate similar patterns.
As a result, when comparing the generations of these models, we expect them to be more similar
to each other than to human texts, which often contain long-tail patterns. Therefore, to compare
the creativity level of GPT-4 with humans, we use a model-generated reference corpus from newer
open-weight models with knowledge cutoff dates similar to GPT-4, including the instruction-aligned
versions of Gemma-7B (Team et al., 2024), Llama3-8B (AI@Meta, 2024), and Mixtral-7B (Jiang
et al., 2023). Specifically, we randomly sample 150k sentences from the RedPajama corpus and
prompt these models to generate document-level continuations. Based on the model-generated ref-
erence corpus, the average C REATIVITY I NDEX of humans is 30.3% higher than GPT-4 in novel
writing (p = 2.3 × 10−12 ; N = 600) (Fig. 3k-l). This suggests that while newer LLMs like GPT-4
may appear more creative when compared to public data, they still learn common patterns from their
private training data and tend to emit similar patterns as other LLMs trained on comparable data.

How does the creativity vary among different groups of human? We compare the creativity
levels among three categories of writings: books published in 2023 from the BookMIA (Shi et al.,
2024) dataset, classic literature by famous authors, and popular young adult fictions, both sampled
from Goodreads’ book lists. Our main finding is that classic literature exhibits a higher creativity
level than the other two categories (Fig. 3m). The average C REATIVITY I NDEX of classic literature
is 21.6% higher than young adult fictions (p = 2.7 × 10−90 ; N = 3000), and 13.8% higher than
books published in 2023 (p = 4.3 × 10−120 ; N = 3000). Though C REATIVITY I NDEX may reflect
some inherent differences in creativity, it could also be influenced by factors like writing style and
era of composition. For instance, some classic literature is written in older English, making it harder
to reconstruct from web texts that primarily use modern English. In addition to the differences across
categories, we also observed noticeable variance in creativity within each category. For example, the
C REATIVITY I NDEX of ‘The Hunger Games’ is 35.4% higher than ‘Twilight’ (p = 1.5×10−19 ; N =
200), even though both books belong to the category of popular young adult fiction.

Can we leverage differences in creativity for detecting machine-generated text? Based on the
creativity difference between humans and LLMs, we propose to use C REATIVITY I NDEX as a cri-
terion for zero-shot black-box machine text detection. Texts with higher creativity are more likely


                                                  8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


to be written by human. Our approach is ready to deploy out-of-the-box, requiring no training or
prior knowledge of the text generator. In addition to creative writing tasks, we also test our method
on detecting machine-generated fake news and theorem proofs. Detecting fake news is crucial for
protecting the public from misinformation, while identifying model-generated solutions is impor-
tant for regulating students’ use of LLMs in their coursework. To obtain additional test data, we
prompt LLMs to generate news articles based on the fake news headlines from the Misinfo Reaction
Frames (Gabriel et al., 2022) and compare them with the real news articles from the XSum (Narayan
et al., 2018) dataset. Meanwhile, we prompt LLMs to generate proofs for theorems from the Natu-
ralProofs (Welleck et al., 2022) benchmark, and compare them with the ground-truth human-written
proofs. The baselines we compare against includes the state-of-the-art zero-shot detector, Detect-
GPT (Mitchell et al., 2023a), which uses the curvature of log probability as the detection criterion, as
well as several supervised methods. These include OpenAI’s RoBERTa-based detector, fine-tuned
on millions of generations from various GPT-2 sized models, and the state-of-the-art supervised
detector, Ghostbuster (Verma et al., 2024), fine-tuned on thousands of generations from ChatGPT.
We measure performance using the area under the receiver operating characteristic curve (AUROC),
which represents the probability that a classifier correctly ranks a randomly-selected human-written
example higher than a randomly selected machine-generated example. Our method achieves new
state-of-the-art performance in zero-shot detection: it consistently surpasses DetectGPT and Ope-
nAI’s detector across all domains, with significant improvements in AUROC—30.2% and 26.9%,
respectively. It also outperforms the strongest supervised baseline, Ghostbuster—which requires
expensive training and data collection—in five out of six domains, achieving an average AUROC
improvement of 3.5% (Fig. 3n).

4    D ISCUSSION

This work investigates the level of linguistic creativity in texts generated by LLMs and written by
humans. Our findings suggest that the content and writing style of machine-generated texts may
be less original and unique, as they contain significantly more semantic and verbatim matches with
existing web texts compared to high-quality human writings. We hypothesize that this limited cre-
ativity in models may result from the current data-driven paradigm used to train LLMs. In this
paradigm, models are trained to mimic human-written texts during the pre-training stage, and to
produce outputs aligned with human preferences during the RLHF stage. As a result, models learn
to generate fluent and coherent texts by absorbing and replicating common patterns observed in their
training data. This reliance on existing text patterns can restrict their originality, as their outputs are
inherently shaped by previously seen examples. In contrast, accomplished authors such as Hem-
ingway go beyond simply mimicking the great writings of others; they craft their own narratives to
express their unique opinions, perspectives, and insights, drawing from their personal experiences,
emotions, and backgrounds, which translates to the more creative compositions of words and phrases
that our method detects. Just as a DJ remixes existing tracks while a composer creates original mu-
sic, we speculate that LLMs behave more like DJs, blending existing texts to produce impressive
new outputs, while skilled human authors, similar to music composers, craft original works.
This work also faces the following limitations. Firstly, the computation of the C REATIVITY I NDEX
is constrained by the reference corpus used for DJ S EARCH. While open-source LLMs such as
OLMo rely on publicly available texts from the internet for their training data, major companies like
OpenAI additionally curate private data to train their closed-source LLMs such as ChatGPT. Without
incorporating these private data into the reference corpus of DJ S EARCH, the C REATIVITY I NDEX of
closed-source LLMs may be somewhat inflated. Secondly, the overlap with existing texts identified
by DJ S EARCH in models’ generations may not conclusively indicate memorization of a specific
document. It’s possible that these text fragments, or their variations, appear in multiple documents
that the model has been trained on, including those outside the reference corpus of DJ S EARCH.
Thirdly, the human authors that this work focuses on are those with relatively high-quality writings
available in existing public datasets. While some human writings can be mediocre, tedious and
unoriginal, we aim to assess how the creativity levels in impressive LLM outputs compare against
the high-quality writings produced by professional human authors. Lastly, we acknowledge that the
discussion surrounding the use of LLMs in social and industrial settings is highly complex, and our
work here speaks only to a part of it. Besides the creativity of machine-generated content, other
considerations in this discussion include socioeconomic factors and ethical implications, which fall
beyond the scope of this paper.


                                                    9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


5   R ELATED W ORK
Measuring Creativity in Ideas: Measuring creative thinking and problem solving takes root in
early work in psychology (Torrance, 1966), where researchers defined four pillars for creative think-
ing: fluency, flexibility, originality and elaboration. Crossley et al. (2016) later on developed this
notion and built on it to expand this to measuring creative writing in students, where they also
adopted n-gram novelty for a measure of originality. However, these prior work focus on creativity
in humans, and they also do not introduce any automated metrics or measurements.

Measuring Creativity in Machine-generated Text Using Expert Annotators: Closely related to
C REATIVITY I NDEX is a recent line of work in the generative AI literature comparing the creativity
of human writers to that of large language models in different domains such as story telling and
journalism (Chakrabarty et al., 2023; 2024; Anonymous, 2024). Similar to us, the approach in this
direction often involves prompting an LLM to write an original story or news article, based on some
existing premise or press release, and then comparing the machine-generated text to the human-
written counterparts. These works, however, take a rather subjective approach, where they define
and measure creativity based on human expert annotations and whether people perceive the text to
be more creative, rather than an objective quantification of novelty that we provide.

Measuring Novelty of N -grams: Finally, closely related to our work in terms of techniques is
Nguyen (2024) and Merrill et al. (2024). The former attempts at finding n-gram rules that would
cover and predict generations from transformer models, showing that more than 70% of the times
transformers follow some pre-set patterns and rules. The latter is more similar to our work as they
also measure the novelty of generated n-grams and compare it to human-written text, however they
differ from us in tow major ways: (1) they only find verbatim matches, whereas we also match to
approximate, semantically similar blocks of text and (2) they compute the percentage of n-grams of
a certain length in a text that can be found in the reference corpus, whereas we measure how much
of the text can be reconstructed by mixing and matching a vast amount of existing text snippets of
varying lengths from the web.

Machine Text Detection: Detecting machine-generated text has been explored for several years
using a variety of methods (Jawahar et al., 2020; Uchendu et al., 2021). Gehrmann et al. (2019)
and Dugan et al. (2023) demonstrate that even humans tend to struggle to differentiate between
text written by humans and machines, highlighting the need for automated detection solutions.
Some approaches involve training a classifier in a supervised manner to identify machine-generated
text (Bakhtin et al., 2019; Uchendu et al., 2020), while others use a zero-shot detection method (So-
laiman et al., 2019; Ippolito et al., 2020). Additionally, there is research on bot detection through
question answering (Wang et al., 2023; Chew & Baird, 2003). Recently, Mitchell et al. (2023b) in-
troduced DetectGPT, a zero-shot method based on the hypothesis that texts produced by a large lan-
guage model (LLM) are located at local maxima, and thus exhibit negative curvature, in the model’s
probability distribution. Follow-up work build on DetectGPT by making it faster (Bao et al., 2024)
and using cross-detection when the target model is unknown (Mireshghallah et al., 2024).


6   C ONCLUSION
We introduce C REATIVITY I NDEX, an interoperable and scalable metric designed to quantify the
linguistic creativity of a given text by estimating how much of that text can be reconstructed by
mixing and matching a vast amount of existing text snippets on the web. To efficiently compute
the C REATIVITY I NDEX, we developed DJ S EARCH, a novel dynamic programming algorithm that
can search verbatim and near-verbatim matches of text snippets from a given document against the
web. We find that the creativity index of professional human writers is, on average, 66.2% higher
than that of LLMs. Notably, RLHF dramatically reduces the creativity index of LLMs by an average
of 30.1%. Furthermore, we demonstrate that C REATIVITY I NDEX can be used as a surprisingly
effective criterion for zero-shot black-box machine text detection. Our method not only surpasses
the strongest zero-shot baseline, DetectGPT, by a significant margin of 30.2%, but also outperforms
the strongest supervised baseline, GhostBuster, in five out of six domains. We hope that this study
enhances the understanding of LLMs through the lens of linguistic creativity, and fosters informed
usage of content created by LLMs in real-world applications.


                                                 10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


R EFERENCES
Sahar Abdelnabi and Mario Fritz. Adversarial watermarking transformer: Towards tracing text
  provenance with data hiding. In 42nd IEEE Symposium on Security and Privacy, 2021.
AI@Meta. Llama 3 model card. 2024. URL https://github.com/meta-llama/
  llama3/blob/main/MODEL_CARD.md.
Anonymous. Do LLMs plan like human writers? comparing journalist coverage of press re-
  leases with LLMs. In Submitted to ACL Rolling Review - June 2024, 2024. URL https:
  //openreview.net/forum?id=E3VS45jxPR. under review.
Mikhail J. Atallah, Victor Raskin, Michael Crogan, Christian F. Hempelmann, Florian Kerschbaum,
 Dina Mohamed, and Sanket Naik. Natural language watermarking: Design, analysis, and
 a proof-of-concept implementation. In Information Hiding, 2001. URL https://api.
 semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:37687669.
Anton Bakhtin, Sam Gross, Myle Ott, Yuntian Deng, Marc’Aurelio Ranzato, and Arthur Szlam.
  Real or fake? learning to discriminate machine from human generated text, 2019. URL https:
  //arxiv.org/abs/1906.03351.
Guangsheng Bao, Yanbin Zhao, Zhiyang Teng, Linyi Yang, and Yue Zhang. Fast-detectgpt: Ef-
  ficient zero-shot detection of machine-generated text via conditional probability curvature. In
  The Twelfth International Conference on Learning Representations, ICLR 2024, Vienna, Austria,
  May 7-11, 2024. OpenReview.net, 2024. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=
  Bpcgcr8E8Z.
John B. Biggs and Kevin F. Collis. The psychological structure of creative writing. Australian
  Journal of Education, 26:59 – 70, 1982. URL https://api.semanticscholar.org/
  CorpusID:141381510.
Tom B. Brown, Benjamin Mann, Nick Ryder, Melanie Subbiah, Jared Kaplan, Prafulla Dhari-
  wal, Arvind Neelakantan, Pranav Shyam, Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, Sandhini Agar-
  wal, Ariel Herbert-Voss, Gretchen Krueger, Tom Henighan, Rewon Child, Aditya Ramesh,
  Daniel M. Ziegler, Jeffrey Wu, Clemens Winter, Christopher Hesse, Mark Chen, Eric Sigler,
  Mateusz Litwin, Scott Gray, Benjamin Chess, Jack Clark, Christopher Berner, Sam Mc-
  Candlish, Alec Radford, Ilya Sutskever, and Dario Amodei. Language models are few-
  shot learners. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 33: Annual Con-
  ference on Neural Information Processing Systems 2020, NeurIPS 2020, December 6-12,
  2020, virtual, 2020. URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper/2020/hash/
  1457c0d6bfcb4967418bfb8ac142f64a-Abstract.html.
Robert Carnevale.    The hollywood writers’ strike may actually be aid-
  ing ai’s takeover, May 2023.        URL https://www.thewrap.com/
  hollywood-writers-strike-ai-deepmind-dramatron-chatgpt/.
Tuhin Chakrabarty, Vishakh Padmakumar, Faeze Brahman, and Smaranda Muresan. Creativity
  support in the age of large language models: An empirical study involving emerging writers.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2309.12570, 2023.
Tuhin Chakrabarty, Philippe Laban, Divyansh Agarwal, Smaranda Muresan, and Chien-Sheng Wu.
  Art or artifice? large language models and the false promise of creativity. In Proceedings of the
  CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems, CHI 2024, Honolulu, HI, USA, May
  11-16, 2024, pp. 30:1–30:34. ACM, 2024. URL https://doi.org/10.1145/3613904.
  3642731.
Monica Chew and Henry S. Baird. Baffletext: a human interactive proof. In IS&T/SPIE Electronic
 Imaging, 2003.
John Joon Young Chung, Shiqing He, and Eytan Adar. The intersection of users, roles, interac-
  tions, and technologies in creativity support tools. In Proceedings of the 2021 ACM Designing
  Interactive Systems Conference, pp. 1817–1833, 2021.


                                                11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Together Computer. Redpajama: an open dataset for training large language models, 2023. URL
  https://github.com/togethercomputer/RedPajama-Data.

Scott A Crossley, Kasia Muldner, and Danielle S McNamara. Idea generation in student writing:
  Computational assessments and links to successful writing. Written Communication, 33(3):328–
  354, 2016.

Mihaly Csikszentmihalyi. Flow and the psychology of discovery and invention. HarperPerennial,
 New York, 39:1–16, 1997.

Marco Cuturi. Sinkhorn distances: Lightspeed computation of optimal transport. In Neural
 Information Processing Systems, 2013. URL https://api.semanticscholar.org/
 CorpusID:15966283.

Qixin Deng, Qikai Yang, Ruibin Yuan, Yipeng Huang, Yi Wang, Xubo Liu, Zeyue Tian, Jiahao Pan,
  Ge Zhang, Hanfeng Lin, Yizhi Li, Ying Ma, Jie Fu, Chenghua Lin, Emmanouil Benetos, Wenwu
  Wang, Guangyu Xia, Wei Xue, and Yi-Ting Guo. Composerx: Multi-agent symbolic music
  composition with llms. ArXiv preprint, abs/2404.18081, 2024a. URL https://arxiv.org/
  abs/2404.18081.

Zekun Deng, Haoxia Yang, and Jun Wang. Can ai write classical chinese poetry like humans? an
  empirical study inspired by turing test. ArXiv preprint, abs/2401.04952, 2024b. URL https:
  //arxiv.org/abs/2401.04952.

Jacob Devlin, Ming-Wei Chang, Kenton Lee, and Kristina Toutanova. BERT: Pre-training of deep
  bidirectional transformers for language understanding. In Proceedings of the 2019 Conference of
  the North American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language
  Technologies, Volume 1 (Long and Short Papers), pp. 4171–4186. Association for Computational
  Linguistics, 2019. URL https://aclanthology.org/N19-1423.

Shuangrui Ding, Zihan Liu, Xiao wen Dong, Pan Zhang, Rui Qian, Conghui He, Dahua Lin, and
  Jiaqi Wang. Songcomposer: A large language model for lyric and melody composition in song
  generation. ArXiv preprint, abs/2402.17645, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2402.
  17645.

Liam Dugan, Daphne Ippolito, Arun Kirubarajan, Sherry Shi, and Chris Callison-Burch. Real
  or fake text?: Investigating human ability to detect boundaries between human-written and
  machine-generated text. In Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, AAAI
  2023, Thirty-Fifth Conference on Innovative Applications of Artificial Intelligence, IAAI 2023,
  Thirteenth Symposium on Educational Advances in Artificial Intelligence, EAAI 2023, Wash-
  ington, DC, USA, February 7-14, 2023, pp. 12763–12771. AAAI Press, 2023. URL https:
  //doi.org/10.1609/aaai.v37i11.26501.

David Eagleman and Anthony Brandt. The runaway species: How human creativity remakes the
  world. Catapult, 2017.

Michele Elam. Poetry will not optimize, or what is literature to ai? American Literature, 2023.
 URL https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:257606488.

Tina Fang, Martin Jaggi, and Katerina Argyraki. Generating steganographic text with LSTMs. In
  Allyson Ettinger, Spandana Gella, Matthieu Labeau, Cecilia Ovesdotter Alm, Marine Carpuat,
  and Mark Dredze (eds.), Proceedings of ACL 2017, Student Research Workshop, pp. 100–106,
  Vancouver, Canada, July 2017. Association for Computational Linguistics. URL https://
  aclanthology.org/P17-3017.

Jonas Frich, Lindsay MacDonald Vermeulen, Christian Remy, Michael Mose Biskjaer, and Peter
  Dalsgaard. Mapping the landscape of creativity support tools in HCI. In Proceedings of the 2019
  CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems, CHI 2019, Glasgow, Scotland, UK,
  May 04-09, 2019, pp. 389. ACM, 2019. URL https://doi.org/10.1145/3290605.
  3300619.


                                               12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Saadia Gabriel, Skyler Hallinan, Maarten Sap, Pemi Nguyen, Franziska Roesner, Eunsol Choi, and
  Yejin Choi. Misinfo reaction frames: Reasoning about readers’ reactions to news headlines.
  In Proceedings of the 60th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics
  (Volume 1: Long Papers), pp. 3108–3127. Association for Computational Linguistics, 2022. URL
  https://aclanthology.org/2022.acl-long.222.
Sebastian Gehrmann, Hendrik Strobelt, and Alexander Rush. GLTR: Statistical detection and vi-
  sualization of generated text. In Proceedings of the 57th Annual Meeting of the Association for
  Computational Linguistics: System Demonstrations, pp. 111–116. Association for Computational
  Linguistics, 2019. URL https://aclanthology.org/P19-3019.
Katy Gero, Alex Calderwood, Charlotte Li, and Lydia Chilton. A design space for writing support
  tools using a cognitive process model of writing. In Proceedings of the First Workshop on Intelli-
  gent and Interactive Writing Assistants (In2Writing 2022), pp. 11–24. Association for Computa-
  tional Linguistics, 2022. URL https://aclanthology.org/2022.in2writing-1.2.
Katy Ilonka Gero, Tao Long, and Lydia B. Chilton. Social dynamics of AI support in creative
  writing. In Proceedings of the 2023 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems,
  CHI 2023, Hamburg, Germany, April 23-28, 2023, pp. 245:1–245:15. ACM, 2023. URL https:
  //doi.org/10.1145/3544548.3580782.
Vlad Petre Glaveanu, Michael Hanchett Hanson, John Baer, Baptiste Barbot, Edward P Clapp, Gio-
  vanni Emanuele Corazza, Beth Hennessey, James C Kaufman, Izabela Lebuda, Todd Lubart, et al.
  Advancing creativity theory and research: A socio-cultural manifesto. The Journal of Creative
  Behavior, 54(3):741–745, 2020.
Dirk Groeneveld, Iz Beltagy, Evan Walsh, Akshita Bhagia, Rodney Kinney, Oyvind Tafjord, Ananya
  Jha, Hamish Ivison, Ian Magnusson, Yizhong Wang, Shane Arora, David Atkinson, Russell Au-
  thur, Khyathi Chandu, Arman Cohan, Jennifer Dumas, Yanai Elazar, Yuling Gu, Jack Hessel,
  Tushar Khot, William Merrill, Jacob Morrison, Niklas Muennighoff, Aakanksha Naik, Crys-
  tal Nam, Matthew Peters, Valentina Pyatkin, Abhilasha Ravichander, Dustin Schwenk, Saurabh
  Shah, William Smith, Emma Strubell, Nishant Subramani, Mitchell Wortsman, Pradeep Dasigi,
  Nathan Lambert, Kyle Richardson, Luke Zettlemoyer, Jesse Dodge, Kyle Lo, Luca Soldaini,
  Noah Smith, and Hannaneh Hajishirzi. OLMo: Accelerating the science of language models. In
  Proceedings of the 62nd Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Vol-
  ume 1: Long Papers), pp. 15789–15809. Association for Computational Linguistics, 2024. URL
  https://aclanthology.org/2024.acl-long.841.
William Hasselberger and Micah Lott. “where lies the grail? ai, common sense, and human practical
 intelligence”. Phenomenology and the Cognitive Sciences, pp. 1–22, 2023. URL https://
 api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:264895815.
Gao Huang, Chuan Guo, Matt J. Kusner, Yu Sun, Fei Sha, and Kilian Q. Weinberger. Supervised
  word mover’s distance. In Neural Information Processing Systems, 2016. URL https://api.
  semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:1762262.
Kent F Hubert, Kim N. Awa, and Darya L. Zabelina. The current state of artificial intelligence
  generative language models is more creative than humans on divergent thinking tasks. Sci-
  entific Reports, 14, 2024. URL https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:
  267616181.
Daphne Ippolito, Daniel Duckworth, Chris Callison-Burch, and Douglas Eck. Automatic detection
  of generated text is easiest when humans are fooled. In Proceedings of the 58th Annual Meeting
  of the Association for Computational Linguistics, pp. 1808–1822. Association for Computational
  Linguistics, 2020. URL https://aclanthology.org/2020.acl-main.164.
Daphne Ippolito, Ann Yuan, Andy Coenen, and Sehmon Burnam. Creative writing with
  an ai-powered writing assistant: Perspectives from professional writers. ArXiv preprint,
  abs/2211.05030, 2022. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2211.05030.
Hamish Ivison, Yizhong Wang, Valentina Pyatkin, Nathan Lambert, Matthew Peters, Pradeep
  Dasigi, Joel Jang, David Wadden, Noah A. Smith, Iz Beltagy, and Hannaneh Hajishirzi. Camels


                                                13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


  in a changing climate: Enhancing lm adaptation with tulu 2. ArXiv preprint, abs/2311.10702,
  2023. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2311.10702.

Ganesh Jawahar, Muhammad Abdul-Mageed, and Laks Lakshmanan, V.S. Automatic detection
  of machine generated text: A critical survey. In Proceedings of the 28th International Confer-
  ence on Computational Linguistics, pp. 2296–2309. International Committee on Computational
  Linguistics, 2020. URL https://aclanthology.org/2020.coling-main.208.

Albert Qiaochu Jiang, Alexandre Sablayrolles, Arthur Mensch, Chris Bamford, Devendra Singh
  Chaplot, Diego de Las Casas, Florian Bressand, Gianna Lengyel, Guillaume Lample, Lu-
  cile Saulnier, L’elio Renard Lavaud, Marie-Anne Lachaux, Pierre Stock, Teven Le Scao,
  Thibaut Lavril, Thomas Wang, Timothée Lacroix, and William El Sayed. Mistral 7b. ArXiv,
  abs/2310.06825, 2023.      URL https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:
  263830494.

Anushrut Jignasu, Kelly O. Marshall, Baskar Ganapathysubramanian, Aditya Balu, Chinmay
  Hegde, and Adarsh Krishnamurthy. Towards foundational ai models for additive manufactur-
  ing: Language models for g-code debugging, manipulation, and comprehension. ArXiv preprint,
  abs/2309.02465, 2023. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2309.02465.

Mandar Joshi, Danqi Chen, Yinhan Liu, Daniel S. Weld, Luke Zettlemoyer, and Omer Levy. Span-
 BERT: Improving pre-training by representing and predicting spans. Transactions of the Associ-
 ation for Computational Linguistics, 8:64–77, 2020. URL https://aclanthology.org/
 2020.tacl-1.5.

John Kirchenbauer, Jonas Geiping, Yuxin Wen, Jonathan Katz, Ian Miers, and Tom Goldstein. A
  watermark for large language models. In Andreas Krause, Emma Brunskill, Kyunghyun Cho,
  Barbara Engelhardt, Sivan Sabato, and Jonathan Scarlett (eds.), Proceedings of the 40th Inter-
  national Conference on Machine Learning, volume 202 of Proceedings of Machine Learning
  Research, pp. 17061–17084. PMLR, 23–29 Jul 2023. URL https://proceedings.mlr.
  press/v202/kirchenbauer23a.html.

Brooks Barnes Koblin and John. Hollywood writers strike: Agreement gives writers guild most
  of what it wanted, Sep 2023. URL https://www.nytimes.com/live/2023/09/24/
  business/hollywood-writers-strike-news.

Matt J. Kusner, Yu Sun, Nicholas I. Kolkin, and Kilian Q. Weinberger. From word embeddings to
 document distances. In Proceedings of the 32nd International Conference on Machine Learning,
 ICML 2015, Lille, France, 6-11 July 2015, volume 37 of JMLR Workshop and Conference Pro-
 ceedings, pp. 957–966. JMLR.org, 2015. URL http://proceedings.mlr.press/v37/
 kusnerb15.html.

Antti Laaksonen. Guide to competitive programming. Springer, 2020.

Xia Liang, Xingjian Du, Jiaju Lin, Pei Zou, Yuan Wan, and Bilei Zhu. Bytecomposer: a human-like
  melody composition method based on language model agent. ArXiv preprint, abs/2402.17785,
  2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2402.17785.

Jonghan Lim, Birgit Vogel-Heuser, and Ilya Kovalenko. Large language model-enabled multi-agent
  manufacturing systems. ArXiv preprint, abs/2406.01893, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/
  abs/2406.01893.

Jiacheng Liu, Sewon Min, Luke Zettlemoyer, Yejin Choi, and Hannaneh Hajishirzi. Infini-gram:
   Scaling unbounded n-gram language models to a trillion tokens. ArXiv preprint, abs/2401.17377,
   2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2401.17377.

Yinhan Liu, Myle Ott, Naman Goyal, Jingfei Du, Mandar Joshi, Danqi Chen, Omer Levy, Mike
  Lewis, Luke Zettlemoyer, and Veselin Stoyanov. Roberta: A robustly optimized bert pretraining
  approach. ArXiv preprint, abs/1907.11692, 2019. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/1907.
  11692.

                                               14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Liane Makatura, Michael Foshey, Bohan Wang, Felix Hähnlein, Pingchuan Ma, Bolei Deng, Megan
  Tjandrasuwita, Andrew Spielberg, Crystal Elaine Owens, Peter Yichen Chen, Allan Zhao, Amy
  Zhu, Wil J. Norton, Edward Gu, Joshua Jacob, Yifei Li, Adriana Schulz, and Wojciech Matusik.
  Large Language Models for Design and Manufacturing. An MIT Exploration of Generative AI,
  2024. https://mit-genai.pubpub.org/pub/nmypmnhs.
William Merrill, Noah A Smith, and Yanai Elazar. Evaluating n-gram novelty of language models
 using rusty-dawg. ArXiv preprint, abs/2406.13069, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/
 2406.13069.
Niloofar Mireshghallah, Justus Mattern, Sicun Gao, Reza Shokri, and Taylor Berg-Kirkpatrick.
  Smaller language models are better zero-shot machine-generated text detectors. In Proceedings
  of the 18th Conference of the European Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics
  (Volume 2: Short Papers), pp. 278–293. Association for Computational Linguistics, 2024. URL
  https://aclanthology.org/2024.eacl-short.25.
Piotr Mirowski, Kory W. Mathewson, Jaylen Pittman, and Richard Evans. Co-writing screenplays
  and theatre scripts with language models: Evaluation by industry professionals. In Proceedings
  of the 2023 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems, CHI 2023, Hamburg,
  Germany, April 23-28, 2023, pp. 355:1–355:34. ACM, 2023a. URL https://doi.org/10.
  1145/3544548.3581225.
Piotr Mirowski, Kory W. Mathewson, Jaylen Pittman, and Richard Evans. Co-writing screenplays
  and theatre scripts with language models: Evaluation by industry professionals. In Proceedings
  of the 2023 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems, CHI 2023, Hamburg,
  Germany, April 23-28, 2023, pp. 355:1–355:34. ACM, 2023b. URL https://doi.org/10.
  1145/3544548.3581225.
Eric Mitchell, Yoonho Lee, Alexander Khazatsky, Christopher D. Manning, and Chelsea Finn. De-
  tectgpt: Zero-shot machine-generated text detection using probability curvature. In International
  Conference on Machine Learning, ICML 2023, 23-29 July 2023, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA, vol-
  ume 202 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pp. 24950–24962. PMLR, 2023a. URL
  https://proceedings.mlr.press/v202/mitchell23a.html.
Eric Mitchell, Yoonho Lee, Alexander Khazatsky, Christopher D. Manning, and Chelsea Finn. De-
  tectgpt: Zero-shot machine-generated text detection using probability curvature. In International
  Conference on Machine Learning, ICML 2023, 23-29 July 2023, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA, vol-
  ume 202 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pp. 24950–24962. PMLR, 2023b. URL
  https://proceedings.mlr.press/v202/mitchell23a.html.
Shashi Narayan, Shay B. Cohen, and Mirella Lapata. Don’t give me the details, just the sum-
  mary! topic-aware convolutional neural networks for extreme summarization. In Proceedings of
  the 2018 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, pp. 1797–1807.
  Association for Computational Linguistics, 2018. URL https://aclanthology.org/
  D18-1206.
George L. Nemhauser, Laurence A. Wolsey, and Marshall L. Fisher. An analysis of approximations
  for maximizing submodular set functions—i. Mathematical Programming, 14:265–294, 1978.
  URL https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:206800425.
Timothy Nguyen.      Understanding transformers via n-gram statistics.            ArXiv preprint,
  abs/2407.12034, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2407.12034.
OpenAI, Josh Achiam, Steven Adler, Sandhini Agarwal, Lama Ahmad, Ilge Akkaya, Floren-
  cia Leoni Aleman, Diogo Almeida, Janko Altenschmidt, Sam Altman, Shyamal Anadkat, Red
  Avila, Igor Babuschkin, Suchir Balaji, Valerie Balcom, Paul Baltescu, Haiming Bao, Moham-
  mad Bavarian, Jeff Belgum, Irwan Bello, Jake Berdine, Gabriel Bernadett-Shapiro, Christopher
  Berner, Lenny Bogdonoff, Oleg Boiko, Madelaine Boyd, Anna-Luisa Brakman, Greg Brock-
  man, Tim Brooks, Miles Brundage, Kevin Button, Trevor Cai, Rosie Campbell, Andrew Cann,
  Brittany Carey, Chelsea Carlson, Rory Carmichael, Brooke Chan, Che Chang, Fotis Chantzis,
  Derek Chen, Sully Chen, Ruby Chen, Jason Chen, Mark Chen, Ben Chess, Chester Cho, Casey
  Chu, Hyung Won Chung, Dave Cummings, Jeremiah Currier, Yunxing Dai, Cory Decareaux,


                                                15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


  Thomas Degry, Noah Deutsch, Damien Deville, Arka Dhar, David Dohan, Steve Dowling, Sheila
  Dunning, Adrien Ecoffet, Atty Eleti, Tyna Eloundou, David Farhi, Liam Fedus, Niko Felix,
  Simón Posada Fishman, Juston Forte, Isabella Fulford, Leo Gao, Elie Georges, Christian Gib-
  son, Vik Goel, Tarun Gogineni, Gabriel Goh, Rapha Gontijo-Lopes, Jonathan Gordon, Morgan
  Grafstein, Scott Gray, Ryan Greene, Joshua Gross, Shixiang Shane Gu, Yufei Guo, Chris Hal-
  lacy, Jesse Han, Jeff Harris, Yuchen He, Mike Heaton, Johannes Heidecke, Chris Hesse, Alan
  Hickey, Wade Hickey, Peter Hoeschele, Brandon Houghton, Kenny Hsu, Shengli Hu, Xin Hu,
  Joost Huizinga, Shantanu Jain, Shawn Jain, Joanne Jang, Angela Jiang, Roger Jiang, Haozhun
  Jin, Denny Jin, Shino Jomoto, Billie Jonn, Heewoo Jun, Tomer Kaftan, Łukasz Kaiser, Ali Ka-
  mali, Ingmar Kanitscheider, Nitish Shirish Keskar, Tabarak Khan, Logan Kilpatrick, Jong Wook
  Kim, Christina Kim, Yongjik Kim, Jan Hendrik Kirchner, Jamie Kiros, Matt Knight, Daniel
  Kokotajlo, Łukasz Kondraciuk, Andrew Kondrich, Aris Konstantinidis, Kyle Kosic, Gretchen
  Krueger, Vishal Kuo, Michael Lampe, Ikai Lan, Teddy Lee, Jan Leike, Jade Leung, Daniel
  Levy, Chak Ming Li, Rachel Lim, Molly Lin, Stephanie Lin, Mateusz Litwin, Theresa Lopez,
  Ryan Lowe, Patricia Lue, Anna Makanju, Kim Malfacini, Sam Manning, Todor Markov, Yaniv
  Markovski, Bianca Martin, Katie Mayer, Andrew Mayne, Bob McGrew, Scott Mayer McKinney,
  Christine McLeavey, Paul McMillan, Jake McNeil, David Medina, Aalok Mehta, Jacob Menick,
  Luke Metz, Andrey Mishchenko, Pamela Mishkin, Vinnie Monaco, Evan Morikawa, Daniel
  Mossing, Tong Mu, Mira Murati, Oleg Murk, David Mély, Ashvin Nair, Reiichiro Nakano, Ra-
  jeev Nayak, Arvind Neelakantan, Richard Ngo, Hyeonwoo Noh, Long Ouyang, Cullen O’Keefe,
  Jakub Pachocki, Alex Paino, Joe Palermo, Ashley Pantuliano, Giambattista Parascandolo, Joel
  Parish, Emy Parparita, Alex Passos, Mikhail Pavlov, Andrew Peng, Adam Perelman, Filipe
  de Avila Belbute Peres, Michael Petrov, Henrique Ponde de Oliveira Pinto, Michael, Pokorny,
  Michelle Pokrass, Vitchyr H. Pong, Tolly Powell, Alethea Power, Boris Power, Elizabeth Proehl,
  Raul Puri, Alec Radford, Jack Rae, Aditya Ramesh, Cameron Raymond, Francis Real, Kendra
  Rimbach, Carl Ross, Bob Rotsted, Henri Roussez, Nick Ryder, Mario Saltarelli, Ted Sanders,
  Shibani Santurkar, Girish Sastry, Heather Schmidt, David Schnurr, John Schulman, Daniel Sel-
  sam, Kyla Sheppard, Toki Sherbakov, Jessica Shieh, Sarah Shoker, Pranav Shyam, Szymon Sidor,
  Eric Sigler, Maddie Simens, Jordan Sitkin, Katarina Slama, Ian Sohl, Benjamin Sokolowsky,
  Yang Song, Natalie Staudacher, Felipe Petroski Such, Natalie Summers, Ilya Sutskever, Jie Tang,
  Nikolas Tezak, Madeleine B. Thompson, Phil Tillet, Amin Tootoonchian, Elizabeth Tseng, Pre-
  ston Tuggle, Nick Turley, Jerry Tworek, Juan Felipe Cerón Uribe, Andrea Vallone, Arun Vi-
  jayvergiya, Chelsea Voss, Carroll Wainwright, Justin Jay Wang, Alvin Wang, Ben Wang, Jonathan
  Ward, Jason Wei, CJ Weinmann, Akila Welihinda, Peter Welinder, Jiayi Weng, Lilian Weng,
  Matt Wiethoff, Dave Willner, Clemens Winter, Samuel Wolrich, Hannah Wong, Lauren Work-
  man, Sherwin Wu, Jeff Wu, Michael Wu, Kai Xiao, Tao Xu, Sarah Yoo, Kevin Yu, Qiming
  Yuan, Wojciech Zaremba, Rowan Zellers, Chong Zhang, Marvin Zhang, Shengjia Zhao, Tianhao
  Zheng, Juntang Zhuang, William Zhuk, and Barret Zoph. Gpt-4 technical report. ArXiv preprint,
  abs/2303.08774, 2023. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2303.08774.

Long Ouyang, Jeff Wu, Xu Jiang, Diogo Almeida, Carroll L. Wainwright, Pamela Mishkin, Chong
  Zhang, Sandhini Agarwal, Katarina Slama, Alex Ray, John Schulman, Jacob Hilton, Fraser Kel-
  ton, Luke E. Miller, Maddie Simens, Amanda Askell, Peter Welinder, Paul Francis Christiano,
  Jan Leike, and Ryan J. Lowe. Training language models to follow instructions with human
  feedback. ArXiv, abs/2203.02155, 2022. URL https://api.semanticscholar.org/
  CorpusID:246426909.

Scott Paeth. 2 human creativity and a doctrine of creation.

Srishti Palani, David Ledo, George W. Fitzmaurice, and Fraser Anderson. ”i don’t want to feel like
  i’m working in a 1960s factory”: The practitioner perspective on creativity support tool adoption.
  In CHI ’22: CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems, New Orleans, LA, USA,
  29 April 2022 - 5 May 2022, pp. 379:1–379:18. ACM, 2022. URL https://doi.org/10.
  1145/3491102.3501933.

Stephen E. Robertson and Steve Walker. Some simple effective approximations to the 2-poisson
  model for probabilistic weighted retrieval. In Annual International ACM SIGIR Confer-
  ence on Research and Development in Information Retrieval, 1994. URL https://api.
  semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:2218552.


                                                 16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Piotr Sawicki, Marek Grze´s, Fabrı́cio Góes, Daniel Brown, Max Peeperkorn, Aisha Khatun, and
  Simona Paraskevopoulou. On the power of special-purpose gpt models to create and evalu-
  ate new poetry in old styles. URL https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:
  269589029.
Piotr Sawicki, Marek Grzes, Fabrı́cio Góes, Daniel Brown, Max Peeperkorn, and Aisha Khatun. Bits
  of grass: Does gpt already know how to write like whitman? ArXiv preprint, abs/2305.11064,
  2023. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2305.11064.
Weijia Shi, Anirudh Ajith, Mengzhou Xia, Yangsibo Huang, Daogao Liu, Terra Blevins, Danqi
 Chen, and Luke Zettlemoyer. Detecting pretraining data from large language models. In The
 Twelfth International Conference on Learning Representations, ICLR 2024, Vienna, Austria,
 May 7-11, 2024. OpenReview.net, 2024. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=
 zWqr3MQuNs.
Irene Solaiman, Miles Brundage, Jack Clark, Amanda Askell, Ariel Herbert-Voss, Jeff Wu, Alec
   Radford, Gretchen Krueger, Jong Wook Kim, Sarah Kreps, Miles McCain, Alex Newhouse, Jason
   Blazakis, Kris McGuffie, and Jasmine Wang. Release strategies and the social impacts of language
   models, 2019. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/1908.09203.
Gemma Team, Thomas Mesnard, Cassidy Hardin, Robert Dadashi, Surya Bhupatiraju, Shreya
  Pathak, Laurent Sifre, Morgane Rivière, Mihir Sanjay Kale, Juliette Love, Pouya Tafti, Léonard
  Hussenot, Pier Giuseppe Sessa, Aakanksha Chowdhery, Adam Roberts, Aditya Barua, Alex
  Botev, Alex Castro-Ros, Ambrose Slone, Amélie Héliou, Andrea Tacchetti, Anna Bulanova, An-
  tonia Paterson, Beth Tsai, Bobak Shahriari, Charline Le Lan, Christopher A. Choquette-Choo,
  Clément Crepy, Daniel Cer, Daphne Ippolito, David Reid, Elena Buchatskaya, Eric Ni, Eric
  Noland, Geng Yan, George Tucker, George-Christian Muraru, Grigory Rozhdestvenskiy, Hen-
  ryk Michalewski, Ian Tenney, Ivan Grishchenko, Jacob Austin, James Keeling, Jane Labanowski,
  Jean-Baptiste Lespiau, Jeff Stanway, Jenny Brennan, Jeremy Chen, Johan Ferret, Justin Chiu,
  Justin Mao-Jones, Katherine Lee, Kathy Yu, Katie Millican, Lars Lowe Sjoesund, Lisa Lee,
  Lucas Dixon, Machel Reid, Maciej Mikuła, Mateo Wirth, Michael Sharman, Nikolai Chinaev,
  Nithum Thain, Olivier Bachem, Oscar Chang, Oscar Wahltinez, Paige Bailey, Paul Michel, Petko
  Yotov, Rahma Chaabouni, Ramona Comanescu, Reena Jana, Rohan Anil, Ross McIlroy, Ruibo
  Liu, Ryan Mullins, Samuel L Smith, Sebastian Borgeaud, Sertan Girgin, Sholto Douglas, Shree
  Pandya, Siamak Shakeri, Soham De, Ted Klimenko, Tom Hennigan, Vlad Feinberg, Wojciech
  Stokowiec, Yu hui Chen, Zafarali Ahmed, Zhitao Gong, Tris Warkentin, Ludovic Peran, Minh
  Giang, Clément Farabet, Oriol Vinyals, Jeff Dean, Koray Kavukcuoglu, Demis Hassabis, Zoubin
  Ghahramani, Douglas Eck, Joelle Barral, Fernando Pereira, Eli Collins, Armand Joulin, Noah
  Fiedel, Evan Senter, Alek Andreev, and Kathleen Kenealy. Gemma: Open models based on
  gemini research and technology, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2403.08295.
E Paul Torrance. Torrance tests of creative thinking. Educational and psychological measurement,
  1966.
Hugo Touvron, Louis Martin, Kevin Stone, Peter Albert, Amjad Almahairi, Yasmine Babaei, Niko-
  lay Bashlykov, Soumya Batra, Prajjwal Bhargava, Shruti Bhosale, Dan Bikel, Lukas Blecher,
  Cristian Canton Ferrer, Moya Chen, Guillem Cucurull, David Esiobu, Jude Fernandes, Jeremy
  Fu, Wenyin Fu, Brian Fuller, Cynthia Gao, Vedanuj Goswami, Naman Goyal, Anthony Hartshorn,
  Saghar Hosseini, Rui Hou, Hakan Inan, Marcin Kardas, Viktor Kerkez, Madian Khabsa, Isabel
  Kloumann, Artem Korenev, Punit Singh Koura, Marie-Anne Lachaux, Thibaut Lavril, Jenya Lee,
  Diana Liskovich, Yinghai Lu, Yuning Mao, Xavier Martinet, Todor Mihaylov, Pushkar Mishra,
  Igor Molybog, Yixin Nie, Andrew Poulton, Jeremy Reizenstein, Rashi Rungta, Kalyan Saladi,
  Alan Schelten, Ruan Silva, Eric Michael Smith, Ranjan Subramanian, Xiaoqing Ellen Tan, Binh
  Tang, Ross Taylor, Adina Williams, Jian Xiang Kuan, Puxin Xu, Zheng Yan, Iliyan Zarov, Yuchen
  Zhang, Angela Fan, Melanie Kambadur, Sharan Narang, Aurelien Rodriguez, Robert Stojnic,
  Sergey Edunov, and Thomas Scialom. Llama 2: Open foundation and fine-tuned chat models.
  ArXiv preprint, abs/2307.09288, 2023. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2307.09288.
Adaku Uchendu, Thai Le, Kai Shu, and Dongwon Lee. Authorship attribution for neural text gen-
  eration. In Proceedings of the 2020 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language
  Processing (EMNLP), pp. 8384–8395. Association for Computational Linguistics, 2020. URL
  https://aclanthology.org/2020.emnlp-main.673.


                                                17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Adaku Uchendu, Zeyu Ma, Thai Le, Rui Zhang, and Dongwon Lee. TURINGBENCH: A
  benchmark environment for Turing test in the age of neural text generation. In Findings
  of the Association for Computational Linguistics: EMNLP 2021, pp. 2001–2016. Associa-
  tion for Computational Linguistics, 2021. URL https://aclanthology.org/2021.
  findings-emnlp.172.
Maryam Vaezi and Saeed Rezaei. Development of a rubric for evaluating creative writ-
 ing: a multi-phase research. New Writing, 16:303 – 317, 2018. URL https://api.
 semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:149864198.
Vivek Verma, Eve Fleisig, Nicholas Tomlin, and Dan Klein. Ghostbuster: Detecting text ghostwrit-
  ten by large language models. In Proceedings of the 2024 Conference of the North American
  Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies (Vol-
  ume 1: Long Papers), pp. 1702–1717. Association for Computational Linguistics, 2024. URL
  https://aclanthology.org/2024.naacl-long.95.
Hong Wang, Xuan Luo, Weizhi Wang, and Xifeng Yan. Bot or human? detecting chatgpt imposters
  with a single question, 2023. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2305.06424.
Sean Welleck, Jiacheng Liu, Ximing Lu, Hannaneh Hajishirzi, and Yejin Choi. Natural-
  prover: Grounded mathematical proof generation with language models. In Advances in
  Neural Information Processing Systems 35: Annual Conference on Neural Information Pro-
  cessing Systems 2022, NeurIPS 2022, New Orleans, LA, USA, November 28 - December 9,
  2022, 2022. URL http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2022/hash/
  1fc548a8243ad06616eee731e0572927-Abstract-Conference.html.
Kevin Yang, Yuandong Tian, Nanyun Peng, and Dan Klein. Re3: Generating longer stories with
  recursive reprompting and revision. In Proceedings of the 2022 Conference on Empirical Meth-
  ods in Natural Language Processing, pp. 4393–4479. Association for Computational Linguistics,
  2022. URL https://aclanthology.org/2022.emnlp-main.296.
Ann Yuan, Andy Coenen, Emily Reif, and Daphne Ippolito. Wordcraft: Story writing with large lan-
  guage models. Proceedings of the 27th International Conference on Intelligent User Interfaces,
  2022. URL https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:247585187.
Zachary Ziegler, Yuntian Deng, and Alexander Rush. Neural linguistic steganography. In Ken-
  taro Inui, Jing Jiang, Vincent Ng, and Xiaojun Wan (eds.), Proceedings of the 2019 Conference
  on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing and the 9th International Joint Confer-
  ence on Natural Language Processing (EMNLP-IJCNLP), pp. 1210–1215, Hong Kong, China,
  November 2019. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/D19-1115. URL
  https://aclanthology.org/D19-1115.


                                               18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A        M ETHOD D ETAILS

A.1       I MPLEMENTATION D ETAILS OF DJ S EARCH

As discussed in the main text, the deployment of the C REATIVITY I NDEX relies on efficiently deter-
mining whether each n-gram xi+i+n ∈ x can be found anywhere in the massive reference corpus C
of publicly available texts. The function f (xi+i+n , C) is a binary indicator that determines whether
an n-gram xi:i+n occurs in C. In line with the definition of C REATIVITY I NDEX, we only consider
the n-grams xi+i+n such that n ≥ L for some fixed constant L.
While a naive approach to checking whether xi+i+n appears in C for every n-gram xi+i+n ∈ x
would take O(|x|2 ) calls3 to f (see Algorithm 1), using a two-pointer approach we can radically
reduce this to O(|x|) calls (see Algorithm 2). Note that a two-pointer approach does O(|x|) calls to
f since in each iteration we advance at least one of the two pointers i and j by 1, and 0 ≤ i, j ≤ |x|.

Algorithm 1 Naive Computation
    NGramsFoundi,j ← False ∀ i ∈ [0..|x|) and j ∈ [0..|x|) ▷ matrix to store n-gram occurrence
    for i ∈ [0, 1, ..., |x| − L) do
        for j ∈ [i + L, ..., |x|) do
            NGramsFound(i, j) ← f (xi:j , C)
        end for
    end for
    return NGramsFound


Algorithm 2 Efficient computation of DJ S EARCH(x, C)
    NGramsFoundi,j ← False ∀ i ∈ [0..|x|) and j ∈ [0..|x|) ▷ matrix to store n-gram occurrence
    i ← 0, j ← L
    while j < |x| do
        NGramsFound(i, j) = f (xi:j , C)
        if NGramsFound(i, j) then
            j ←j+1                                                  ▷ we will search for xi:j+1 next
        else
            i←i+1                 ▷ since xi:j was not found, xi:j+k will not be found for all k > 0
            j ← max(i + L, j)                              ▷ we only explore L-grams and beyond
        end if
    end while
    return NGramsFound


A.2       I MPLEMENTATION D ETAILS OF W ORD M OVER ’ S D ISTANCE

Let w be an n-gram. Let f (w, C) be the function that determines whether w appears in any text
d ∈ C, either exactly or
                      S as a phrase that is highly similar in meaning to w (e.g., a paraphrase of w).
Trivially, f (w, C) := d∈C f (w, d), and here on we will only discuss how to compute f (w, d).
An established approach for finding semantically similar phrases to a given n-gram w is to compute
its embedding—embedding(w)—and then independently compute its similarity to the embeddings
of all other n-grams to be analyzed. An embedding of a n-gram is a vector that represents the mean-
ing of such n-gram in an k-th dimensional space of fixed size, enabling the comparison of similarity
between concepts expressed in different surface forms. This comparison is typically done using
cosine similarity, the scaled dot product between the two embeddings being compared. Text embed-
dings are generated by models specifically trained to this effect (e.g., BERT (Devlin et al., 2019),
RoBERTa (Liu et al., 2019), SpanBERT (Joshi et al., 2020)) making their computation expensive at
a large scale. Notably, text embeddings usually do not possess linearity, i.e. the embedding of con-
catenating n-grams w and v cannot be deduced from knowing embedding(w) and embedding(v),
and instead needs to be computed from scratch.
    3
        There are (|x| − L)(|x| − L + 3)/2 spans to analyze if L is the minimum n-gram length to be considered.


                                                       19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Since our goal is to find the n-grams of d that are highly similar to w, using the traditional approach
would entail
        P comparing embedding(w) with the embeddings of all n-grams in C, which are          P approx-
imately d∈C |d|2 in number. Note that this also implies independently computing ≈ d∈C |d|2
embeddings, which increases the computation costs significantly. Instead we use Word Mover’s
Distance (Kusner et al., 2015) (WMD), a method to estimate similarity between two n-grams by
combining comparisons between pairs of word embeddings. This enables lifting the requirement
to independently computing the embedding for each n-gram in C. Concretely, the Word Movers’
Distance between two n-grams w and v is defined as follows:

                      1      X
         Dw→v :=                          min 1 − cosine similarity(embedding(vj ), embedding(wi ))
                     |w|                j∈[0..|v|)
                           i∈[0..|w|)
                            1      X
                 =1−                            max cosine similarity(embedding(vj ), embedding(wi ))
                           |w|                j∈[0..|v|)
                                 i∈[0..|w|)

   WMD(w, v) := max(Dw→v , Dv→w )

WMD also pre-filters the words considered in w and v to only include the content words in the
analysis (i.e, discards stop-words, such as the, a, an, it, on, ...).
Note that Dw→v ’s definition is asymmetric (Dw→v ̸= Dv→w ). Thus, we consider the Word Movers’
Distance of two n-grams w and v as the maximum of Dw→v and Dv→w : w and v are highly similar
if their distance is below a threshold δ for both Dw→v and Dv→w (See Algorithm 3):

                                 WMD(w, v) = max(Dw→v , Dv→w ) < δ



Algorithm 3 Conceptual writeup of f (w, d) using Word Mover Distance (WMD) to find the n-
grams of a single text d ∈ C that are highly similar to the n-gram w and are of length ≥ L.
  procedure DIRECTIONAL          WMD(w, v)
      return 1 - |v|1
                          j∈[0..|v|) maxi∈[0..|w|) cosine similarity(embedding(wi ), embedding(vj ))
                       P

  end procedure
  for a ∈ [0, 1, ..., |d|) do
      for b ∈ [a + L, ..., |d|] do
          symmetricWMD ← max(directionalWMD(d[a : b), w), directionalWMD(w, d[a : b)))
          if symmetricWMD < δ then
               return True
          end if
      end for
  end for
  return False

Avid readers may notice that Algorithm 3 repeatedly computes the maximum over the same set,
and sums of contiguous similarity scores; these can be pre-computed. Algorithm 4 shows these
optimizations, resulting in an algorithm of time complexity O(|d| · |w| + |d|2 |w|) = O(|d|2 |w|),
assuming already computed word embeddings. Note that because there is a fixed vocabulary, all
word embeddings as well as cosine similarities of word embedding pairs can be pre-computed.
We described how  S to compute f (w, d) for a single document d ∈ C, as we have already established
that f (w, C) = d∈C f (w, d). To accelerate computation, and given that similar n-grams to xi:i+n
are more likely to occur in texts similar to x, we select C’s top most likely documents to contain
S using a BM25Robertson & Walker (1994) index, denoted C . We then approximate f (w, C) ≈
                                                                ′
w
  d∈C ′ f (w, d).
As a final optimization, we note that it is unnecessary to compute the costly f (w, C) for finding
semantically similar matches for w in the case where w appears exactly in C. To check if w appears
exactly in C, we can leverage the existing, less expensive approach Infini-Gram (Liu et al., 2024)
and search for the semantic similar matches only if Infini-Gram could not find any exact matches.


                                                           20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Algorithm 4 Efficient Computation of f (w, d) (optimization of Algorithm 3)
  token similarityi,j ← cosine similarity(embedding(wi ), embedding(dj )) ∀ i ∈ [0..|w|) and j ∈
  [0..|d|)
  for j ∈ [1, ..., |d|] do
       doc prefix similarityj ← doc prefix similarityj−1 + maxi∈[0..|w|) token similarityi,j−1
  end for

  for a ∈ [0, 1, ..., |d|) do
      for b ∈ [a + L, ..., |d|] do
          computed WMD(d[a         :  b), w)     ←         1 − (doc prefix similarityb −
  doc prefix similaritya )/(b − a)
          computed WMD(w, d[a : b)) ← 1 − |w|
                                           1
                                                i∈[0..|w|) maxj∈[a..b) token similarityi,j
                                              P

          symmetric WMD ← max(computed WMD(d[a : b), w), computed WMD(w, d[a : b)))
          if symmetric WMD < δ then
               return True
          end if
      end for
  end for
  return False


A.3    D EDUPLICATION OF THE R EFERENCE C ORPUS

When a text x is part of the reference corpus C, its C REATIVITY I NDEX would trivially become
zero. This issue often arises when analyzing the works of famous authors, as their writings are
frequently copied, quoted, or cited online. To address this, when analyzing human texts written
before the cutoff date of the reference corpus, we exclude any document d ∈ C that contains copies,
quotations, or citations of the text x from the reference corpus C, and compute C REATIVITY I NDEX
of x using this filtered reference corpus.
Specifically, we measure the degree of overlap between x and d by calculating the length of the
longest common subsequence (LCS) between them, normalized by the length of x. Formally,
S(x,d) = ||LCS(x,d)||
              ||x||   . If x and d have a high degree of overlap (i.e., S(x, d) ≥ α), it’s very likely that
d contains an exact copy of x. If x and d show a moderate amount of overlap (i.e., β ≤ S(x, d) < α),
we prompt a LLM to determine whether d contains copies or quotations of x using in-context exam-
ples provided below. Additionally, if d includes the author name or title of x, it is highly likely that
d contains a citation of x. In practice, we set the values of α and β to 0.9 and 0.3, respectively, and
use LLaMA 2 Chat as the LLM to check for copies and quotations.
To determine the optimal value for α and β, we analyzed the relationship between the degree of
overlap S(x, d) and the likelihood that the reference document d contains an exact copy or quotations
of the input text x.

  Degree of Overlap S(x, d)   0.1    0.2      0.3     0.4    0.5      0.6     0.7    0.8      0.9     1.0
  Percentage of Exact Copy    0.0    0.0      0.0    0.03    0.12    0.28    0.49    0.77     0.94    1.0
  Percentage of Quotation     0.0    0.02    0.04    0.11    0.15    0.13    0.05    0.02     0.0     0.0


We found that when S(x, d) < 0.3, there are no exact copies, and almost no quotations of the input
text x in the reference document d. Conversely, when S(x, d) > 0.9, the reference document d
almost always contains an exact copy of x. For cases where 0.3 < S(x, d) < 0.9, all three scenarios
(exact copy, quotation, or none) are plausible. Therefore, we set the values of α and β to 0.9 and 0.3
to ensure accurate deduplication.


                                                    21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Please check if paragraph A contains any copies or quotations from
paragraph B.

Here are some examples:
Paragraph A: In the end though, I did the required reading, complained
bitterly about being bored, wrote the requisite essay, and promptly
forgot all about it. "He was an old man who fished alone in a skiff
in the Gulf Stream and he had gone eighty-four days now without taking
a fish. In the first forty days ...
Paragraph B: He was an old man who fished alone in a skiff in the Gulf
Stream and he had gone eighty-four days now without taking a fish. In
the first forty days a boy had been with him. But after forty days
without a fish the boy’s parents had told him that the old man was now
definitely and finally salao ...
Answer: Yes


Paragraph A: He was an old man who fished alone in a lobster boat off the
Maine coast and he had gone 117 days without taking a crustacean. His
luck was not bad, rather his judgment was good (don’t fish the Atlantic
in winter). Then he met us and for all I know his luck changed. El
Campion is due for a change of luck ...
Paragraph B: He was an old man who fished alone in a skiff in the Gulf
Stream and he had gone eighty-four days now without taking a fish. In
the first forty days a boy had been with him. But after forty days
without a fish the boy’s parents had told him that the old man was now
definitely and finally salao ...
Answer: No


Paragraph A: Santiago, the "old man who fished alone," in Hemingway’s
"The Old Man and the Sea" appears as one who has an undefeatable
character, a loving, cheerful character, and very humble. The writer
describes him in this way: "Everything about him was old except his
eyes, and they were the same color as the sea ...
Paragraph B: He was an old man who fished alone in a skiff in the Gulf
Stream and he had gone eighty-four days now without taking a fish. In
the first forty days a boy had been with him. But after forty days
without a fish the boy’s parents had told him that the old man was now
definitely and finally salao ...
Answer: Yes


Paragraph A: He was an old man who could see the form of his god, and
a monk, moreover. Izzie had limited ability to communicate directly with
her own deity. Much of her life she had proceeded by vague impressions
and only glimpsed the great god’s image briefly in the depths of
meditation ...
Paragraph B: He was an old man who fished alone in a skiff in the Gulf
Stream and he had gone eighty-four days now without taking a fish. In
the first forty days a boy had been with him. But after forty days
without a fish the boy’s parents had told him that the old man was now
definitely and finally salao ...
Answer: No


Here is the test example:
Paragraph A: [A]
Paragraph B: [B]
Answer:


                                               22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


B     E VALUATION



B.1   M ACHINE T EXT G ENERATION


We experiment with state-of-the-art LLMs: GPT-3 (Brown et al., 2020) (text-davinci-003),
ChatGPT (Ouyang et al., 2022) (gpt-3.5-turbo), LLaMA 2 Chat (Touvron et al., 2023), Tulu
2 (Ivison et al., 2023) and OLMo Instruct (Groeneveld et al., 2024) along with their base model
before RLHF: GPT Base (Brown et al., 2020) (davinci-002), LLaMA 2 Base (Touvron et al.,
2023) and OLMo Base (Groeneveld et al., 2024). These models are primarily pre-trained on the
web data available before the cutoff date of the reference corpus RedPajama (Computer, 2023). We
additionally discuss how to handle newer models, such as GPT-4 (OpenAI et al., 2023), which are
largely trained on more recent web data and third-party private data, both of which fall outside the
reference corpus RedPajama.
To obtain machine texts, we prompt LLMs to generate several paragraphs of novels, poems, or
speeches, starting with an initial sentence taken from existing human writings in each category. To
construct test data for machine text detection, we further prompt LLMs to generate news articles
based on the fake news headlines from the Misinfo Reaction Frames (Gabriel et al., 2022) and to
generate theorem proofs for questions from the NaturalProofs (Welleck et al., 2022) benchmark.
The prompts used for each task are illustrated below. For all generations, we use nucleus sampling
with p = 0.9 and set the maximum length of the generated texts to 288 tokens.

Please write a few paragraphs for a novel starting with the following
prompt: [PROMPT SENTENCE]

Please write a poem starting with the following line:                         [PROMPT LINE]

Please write a speech starting with the following sentence:                            [PROMPT
SENTENCE]

Please write a news article based on the given headline:                          [NEWS
HEADLINE]

Please provide a proof for the following theorem:                       [THEOREM QUESTION]

To obtain model-generated reference corpus to compare the C REATIVITY I NDEX of GPT-4 with
humans, we randomly sample 150k sentences from the RedPajama corpus and prompt open-
weight LLMs with knowledge cutoff dates similar to GPT-4 to generate document-level contin-
uations. The models we use are the instruction-aligned versions of Gemma-7B (Team et al.,
2024) (gemma-7b-it), Llama3-8B (Meta-Llama-3-8B) (AI@Meta, 2024), and Mixtral-7B
(Mistral-7B-v0.1) (Jiang et al., 2023). The prompt used to generate continuations is illustrated
below. We use nucleus sampling with p = 0.9 and set the maximum length of the generated texts to
2048 tokens.

Please generate a continuation for the following sentence:                           [PROMPT
SENTENCE]

We additionally experiment with different prompt formats, intentionally encouraging creativity in
models’ generations by incorporating instructions such as ‘push for creative ideas, unique emotions,
and original twists,’ ‘be bold and creative,’ or ‘you are a creative writer.’ Please see blow for a full
list of the prompts we tried.

Write a few paragraphs for a novel from the following prompt, pushing
for creative ideas, unique emotions, and original twists.
Prompt: [PROMPT SENTENCE]


                                                  23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Use the following prompt to write a few paragraphs for a novel with
creative, unqiue perspectives or twists. Let your originality shine.
Prompt: [PROMPT SENTENCE]

Create a few paragraphs from the following prompt for a novel, focusing
on novel ideas, emotions, or perspectives. Be as creative as possible.
Prompt: [PROMPT SENTENCE]

Write a few paragraphs for a novel based on the following prompt,
exploring unexpected twists, emotions, or unique perspectives. Be bold
and creative.
Prompt: [PROMPT SENTENCE]

Based on the following prompt, and write a few paragraphs for a novel
that explore unexpected twists, deep emotions, or unique perspectives.
Let your creativity flow, and don’t be afraid to experiment with
unconventional ideas or characters
Prompt: [PROMPT SENTENCE]

As a creative agent, write a few paragraphs for a novel based on the
following prompt, bringing your novel ideas and original emotions to
life.
Prompt: [PROMPT SENTENCE]

You are a creative writer, write a few paragraphs for a novel based
on the following prompt. Explore unique perspectives and unexpected
twists, and let your creativity guide you.
Prompt: [PROMPT SENTENCE]

You are a creative agent, free to shape this story in any direction.
Write a few paragraphs for a novel based on the following prompt, using
your imagination to uncover surprises and depth.
Prompt: [PROMPT SENTENCE]

As a creative writer, your task is to write a few paragraphs for a
novel based on the following prompt. Dive into original ideas, explore
emotions, and surprise yourself.
Prompt: [PROMPT SENTENCE]

You are a creative writer who brings stories to life. Write a few
paragraphs for a novel based on the following prompt, letting your
imagination take bold, unexpected turns.
Prompt: [PROMPT SENTENCE]


B.2   DATASET D ETAILS



Reference Corpus: We use RedPajama (Computer, 2023), the largest web data collection avail-
able at the time of this study, as our reference corpus. RedPajama contains 100 billion text docu-
ments with 100+ trillion raw tokens from 84 CommonCrawl dumps.

Novel: For human-written novels, we use book snippets from the BookMIA (Shi et al., 2024)
dataset. The BookMIA dataset contains approximately 10k book snippets, with an average length of
around 650 words per snippet. We randomly sample 100 book snippets from the BookMIA dataset
and select the first K sentences of each snippet such that their total length exceeds 256 words, to
use as human text. Since novels we use were published after the cutoff date of RedPajama, there’s
no need for deduplication before DJ S EARCH.


                                                24
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Speech: For the transcripts of human speeches, we randomly sample 100 speeches from the fa-
mous speeches available in the American Rhetoric speech bank. For each speech, we randomly
sample continuous K sentences such that their total length exceeds 256 words, to use as human
text. Since these speeches were made before the cutoff date of RedPajama, deduplication is needed
before DJ S EARCH.

Poem: For human-written poems, we randomly sample 100 poems from the popular modern po-
ems collected by PoemHunter.com. Since these poems were published before the cutoff date of
RedPajama, deduplication is needed before DJ S EARCH.

News Article: We use news articles from the XSum (Narayan et al., 2018) dataset as the human
text for the machine text detection task. The Xsum dataset contains around 200k new articles, with
an average length of around 380 words per article. We randomly sample 500 articles to use as human
text. Since these news articles were released before the cutoff date of RedPajama, deduplication is
needed before DJ S EARCH. For machine-generated fake news, we randomly sample 500 fake news
headlines from the Misinfo Reaction Frames (Gabriel et al., 2022), and based on these headlines,
LLMs are asked to generate corresponding news articles.

Theorem Proof: We use the ground-truth human-written proofs from the NaturalProofs (Welleck
et al., 2022) dataset as the human text for the machine text detection task. The NaturalProofs
dataset contains approximately 24k theorems and their corresponding proofs. We randomly sam-
ple 500 theorem-proof pairs and use the ground-truth proofs as human text. Since the NaturalProofs
dataset was curated after the cutoff date of RedPajama, there’s no need for deduplication before
DJ S EARCH. For machine-generated math proofs, we prompt LLMs to write proofs for the 500
theorems we sampled.

B.3   PARAMETERS OF DJ S EARCH

We set the minimum n-gram length L in DJ S EARCH to 5, and set the threshold for Word Mover’s
Distance to 0.95 for semantic matches. We observe that the L-uniqueness is close to zero for most
human and machine texts when L ≤ 5 and close to one when L ≥ 12. Therefore, in practice, we
sum up the L-uniqueness for 5 ≤ L ≤ 12 when computing C REATIVITY I NDEX.
The only experiment with slightly different parameters is to compare the creativity of GPT-4 with
humans. We observed that the L-uniqueness is close to one when L ≥ 7 based on the model-
generated reference corpus. Therefore, we sum up the L-uniqueness for 5 ≤ L ≤ 7 when computing
C REATIVITY I NDEX.

B.4   RUNTIME OF DJ S EARCH

To verify linear complexity, we measured the runtime of DJ S EARCH with respect to increasing
input text lengths, using RedPajama as the reference corpus, restricting the matching criteria to
verbatim matches only and averaging the results over 500 examples.

                           Input Length            64         128     256      512
                           Runtime (seconds)       9.2        16.9    30.7     62.3


We observed that the runtime of DJ S EARCH indeed increases linearly with the length of the input
text. We also measured the runtime of DJ S EARCH with respect to increasing sizes of the reference
corpus while keeping the input length fixed at 256 words. In addition to RedPajama, which contains
approximately 1.4 trillion tokens, we experimented with the Pile (380B tokens) and DOLMA (2.6
trillion tokens).

                  Reference Corpus Size        380B Tokens       1.4T Tokens    2.6T Tokens
                  Runtime (seconds)                24.1              30.7           37.1


We found that the runtime increase for DJ S EARCH is minimal as the size of the reference corpus
grows. This is likely due to the high optimization of the Infini-gram, which enables it to retrieve
matched n-grams within milliseconds.


                                                         25
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


B.5   VARIATION OF W ORD M OVER ’ S D ISTANCE

We experimented with different variations of transport-inspired distances, including relaxed WMD,
supervised WMD (Huang et al., 2016), and Sinkhorn distance (Cuturi, 2013).
We computed the C REATIVITY I NDEX for ChatGPT and human writing in the novel domain based
on semantic matches using relaxed WMD, supervised WMD, and Sinkhorn distance. Regardless of
the distance metric used, human writings consistently exhibited a significantly higher C REATIVITY
I NDEX than ChatGPT, aligning with our main results. Specifically, based on relaxed WMD, the
C REATIVITY I NDEX of human authors was 97.6% higher than ChatGPT (p = 2.5 × 10−13 ; N =
100). Based on supervised WMD, the C REATIVITY I NDEX of human authors was 79.3% higher than
ChatGPT (p = 1.9 × 10−7 ; N = 100). Based on Sinkhorn distance, the CREATIVITY INDEX of
human authors was 91.3% higher than ChatGPT (p = 3.5 × 10−12 ; N = 100).
As mentioned in the main text, the motivation for using transport-inspired distances—which com-
bine word embedding distances for each n-gram’s words rather than directly computing the Eu-
clidean distance between embeddings of two n-grams—is rooted in efficiency. The latter requires
computing n-gram embeddings for every n-gram in the input text and every document in the ref-
erence corpus during DJ S EARCH, which is computationally infeasible. Ideally, a good transport-
inspired distance should approximate the Euclidean distance between the embeddings of two n-
grams. To evaluate this, we computed the Pearson correlation between our implementations of
WMD, relaxed WMD, supervised WMD, and Sinkhorn distance with the Euclidean distance be-
tween the embeddings of two n-grams to assess how closely they correlate.

                        Our MWD       Relaxed MWD         Supervised MWD   Sinkhorn Distance
             r-value       0.842          0.823                 0.716            0.808
             p-value    5.7 × 10−11    4.1 × 10−10           8.3 × 10−4       9.1 × 10−8


We found that all transport-inspired distances correlate highly with Euclidean distance, showing
strong statistical significance. The slightly lower correlation with supervised MWD may be due to
its training objective, which focuses on distinguishing between different categories of documents.

B.6   C OMPARE WITH E XISTING C REATIVITY M ETRICS

A recent study by Chakrabarty et al. (2024) evaluates the creativity of stories written by LLMs
and professional human authors through expert evaluations based on a carefully designed rubric
inspired by the Torrance Test of Creative Thinking (TTCT). This work introduces the Torrance Test
of Creative Writing (TTCW), which consists of 14 binary questions grouped into four dimensions:
Fluency, Flexibility, Originality, and Elaboration. To conduct the evaluation, ten expert creative
writers were recruited to evaluate 48 stories—written either by LLMs or published in The New York
Times—using the TTCW rubric.
For each story, three expert evaluators are tasked with answering 14 binary questions, each designed
to quantify a specific dimension of creativity. For example, within the Fluency dimension, “Un-
derstandability & Coherence” is assessed by asking, “Do the different elements of the story work
together to form a unified, engaging, and satisfying whole?” In the Flexibility dimension, “Emo-
tional Flexibility” is evaluated with the question, “Does the story achieve a good balance between
interiority and exteriority, in a way that feels emotionally flexible?” Similarly, within the Originality
dimension, “Originality in Thought” is measured by asking, “Is the story an original piece of writing
without any clichés?” For each of the 14 binary questions, the final answer is determined by majority
vote among the expert evaluators.
To evaluate the correlation between our C REATIVITY I NDEX and Chakrabarty et al.’s TTCW, we
compute the C REATIVITY I NDEX for each of the 48 stories. For each binary question in the TTCT
(e.g., “Understandability & Coherence” or “Emotional Flexibility”), we calculate the point biserial
correlation between the C REATIVITY I NDEX values and the corresponding binary expert ratings of
that question across all 48 stories.
We found that the C REATIVITY I NDEX positively correlates with all dimensions of TTCW, showing
particularly strong correlations with high statistical significance in dimensions such as “Emotional
Flexibility,” “Narrative Pacing,” “Structural Flexibility,” and “Originality in Thought.”


                                                     26
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                   Emotional          Narrative      Structural          Originality       Scene vs         Rhetorical        Language
                   Flexibility         Pacing        Flexibility         in Thought       Summary           Complexity        Proficiency
    r-value          0.6826            0.6524          0.5968              0.5968           0.5812            0.5810            0.5702
    p-value          0.0028            0.0051          0.0135              0.0135           0.0135            0.0135            0.0204


              World Building     Narrative     Originality in      Understandability    Perspective &        Originality in    Character
                & Setting         Ending     Form & Structure        & Coherence       Voice Flexibility   Theme & Content    Development
 r-value          0.5170          0.4871          0.4626                0.4495              0.4467              0.3582           0.2299
 p-value          0.0426          0.0617          0.0816                0.0941              0.0969              0.1231           0.1453


C      R ELATED W ORK

Measuring Creativity in Ideas: Measuring creative thinking and problem solving takes root in
early work in psychology (Torrance, 1966), where researchers defined four pillars for creative think-
ing: fluency, flexibility, originality and elaboration. Crossley et al. (2016) later on developed this
notion and built on it to expand this to measuring creative writing in students, where they also
adopted n-gram novelty for a measure of originality. However, these prior work focus on creativity
in humans, and they also do not introduce any automated metrics or measurements.

Measuring Creativity in Machine-generated Text Using Expert Annotators: Closely related to
C REATIVITY I NDEX is a recent line of work in the generative AI literature comparing the creativity
of human writers to that of large language models in different domains such as story telling and
journalism (Chakrabarty et al., 2023; 2024; Anonymous, 2024). Similar to us, the approach in this
direction often involves prompting an LLM to write an original story or news article, based on some
existing premise or press release, and then comparing the machine-generated text to the human-
written counterparts. These works, however, take a rather subjective approach, where they define
and measure creativity based on human expert annotations and whether people perceive the text to
be more creative, rather than an objective quantification of novelty that we provide.

Measuring Novelty of N -grams: Finally, closely related to our work in terms of techniques is
Nguyen (2024) and Merrill et al. (2024). The former attempts at finding n-gram rules that would
cover and predict generations from transformer models, showing that more than 70% of the times
transformers follow some pre-set patterns and rules. The latter is more similar to our work as they
also measure the novelty of generated n-grams and compare it to human-written text, however they
differ from us in tow major ways: (1) they only find verbatim matches, whereas we also match to
approximate, semantically similar blocks of text and (2) they compute the percentage of n-grams of
a certain length in a text that can be found in the reference corpus, whereas we measure how much
of the text can be reconstructed by mixing and matching a vast amount of existing text snippets of
varying lengths from the web.

Machine Text Detection: Detecting machine-generated text has been explored for several years
using a variety of methods (Jawahar et al., 2020; Uchendu et al., 2021). Gehrmann et al. (2019)
and Dugan et al. (2023) demonstrate that even humans tend to struggle to differentiate between
text written by humans and machines, highlighting the need for automated detection solutions.
Some approaches involve training a classifier in a supervised manner to identify machine-generated
text (Bakhtin et al., 2019; Uchendu et al., 2020), while others use a zero-shot detection method (So-
laiman et al., 2019; Ippolito et al., 2020). Additionally, there is research on bot detection through
question answering (Wang et al., 2023; Chew & Baird, 2003). Recently, Mitchell et al. (2023b)
introduced DetectGPT, a zero-shot method based on the hypothesis that texts produced by a large
language model (LLM) are located at local maxima, and thus exhibit negative curvature, in the
model’s probability distribution. Follow-up work build on DetectGPT by making it faster (Bao
et al., 2024) and proposing to use cross-detection when the target model is unknown (Mireshghallah
et al., 2024).
Various strategies have been developed to detect machine-generated text in real-world settings. One
notable approach is watermarking, which embeds algorithmically detectable patterns into the gen-
erated text while maintaining the quality and diversity of the language model’s outputs. Initial
watermarking techniques for natural language were proposed by Atallah et al. (2001) and have been
adapted for neural language model outputs (Fang et al., 2017; Ziegler et al., 2019). Recent advance-


                                                                      27
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


ments include Abdelnabi & Fritz (2021) work on an adversarial watermarking transformer (AWT)
for transformer-based language models. Unlike methods dependent on specific model architectures,
Kirchenbauer et al. (2023) introduce a watermarking technique applicable to texts generated by any
common autoregressive language model.

Application of LLMs in Creative Writing: Recent advancements have highlighted the potential
of LLMs in supporting various creative writing endeavors, ranging from short stories (Yang et al.,
2022) to screenplays (Mirowski et al., 2023b). Enhancing LLMs to produce text that aligns more
closely with human preferences has made them adept at following user instructions, thereby turn-
ing them into valuable tools for individuals without technical expertise. This progress has boosted
the commercial viability of LLMs as writing aids, which can continue a narrative, describe scenes,
or offer feedback. Chung et al. (2021) conducted a review of literature on creativity support tools
across various arts, leading to the development of a taxonomy that includes roles, interactions, and
technologies. In contrast, Frich et al. (2019) and Palani et al. (2022) focused on how creative prac-
titioners select new tools, highlighting their emphasis on functionality, workflow integration, and
performance, and noting that personal recommendations often guide their choices. Additionally,
Gero et al. (2022) created a space based on the cognitive process model of writing, influencing inter-
face design decisions. Gero et al. (2023) further explored the social dynamics of AI in creative tasks,
revealing a disconnect between writers’ objectives and the support provided by computer tools.


                                                  28
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 5: Example outputs from DJ S EARCH based on both verbatim and semantic matches. We
prompt LLMs to generate a few paragraphs of a novel, beginning with a first sentence taken from a
human-written novel snippet.


                                               29
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 6: Example outputs from DJ S EARCH based on both verbatim and semantic matches. We
prompt LLMs to generate a few paragraphs of a novel, beginning with a first sentence taken from a
human-written novel snippet.


                                               30
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 7: Example outputs from DJ S EARCH based on both verbatim and semantic matches. We
prompt LLMs to generate a few paragraphs of a novel, beginning with a first sentence taken from a
human-written novel snippet.


                                               31
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 8: Example outputs from DJ S EARCH based on both verbatim and semantic matches. We
prompt LLMs to generate a few paragraphs of a novel, beginning with a first sentence taken from a
human-written novel snippet.


                                               32
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 9: Example outputs from DJ S EARCH based on both verbatim and semantic matches. We
prompt LLMs to generate a few paragraphs of a novel, beginning with a first sentence taken from a
human-written novel snippet.


                                               33
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 10: Example outputs from DJ S EARCH based on both verbatim and semantic matches. We
prompt LLMs to generate a few paragraphs of a novel, beginning with a first sentence taken from a
human-written novel snippet.


                                               34
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 11: Example outputs from DJ S EARCH based on verbatim matches. We prompt LLMs to
generate a few paragraphs of a novel, beginning with a first sentence taken from a human-written
novel snippet.


                                               35
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 12: Example outputs from DJ S EARCH based on verbatim matches. We prompt LLMs to
generate a few paragraphs of a novel, beginning with a first sentence taken from a human-written
novel snippet.


                                               36
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 13: Example outputs from DJ S EARCH based on verbatim matches. We prompt LLMs to
generate a few paragraphs of a novel, beginning with a first sentence taken from a human-written
novel snippet.


                                               37
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 14: Example outputs from DJ S EARCH based on verbatim matches. We prompt LLMs to
generate a few paragraphs of a novel, beginning with a first sentence taken from a human-written
novel snippet.


                                               38
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 15: Example outputs from DJ S EARCH based on verbatim matches. We prompt LLMs to
generate a few paragraphs of a novel, beginning with a first sentence taken from a human-written
novel snippet.


                                               39
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 16: Example outputs from DJ S EARCH based on verbatim matches. We prompt LLMs to
generate a few paragraphs of a novel, beginning with a first sentence taken from a human-written
novel snippet.


                                               40
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 17: Example outputs from DJ S EARCH based on verbatim matches. We prompt LLMs to
generate a speech starting with the opening sentence of a human speech transcript.


                                               41
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 18: Example outputs from DJ S EARCH based on verbatim matches. We prompt LLMs to
generate a speech starting with the opening sentence of a human speech transcript.


Figure 19: Example outputs from DJ S EARCH based on verbatim matches. We prompt LLMs to
generate a speech starting with the opening sentence of a human speech transcript.



                                               42
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 20: Example outputs from DJ S EARCH based on verbatim matches. We prompt LLMs to
generate a speech starting with the opening sentence of a human speech transcript.


Figure 21: Example outputs from DJ S EARCH based on verbatim matches. We prompt LLMs to
generate a speech starting with the opening sentence of a human speech transcript.



                                               43
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 22: Example outputs from DJ S EARCH based on verbatim matches. We prompt LLMs to
generate a speech starting with the opening sentence of a human speech transcript.


                                               44
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 23: Example outputs from DJ S EARCH based on verbatim matches. We prompt LLMs to
generate a speech starting with the opening sentence of a human speech transcript.


                                               45
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 24: Example outputs from DJ S EARCH based on verbatim matches. We prompt LLMs to
generate a speech starting with the opening sentence of a human speech transcript.


                                               46
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 25: Example outputs from DJ S EARCH based on verbatim matches. We prompt LLMs to
generate a poem starting with the first line of a human-written poem.


                                               47
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 26: Example outputs from DJ S EARCH based on verbatim matches. We prompt LLMs to
generate a poem starting with the first line of a human-written poem.


                                               48
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 27: Example outputs from DJ S EARCH based on verbatim matches. We prompt LLMs to
generate a poem starting with the first line of a human-written poem.


                                               49
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 28: Example outputs from DJ S EARCH based on verbatim matches. We prompt LLMs to
generate a poem starting with the first line of a human-written poem.


                                               50
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 29: Example outputs from DJ S EARCH based on verbatim matches. We prompt LLMs to
generate a poem starting with the first line of a human-written poem.


                                               51
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 30: Example outputs from DJ S EARCH based on verbatim matches. We prompt LLMs to
generate a poem starting with the first line of a human-written poem.


                                               52
