Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


W HY I N -C ONTEXT L EARNING M ODELS ARE G OOD
F EW-S HOT L EARNERS ?
  Shiguang Wu                                                          Yaqing Wang
  Department of Electronic Engineering,                                Beijing Institute of Mathematical
  Tsinghua University                                                  Sciences and Applications
  wsg23@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn                                          wangyaqing@bimsa.cn

  Quanming Yao∗
  Department of Electronic Engineering, Tsinghua University
  State Key laboratory of Space Network and Communications, Tsinghua University
  qyaoaa@tsinghua.edu.cn



                                                A BSTRACT

            We explore in-context learning (ICL) models from a learning-to-learn perspective.
            Unlike studies that identify specific learning algorithms in ICL models, we compare
            ICL models with typical meta-learners to understand their superior performance.
            We theoretically prove the expressiveness of ICL models as learning algorithms
            and examine their learnability and generalizability. Our findings show that ICL
            with transformers can effectively construct data-dependent learning algorithms
            instead of directly follow existing ones (including gradient-based, metric-based, and
            amortization-based meta-learners). The construction of such learning algorithm is
            determined by the pre-training process, as a function fitting the training distribution,
            which raises generalizability as an important issue. With above understanding, we
            propose strategies to transfer techniques for classical deep networks to meta-level
            to further improve ICL. As examples, we implement meta-level meta-learning
            for domain adaptability with limited data and meta-level curriculum learning
            for accelerated convergence during pre-training, demonstrating their empirical
            effectiveness.


1       I NTRODUCTION

Large Language Models (LLMs) (Achiam et al., 2023) have witnessed remarkable progress in recent
years. Beyond traditional natural language processing tasks such as machine translation and sentiment
analysis, LLMs have gained prominence in solving more complex tasks by understanding instructions
and examples from human input and generating coherent, human-like text. LLMs use in-context
learning (ICL) (Brown, 2020) to understand and generate responses based on the input text. Given
a prompt containing examples (input-output pairs) from a task and a query input, ICL allows the
LLM to generate the corresponding output without altering their weights. For example, given "happy
-> positive; sad -> negative; blue ->", the model can output "negative", while given "green ->
cool; yellow -> warm; blue ->" the model can output "cool". Formally, ICL can be formulated as
follows: given input (x(1) , y(1) , · · · , x(n) , y(n) , x(n+1) ), where there is an underlying task f such
that y(i) = f (x(i) ), the model outputs a prediction of f (x(n+1) ). By pre-training to simulate the
above behavior over a distribution of f , the ICL model can generalize to unseen tasks.
The remarkable performance of LLMs across a wide range of applications has garnered significant
attention, to understand how the ICL ability is acquired and executed. However, ICL has thus far
been well understood primarily in highly simplified settings: linear-transformers trained on linear
regression tasks. In these cases, the model is shown to precisely learn to perform pre-conditioned
gradient descent based on input examples, with explicit weights corresponding to the global minimum
during pre-training (Von Oswald et al., 2023; Mahankali et al., 2024; Ahn et al., 2023; Gatmiry
    ∗
        Correspondence author


                                                       1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 1: In-context learning models can find the data-dependent optimal learning algorithm, in a
space which is more inclusive than typical meta-learners.


et al., 2024). Nevertheless, this setting is so simplified that it is far removed from real-world
scenarios, and no more complex settings currently offer such a transparent understanding. To achieve
a more generalizable understanding of ICL, researchers have approached the problem from various
perspectives, including theoretical results on expressiveness (Wang et al., 2024b; Bai et al., 2023),
learning dynamics and convergence (Tian et al., 2023; Li et al., 2023b; Huang et al., 2024; Zhang
et al., 2024; Sander et al., 2024), generalization error (Li et al., 2023a; 2024; Wies et al., 2023), and
observations of ICL model behaviors (Akyürek et al., 2023; Bhattamishra et al., 2024; Zhang et al.,
2023).
Although precisely understanding what and how do ICL models learn from pre-training is chal-
lenging and depends on various problem settings and data distributions, a basic consensus has been
reached. Specifically, it is understood that an ICL model learns a learning algorithm that maps
(x(1) , y(1) , · · · , x(n) , y(n) ) to f through pre-training. The inference process is then interpreted as
first learning f from (x(1) , y(1) , · · · , x(n) , y(n) ) and subsequently applying it to a new input x(n+1) .
This consensus highlights the nature of ICL models as meta-learners (Kirsch et al., 2022; Dai et al.,
2023), which involves learning a learning algorithm to enable systems to quickly adapt to new
tasks—essentially, learning-to-learn (Schmidhuber, 1987; Thrun & Pratt, 1998). Given tasks for
meta-training (pre-training), the goal is to learn a learner function (i.e., a learning algorithm) that can
make inferences for a given input based on a provided set of labeled examples, enabling generalization
to meta-testing (unseen) tasks. While typical meta-learners have been extensively studied, none have
demonstrated the level of general intelligence achieved by LLMs, or ICL models. This naturally
raises the question: what distinguishes ICL models from typical meta-learners? While existing works
on understanding ICL focus on identifying the exact learning algorithms that ICL models learn,
we aim to address a different question: why are ICL models more prominent compared to typical
meta-learners?
The difference between ICL models and typical meta-learners lies in their hypothesis spaces. ICL is
seen as meta-learning with minimal inductive bias (Kirsch et al., 2022). In machine learning, less
inductive bias, often leads to better performance with sufficient data (LeCun et al., 2015). Human-
designed knowledge may not always be relevant, while data-driven knowledge, optimized through
training data, performs well when the hypothesis space is expressive and training is generalizable.
Meta-learners’ hypothesis spaces define the knowledge needed for a learning algorithm. They use
a function with two inputs: a support set with labeled examples and a query input, producing the
prediction. Typical meta-learners rely on strong prior knowledge to structure their algorithms. In
contrast, ICL models use a black-box model, like transformers (Vaswani, 2017), which enable
data-driven interactions among samples, can be stacked into deep architectures, and incorporate
necessary inductive biases. These properties enhance their generalizability. We study if the advantage
of data-driven approaches over human-designed knowledge contributes to the success of ICL models
(Figure 1). We believe that ICL models are prominent due to their ability to learn data-dependent
optimal learning algorithms. However, their optimality is data-dependent1 , posing potential risks in
generalizability.


    1
      The formal definitions of an optimal learning algorithm and a data-dependent optimal learning algorithm
are provided in Appendix B


                                                      2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


In this paper, we first prove the expressiveness of ICL with transformers as learning algorithms, and
then we verify the aforementioned conjecture. Our findings indicate that ICL models are capable
of learning data-dependent optimal algorithms, but their generalizability is limited. This limitation
is evident from their distribution-sensitive performance when the algorithm is implicit, prompting
us to reconsider the interpretation of ICL as ’algorithm selection’ in existing literature. Building
on this insight, we identify shared challenges between training deep models in supervised learning
and pre-training ICL models. We then propose leveraging deep-learning techniques to enhance ICL
by mapping supervised learning approaches to meta-learning. Our contributions are summarized as
follows:

• We investigate ICL model from a learning-to-learn perspective by comparing it with typical
  meta-learners, understanding it as a meta-learner with minimal inductive bias.
• We theoretically prove that ICL with transformer is expressive enough to mimic existing meta-
  learners. We demonstrate its ability to construct data-dependent optimal algorithms across a wide
  range of settings. We also show that its generalizability is limited, as it implicitly fits the training
  distribution rather than learning an explicit algorithm.
• We proposed to transfer techniques in classical deep networks to improve ICL. As examples, we
  enhance the domain adaptability of ICL models through pre-training with meta-level meta-learning
  and accelerate convergence through pre-training with meta-level curriculum learning.


2     E XPRESSIVENESS OF ICL AS M ETA -L EARNERS

2.1   A U NIFIED F ORMULATION OF L EARNING - TO -L EARN

We first construct the formulation to align ICL models and typical meta-learners. To investigate
learning algorithms as learnable functions, a learning algorithm (Kirsch et al., 2022) is considered as
a mapping from a labeled dataset D = {(x(i) , y(i) )}ni=1 and a query input x(q) to a prediction ŷ(q) .
The function of a learning algorithm can all be represented as a learner function g:

                                          ŷ(q) = g(x(q) , D).                                        (1)
Learning-to-learn (Vilalta & Drissi, 2002; Hospedales et al., 2021), also known as meta-learning,
aims to optimize a learnable function g(·; θ) through meta-training. The process of training ICL
models or other meta-learners exemplifies learning-to-learn.

In-Context Learning with Transformer Generally, there is a input matrix Z0 composed of D and
x(q) , which is fed into a M -layer transformer TFM . Denote the collection of all model weights in
TFM as θM . ICL can thus be represented as a learner function gM :

                                 gM (x(q) , D; θM ) = TFM (Z0 ; θM ),                                 (2)
with details on the construction of Z0 , the model architecture of TFM , and the optimization of θM
provided in Appendix A.1.

Meta-Learning Methods Typical meta-learners are more restricted to certain learning algorithm
structures designed by human experts. Strong inductive biases are introduced into g(·; θ), defining
how to adapt to D and make inference for x(q) . Typical meta-learners are generally classified into
three categories (Bronskill et al., 2021): gradient-based, metric-based and amortization-based. Below
is a summary of the function of each category.

• Gradient-Based. Given a prediction model h : x 7→ y and a loss function ℓ(·, ·), gradient-based
  meta-learners (Finn et al., 2017) perform gradient-descent using the labeled data in D:
                                                     Xn
                    ggd (x(q) , D; θ) = h(x(q) ; θ −      ∇θ ℓ(h(x(i) ; θ), y(i) )).           (3)
                                                         i=1

• Metric-Based. Metric-based learners (Koch et al., 2015; Garcia & Bruna, 2018; Sung et al., 2018)
  learn to compare the query with examples by optimizing a distance metric in the feature space. Let


                                                    3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


    dθ (·, ·) denote a distance function. Pair-wise metric-based algorithm makes prediction based on the
    pair-wise distance between the query and examples:
                                                     1 Xn
                                gsim (x(q) , D; θ) =          dθ (x(i) , x(q) )y(i) .                (4)
                                                     n    i=1

  For classification tasks where y(i) ∈ {cc }C   c=1 , one can also adopt class-prototype metric-based
  algorithm (Snell et al., 2017), which compares the query with the class prototypes:
                                              XC           1 X
                        gprt (x(q) , D; θ) =         dθ (               x(i) , x(q) )cc ,           (5)
                                                 c=1      C    y (i) =c

  where cc is the class prototype of class c.
• Amortization-Based. Amortization-based meta-learners replace the optimization process with a
  single forward pass of the encoder to efficiently learn informative modulations (Garnelo et al.,
  2018; Ravi & Beatson, 2019). Typically, they follow a framework that uses a set encoder (Zaheer
  et al., 2017) to map D to a vector e representing the task context, then feeds the context e and the
  query to a prediction model fθ : (x, e) 7→ y. Considering the universal approximation property of
  neural networks, an amortization-based meta-learner can be formulated as:
                                                            1 Xn
                             gam (x(q) , D; θ) = fθ (x(q) ,           [x(i) |y(i) ]).               (6)
                                                            n   i=1

The meta-training process is provided in Appendix A.2.

2.2     U NDERSTANDING ICL THROUGH U NIFIED F ORMULATION

With the unified formulation, we study the expressiveness of ICL models compared with typical
meta-learners. Expressiveness in deep-learning refers to a model’s ability to capture complex patterns
and relationships within data (LeCun et al., 2015), a fundamental property that enables deep learning
models to achieve high performance on intricate tasks. Here, we focus on expressiveness at the
meta-level—specifically, the ability to capture interaction patterns and relationships among samples
in D and x(q) , which corresponds to the expressiveness of learning algorithms. In this section, we
prove that ICL with transformer is expressive enough to perform any learning algorithm that
typical meta-learners can.
Specifically, we show that, with certain parameter instantiations, ICL with transformer gM (2) can
perform gradient-based ggd (3), pair-wise metric-based gsim (4), class-prototype metric-based gprt
(5) and amortization-based gam (6). Since class-prototype metric-based methods are applicable only
to classification tasks, we consider standard C-class classification tasks. Formally, we present the
following theorems for classification problems where C < ∞:
Theorem 2.1. ∀ g ∈ {ggd , gsim , gprt , gam }, ∀ θ ∈ R|θ| , ∃ M ∈ N∗ < ∞, ∃ θM ∈ R|θM | ,
gM (x(q) , D; θM ) = g(x(q) , D; θ).

The detailed settings, the mild assumptions and proofs for this part, are provided in Appendix C.

3     ICL M ODEL D OES L EARN DATA -D EPENDENT O PTIMAL A LGORITHM
We have shown that the ICL model is expressive by proving that its hypothesis space is inclusive, at
least covering the capabilities of typical meta-learners. However, the specific solution that the ICL
model achieves within this space through pre-training on a given task set—i.e., the exact learning
algorithm it learns—directly determines its performance and generalizability. Understanding this is
crucial to investigating its prominence. In this section, we investigate whether the ICL model, with
sufficient pre-training, learns an optimal learning algorithm from the training tasks, and examine its
generalizability when the specific learning algorithm is not explicitly known.

Algorithm Criterion. To determine whether two learning algorithms are identical, particularly for
classification tasks, their classification boundaries can be visualized through Monte Carlo sampling
of query inputs. Given multiple trials with different sets of labeled examples, if two learner functions
consistently produce the same classification boundary and exhibit identical end-to-end performance,
we can infer with high probability that they represent the same learning algorithm.


                                                    4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Generalizability of Learning Algorithm. We use the terms explicit and implicit optimal learn-
ing algorithm to distinguish the generalizability of a learning algorithm. Formally, we define
explicit optimal algorithm g(·; F, ∗) of a function family F as: when n → ∞, ∀f ∈ F, ∀p(x),
Ep(x) [g(x(q) , D; F, ∗)] = f (x(q) ), where D = {(x(i) , f (x(i) ))}ni=1 , x(q) ∼ p(x), x(i) ∼ p(x). In
other words, An explicit optimal learning algorithm for F is generalizable across any data distribution
p(x), allowing it to learn any function f ∈ F. In contrast, implicit optimal learning algorithms are
sensitive to the specific data distribution. We denote G Ω as the set of all ground-truth explicit optimal
algorithms for a task set Ω. For example, Ordinary Least Squares is an explicit optimal learning
algorithm g(·; F, ∗) for linear regression tasks (F = {f | f (x) = w⊤ x}), while memorizing and
looking-up is an implicit optimal learning algorithm for any problem.

3.1   G ENERATING TASKS WITH E XPLICIT O PTIMAL A LGORITHMS

To determine whether ICL with transformers learns the optimal learning algorithm, we generate
tasks whose optimal predictions can be precisely achieved by certain explicit learning algorithms.
For specific algorithms, we select representatives from each category of typical meta-learners: gsim ,
gprt and gam . Specifically, denoting a set of tasks Ω = {Dτ }Tτ=1 , we generate three types of tasks:
pair-wise metric-based tasks Ωsim where MatchNet (Vinyals et al., 2016) (∈ gsim ) is the optimal
learner, class-prototype metric-based tasks Ωprt where ProtoNet (Snell et al., 2017) (∈ gprt ) is the
optimal learner, amortization-based tasks Ωam where CNPs (Garnelo et al., 2018) (∈ gam ) is the
optimal learner. We do not consider ggd for two reasons: (i) it is challenging to define a family of
classification tasks and the corresponding h to guarantee the optimum; and (ii) proving that ICL can
express ggd is not considered as a contribution of this paper, as it is straightforward by leveraging
results from Bai et al. (2023); Wang et al. (2024b). Details regarding task generation and experimental
settings are provided in Appendix D.

3.2   ICL M ODEL L EARNS E XPLICIT O PTIMAL A LGORITHM ON S IMPLE TASKS

To verify that ICL with transformers learns the optimal algorithm, we perform meta-training using a
single type of task corresponding to one explicit optimal algorithm. We then draw conclusions by
comparing the classification boundaries of the trained ICL model with those of the known optimal
algorithm. Additionally, we augment the above-mentioned optimal meta-learners with parameterized
feed-forward layers, allowing them to be meta-trained alongside the ICL model. This ensures that
their optimality becomes data-dependent, similar to the ICL model. We conduct this investigation
using the three types of tasks described above.


      (a) Pair-wise metric-based.   (b) Class-prototype metric-based.     (c) Amortization-based.
Figure 2: Meta-testing performance of learners meta-trained and tested on the same single type of
tasks.

Figure 2(a) shows the end-to-end performance of learners trained on Ωsim and tested on Ω′sim (unseen
tasks). The results indicate that the end-to-end performance of the ICL model is only marginally
different from MatchNet, the parameterized optimal meta-learner obtained through meta-training. To
further verify this, we visualize how the ICL model classifies each sample given a few fixed labeled
examples. An example is shown in the first column in Figure 5, with additional cases provided
in Appendix E.1. These visualizations confirm that the ICL model learns the same algorithm as
MatchNet, which is data-dependent and optimal for Ωsim . Similarly, we observe that the ICL model
learns ProtoNet on Ωprt , where ProtoNet is the optimal learner for this task type, as shown in Figure
2(b), and the second column in Figure 5. Likewise, the ICL model learns CNPs on Ωam , the optimal


                                                    5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


learner for these tasks, as demonstrated in Figure 2(c), and the third column in Figure 5. Results of
more trials are provided in Appendix E.1. Thus, we conclude that when pre-trained on Ωsim , Ωprt or
Ωam , the ICL model learns the explicit optimal algorithm.

3.3     ICL M ODEL L EARNS I MPLICIT O PTIMAL A LGORITHM ON M IXED TASKS

In real-world scenarios, tasks are often complex and diverse. Therefore, we further investigate what
learning algorithm the ICL model learns when the pre-training tasks come from various types that do
not share a single optimal explicit learning algorithm.
Specifically, we mix the above Ωsim , Ωprt and Ωam to form meta-training task set Ωmix , such that
G Ωmix = {MatchNet, ProtoNet, CNPs}. We meta-train ICL model, MatchNet, ProtoNet and CNPs
with Ωmix , and evaluate their performance on unseen Ω′sim , Ω′prt and Ω′am respectively. Figure 3 shows
the results. We also compare with the performance of data-dependent optimal algorithm (D.-Dpt.
Optimal) for each type of testing tasks. In Figure 3(a), D.-Dpt. Optimal refers to MatchNet trained on
Ωsim and tested on Ω′sim ; in Figure 3(b), it refers to ProtoNet trained on Ωprt and tested on Ω′prt ; and in
Figure 3(c), it refers to CNPs trained on Ωam and tested on Ω′am . We also visualize the classification
boundaries of the ICL model on testing tasks, which align with those of the optimal algorithms.
Examples of these patterns are shown in Figures 10–12 and are further detailed in Appendix E.2.


      (a) Pair-wise metric-based tasks. (b) Class-prototype metric-based.     (c) Amortization-based.
Figure 3: Meta-testing performance of learners meta-trained on hybrid tasks, tested on each seen task
type separately.

From the above results, we draw several conclusions. First, typical meta-learners trained on Ωmix
(MatchNet, ProtoNet, CNPs) fail to achieve the data-dependent optimal (D.-Dpt. Optimal) perfor-
mance on Ω′sim , Ω′prt or Ω′am , indicating that none of thses explicit learning algorithm can simultane-
ously be optimal for Ωsim , Ωprt and Ωam . Second, the ICL model trained on Ωmix (ICL) demonstrates
performance very similar to data-dependent optimal (D.-Dpt. Optimal) models. Furthermore, the
identical classification boundaries presented in Appendix E.2 suggest that the ICL model successfully
learns a data-dependent optimal learning algorithm on Ωmix . Finally, these findings collectively
demonstrate that the ICL model is more expressive than typical meta-learners and is capable of
learning a data-dependent optimal algorithm that ∈   / G Ωmix . However, the precise nature of this learned
algorithm remains unknown.
We concern about the question of whether the data-dependent optimal learning algorithm on Ωmix is
implicit or explicit, as this is directly related to the generalizability of the ICL model. Existing works
have studied ICL models trained on mixed types of tasks to perform “algorithm selection” (Li et al.,
2023a; Bai et al., 2023; Bhattamishra et al., 2024; Wang et al., 2024b). “Algorithm selection” refers
to the process where, among all algorithms that are explicitly optimal for specific pre-training tasks,
the ICL model selects the most suitable algorithm based on the specific task context. This can be
formally described when trained with Ωmix :

                                gM (x(q) , D; θM ) = g ∗ (x(q) , D),                                     (7)
                                       X           X
                 s.t., g ∗ = arg min          ′          (i) (i)     ′
                                                                       ℓ(g(x(i) , D/D′ , y(i) ),
                                 g∈G Ωmix     D ⊂D      (x   ,y   )∈D

which is an end-to-end explicit optimal algorithm.
However, we question whether the ICL model truly learns the “algorithm selection” algorithm when
trained on mixed types of tasks. While this interpretation may appear reasonable based on existing


                                                       6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 5: Comparing ICL’s predictions and true labels with different types of tasks. Upper: true label.
Lower: ICL prediction.



empirical results, it raises concerns about the model’s generalizability to unseen task types and
out-of-distribution data—an aspect that has not been thoroughly investigated in the literature. First, If
ICL model trained with Ωmix strictly follows (7), it would struggle catastrophically with tasks from
novel types that cannot be solved by any g ∈ G Ωmix . Second, if the model learns an explicit optimal
algorithm for tasks from seen types, it would lack the distribution sensitivity necessary to consistently
handle tasks from seen types with data from varying distributions. The following results show that
ICL is not "algorithm selection".



3.3.1   ICL C AN S OLVE TASKS FROM U NSEEN T YPE

We continue to consider the ICL model trained on the above Ωmix , but now introduce a novel type of
tasks for testing: radial distance tasks Ωrad . A task is generated by first sampling r ∈ R from p(τ ),
which defines the classification boundary. Then, {x(i) ∈ Rd }N   i=1 are sampled from p(x), and labels
are assigned as follows: y(i) = 0 if ||x(i) || ≤ r otherwise y(i) = 1. Note that we specifically control
p(x) based on r to ensure that the labels are balanced within each task.
Such radial distance tasks cannot be solved by following the “algorithm selection” approach, as a
radial distance task D cannot
                           P be learned by any g ∈ G Ωmix = {MatchNet, ProtoNet, CNPs}. Formally,
∀g ∈ G Ωmix , Ep(τ ),p(x) [ (x(i) ,y(i) )∈D ℓ(g(x(i) , D/(x(i) , y(i) )), y(i) )] = l, where l represents the
expected loss of making predictions through random guessing. Following the "algorithm selection"
interpretation in (7), no g ∗ can be determined. Even if an arbitrary g ∗ were selected and used, its
performance would not improve with an increasing number of examples.
However, we find that ICL model
trained with Ωmix can handle radials
distance tasks effectively. While the
exemplar tasks in the 4-6th columns
in Figure 5 show that ICL model
does not solve them optimally, the
increasing accuracy with a growing
number of examples, as shown in
Figure 4(a), indicates that it effec-
tively learns task-specific informa-       (a) Radial distance tasks.      (b) Under distribution shift.
tion—something that an “algorithm Figure 4: Performance comparing between ICL and ideal "al-
selector” cannot achieve. We con- gorithm selection".
jecture that when g ∈ Ωg is inclu-
sive, the pre-trained ICL could be generalized to diverse tasks, including those from novel types. This
property likely contributes to the success of LLMs by approaching the ideal of “learning-to-learn.”


                                                     7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


3.3.2    ICL S HOWS D ISTRIBUTION -S ENSITIVE G ENERALIZABILITY
Another result reveals that the ICL model has limited generalizability, even on tasks from seen types,
as it is sensitive to the data distribution. In contrast, an “algorithm selector,” as an explicit optimal
algorithm, would not exhibit such sensitivity. Figure 4(b) shows the ICL’s performance on hybrid
tasks from seen type. The ICL model is trained with Ωmix from with input distribution p(x), but tested
on Ω′mix with a shifted distribution p′ (x). The performance decreases noticeably as the distribution
shift between training and testing (x-axis) increases, despite the tasks being from seen types. This
result directly addresses our question, demonstrating that though ICL model trained with Ωmix does
learn a data-dependent optimal learning algorithm, it is implicit. Consequently, the ICL model
exhibits limited generalizability, as its meta-testing performance is sensitive to data distribution. This
behavior reflects the generalizability characteristics of deep learning, now observed at the meta-level.

4     I MPROVING ICL M ODELS BY T RANSFERRING T ECHNIQUES FOR
      C LASSICAL D EEP N ETWORKS
Above, we have seen that ICL model can be seen as a data-dependent optimal meta-learner. However,
the learned data-dependent optimal algorithm is fitting the training distribution, limiting generaliz-
ability — a behavior similar to well-known characteristics of classical deep networks. There are
many techniques to enhance classical deep networks’ performance, e.g., contrastive learning (Khosla
et al., 2020), meta-learning (Finn et al., 2017), curriculum learning (Bengio et al., 2009), and data
augmentation (Shorten & Khoshgoftaar, 2019). We are motivated to transfer exemplar techniques
that are originally for deep networks to address the above problems to ICL here.
From a motivational perspective, classical deep networks and ICL models share fundamental chal-
lenges. Both require inclusive training data for generalization, but training data is often limited
in real-world. They also share common goals, such as improving generalizability, accelerating
convergence, and enabling fast adaptation. Thus techniques designed to address these issues in
classical deep networks may also be effective for ICL models. From a technical perspective, many
techniques designed to achieve the above goals do not impose strict analytical restrictions on the
loss function or model architecture, requiring only a differentiable supervision signal. And the
inference process of ICL also only relies on feeding-forward. Therefore, these techniques can at least
be implemented at the meta-level through the mapping from samples to tasks, sample-wise loss to
task-wise auto-regressive loss, and epochs to episodes. Here, we discuss two exemplary practices:
meta-level meta-learning, which significantly improves ICL performance on specific domains with
very limited data for adaptation, and meta-level curriculum learning, which effectively accelerates
the pre-training process.

4.1     M ETA -L EVEL M ETA - LEARNING

While general ICL models can be applied directly, adapting them to domain-specific data is common
for building domain-specific intelligence. However, limited domain-specific data increases the risk of
overfitting, a few-task problem akin to the few-shot issue in supervised learning (Wang et al., 2020),
illustrated in detail in Appendix G. Techniques like LoRA (Hu et al., 2022) and prefix-tuning (Li &
Liang, 2021) address this by efficiently adapting ICL models. Unlike existing methods that assume a
pre-trained general ICL model pre-trained by (13) is given, we consider pre-training specifically for
adaptation, optimizing performance after few-task domain adaptation. This meta-level meta-learning
approach mimics few-task adaptation during pre-training by solving a bi-level optimization problem.
It is practical as real-world pre-training tasks are often naturally divided into semantic domains.
Consider a domain distribution p(δ). Each domain δ determines a distribution of tasks pδ (τ ) where
a domain-specific task set Ωδ = {Dτ }Tτ =1     δ
                                                   can be drawn. During pre-training, we manually split
Ωδ into two disjoint task sets: a training (support) task set Ωtrδ = {Dτ }tτ =1 and a validation (query)
                           Tδ
task set Ωval δ = {Dτ }τ =t+1 . Denote a meta-level meta-learner as G(g, Ω; ∆), i.e., a domain adapter
adapting meta-learner g with task set Ω. Denote a meta loss function evaluating meta-learner g with
{Dτtr , Dτval } as ℓmeta (τ, g). Meta-level meta-training is performing:
                                      h 1 X                                              i
                           min Ep(δ)      val
                                                          ℓmeta (τ, G(g(·; θ), Ωtrδ ; ∆)) .          (8)
                             ∆          |Ωδ |    τ ∈Ωδval


                                                    8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Specifically, to adopt meta-level meta-learning for improving the pre-training of the ICL model
                                                                                            tr
g(·; θ) = gM (; θPM ), we implement MAML as the meta-level meta-learner: G(g(·; θ), Ωδ ; ∆) =
              1
g(·; θ − ∇θ |Ωtr | τ ∈Ωtr ℓmeta (τ, g(·; θ))), which avoids designing additional learnable ∆ due to
               δ        δ
MAML’s model-agnostic property. Alternatively, one can also design meta-level meta-learners based
on metric or amortization-based approaches.


  (a) Given 64 tasks for adaptation. (b) Given 256 tasks for adaptation. (c) Given 1024 tasks for adaptation.

Figure 6: Performance of meta-trained ICL model and meta-level meta-trained ICL model on unseen
domain, given a few tasks for adaptation.

We conduct experiments on linear regression tasks, where the distribution of linear weights is
pδ (τ ) = N (µδ , Σδ ) with (µδ , Σδ ) ∼ p(δ). More details are provided in Appendix F. We denote
such meta-level meta-trained ICL model as M2 -ICL. After pre-training, we test on unseen domains
                                                                                                Tδ
drawn from p(δ). Each domain provides Ωtrδ = {Dτ }tτ =1 for adaptation, and Ωval     δ = {Dτ }τ =t+1
for performance evaluation. The performance is shown in Figure 6. Note that reasonable solutions
include ICL w/ adpt, ICL w/o adpt, and M2 -ICl w/ adpt, while M2 -ICl w/o adpt serves only as an
intermediate product of meta-level meta-learning. We find that M2 -ICL w/ adpt outperforms both
ICL w/ adpt and ICL w/o adpt, particularly when the number of adaptation tasks is very small (64,
Figure 6(a)), while the advantage gradually decreases with the growth of task number (marginal
with 1024 adaptation tasks Figure 6(c)). Meta-level meta-learning is effective for fast adaptation on
few-task domain, like typical meta-learning’s effectiveness for fast adaptation on few-shot task. Note
that, although the adaptation strategy in this experiment involves fine-tuning all parameters using
gradient descent (i.e., G is derived from MAML with inner updates as full-parameter fine-tuning),
any differentiable adaptation strategy can replace the inner-update or be incorporated into other
specifications of G. The comparison between ICL and M2 -ICL is isomorphic with the comparison
between a model trained using standard supervised learning and a model meta-trained using MAML.
Experiment results on cross-domain few-shot image classification is provided in Appendix H.

4.2   M ETA -L EVEL C URRICULUM L EARNING

Curriculum meta-learning strategy is intuitive, as a meta-learner should progressively learn tasks
from simple to complex for better convergence (Bengio et al., 2009). This approach has been shown
to be effective for gradient-based meta-learners (Chen et al., 2021; Stergiadis et al., 2021). Here, we
investigate whether the curriculum strategy can enhance the meta-training of ICL.
We consider a simple case: an
ICL model learning linear regres-
sion tasks, where task complexity
is evaluated by the number of di-
mensions. This approach, practiced
by Garg et al. (2022), has not yet
been explicitly investigated for its
effect. With a maximum dimension
of 20, we train the ICL model on
tasks with an increasing number of       (a) Effective dimension.            (b) Training loss.
effective dimensions (denoted such
baseline as CL-ICL, which curricu- Figure 7: Training dynamics of ICL model with curriculum.
lum is shown in Figure 7(a)), while
values in the remaining dimensions are set to zero. The training loss (Figure 7(b)) and performance


                                                      9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


comparison under limited training (Figure 8(a)) demonstrate that this curriculum enables faster con-
vergence. However, with sufficient training, the ICL models trained with and without the curriculum
exhibit nearly identical training loss and testing performance (Figure 8(b)). This result suggests that,
in this case, the curriculum strategy accelerates convergence but does not lead to a better optimum.

5   R ELATED W ORKS
Here, we provide a detailed discus-
sion of the connections between this
paper and the most relevant studies.
It has been comprehensively inves-
tigated (Akyürek et al., 2023; Bai
et al., 2023) that the explicit learn-
ing algorithms that transformers can
learn in-context, including ridge re-
gression, least squares, and Lasso
on linear regression tasks. Building                        5                               5
on their findings, we believe that (a) Testing @ 2 × 10 episodes. (b) Testing @ 5 × 10 episodes.
transformers are capable of learn- Figure 8: Testing performance of ICL model with curriculum.
ing numerous explicit learning algo-
rithms in-context. Rather than focusing on identifying specific explicit algorithms under different
settings, our work provides a broader and more abstract understanding of ICL with transformers.
We conceptualize ICL as a data-dependent model that can express typical meta-learners. These
meta-learners are capable of expressing a wide range of explicit learning algorithms (Finn & Levine,
2018; Zaheer et al., 2017) and can be applied to a variety of broad applications (Wu et al., 2024; Yao
et al., 2024; Wang et al., 2024a). It has also been proven that ICL with transformers can implement
gradient descent on neural networks (Bai et al., 2023), which we leverage as an important tool to
show that ICL can perform gradient-based meta-learning algorithms.
We adopt the definition of a learning algorithm from Kirsch et al. (2022) and build on their under-
standing that ICL models function as general-purpose meta-learning systems with minimal inductive
bias. They demonstrate that ICL models can do learning-to-learn and a large number of training tasks
matters. We compare ICL models with other meta-learners, proving the expressiveness of ICL with
transformers and revealing its learnability and the characteristics of the algorithms it learns.

6   C ONCLUSION , L IMITATIONS AND D ISCUSSION
Pre-training an ICL model is essentially learning-to-learn. This paper compares ICL models with
typical meta-learners, suggesting strategies to enhance ICL. It shows that ICL with transformers
can learn optimal algorithms in a data-dependent way, but generalizability remains an issue as the
learned algorithm may fit the training distribution rather than generalize well. ICL models in meta-
learning are similar to deep models in supervised learning, sharing characteristics like data-dependent
optimality and generalizability challenges. We propose applying deep-learning techniques, such as
meta-level meta-learning and curriculum learning, to improve ICL. These strategies could enhance
domain adaptability and speed up convergence, providing insights into ICL and a foundation for
more robust models.
This paper examines ICL with transformers without considering the order of examples. Future
research could explore the impact of positional embeddings in transformers, alternative architectures
like RNNs and SSMs (Gu & Dao, 2023), and the convergence dynamics of pre-training ICL models,
especially for real-world LLMs. Additionally, advanced techniques like contrastive learning and
denoising could be adapted to the meta-level to further improve ICL performance.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
Q. Yao’s work is supported by National Natural Science Foundation of China (under Grant No.
92270106), Beijing Natural Science Foundation (under Grant No. 4242039), and CCF-Huawei
Populus Grove Fund.


                                                  10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


R EFERENCES
Josh Achiam, Steven Adler, Sandhini Agarwal, Lama Ahmad, Ilge Akkaya, Florencia Leoni Aleman,
  Diogo Almeida, Janko Altenschmidt, Sam Altman, Shyamal Anadkat, et al. GPT-4 technical report.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.08774, 2023.
Kwangjun Ahn, Xiang Cheng, Hadi Daneshmand, and Suvrit Sra. Transformers learn to implement
 preconditioned gradient descent for in-context learning. In NeurIPS, pp. 45614–45650, 2023.
Ekin Akyürek, Dale Schuurmans, Jacob Andreas, Tengyu Ma, and Denny Zhou. What learning
  algorithm is in-context learning? investigations with linear models. In ICLR, 2023.
Yu Bai, Fan Chen, Huan Wang, Caiming Xiong, and Song Mei. Transformers as statisticians:
  Provable in-context learning with in-context algorithm selection. In NeurIPS, pp. 57125–57211,
  2023.
Yoshua Bengio, Jérôme Louradour, Ronan Collobert, and Jason Weston. Curriculum learning. In
  ICML, pp. 41–48, 2009.
Satwik Bhattamishra, Arkil Patel, Phil Blunsom, and Varun Kanade. Understanding in-context
  learning in transformers and LLMs by learning to learn discrete functions. In ICLR, 2024.
John Bronskill, Daniela Massiceti, Massimiliano Patacchiola, Katja Hofmann, Sebastian Nowozin,
  and Richard Turner. Memory efficient meta-learning with large images. In NeurIPS, pp. 24327–
  24339, 2021.
Tom B Brown. Language models are few-shot learners. In NeurIPS, pp. 1877–1901, 2020.
Yudong Chen, Xin Wang, Miao Fan, Jizhou Huang, Shengwen Yang, and Wenwu Zhu. Curriculum
  meta-learning for next POI recommendation. In KDD, pp. 2692–2702, 2021.
Damai Dai, Yutao Sun, Li Dong, Yaru Hao, Shuming Ma, Zhifang Sui, and Furu Wei. Why can GPT
  learn in-context? language models implicitly perform gradient descent as meta-optimizers. In
  Findings of the ACL, pp. 4005–4019, 2023.
Chelsea Finn and Sergey Levine. Meta-learning and universality: Deep representations and gradient
  descent can approximate any learning algorithm. In ICLR, 2018.
Chelsea Finn, Pieter Abbeel, and Sergey Levine. Model-agnostic meta-learning for fast adaptation of
  deep networks. In ICML, pp. 1126–1135, 2017.
Victor Garcia and Joan Bruna. Few-shot learning with graph neural networks. In ICLR, 2018.
Shivam Garg, Dimitris Tsipras, Percy S Liang, and Gregory Valiant. What can transformers learn
  in-context? a case study of simple function classes. In NeurIPS, pp. 30583–30598, 2022.
Marta Garnelo, Dan Rosenbaum, Christopher Maddison, Tiago Ramalho, David Saxton, Murray
 Shanahan, Yee Whye Teh, Danilo Rezende, and SM Ali Eslami. Conditional neural processes. In
 ICML, pp. 1704–1713, 2018.
Khashayar Gatmiry, Nikunj Saunshi, Sashank J Reddi, Stefanie Jegelka, and Sanjiv Kumar. Can
  looped transformers learn to implement multi-step gradient descent for in-context learning? In
 ICML, pp. 15130–15152, 2024.
Albert Gu and Tri Dao. Mamba: Linear-time sequence modeling with selective state spaces. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2312.00752, 2023.
Kurt Hornik, Maxwell Stinchcombe, and Halbert White. Multilayer feedforward networks are
  universal approximators. Neural Networks, 2(5):359–366, 1989.
Timothy Hospedales, Antreas Antoniou, Paul Micaelli, and Amos Storkey. Meta-learning in neural
  networks: A survey. IEEE TPAMI, 44(9):5149–5169, 2021.
Edward J Hu, Yelong Shen, Phillip Wallis, Zeyuan Allen-Zhu, Yuanzhi Li, Shean Wang, Lu Wang,
  and Weizhu Chen. LoRA: Low-rank adaptation of large language models. In ICLR, 2022.


                                                11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Yu Huang, Yuan Cheng, and Yingbin Liang. In-context convergence of transformers. In ICML, pp.
  19660–19722, 2024.
Prannay Khosla, Piotr Teterwak, Chen Wang, Aaron Sarna, Yonglong Tian, Phillip Isola, Aaron
  Maschinot, Ce Liu, and Dilip Krishnan. Supervised contrastive learning. In NeurIPS, pp. 18661–
  18673, 2020.
Louis Kirsch, James Harrison, Jascha Sohl-Dickstein, and Luke Metz. General-purpose in-context
  learning by meta-learning transformers. arXiv preprint arXiv:2212.04458, 2022.
Gregory Koch, Richard Zemel, Ruslan Salakhutdinov, et al. Siamese neural networks for one-shot
  image recognition. In ICML Deep Learning Workshop, volume 2, pp. 1–30. Lille, 2015.
Yann LeCun, Yoshua Bengio, and Geoffrey Hinton. Deep learning. Nature, 521(7553):436–444,
  2015.
Hongkang Li, Meng Wang, Songtao Lu, Xiaodong Cui, and Pin-Yu Chen. How do nonlinear
  transformers learn and generalize in in-context learning? In ICML, pp. 28734–28783, 2024.
Xiang Lisa Li and Percy Liang. Prefix-Tuning: Optimizing continuous prompts for generation. In
  ACL, pp. 4582–4597, 2021.
Yingcong Li, Muhammed Emrullah Ildiz, Dimitris Papailiopoulos, and Samet Oymak. Transformers
  as algorithms: Generalization and stability in in-context learning. In ICML, pp. 19565–19594,
  2023a.
Yuchen Li, Yuanzhi Li, and Andrej Risteski. How do transformers learn topic structure: Towards a
  mechanistic understanding. In ICML, pp. 19689–19729, 2023b.
Arvind Mahankali, Tatsunori B Hashimoto, and Tengyu Ma. One step of gradient descent is provably
  the optimal in-context learner with one layer of linear self-attention. In ICLR, 2024.
Sachin Ravi and Alex Beatson. Amortized bayesian meta-learning. In ICLR, 2019.
Michael E Sander, Raja Giryes, Taiji Suzuki, Mathieu Blondel, and Gabriel Peyré. How do trans-
 formers perform in-context autoregressive learning? In ICML, pp. 43235–43254, 2024.
Jürgen Schmidhuber. Evolutionary principles in self-referential learning, or on learning how to learn:
  the meta-meta-... hook. PhD thesis, Technische Universität München, 1987.
Connor Shorten and Taghi M Khoshgoftaar. A survey on image data augmentation for deep learning.
  Journal of big data, 6(1):1–48, 2019.
Jake Snell, Kevin Swersky, and Richard Zemel. Prototypical networks for few-shot learning. In
  NeurIPS, pp. 4077–4087, 2017.
Emmanouil Stergiadis, Priyanka Agrawal, and Oliver Squire. Curriculum meta-learning for few-shot
  classification. arXiv preprint arXiv:2112.02913, 2021.
Flood Sung, Yongxin Yang, Li Zhang, Tao Xiang, Philip HS Torr, and Timothy M Hospedales.
  Learning to compare: Relation network for few-shot learning. In CVPR, pp. 1199–1208, 2018.
Sebastian Thrun and Lorien Pratt. Learning to learn: Introduction and overview. In Learning to
  Learn, pp. 3–17. Springer, 1998.
Yuandong Tian, Yiping Wang, Beidi Chen, and Simon S Du. Scan and snap: Understanding training
  dynamics and token composition in 1-layer transformer. In NeurIPS, pp. 71911–71947, 2023.
Eleni Triantafillou, Tyler Zhu, Vincent Dumoulin, Pascal Lamblin, Utku Evci, Kelvin Xu, Ross
  Goroshin, Carles Gelada, Kevin Swersky, Pierre-Antoine Manzagol, et al. META-DATASET: A
  dataset of datasets for learning to learn from few examples. In ICLR, 2020.
A Vaswani. Attention is all you need. In NeurIPS, pp. 5998–6008, 2017.


                                                 12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Ricardo Vilalta and Youssef Drissi. A perspective view and survey of meta-learning. Artificial
  Intelligence Review, 18:77–95, 2002.
Oriol Vinyals, Charles Blundell, Timothy Lillicrap, Daan Wierstra, et al. Matching networks for one
  shot learning. In NeurIPS, pp. 3630–3638, 2016.
Johannes Von Oswald, Eyvind Niklasson, Ettore Randazzo, João Sacramento, Alexander Mordvintsev,
  Andrey Zhmoginov, and Max Vladymyrov. Transformers learn in-context by gradient descent. In
  ICML, pp. 35151–35174, 2023.
Yaqing Wang, Quanming Yao, James T Kwok, and Lionel M Ni. Generalizing from a few examples:
  A survey on few-shot learning. ACM Computing Surveys, 53(3):1–34, 2020.
Yaqing Wang, Hongming Piao, Daxiang Dong, Quanming Yao, and Jingbo Zhou. Warming up
  cold-start CTR prediction by learning item-specific feature interactions. In KDD, pp. 3233–3244,
  2024a.
Zhijie Wang, Bo Jiang, and Shuai Li. In-context learning on function classes unveiled for transformers.
  In ICML, pp. 50726–50745, 2024b.
Noam Wies, Yoav Levine, and Amnon Shashua. The learnability of in-context learning. In NeurIPS,
  pp. 36637–36651, 2023.
Shiguang Wu, Yaqing Wang, and Quanming Yao. PACIA: Parameter-efficient adapter for few-shot
  molecular property prediction. In IJCAI, pp. 5208–5216, 2024.
Quanming Yao, Zhenqian Shen, Yaqing Wang, and Dejing Dou. Property-aware relation networks
  for few-shot molecular property prediction. IEEE TPAMI, 46(8):5413–5429, 2024.
Manzil Zaheer, Satwik Kottur, Siamak Ravanbakhsh, Barnabas Poczos, Russ R Salakhutdinov, and
 Alexander J Smola. Deep sets. In NeurIPS, pp. 3391–3401, 2017.
Ruiqi Zhang, Spencer Frei, and Peter L Bartlett. Trained transformers learn linear models in-context.
  JMLR, 25(49):1–55, 2024.
Yufeng Zhang, Fengzhuo Zhang, Zhuoran Yang, and Zhaoran Wang. What and how does in-context
  learning learn? bayesian model averaging, parameterization, and generalization. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2305.19420, 2023.


                                                 13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A     P RELIMINARIES
A.1    I N -C ONTEXT L EARNING WITH T RANSFORMER

Input. Following existing works (Von Oswald et al., 2023; Ahn et al., 2023), we investigate
ICL without positional embedding to study its learning-to-learn ability while ignoring the order of
examples. Let x(i) ∈ Rd be a input, and y(i) ∈ Re be the corresponding output. For each task τ ,
there a task-specific function fτ and dataset of the task Dτ that ∀(x(i) , y(i) ) ∈ Dτ , y(i) = fτ (x(i) ).
Labeled examples and query of a task are input together. Define the input matrix Z0 :
                                         (1)
                                        x       x(2) · · · x(n) x(n+1)
                                                                            ∈ R(d+e)×(n+1) ,
           (1) (2)     (n)  (n+1)

   Z0 = z z · · · z z               = (1)                                                              (9)
                                        y       y(2) · · · y(n)       q
where q ∈∈ Re is the indicator of unlabeled query. ICL model is trained to output the prediction of
y(n+1) given Z0 , with a set of tasks {Dτ }Tτ=1 = {{(x(i) , y(i) )}N    T
                                                                   i=1 }τ =1 from training distribution
                                                                     τ

             (i)
fτ ∼ p(τ ), x ∼ p(x), to generalize to unseen tasks.

Model Architecture. ICL is typically achieved by transformer, which are composed of stacked
self-attention layers. Given Z ∈ R(d+e)×(n+1) , a single-head self-attention layer Attnsmax is defined
as
                                                           ⊤ ⊤
                             Attnsmax
                                 Wk,q,v (Z) = Wv Z · smax(Z Wk Wq Z) ,                                (10)

where Wv , Wk , Wq ∈ R(d+e)×(d+e) are the (value, key and query) weight matrices, and smax(·) is
the softmax operator which applies softmax operation to each column of the input matrix. Note that
the prompt is asymmetric since the label for x(n+1) is excluded from the input.
An M -layer transformer, denoted as TFM , consists of a stack of M self-attention layers and MLP
blocks. Formally, denoting by Zl the output of the lth layer attention, we define
                    Zl+1 = Zl + σαl (AttnPl ,Ql (Zl )) for l = 0, 1, . . . , M − 1,                   (11)
where σ(·) represents feed-forward layers parameterized by αl , which operates independently on
each column of the input. Given Z0 , the prediction is obtained as
                                                        −1
                   ŷ(n+1) = TFM (Z0 ; {Pl , Ql , αl }M
                                                      l=0 , Wr ) = Wr [ZM ]:,(n+1) ,                  (12)

where [ZM ]:,(n+1) is the (n + 1)-th column of ZM , and Wr ∈ Re×(d+e) is the linear readout weight.
During training, given the distribution of tasks fτ ∼ p(τ ), x(i) ∼ p(x), and loss function ℓ(·, ·) (e.g.,
cross-entropy), the parameters are optimized to minimize the expectation of auto-regressive loss of
training tasks:
                                                             τ −1
                                                         1 NX
                                                                  ℓ(ŷ(i+1) , y(i+1) ) .

                               min         Ep(τ ),p(x)                                                (13)
                                   M −1
                      {Pl ,Ql ,θl }l=0 ,Wr              N τ i=0


A.2    M ETA -L EARNING

Meta-learning is a methodology concerned with “learning-to-learn” algorithms. Define g(·; θ) is
a meta-learner that maps a task dataset Dτ and a query input x(q) to its task-specific prediction.
Typical meta-learning algorithms first learn an explicit model to a model h from Dτ and then perform
the prediction, i.e, ŷ(q) = g(x(q) , D; θ) = g ′ (D; θ)(x(q) ). For meta-training, given the training
distribution p(τ ) and p(x), from which the tasks {Dτ }Tτ=1 are drawn, the goal is to learn g(·; θ) that
performs well on unseen tasks. Within each task, a training set Dτtr = {(xτ,i , yτ,i )}ni=1 is used to
provide supervised information, and a validation set Dτval = {(xτ,i , yτ,i )}N τ
                                                                             i=n+1 is used to evaluate
performance and optimize the meta-learner. The meta-training process is then performed as:
                                                      Nτ
                                               1     X
                                                          ℓ(g(x(i) , Dτtr ; θ), y(i) ) .

                       min Ep(τ ),p(x)                                                                (14)
                         θ                   Nτ − n i=n+1


                                                       14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


B     O PTIMALITY OF A L EARNING A LGORITHM
We claim ICL model learns data-dependent optimal learning algorithms (DDOLA), which is different
and weaker than (true) optimal learning algorithm (OLA).
Formally, given a finite training set Dtrain = {(xi , yi )} where each sample is i.i.d.: (xi , yi ) ∼
p(x, y), and a unseen testing set Dtest = {(xj , yj )} following the same distribution, the OLA is
g ∗ = arg maxg E(xj ,yj )∼p(x,y) {Prob[g(xj , Dtrain ) = yj ]}. Which is to say a learning algorithm can
make the most "accurate" prediction given a training set and unseen target input from the same
distribution. It is possible to know the optimal learning algorithm with the priori of p(x, y). For
example, ordinary least squares is optimal for linear regression with Gaussian noise. In the paper,
three types of tasks are generated by designed ways, i.e., known p(x, y) (Section 3.1). It is obvious
that a MatchNet model with certain parameters (simply keeping all modules inside as identical
mappings) is the optimal learning algorithm for Ωsim , and so does ProtoNet for Ωprt and CNPs for
Ωam . However, meta-learners have not access the true p(x, y). They only learn the function to infer
p(x, y) from Dtrain = {(xi , yi )} through meta-training, which inevitably brings variance and bias,
being (meta-training) data-dependent. So we denote that given certain meta-training set, the best that
a random-initialized and meta-trained deep learner can do as the DDOLA. This could be empirically
approximated by meta-training a deep and random-initialized MatchNet/ProtoNet/CNPs with certain
meta-training set (for the three task types respectively).

C     P ROOF OF THE M ETA -L EVEL E XPRESSIVENESS OF ICL
Theorem C.1. ∀ g ∈ {ggd , gsim , gprt , gam }, ∀ θ ∈ R|θ| , ∃ M ∈ N∗ < ∞, ∃ θM ∈ R|θM | ,
gM (x(q) , D; θM ) = g(x(q) , D; θ).

Proof Sketch The proof of is constructed by decomposing the functions of typical learners into
M ∈ N∗ < ∞ conditioned steps, where each step can be achieved through one transformer layer
with the following two basic tools:
1. Universal approximation property of multi-layer perceptron (MLP) (Hornik et al., 1989): This
   property allows feed-forward layers to express a wide range of functions Rdim1 → Rdim2 . In each
   transformer layer, the feed-forward module operates independently on each column of the input
   matrix. This enables the transformer to perform a wide range of sample-wise transformations at
   every layer.
2. Orthonormal label embedding in R2C : We use a set of orthonormal vectors in R2C as embeddings
   for the categorical labels (including the query identifier), such as one-hot embeddings. This
   ensures that the attention weight matrix A ∈ R(n+1)×(n+1) in the self-attention module of each
   transformer layer can be label-aware. Label-awareness implies that {A ∈ R(n+1)×(n+1) | (y(i) =
      ′                 ′
   y(i ) ) ∧ (y(j) = y(j ) ) ⇒ Ai,j = Ai′ ,j ′ }, i.e., the interaction weight between ordered a sample
   pair (i, j) depends only on their labels (y(i) , y(j) ), and can take any value in R∗ . This allows the
   learning algorithm to achieve the behavior of a label-aware set function.
The decomposition into finite conditioned steps is specific to each theorem and is not necessarily
unique. Next we provide the full proof.

C.1     D ETAIL S ETTINGS

C.1.1    C LASSIFICATION TASK WITH O RTHONORMAL L ABEL E MBEDDING
Classification task specifies the ICL’s input in Section A.1 with y(i) ∈ {c1 , c2 , · · · , cC }, where cc
is the embedding vector of the c-th class. For these label embeddings, we can find 2C orthonormal
vectors in R2C : {uj }2C
                      j=1 , such that:

                                         ⊤         1, if i = j
                                       ui uj =                  .                                     (15)
                                                   0, if i ̸= j
A simple choice of {uj }2C                                                C
                        j=1 is the set of 2C one-hot vectors. We use {uj }j=1 as the embeddings of
     C            (i)     C
{cc }c=1 , i.e., y ∈ {uj }j=1 , and uC+1 as the indicator of query q.


                                                   15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


C.1.2    S ELF -ATTENTION WITHOUT S OFTMAX

In our setting, we consider self-attention layers that replace the softmax operation in (10) with
column-wise L1-normalization. In particular, (10) is now approximated and reparameterized with
weights P := Wv ∈ R(d+e)×(d+e) and Q := Wk ⊤ Wq ∈ R(d+e)×(d+e) as:

                                                         ⊤
                                AttnP,Q (Z) = P Znormcol
                                                     1 (Z QZ) .                                     (16)
                         
                             Ai,j          X
                         
                          P           ,       |Ai,j | =
                                                       ̸ 0
                             i |Ai,j |
                         
                         
                                             i
where [normcol
           1   (A)]i,j =      X                            . Note that it is conventional to omit certain
                          0,      |A       | = 0
                         
                                       i,j
                         
                         
                         
                                  i
non-linearities, such as the softmax operation, in self-attention layers to align transformers with
explicit learning algorithms. While existing works often replace the softmax operation with n1
(Von Oswald et al., 2023; Ahn et al., 2023), the normcol
                                                     1 in (16) provides a closer approximation.

Since the proof for the gradient-based algorithm (3) follows trivially from the results of Bai et al.
(2023); Wang et al. (2024b), we focus on metric-based algorithms (4) and (5), as well as amortization-
based algorithms (6). We prove that there exists an TF model with specific real-valued parameters
that can perform these algorithms.
Note that, for simplicity in proving the expressiveness of ICL with transformer, we focus on the
algorithm framework: we leave feature-level transformations with neural networks alone as they can
occur in both ICL model and conventional meta-learners, and enjoy the same universal approximation
property (Hornik et al., 1989); we also do not consider the order of samples in D, omitting any se-
quential models in meta-learners and positional embeddings in ICL. Typical metric-based algorithms
are thus categorized into to types: one is based on pair-wise distance (4), e.g., MatchNet; another
one is based on distance with class prototypes (5), e.g., ProtoNet. And typical amortization-based
algorithms are summarized as a function taking the query and the encoded set as input (6). By proving
that these exemplar set and inference functions can be implemented, more complex algorithms—such
as feature-wise transformations, interactions between samples, and advanced distance functions—can
be easily achieved through the recursive application of self-attention and feed-forward layers.

C.1.3    ICL C AN P ERFORM PAIR -W ISE M ETRIC -BASED A LGORITHMS

For pair-wise metric-based algorithms, we take MatchNet for example, proving (12) can perform
                                                n
                                             1X
                               ŷ(n+1) =           < x(i) , x(n+1) > y(i) .                         (17)
                                             n i=1

In fact, this case is relatively simple and can be implemented using      a  single-layer
                                                                                        transformer

                                                                     I 0                0 0
without relying on the two tools. One implementation is Q0 =                 , P0 =           , Wr =
                                                                      0 0               0 I
                ⊤
  0 ··· 0                                                              Pn
                  . Note that though the output of TF would be λ i=1 < x(i) , x(n+1) > y(i) ,
 u1 · · · uc
where λ ∈ R is a query-specific value, it has the same classification result with (17).

C.1.4    ICL C AN P ERFORM C LASS -P ROTOTYPE M ETRIC -BASED A LGORITHMS

For the second category of metric-based algorithms, we take ProtoNet for example, proving (12) can
perform

                                       C
                                       X           1 X (i)
                           ŷ(n+1) =         −||          x − x(n+1) ||uc .                         (18)
                                       c=1
                                                   Nc (i)
                                                      y    =c



                                                      16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


This can be implemented by a 3C − 1 layer transformer achieving [Z3l−1 ](d:d+2C),(n+1) = q +
Pl        (n+1)
  c=1 ||x       − pc ||u(c+1+C)mod(2C) in the following step-by-step functions:
                                                (1)
                                               x      x(2) · · · x(n) x(n+1)
                                        Z0 = (1)                                  ,      (19)
                                               y      y(2) · · · y(n)       q
                                                             (i)
                                                             x      x(n+1) − p1
                                                      Z1 = (i)                    ,      (20)
                                                             y           q
                                                (i)
                                                x           x(n+1) − p1
                                         Z2 = (i)                                 ,      (21)
                                                y     q + ||x(n+1) − p1 ||uC+2
                                                (i)
                                                x               x(n+1)
                                         Z3 = (i)             (n+1)               ,      (22)
                                                y     q + ||x       − p1 ||uC+2
                                                (i)
                                                x           x(n+1) − p2
                                         Z4 = (i)                                 ,      (23)
                                                y     q + ||x(n+1) − p1 ||uC+2
                         (i)
                        x                        x(n+1) − p2
                Z5 = (i)              (n+1)                                       ,      (24)
                        y     q + ||x       − p1 ||uC+2 + ||x(n+1) − p2 ||uC+3
                         (i)
                        x                           x(n+1)
                Z6 = (i)              (n+1)                                       ,      (25)
                        y     q + ||x       − p1 ||uC+2 + ||x(n+1) − p2 ||uC+3
                                                                                   ··· ,         (26)
                             (i)                               (n+1)

                            x                             x
                    Z3l−3 = (i)            Pl−1        (n+1)                           ,         (27)
                            y         q+     c=1 ||x           − pi ||u(i+1+C)mod(2C)
                             (i)
                                                   x(n+1) − pl

                            x
                    Z3l−2 = (i)            Pl−1                                 ,                (28)
                            y         q + c=1 ||x(n+1) − pi ||u(i+1+C)mod(2C)
                             (i)
                                                   x(n+1) − pl

                            x
                    Z3l−1 = (i)          Pl                                     ,                (29)
                            y         q + c=1 ||x(n+1) − pi ||u(i+1+C)mod(2C)
                                                                                                 (30)
                                                                              ⊤
                           0     ···           0           ···    0
and readout by Wr =                                                    . Each step of function
                        −uC+2 · · · −u(c+1+C)mod(2C) · · · −u1
from Zl to Zl+1 can be implemented by one transformer layer, which would be proved later.

C.1.5   ICL C AN P ERFORM A MORTIZATION -BASED A LGORITHMS
                              Pn                            ′
Denote the set embedding n1 i=1 [x(i) |y(i) ] as e ∈ Rd . As f in (6) can always be implemented by
feed forward layers taking the concatenation of x(q) and e as input, there exists a learnable function
        ′
h1 in Rd × Rd and h2 in Rd × R2C that
                               f ([(x(q) )⊤ , e⊤ ]⊤ ) = h2 (x(q) + h1 (e)).                       (31)
Thus, we prove that (12) can perform
                                                              n
                                                           1 X (i) (i)
                           ŷ(n+1) = h2 (x(n+1) + h1 (           [x |y ])).                       (32)
                                                           n i=1
This can be implemented by a 3 layer transformer achieving the following step-by-step function:
                                          (1)
                                         x     x(2) · · · x(n) x(n+1)
                                Z0 = (1)                                      ,               (33)
                                         y     y(2) · · · y(n)        q
                                                          Pn
                                          x(n+1) + h1 ( n1 i=1 [x(i) |y(i) ])
                                    (i)
                                   x
                           Z1 = (i)                                                           (34)
                                   y                      q
                                                         Pn
                                    h2 (x(n+1) + h1 ( n1 i=1 [x(i) |y(i) ]))
                              (i)
                             x
                       Z2 = (i)                                               ,               (35)
                             y                         q

                        I 0
and readout by Wr =          . Each step of function from Zl to Zl+1 can be implemented by one
                        0 0
transformer layer, which would be proved now.


                                                  17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


C.1.6     T HE F UNCTION OF O NE T RANSFORMER L AYER
A transformer layer (11) can perform a wide range of functions, as we can decompose it is composed
of a self-attention layer and feed-forward layers, where (i) self-attention (16) with orthonormal label
tokenization (15) can achieve a wide range of label-aware set operations. (ii) feed-forward layer σ(·)
in (11) can learn any measurable functions in Rd+2c × Rd+2c . Here we prove how a transformer
layer can obtain the above functions from Zl to Zl+1 . The main idea is a function can be decomposed
to three sub-steps: label-selecting which is achieved by A = Z ⊤ QZ, linear interaction achieved by
P Znormcol1 (A), and non-linear transformation by σθ (·) if needed.


Label-Aware Attention. In one self-attention layer, equation (16), first each column in Z refer to
other columns through attention weights A = Z ⊤ QZ. A ∈ R(n+1)×(n+1) is selecting interaction
objectives and weighting interaction weights. We use label-aware to describe {A ∈ R(n+1)×(n+1) |
            ′                 ′
(y(i) = y(i ) ) ∧ (y(j) = y(j ) ) ⇒ Ai,j = Ai′ ,j ′ }, i.e., the interaction weight between ordered
sample-pair (i, j) only depends on their labels (y(i) , y(j) ) (including unknown label q), and can be
arbitrary value in R.
With our orthonormal label embedding in R2c , A is label-aware, thus can achieve label-aware
interaction. For example, to achieve (19) to (20), we require (c + 1)2 conditions about A:
                                
                                  Ac1 ,q = 1
                                
                                Aci ,q = 0, i ∈ {2, 3, · · · , C}
                                
                                
                                
                                   Aq,ci = 0, i ∈ {1, 2, · · · , C}                           (36)
                                                      ∈ {1,    · · ·
                                
                                
                                
                                  A ci ,cj = 0, i, j       2,       , C}
                                
                                
                                   Aq,q = 0

                                                                           0 0
As A = Z ⊤ QZ and Ai,j is only related to y(i) , y(j) , we have Q =              where L ∈ R2C×2C .
                                                                           0 L
Equation (36) gives (C + 1)2 linear equations about L:
                                ⊤
                               
                                 u1 Luq = 1
                               
                                   ⊤
                               ui Luq = 0, i ∈ {2, 3, · · · , C}
                               
                               
                               
                               
                                  u⊤
                                   q Lui = 0, i ∈ {1, 2, · · · , C}                           (37)
                               
                                  ⊤
                               ui Luj = 0, i, j ∈ {1, 2, · · · , C}
                               
                               
                               
                                ⊤
                               
                                  uq Luq = 0
Proposition C.2. ∀c > 1, Equation (37) has solutions in R2C×2C .
                                                                                                       2
Proof. Denote ui ⊗ uj                         [ui,1 u⊤         ⊤                  ⊤ ⊤
                                                                                                    R4C ,   ⃗
                                         =           j , ui,2 uj , · · · , ui,2C uj ]       ∈               L    =
                                               2
                                                                                   ⊤⃗
[L1,1 , · · · , L1,2C , · · · , L2C,2C ]⊤ ∈ R4C , then u⊤ i Luj = (ui ⊗ uj ) L.

         ⃗ = A,
(37)⇐⇒ U L   ⃗ where
                                                                                        2       2
                     U = [ui ⊗ uj for i, j ∈ {1, 2, · · · , C + 1}]⊤ ∈ R(C+1) ×4C .                             (38)


                                                             2c
                                                             X
                            (ui ⊗ uj )⊤ (ui′ ⊗ uj ′ ) =            uit ui′ t u⊤
                                                                              j uj ′                            (39)
                                                             t=1
                                                                      X2c
                                                        = (u⊤
                                                            j u j ′ )(    uit ui′ t )                           (40)
                                                                    t=1
                                                        = (u⊤ u
                                                            j j ′ )(u ⊤
                                                                      i ui′ )                                   (41)
                                                                       ′                ′
                                                              1, if i = i ∧ j = j

                                                        =                                                       (42)
                                                              0, if i ̸= i′ ∨ j ̸= j ′


                                                        18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                       =⇒ rank(U ) = (C + 1)2                                       (43)


                                   2     2
                      ⃗ ∈ R(C+1) ×(4C +1) , c > 1 =⇒ rank([U, A])
                  [U, A]                                      ⃗ ≤ (C + 1)2 .                        (44)

(43), (44) =⇒
                                     ⃗ = rank(U ) = (C + 1)2 < 4C 2 .
                            rank([U, A])                                                            (45)
                                              2
              ⃗ =A
=⇒ Equation U L  ⃗ has solutions in R4C . ⇐⇒ Equation (37) has solutions in R2C×2C .

Note that for any function from Zl to Zl+1 , the number of conditions about A ≤ (2C)2 . Thus for any
label-aware function from Zl to Zl+1 , it requires a label-ware A and we can find a linear system of
            ⃗ = A,
equations U L     ⃗ that has solutions in R4c2 , as the proof rank([U, A])
                                                                       ⃗ = rank(U ) ≤ 4c2 is without
loss of generalizability.

Linear Interaction. After obtaining desired A, normcol                                  col
                                                          1 (A) is performed as norm1 is a better
approximation of softmax than n1 , and also required to deal with inconsistent label number in our
classification tasks. Then all columns in Z interact with the others linearly through P Znormcol
                                                                                             1  (A).
                                                                                         −I 0
Still taking (19) to (20) as example, after obtaining desired A satisfying (36), P =             can
                                                                                          0 0
achieve the function.

Non-Linear Transformation. In (11), σθ (·) is feed-forward layers that function on each column
of Z independently. Thanks to the universal approximation property (Hornik et al., 1989), it can
approximate any measurable function in Rd+2c × Rd+2c to any desired degree of accuracy. Thus,
feature-level non-linear transformation from Zl to Zl+1 could turn to σθl (·). For example, (19) to
(20) does not require non-linearity so it can be implemented as σ(z) = z. For (20) to (21), one
implementation is σ(z) = [0, ||[z]1:d+1 ||uC+2 ]⊤ . Note that in this step, the = does not hold strictly,
but can be approximated by MLPs with error ϵ > 0. We use "=" to mean such approximation for
simplicity, as the error can be arbitrary small.
In conclusion, each step from Zl to Zl+1 can be implemented using a transformer layer. Typical
metric- and amortization-based meta-learning algorithms (4)(5)(6) can be implemented with ICL.
More complex models following the same set functions can also be performed by ICl with additional
recursion of transformer layers, whose proof is trivial. Moreover, as it has been proved that ICL
can perform gradient-based algorithms (3), ICL can exactly perform conventional handcrafted meta-
learning algorithms.

D    G ENERATING TASKS
Here, we present the task generation process for gsim , gprt and gam . The tasks are designed in specific
forms such that they are all linearly separable in x(i) ∈ Rd , enabling 2D visualization to observe the
behavior of ICL.
For pair-wise metric-based algorithms gsim , we generate a task by sampling C × NC support samples
{x(i) ∈ Rd }C×N
              i=1
                   C
                      from distribution p(τ ) and randomly assign them with labels y (i) = c, making
C × NC supports exactly contains NC label c for each c = 1, 2, · · · , C. Then the remaining
samples {x(i) ∈ Rd }N    C +N
                                   are sampled from distribution px , and assigned with labels y (i) =
            PC×NC i=C×N(i)    C +1

arg maxc j=1,y(j) =c < x , x(j) >. A typical meta-learner, MatchNet, can learn the optimal
classifier. A case is shown in Figure 9(a), where each point corresponds to a x(i) ∈ R2 and different
labels are assigned with different colors.
For class-prototype metric-based algorithms gprt , we generate a task by sampling C prototypes
{pc ∈ Rd }C c=1 from p(τ ). Then sample {x
                                           (i)
                                               ∈ Rd }N i=1 from px , and assign labels by y
                                                                                            (i)
                                                                                                =
                 (i)
argminc ||pc − x ||. The corresponding optimal classifier is ProtoNet. A case is shown in Figure
9(b).


                                                   19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


      (a) Pair-wise metric-based.     (b) Class-prototype metric-based.       (c) Amortization-based.

                                Figure 9: Examples of three types of tasks.


For amortization-based algorithms gam , we pre-define a partition of R, {Ωc }C
                                                                             c=1 , as decision range.
We generate a task by sampling µ ∈ Rd from p(τ ). Then sample {x(i) ∈ Rd }N      i=1 from px (µ) =
                                 (i)
                                                Pd     (i)
N (µ, Σ), and assign labels by y = c where t=1 [x − µ]t ∈ Ωc . The corresponding optimal
classifier is CNPs. A case is shown in Figure 9(c).

E     M ORE E MPIRICAL R ESULTS

E.1     ICL M ODEL T RAINED WITH S INGLE T YPE OF TASKS

Figures 10, 11 and 12 show more cases to support that ICL model learns MatchNet, ProtoNet, CNPs
on Ωsim , Ωprt , Ωam respectively.


    (a) ICL-1.        (b) True-1.       (c) ICL-2.        (d) True-2.     (e) ICL-3.         (f) True-3.

Figure 10: Comparison of ICL’s predictions with true labels on pair-wise metric-based meta-testing
tasks, with the ICL model trained on a single task type.


    (a) ICL-1.        (b) True-1.       (c) ICL-2.        (d) True-2.     (e) ICL-3.         (f) True-3.

Figure 11: Comparing ICL’s predictions and true labels on class-prototype metric-based tasks, with
the ICL model trained on a single task type.


    (a) ICL-1.        (b) True-1.       (c) ICL-2.        (d) True-2.     (e) ICL-3.         (f) True-3.

Figure 13: Comparing ICL’s predictions and true labels on pair-wise metric-based tasks, with the ICL
model trained on mixed task types.


                                                     20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


    (a) ICL-1.     (b) True-1.      (c) ICL-2.        (d) True-2.    (e) ICL-3.      (f) True-3.

Figure 12: Comparing ICL’s predictions and true labels on amortization-based tasks, with the ICL
model trained on a single task type.


    (a) ICL-1.     (b) True-1.      (c) ICL-2.        (d) True-2.    (e) ICL-3.      (f) True-3.

Figure 14: Comparing ICL’s predictions and true labels on class-prototype metric-based tasks, with
the ICL model trained on mixed task types.


    (a) ICL-1.     (b) True-1.      (c) ICL-2.        (d) True-2.    (e) ICL-3.      (f) True-3.

Figure 15: Comparing ICL’s predictions and true labels on amortization-based tasks, with the ICL
model trained on mixed task types.


E.2    ICL M ODEL T RAINED WITH M IXED T YPE OF TASKS

Figures 13, 14 and 15 show cases to support that ICL model learns data-dependent optimal learning
algorithm on Ωmix = {Ωsim , Ωprt , Ωam }.

F     E XPERIMENT D ETAILS
Our code is provided at https://github.com/ovo67/Uni_ICL.


                                                 21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                    Figure 16: The problem setting of meta-level meta-learning.


G     I LLUSTRATION OF M ETA -L EVEL M ETA -L EARNING
Here, we provide further illustrations of the problem setting and the algorithm procedure of the
proposed meta-level meta-learning, supplementing Section 4.1. The problem setting is illustrated in
Figure 16. Conventional single-task learning solves problems on a single task, which consists of a set
of data points for training and another set for testing. Typical meta-learning addresses problems on a
domain, which includes a set of tasks for meta-training and another set for meta-testing. Meta-level
meta-learning operates on a collection of domains, each containing multiple tasks, and involves a set
of domains for meta-level meta-training and another set for meta-level meta-testing.
Next, we illustrate the process of training an M2 -ICL model. The meta-level meta-training process,
with MAML as the meta-level meta-learner, is provided in Algorithm 1. Note that the meta-level
meta-learner G(; ∆) in Equation (8) does not have to be MAML. We take MAML as G(; ∆) because
of its model-agnostic property, which allows us to avoid designing additional learnable parameters ∆.
However, one can design customized G(; ∆) meta-learners, such as metric-based or amortization-
based methods.

Algorithm 1 Training M2 -ICL
Input: Training domain distribution p(δ), ICL model g(·; θ).
 1: while Not converge do
 2:   Sample a domain δ ∼ p(δ).
 3:   Sample tasks τ ∼ pδ (δ) to form task sets Ωtrδ and Ωval
                                                            δ .
 4:   for Every task τ ∈ Ωtrδ do
                                                    PNτ −1
 5:     Calculate task loss ℓmeta (τ, g(·; θ)) = N1τ i=0     ℓ(ŷ(i+1) , y(i+1) ) by (12).
 6:   end for
      Update θδ = θ − ∇θ |Ω1tr | τ ∈Ωtr ℓmeta (τ, g(·; θ)).
                                P
 7:
                                δ        δ
 8:   for Every task τ ∈ Ωval
                            δ do                      PNτ −1
 9:     Calculate task loss ℓmeta (τ, g(·; θτ )) = N1τ i=0     ℓ(ŷ(i+1) , y(i+1) ) by (12).
10:   end for
      Update θ ← θ − ∇θ |Ω1val | τ ∈Ωval ℓmeta (τ, g(·; θτ )).
                                 P
11:
                             δ           δ
12: end while



H     M ETA -L EVEL M ETA -L EARNING FOR C ROSS -D OMAIN F EW-S HOT I MAGE
      C LASSIFICATION
We investigate the effective of meta-level meta-learning on real-world few-shot image classification
problem. We use META-DATASET (Triantafillou et al., 2020) for training. Because it contains


                                                   22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


multiple datasets inside each we can sample many few-shot classification tasks, thus can be naturally
divided into multiple domains to perform the meta-level meta-training (8).
Following standard settings, we used the training sets of ILSVRC, Omniglot, Aircraft, Birds, Textures,
Quick Draw, and Fungi during training. For testing, we used unseen datasets such as Traffic Signs,
MSCOCO, and additional datasets like MNIST, CIFAR10, and CIFAR100. Each dataset is treated
as a domain for meta-level meta-learning. We considered 5-way 5-shot tasks at the meta-level and
8/16/32 tasks-for-adaptation per domain at the meta-meta-level. The sampling of classes and images
to form tasks, as well as the sampling of tasks-for-adaptation within a domain, was random.
We consider the following baselines:

       • ICL w/o adpt: The standard meta-learning setting, where meta-training is performed on all
         tasks without distinguishing between datasets. During meta-testing, no domain adaptation is
         performed, meaning that the 8/16/32 tasks are not utilized.
       • ICL w/ adpt: The meta-training process is identical to that of ICL w/o adpt. While dur-
         ing meta-testing, the model adapts using 8/16/32 domain-specific tasks by fine-tuning all
         parameters (step = 5, learning rate = 0.0001, batch size = 8/16/32).
       • M2 -ICL: Meta-level meta-training an ICL model following the method introduced in Sec-
         tion 4.1. The domain adaptation process, i.e., the inner-loop of meta-level-MAML is
         configured as step=5, lr=0.0001, with 16 tasks-for-adaptation per domain. During testing,
         given 8/16/32 domain-specific tasks, the same adaptation process is applied.

Our implementation builds the ICL model with a 8-layer transformer (without positional encoding),
where the input features are 512-dim extracted by a ResNet (i.e., resnet-18). Though the model is
relatively toy, it is enough to verify the effectiveness of meta-level meta-learning for improving ICL
in real-world application: the method pipeline is generalizable and one can replace them with models
with more advanced architectures or for other applications.

Table 1: Image classification accuracy (%) on META-DATASET, a benchmark for cross-domain
few-shot image classification.

           Method           Traffic Signs   MSCOCO    MNIST      CIFAR10     CIFAR100     Average
       ICL w/o adpt             45.4          35.5     88.1        65.2         55.9       58.02
    ICL w/ adpt (8 tasks)       41.9          35.1     76.4        64.9         55.5       53.76
   ICL w/ adpt (16 tasks)       43.3          36.2     78.5        66.0         56.3       56.06
   ICL w/ adpt (32 tasks)       46.1          36.5     83.2        66.8         58.3       58.18
      M2 -ICL (8 tasks)         45.9          39.4     86.6        67.4         57.2       59.30
     M2 -ICL (16 tasks)         47.5          40.6     88.9        68.0         57.9       60.58
     M2 -ICL (32 tasks)         52.6          44.1     91.0        69.4         59.2       63.26

The results are provided in Table 1. We find that the M2 -ICL significantly outperforms ICL w/o or w/
adpt with any tasks. Specifically, comparing with ICL w/o adpt (standard meat-training and testing),
adapting the ICL model with 8 tasks badly harms the performance due to overfitting, and with 16
tasks also do harm, while 32 tasks shows marginally improvement. However, adapting the M2 -ICL
model with only 8 tasks is enough to surpasses the average performance, and the growing number of
tasks for adaptation brings more significant improvement. ICL w/o adpt, ICL w/ adpt (32 tasks) and
M2 -ICL (8 tasks) have comparable performance. This show the proposed meta-level meta-learning is
very effective to improve the few-task domain adaptation ability.


                                                 23
