Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


D IFFERENTIAL  LEARNING KINETICS GOVERN THE
TRANSITION FROM MEMORIZATION TO GENERALIZA -
TION DURING IN - CONTEXT LEARNING

 Alex Nguyen                                           Gautam Reddy
 Princeton Neuroscience Institute                      Department of Physics
 Princeton University                                  Princeton University
 qanguyen@princeton.edu                                greddy@princeton.edu



                                             A BSTRACT
         Transformers exhibit in-context learning (ICL): the ability to use novel informa-
         tion presented in the context without additional weight updates. Recent work
         shows that ICL emerges when models are trained on a sufficiently diverse set
         of tasks and the transition from memorization to generalization is sharp with in-
         creasing task diversity. One interpretation is that a network’s limited capacity to
         memorize favors generalization. Here, we examine the mechanistic underpinnings
         of this transition using a small transformer applied to a synthetic ICL task. Using
         theory and experiment, we show that the sub-circuits that memorize and general-
         ize can be viewed as largely independent. The relative rates at which these sub-
         circuits learn explains the transition from memorization to generalization, rather
         than capacity constraints. We uncover a memorization scaling law, which deter-
         mines the task diversity threshold at which the network generalizes. The theory
         quantitatively explains a variety of other ICL-related phenomena, including the
         long-tailed distribution of when ICL is acquired, the bimodal behavior of solu-
         tions close to the task diversity threshold, the influence of contextual and data
         distributional statistics on ICL, and the transient nature of ICL.


1   I NTRODUCTION
Large transformer models trained to predict the next token exhibit powerful generalization capabil-
ities. One signature of such generalization capabilities is in-context learning (ICL): the ability to
solve a task based on new information presented in the context without additional weight updates
(Brown et al. (2020); Dai et al. (2022); Dong et al. (2022); Garg et al. (2022); Xie et al. (2021);
Olsson et al. (2022)). Arguably, the ability to interpret novel inputs on-the-fly is a core feature of
any intelligent system. However, updating synaptic weights on rapid behavioral timescales is chal-
lenging, both for natural and artificial systems. The emergence of ICL in large language models
(LLMs) shows that finding network states that learn on-the-fly is indeed possible. Understanding
how ICL emerges in LLMs promises insights into how such algorithms may be implemented in the
brain and how the data distribution, training objective and network architecture interact to enable
ICL acquisition at scale.
Various methods have been used to probe the ICL capabilities of LLMs (Brown et al. (2020); Dong
et al. (2022); Pan (2023); Min et al. (2022); Olsson et al. (2022)). A common ICL paradigm is
to present exemplars as a sequence of item-label pairs, and measure the network’s response to a
target item (Chan et al. (2022); Kirsch et al. (2022); Garg et al. (2022); Akyürek et al. (2022);
Von Oswald et al. (2023); Raventós et al. (2023); Bai et al. (2023)). While LLMs display remarkable
capabilities on such ICL tasks, interpreting the underlying network mechanisms that give rise to
these capabilities remains challenging (but see Wang et al. (2022)). Recent work has approached
this challenge by examining how small transformer models solve synthetic ICL tasks (Reddy (2023);
Bietti et al. (2024); Akyürek et al. (2022); Ahn et al. (2023); Von Oswald et al. (2023); Edelman et al.
(2024)). We highlight two notable aspects of ICL phenomenology relevant for our current work: the
influence of task diversity on whether the network memorizes a finite dataset or acquires ICL (i.e.,
generalizes), and how ICL is acquired (and lost) during training.


                                                   1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


First, data distributional properties (such as task diversity and their rank-frequency distribution) in-
fluence whether the network acquires ICL or encodes the response to queries seen during training
within its weights (Kirsch et al. (2022); Chan et al. (2022); Raventós et al. (2023). Following pre-
vious work, we refer to such memorization as in-weights learning (IWL). Notably, the transition
from memorization (IWL) to generalization (ICL) is sharp with respect to task diversity. A curious
feature of this transition is that solutions close to the task diversity threshold are bimodal (Kirsch
et al. (2022)). That is, across different random number seeds, solutions either show IWL or acquire
ICL but intermediate solutions are unlikely.
Second, ICL is often implemented by multi-layer computations involving nonlinear attention heads
and MLPs (Olsson et al. (2022); Von Oswald et al. (2023); Reddy (2023); Bietti et al. (2024)).
The rugged loss landscape induced by such multi-layer, nonlinear operations leads to long plateaus
followed by a sharp drop in loss (Reddy (2023)). Finally, ICL is seemingly transient, i.e., the network
gradually loses the ICL capability if it is trained for sufficiently long (Singh et al. (2023)).
                                                                                It is unclear what leads to the transition from
                                                                                IWL to ICL acquisition with increasing task di-
    (a) Capacity-constrained   (b) Differential learning                        versity. The loss is minimized when a finite
                                        kinetics
                                                                                training dataset is perfectly memorized. Thus,
                                                                                a naive hypothesis would suggest that as the task
                                                                                diversity increases, the network’s limited capac-
                                                           data diversity


                                                                                ity to memorize favors the ICL solution (Figure
                   ICL          IWL                ICL
         IWL                                                                    1a). Our goal is to test this hypothesis by deriv-
                                                                                ing a precise quantitative description of the tran-
                                                                                sition, and thus we set out to identify a minimal
                                                                                setting that captures the phenomenon.
        IWL
                   ICL         IWL                  ICL                         Contributions and outline. We first identify a
                                                                                one-layer transformer model trained on an in-
                                                                                context classification task that recapitulates the
Figure 1: (a) In the capacity-constrained model,                                sharp transition from memorization to general-
the network’s limited capacity to memorize fa-                                  ization. Despite its simplicity, the one-layer
vors ICL acquisition with increasing task di-                                   model displays surprisingly rich phenomenol-
versity. (b) In the differential learning kinetics                              ogy, including abrupt ICL learning dynamics,
model, independent sub-circuits contribute to-                                  transience and bimodal solutions close to the
wards IWL and ICL. IWL is slower for greater                                    task diversity threshold.
task diversity. The network acquires ICL before
the network can significantly memorize the train-  Next, we derive an analytical framework that
ing set. IWL is significantly slowed down as ICL   quantitatively characterizes ICL acquisition and
explains most of the loss, but does eventually     its competition with IWL. We show that the
memorize the training set. The network subse-      transition from IWL to ICL for our network
quently loses the ICL capability due to regular-   is governed by a dynamical competition be-
ization.                                           tween memorization and generalization (Figure
                                                   1b). However, whether the network is capacity-
                                                   constrained or rate-determined depends on the
                                                   network architecture, and we derive a quantita-
tive measure to determine which of these constraints is at play. The theory predicts that the number
of iterations before ICL is acquired is exponentially sensitive to the initial parameters, which in
turn explains the bimodal behavior of solutions close to the task diversity threshold. The task di-
versity threshold follows a power law whose exponent has a non-trivial relationship with another
novel memorization scaling law. ICL transience naturally follows from the theory under standard
L2 regularization. Finally, we validate our theory by empirically verifying these predictions using
our transformer model.


2      TASK FORMULATION

We consider a simplified version of an ICL task proposed by Chan et al. (2022), which allows for
disentangling ICL and IWL performance (Figure 2a). Before training, we generate a dataset D
that contains K item-label pairs, D = {(x1 , ℓ1 ), (x2 , ℓ2 ), . . . , (xK , ℓK )}. Each item xi is a D-


                                                                            2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


        (a) Dataset                 Model           (b)                                         (d)
                                                                    1.0                                    1.0
                                        logit
                                                                    0.9                                    0.9


                                                     ICL accuracy


                                                                                                Accuracy
                                                                    0.8                                    0.8
                          3-layer MLP                                                                                                        ICL
                                                                    0.7                                    0.7                               IWL
                                          +
                                                                    0.6                                    0.6
                        attention
                            head
                                                                    0.5                                    0.5

                                                                          103       104   105                    0             1             2
                                        input                                       K                                Training iterations (×105)
                                                    (c)                                         (e)
                Training input sequence                             1.0                                    1.0

                                                ?                   0.9                                    0.9


                                                     IWL accuracy
                                                                                                           0.8


                                                                                                Accuracy
                                                                    0.8
         ICL eval sequence (novel item-labels)
                                                                                                           0.7
                                                                    0.7
                                                ?
                                                                                                           0.6
                                                                    0.6
         IWL eval sequence (no exemplar)                                                                   0.5
                                                                                                                                   ICL
                                                                                                                                   IWL
                                                                    0.5
                                                ?
                                                                          103       104   105                    0            20            40
                                                                                    K                                Training iterations (×105)



Figure 2: (a) Data generation process: We create a dataset D consisting of K item-label (xi , ℓi ) pairs
where each xi ∼ N (0, 1/D) and ℓi is randomly sampled from {−1, +1}. The network receives a
sequence of N + 1 tokens. Each of the first N tokens is a concatenation xi ⊕ ℓi of an (xi , ℓi )
pair sampled uniformly from D (details in main-text). The final N + 1 target token consists of
only the item xi as its label component is zero-ed out. The network is trained to correctly predict
the label of the last item. Model architecture: The input is normalized using LayerNorm, then
fed to our network, which consists of a one-layer attention network followed by a 3-layer MLP.
(b) ICL performance demonstrates a sharp transition as a function of data diversity K. Further, at
the transition threshold K ∗ ≈ 104 , we observe bimodality where the model either memorizes or
generalizes. (c) IWL accuracy vs K. IWL and ICL accuracies follow opposite trends. (d) ICL
accuracy curves show that ICL performance plateaus at the beginning of training but undergoes a
rapid transition as ICL is acquired. (e) ICL is transient, i.e., ICL accuracy gradually decreases to
chance levels when the parameters in the attention head are heavily regularized.


dimensional random vector with components drawn i.i.d from N (0, 1/D) and is randomly assigned
one of two labels, ℓi ∈ {−1, +1}.
The data is presented to the network as a sequence of N + 1 tokens, where each token tj is the item
concatenated with its label, tj = xj ⊕ ℓj . The first N tokens in the sequence are drawn uniformly
from D. The N + 1th token (the target token) has an empty label vector. The target token is chosen
uniformly randomly from the N items in the context, so that there is an exemplar always present
in the context. Given an input sequence, the network is trained to predict the label of the target
token using a binary cross-entropy loss. Since the total number of item-label pairs (K) is finite, the
network can either memorize each item’s label (IWL), or it can learn to use the exemplar within the
context to predict the correct label (ICL).
To measure ICL, we construct a test dataset Dtest consisting of novel item-label pairs (sampled
like D) and evaluate the network’s accuracy on sequences sampled from Dtest using the previously
described procedure. To measure IWL, we evaluate the network on sequences sampled from D,
except that the target has no corresponding exemplar in the sequence. In this case, the context
has no useful information, and the network must rely on the label’s information encoded within its
weights.


3     R ESULTS

3.1   A ONE - LAYER TRANSFORMER MODEL RECAPITULATES ICL PHENOMENOLOGY

We begin with a one-layer attention-based network followed by a multi-layer perceptron (MLP).
Given tokens t1 , t2 , . . . , tN +1 , we first apply a LayerNorm operation to obtain t′i = LayerNorm(ti ).


                                                                                3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


(a)                                             (b)                                                       (c)
                1.0                                        1.0                                                      1.0
 ICL Accuracy   0.9                                        0.9                                                      0.9

                0.8


                                                Accuracy


                                                                                                         Accuracy
                                                           0.8                                                      0.8
                                                                                                ICL                                                     ICL
                0.7                                        0.7                                  IWL                 0.7                                 IWL

                0.6                                                                                                 0.6
                                                           0.6
                0.5                                                                                                 0.5
                                                           0.5
                      103    104       105                       0      500    1000    1500       2000                    0     5000    10000   15000      20000
                                   K                                 Training iterations (× 50)                               Training iterations (× 50)


Figure 3: Phenomenology of the minimal model. (a) ICL performance in the minimal model demon-
strates a sharp transition as a function of data diversity K. (b) ICL acquisition is abrupt during
training. (c) ICL is transient when w is exclusively regularized.


The attention operation then produces the output
                                                                                  ′T        ′
                                                                     N +1              T
                                                                     X     etj K QtN +1
                                             u = t′N +1 +                                   ′
                                                                          P t′ T K T Qt′ V tj ,                                                               (1)
                                                                           ke
                                                                               k       N +1
                                                                      j=1

where Q, K, V are (D + 2) × (D + 2) query, key and value matrices (ℓj ’s are one-hot vectors for
the one-layer model, and we use ℓj = ±1 elsewhere). The MLP ϕ takes input u of dimension D + 2
and produces logits ϕ(u). If the target’s true label is (1, 0), the loss is − log σ(ϕ(u)), and if the
target’s true label is (0, 1), the loss is − log σ(−ϕ(u)), where σ is the logistic function. The MLP
is a three-layer ReLU network with hidden dimension d. We use stochastic gradient descent (SGD)
with batch size 128, learning rate 0.01, weight-decay 10−10 , D = 63, N = 100 and d = 512, unless
otherwise specified.
We examine how ICL accuracy scales with the number of item-label pairs, K. For K ≪ K ∗ , where
K ∗ ∼ 104 , we find that the network shows IWL but fails to acquire ICL (Figure 2b,c). Conversely,
for K ≫ K ∗ , the network consistently acquires ICL but does not show IWL. The transition from
IWL to ICL is sharp. Solutions in the vicinity of K = K ∗ are bimodal (visible in Figure 2b
and quantified later in Figure 6c). Examining the ICL accuracy during learning shows an abrupt
transition from chance-level to perfect accuracy (Figure 2d). Previous work has also shown that ICL
accuracy gradually decays to zero if training is continued for a sufficiently large number of iterations
(Singh et al. (2023)). Transience is recapitulated when we significantly extend the number of training
iterations (Figure 2e), provided the parameters within the attention head are regularized more heavily
than those in the MLP. This skewed regularization scheme hints at a potential explanation for what
causes transience (as noted in Singh et al. (2023)), which we will later explain quantitatively using
our theoretical framework.

3.2                   D ISENTANGLING ICL AND IWL IN A MINIMAL MODEL

Figure 2(c-f) shows that, despite its simplicity, the one-layer transformer model captures the core
features of the memorization to generalization transition and ICL training dynamics observed in
more complex models. However, a mechanistic analysis is still challenging due to the nonlinearities
in the attention head, the MLP and how these two operations interact. To make progress, we further
reduce our one-layer transformer model into a disentangled model (which we refer to as the “mini-
mal model” hereafter) by proposing two ansatz. We will show empirically that the minimal model
also reproduces the phenomena in Figure 2(c-f). This minimal model is amenable to a theoretical
analysis and leads to specific quantitative predictions. We then validate our ansatz by empirically
testing these predictions using our original transformer model (Section 4).
To motivate the ansatz, we observe that ICL in this task involves a simple match-to-sample operation
implemented by the attention head. The attention paid by the target token is determined by its dot-
product similarity with the content (the first D dimensions) of the tokens in the context. The value
matrix reads the labels of the tokens weighted by the attention paid to those tokens and passes it on


                                                                              4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


to the MLP. Put together, these observations suggest that the relevant operations performed by the
query-key product and the value matrix are captured by

                                  βID×D 0D×1                   0D×D 0
                       KT Q =                      , V =                                       (2)
                                   01×D     01×1                  0     w
where ID×D is a D-dimensional identity matrix, β, w are (learnable) scalars and the rest of the
components are zeroes.
From equation 1, the MLP receives the sum of the target token tN +1 and the output of the attention
head as its input. Note that all the information required by the MLP to memorize the label of the
target is present in tN +1 . That is, IWL does not require the output of the attention head. Similarly,
all the information required to predict the target’s label using ICL is contained in the output of the
attention head. Based on these observations, we posit that the final logit used to predict the target’s
label is the sum of logits generated independently by an MLP (which takes xN +1 as input) and the
attention head (using the simplified K T Q and V matrices in equation 2). Specifically, given an
input sequence t1 , t2 , . . . , tN +1 , we assume the MLP ϕ produces a logit zMLP = ϕ(xN +1 ) and the
attention head produces the logit
                                                 N        T
                                                X      eβxj xN +1
                                         zATT =     PN                wℓj ,                         (3)
                                                            βxT
                                                              k xN +1
                                                j=1   k=1 e
Put together, the predicted probability that the target’s label is +1 is given by σ(zMLP + zATT ).
The binary cross-entropy loss for a given input sequence is then − log σ(ℓc (zMLP + zATT )), where
ℓc = ±1 is the true label of the target.
In summary, we assume an independence ansatz, where the attention head and MLP perform ICL
and IWL respectively, and additively contribute towards the prediction of the target’s label. Further,
we assume that the majority of the ICL learning dynamics is captured by reducing the K T Q and V
matrices to two “order parameters”, β and w. That the strengths of the relevant attention operations
determine ICL acquisition is our second ansatz.
The minimal model is parameterized by β, w and the parameters of the MLP (a three-layer ReLU
network of hidden dimension 512). The model is trained and evaluated using the same procedures
used on the transformer model. Figure 3(a-c) show that the three phenomena of interest, that is,
the transition from memorization to generalization, abrupt ICL learning and ICL transience, are
reproduced by the minimal model. We now use the minimal model to develop an analytical theory.
We outline the main results here and present more detailed derivations in the Appendix.

3.3   T HE LOSS LANDSCAPE OF THE MINIMAL MODEL

We consider the asymptotic limit K ≫ N ≫ 1 and the infinite-dimensional limit D → ∞ (recall,
K > 103 , N = 102 , D = 63 in our experiments). From equation 3, ICL is acquired when w, β ≫ 1.
Our goal is to compute the time taken for the network to acquire ICL starting from w = w0 , β = β0
with |w0 |, |β0 | ≪ 1.
In the limit D → ∞, the dot product xTj xN +1 is 1 if xj is a copy of the target and 0 otherwise. It
is unlikely there is more than one copy of the target in the context when K ≫ N . Let c denote the
index of this copy. From equation 3, we have
                                    eβ

                                                       1
                    zATT ≈ w                ℓc +               (2n + − N − ℓ c )   ,            (4)
                               eβ + N − 1        eβ + N − 1
where n+ is the (binomally distributed) number√of tokens with label +1 amongst the N tokens in
the context. When N ≫ 1, n+ /N ≈ 1/2 + η/2 N , where η ∼ N (0, 1).
Next, the MLP’s contribution to the average loss appears only through the distribution of logits ob-
tained by applying the MLP to each of the K items in D. In particular, denote P + as the distribution
of logits obtained when the MLP is applied to the items in D with a +1 label. We use the fact
that the two labels are symmetric, and average over n+ and P + to show that the average binary
cross-entropy loss L is (see Appendix)
          *                                                    √        !!+
                                             eβ − 1

                   η             +                           η N
  L≈−        1+ √        log σ ϕ + w                   +                                        . (5)
                    N                     eβ + N − 1 eβ + N − 1                         +     +
                                                                               η∼N (0,1),ϕ ∼P



                                                  5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


The loss landscape throughout training is thus specified by P + , w and β. Retaining the fluctuations
in η is necessary to accurately describe ICL acquisition.

3.4      T HE DYNAMICS OF ICL ACQUISITION
                                                                                                 √
To examine the dynamics of ICL acquisition, we find an expression for the loss when |w| ≪ N and
eβ − 1 ≪ N (for arbitrary P + ). Both these conditions are satisfied at initialization (|w0 |, |β0 | ≪ 1).
From equation 5, a few steps of simplification leads to (Appendix)
                                                                    c2 w 2

                              D
                                         −ϕ+
                                              E        c1    β
                         L ≈ log(1 + e       )     −        e w−              ,                        (6)
                                                ϕ+     N              2
                                                                                     √
where c1 ≡ ⟨σ(−ϕ+ )⟩ϕ+ and c2 ≡ 1 − ⟨σ(−ϕ+ )2 ⟩ϕ+ /c1 . Here, we used |w| ≪ N and eβ − 1 ≪
                                                                                         √
N to Taylor expand equation 5 and retained terms to order 1/N (terms of order 1/ N vanish in
expectation). The distribution from which ϕ+ is drawn has been dropped for notational convenience.
                                                     Equation 6 allows us to make several important in-
                                                     ferences. The first term in the r.h.s of equation 6
                                                     is the loss incurred by the MLP. It does not involve
                                                     w, β and thus does not affect ICL learning dynam-
                                                     ics. Since the second term in the r.h.s of equation 6
  2.0
                                                     is small at initialization, the rate at which the MLP
   1.5                                               memorizes is not affected by ICL learning. That
   1.0                                               is, IWL proceeds without any competition from ICL
                                                     until ICL is acquired (which happens abruptly).
   0.5
                                                     The scalar variables c1 and c2 depend on P + and
                                                     thus depend on the time t since training began. Their
         −2.5                                        evolution in general depends on multiple factors, in-
            0.0                                      cluding MLP architecture, initialization scheme and
                                                −2
            w 2.5                           0        the number of tasks K to be memorized. Impor-
                                        2            tantly, IWL influences ICL acquisition only through
                    5.0             4   b
                          7.5   6                    c1 (t) and c2 (t), which in turn depend only on how
                                                     the MLP memorizes class labels. We proceed with
                                                     our analysis by retaining c1 (t) and c2 (t) as yet-to-
Figure 4: The approximate ICL loss land-             be-determined MLP-specific dynamical “order pa-
scape L (fixing zMLP = 0) in the minimal             rameters”, keeping in mind that their dependence on
model as a function of the key parameters            t and K will play an important role in our analysis
β, w exhibits a nearly flat region close to ini-     further below.
tialization, but the dynamics always leads to
ICL acquisition (w, β ≫ 1).                       Gradient descent dynamics over the loss in equa-
                                                  tion 6 gives
                                                               dw     c1 β
                                                                   =      e − c2 w ,           (7)
                                                                dt    N
                                                                dβ    c1
                                                                          weβ .

                                                                   =                           (8)
                                                                dt    N
                                                                                      +
Learning initially proceeds at a slow rate c1 /N (since N ≫ 1 and 0 < c1 < 1). Since ϕ on average
increases as the MLP memorizes, c1 decreases and slows down ICL acquisition. If the MLP (near)
perfectly memorizes the K item-label pairs before ICL is acquired, then ICL is never acquired. In
other words, the loss “explained away” due to MLP memorization creates an effective competition
between IWL and ICL acquisition despite the additive contributions of the MLP and the attention
head to the logit. Since 0 < c2 < 1, equation 7 shows that w eventually converges from its initial
value to a positive value w = eβ /c2 . β increases monotonically when w is positive until ICL is
acquired. Thus, equation 7 and equation 8 imply that ICL will always be acquired, however slowly,
if the MLP is unable to perfectly memorize the K item-label pairs (i.e., c1 (∞) > 0).
However, the choice of label statistics in the context matters. For example, consider the case when
N is even and there are exactly N/2 tokens with +1 and −1 labels in the context. To compute the
mean loss L′ in this scenario, we set η = 0 in equation 5 and Taylor expand w.r.t (eβ − 1)/N to get
                                 D               +
                                                   E      c1
                            L′ ≈ log(1 + e−ϕ ) + − w eβ − 1 .

                                                                                                 (9)
                                                    ϕ     N


                                                      6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


The origin is a saddle point. The parameters either flow to the ICL solution (w, β > 0) or to a
suboptimal solution (w, β < 0) depending on the initial values w0 , β0 . That is, ICL acquisition is
not guaranteed. Intuitively, when n+ is binomially distributed, the network learns that the target’s
label is more likely to be a +1 if there are more +1 labels than −1 labels in the context. This bias,
however small, pushes w to a positive value and leads the network into the ICL basin. When the
numbers of +1 and −1 labels are forced to be equal, w could flow into the basin that leads to ICL or
flow to an alternative potentially suboptimal solution. We revisit the n+ = N/2 case in Section 4.

3.5   E XPONENTIAL DEPENDENCE OF tICL ON INITIAL CONDITIONS

Equation 7 and equation 8 allow us to estimate the number of iterations it takes to acquire ICL
(Appendix). Note that “time” t here is a proxy for the number of iterations, which we can only
determine up to a constant pre-factor. Exact integration of equations 7 and 8 is infeasible, but an
approximate expression is obtained when |w0 |, |β0 | ≪ 1. We fix w0 = 0 hereafter, though the more
general case of w0 ̸= 0 can be solved (Appendix). We find that the number of iterations it takes for
ICL acquisition (denoted τK ) satisfies
                       √                                         Z t
                     N 2πe−β0 ≈ IK (τK ), where IK (t) ≡ 2           c1 (t′ )dt′ .             (10)
                                                                     0
The subscript K is introduced to highlight that c1 depends on K.
We first consider the case K = ∞ so that the MLP is unable to memorize D. The MLP logit ϕ+
is distributed symmetrically around 0, in which case c1 (t) = ⟨σ(−ϕ+ )⟩ϕ+ ≈ 1/2 and I∞ (t) = t.
Solving for τ∞ (which we call tICL hereafter) using equation 10, we get
                                                 √
                                        tICL ≈ N 2πe−β0 .                                  (11)

The dynamics are qualitatively different when −β0 is large and eβ0 ≪ 1. In this case, we obtain
tICL ≈ N e−2β0 (Appendix). We numerically verify the exponential dependence of tICL on the initial
values of β0 (Supplementary Figure A.1a). A consequence of this exponential dependence is that
normal-distributed values of β0 will lead to a long-tailed distribution of tICL . In pictorial terms,
due to the nearly flat loss landscape close to initialization (Figure 4), small variation in the initial
parameters w0 , β0 leads to large variation in when ICL is acquired.

3.6   M EMORIZATION SCALING LAWS AND THE TRANSITION FROM MEMORIZATION TO
      GENERALIZATION

Equation 10 shows that the behavior of an MLP-specific quantity, c1 (t) (via IK ), determines when
ICL is acquired for different values of K. It is useful to introduce the quantity IK (∞), which can
be interpreted as the time taken for the MLP to memorize a dataset of size K. Equations 10 and 11
together with the monotonicity of IK (t) imply that ICL is acquired if
                                          tICL < IK (∞).                                       (12)
We delineate two distinct mechanisms depending on whether IK (∞) is finite or not:
      1. Capacity-constrained: We call the network capacity-constrained if IK (t) diverges as t →
         ∞, i.e., the network never fully memorizes the dataset. Equation 12 then implies that the
         network generalizes when K > Kcc , where Kcc is the smallest K at which the network is
         capacity-constrained.
      2. Differential learning kinetics: It is possible that IK (∞) is finite. In this case, the network
         transitions from memorization to generalization at K = K ∗ such that tICL ≈ IK ∗ (∞). In
         other words, when K > K ∗ , it takes longer for the network to memorize the dataset (even
         though it has the capacity to do so) than it takes for the network to generalize. We call
         this case the differential learning kinetics regime as the relative rates at which the network
         memorizes and generalizes determine when the transition occurs.
The divergence of IK (t) as t → ∞ may occur either because the network has limited capacity to
memorize the K samples or because of the data distribution. For example, if the rank-frequency
distribution of item-label pairs follows a Zipf’s law p(f ) ∼ f −α with exponent α ≤ 1, then the
network’s loss is dominated by rare item-label pairs that are not memorized. Previous work has
shown that such skewed data distributions indeed favor ICL acquisition (Chan et al. (2022)).


                                                   7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                         We examine the behavior of IK for a uniform distribu-
                                         tion over item-label pairs. To our knowledge, current
                  Slope = 0.70           deep learning theory does not inform how the distribu-
                                         tion of logits (or summary statistics such as c1 ) scales
                                         with t and K for typical MLP architectures. To make
                                         progress,  we empirically measure c1 (t), c2 (t) for dif-
 IK (∞)


       1
    10
                                         ferent K using an independent set of MLP experiments
                                         (Supplementary Figure A.2). We find that c1 (t) for K
                                         between 500 and 50000 decays fast enough such that its
                                         integral IK (∞) is finite (Supplementary Figure A.3a).
                                         Our MLP is thus not capacity-constrained. Further, we
    100                                  uncover a scaling law, IK (∞) ∼ K ν , where ν ≈ 0.7
              103         104      105   (Figure 5). From equation 12, using the expression for
                        K
                                         tICL in equation 11 and the scaling law IK (∞) ∼ K ν
                                         leads to an estimate for the task diversity threshold K ∗
Figure 5: IK (∞) shows a power-law scal- for the transition from memorization to generalization:
ing with K with exponent ν ≈ 0.7.
                                                            K ∗ ∼ N 1/ν e−β0 /ν ,             (13)

up to a constant prefactor. Note the exponential dependence on β0 , whose random initialization
implies that there is a range of K for which the network will either show memorization or gen-
eralization. The theory further predicts a non-trivial power-law relation between the task diversity
threshold and the context length.

3.7       S LOW IWL EXPLAINS TRANSIENT ICL

We now explain why transience appears in our minimal model (Figure 3c) when the attention head
is regularized more heavily compared to the MLP. For simplicity, we impose L2 regularization with
parameter λw only on w. We return to equation 5 for the loss, which applies throughout training.
Since w, β ≫ 1 after ICL is acquired, we can simplify equation 5 to obtain (Appendix)
                                     D   +
                                           E          λw w2
                                  L ≈ e−ϕ      e −w
                                                    +       .                                    (14)
                                            ϕ+          2
Once ICL is acquired, memorization slows down dramatically due to the small factor e−w . Without
L2 regularization on w, w continues to increase (at a decreasing rate) and ICL is not transient.
However, when w is regularized, w after ICL acquisition tracks wtr , where
                                                            D      +
                                                                     E
                        wtr (t) ≈ W (c3 (t)/λw ) , c3 (t) ≡ e−ϕ        +
                                                                         .                  (15)
                                                                       ϕ

The Lambert W function W (x) is monotonic in x when x is positive. c3 decreases as the network
memorizes the dataset (Figure A.2c). Thus, wtr decreases as c3 decreases. wtr decays to zero (and
ICL fades away) when the dataset is sufficiently memorized, i.e., when c3 ≪ λw . Thus, the analysis
suggests that extremely slow memorization coupled with regularization leads to ICL transience.
We note however that in more complex models the effects of a global regularization parameter on
different sub-circuits are hard to disentangle, which may explain the puzzling observations in Singh
et al. (2023).
Equation 15 hints at a relationship between the loss on ICL sequences (LICL ) and the loss of IWL
sequences (LIWL ) after ICL is acquired. We use a heuristic argument (Appendix) to show that
                                    1
                            LIWL ≈ − log(LICL ), when LICL ≪ 1,
                                    2
                                    1
                            LICL ≈ − log(LIWL ), when LIWL ≪ 1.                                  (16)
                                    2
These approximate relations between LICL and LIWL are consequences of our two ansatz. If our
ansatz are valid, the theory predicts that these relations should hold from the moment ICL is acquired
until it fades due to gradual IWL.


                                                  8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


    (a)                          Task diversity threshold                         (c)                   Bimodality at the threshold     (d)                                              ICL & IWL losses
                                    vs context length
                                                                                                                                                                             2.5                    K = 10000
                                                                                           102                                                                                                      LIW L = − 12 log(LICL )
                                                                                                                                                                             2.0
                                                                                                                                                                                                    LIW L = e−2LICL


                                                                                                                                                            IWL loss
                                                                                                                                                                             1.5


                                                                                  IK (t)
                                                                 Data
    K∗



                                                                 Linear Fit
              104                                                Predicted Fit             101                                                                               1.0

                                                                                                                                                                             0.5

                                                                                                0
                                                                                           10                                                                                0.0
                                                                                                                                                                                   0            1            2          3
                                 6 × 101         102         2 × 102                                       101          102       103                                                               ICL loss
                                                    N                                                            Iterations (t)
 (b)                                                                                                                                    (e)                                            Contextual statistics
                                  Time to acquire ICL                                                             K ∗ = 9666


                                                                                                                                        Fraction of runs that acquire ICL
                                                                                                                                                                                       Equal 0s and 1s
                                       Linear Fit                                                                                                                            1.0       Standard
     tICL (in iterations ×105)


                       4               Medians                                           100                                                                                 0.8

                       3                                                                   75                                                                                0.6
                                                                                 Count

                                                                                                                                                                             0.4
                       2                                                                   50
                                                                                                                                                                             0.2
                       1                                                                   25
                                                                                                                                                                             0.0
                       0                                                                    0                                                                               −0.2
                                  50       100      150    200        250                           0               2             4                                                          104
                                                       N                                                   tICL (in iterations ×105)                                                                     K


Figure 6: (a) The critical task diversity threshold K ∗ exhibits a power law relationship with respect
to N . The experimentally determined critical exponent (linear fit) closely matches our predicted
critical exponent 1/ν where ν ≈ 0.7 (predicted fit). (b) The median time taken to acquire ICL (tICL )
scales linearly as a function of N and the distribution of tICL is long-tailed. For clearer visualization
of the full distribution, see Supplementary Figure A.4. (c) Close to K = K ∗ , depending on the
initialization seed (red and green dots), the network will either generalize (green) or not (red). Dif-
ferent seeds are predicted to show either small tICL or do not acquire ICL, with few intermediates.
A histogram of tICL for K = 9666 confirms this prediction at the critical task diversity threshold
K ∗ . Note that the maximum number of iterations is ≈ 4.5 × 105 . (d) In runs that exhibit transience,
we observe a relationship between ICL loss and IWL loss after the model has acquired ICL, closely
matching our predicted functional relationship. (e) We measured the fraction of solutions that ac-
quired ICL as we vary K, by training at least 20 models with different seeds for each K, on a new
dataset D′ where every sequence is constrained to contain exactly N/2 items of each label. We ob-
serve that the critical task diversity threshold K ∗ is greatly increased and that many more solutions
fail to achieve ICL compared to models trained on our standard dataset D.



4                   E MPIRICAL VALIDATION

The theory makes a number of new quantitative predictions related to ICL acquisition. We em-
pirically test six nontrivial predictions that span various aspects of ICL phenomenology using the
original transformer model in equation 1.
Power-law scaling of the task diversity threshold with context length. Equation 13 predicts a
highly non-trivial power law relationship between the task diversity threshold K ∗ and N . To test
this prediction, we train our original transformer model (equation 1) at varying N and K. At each N ,
we observe a sharp transition from memorization to generalization as K increases (Supplementary
Figure A.7). For each N , we determine K ∗ by fitting a sigmoidal curve to ICL performance as a
function of K. As ν ≈ 0.7, Equation 13 predicts an exponent of 1/ν ≈ 1.43, closely matching our
measured exponent ≈ 1.41 (Figure 6a).
Linear scaling of the time taken to acquire ICL with context length. Equation 11 predicts that
tICL (time taken to acquire ICL) scales linearly with N . To test this, we train our original transformer
model (equation 1) at varying N and take the limit K → ∞ by resampling our dataset D at every
training iteration. We then determine tICL as the epoch at which ICL accuracy exceeds 95%. We
train ≈ 100 seeds for each N to obtain the full distribution of tICL . Figure 6b confirms a linear


                                                                                                                    9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


relationship between the median tICL as a function of N . We verified that the linear relationship also
holds for a two-layer transformer (Supplementary Figure A.5).
Bimodal solutions near the transition. For K near the transition, K ≈ K ∗ , equation 13 predicts
that independent runs will either have tICL > IK ∗ (∞) or tICL < IK ∗ (∞) depending on the net-
work’s initial parameters. In the former case, ICL is never acquired. The nonlinear form of IK (t)
(illustrated in Figure 6c, top) suggests that in the latter case, tICL will be short, with few intermedi-
ates in between. We verify this bimodal behavior of the solutions around the transition by generating
runs with ≈ 250 seeds near K ≈ K ∗ (Figure 6c, bottom).
Long-tailed distribution of the time taken to acquire ICL. Equation 11 predicts a long-tailed
distribution of tICL . We verify this prediction in histograms of tICL for each N , using the same data
as in Figure 6b (Supplementary Figure A.4).
Interdependence of the ICL loss and IWL loss after ICL acquisition. Equation 16 predicts a
non-trivial relationship between the ICL loss LICL and the IWL loss LIWL after ICL is acquired. In
runs in which we observed transience, we plot IWL performance as a function of ICL performance
and observe a close match between equation 16 and data (Figure 6d).
Failure of ICL acquisition when every sequence contains N/2 tokens of each label. Equation 9
predicts that the network is more likely to fail to acquire ICL when there are exactly N/2 tokens
with +1 and −1 labels in the context. We test this prediction in a dataset D′ with N = 100, where
each training sequence (including the target token) viewed by the one-layer transformer has N/2
tokens of each label in its context. For each K, we trained the model using ≈ 20 seeds. We measure
the probability of acquiring ICL as the fraction of seeds whose final ICL performance exceeds 75%.
We observe much lower probability of acquiring ICL for models trained on D′ compared to those
trained on our standard D (Figure 6e). Moreover, the loss curves across seeds are diverse, with many
seeds not acquiring ICL and some saturating at sub-optimal solutions (See Supplementary Figure
A.8).


5   C ONCLUSION


Here, we propose a theory based on the ansatz that the network contains sub-circuits that are inde-
pendently involved in memorization and generalization. A trade-off arises simply because the rate
at which one sub-circuit is optimized depends on how much loss is already explained by the other
sub-circuit(s). Building on this theory, we show that the transition from memorization to general-
ization in our model is determined by the relative rates at which these sub-circuits memorize and
generalize. However, the theory does not rule out the possibility that capacity constraints play a role
in other scenarios.
This ansatz, despite being cast in the context of a simplified one-layer model, explains a surprising
variety of ICL-related phenomena observed with much larger models. These include a long-tailed
distribution in when ICL is acquired, an MLP memorization scaling law, the bimodality of solutions
at the task diversity threshold, the transient nature of ICL, amongst other novel quantitative relations
that our theory identifies. The two most striking predictions are (1) the non-trivial relationship
between an MLP-specific memorization scaling law (IK (∞) ∼ K ν ) and a task diversity threshold
scaling law w.r.t context length (K ∗ ∼ N 1/ν ), and (2) the long-tailed distribution of when ICL is
acquired and its linear scaling with context length (tICL ∼ N ). Both these predictions have been
validated in our experiments.
Our results offer some hope that seemingly intractable phenomena observed in large models can be
reproduced and analyzed using simpler, tractable models through careful experimental design. How-
ever, further work is necessary to examine to what extent such insights provided by small models
remain valid for larger models (that potentially contain many sub-circuits) and for more naturalistic
tasks (where a clear distinction between memorization and generalization cannot be made) (Min
et al. (2022); Wei et al. (2023); Pan (2023); Shi et al. (2024)).


                                                   10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We thank Kenneth A. Norman, Albert Qin, Cole Gibson and anonymous reviewers for support and
valuable feedback on the manuscript. AN is supported by NIH grant RF1MH125318. GR is partially
supported by a joint research agreement between Princeton University and NTT Research Inc.

R EFERENCES
Kwangjun Ahn, Xiang Cheng, Hadi Daneshmand, and Suvrit Sra. Transformers learn to implement
 preconditioned gradient descent for in-context learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.00297, 2023.
Ekin Akyürek, Dale Schuurmans, Jacob Andreas, Tengyu Ma, and Denny Zhou. What learning algo-
  rithm is in-context learning? investigations with linear models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2211.15661,
  2022.
Yu Bai, Fan Chen, Huan Wang, Caiming Xiong, and Song Mei. Transformers as statisticians: Prov-
  able in-context learning with in-context algorithm selection. arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.04637,
  2023.
Alberto Bietti, Vivien Cabannes, Diane Bouchacourt, Herve Jegou, and Leon Bottou. Birth of a
  transformer: A memory viewpoint. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 36,
  2024.
Tom Brown, Benjamin Mann, Nick Ryder, Melanie Subbiah, Jared D Kaplan, Prafulla Dhariwal,
  Arvind Neelakantan, Pranav Shyam, Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, et al. Language models are
  few-shot learners. Advances in neural information processing systems, 33:1877–1901, 2020.
Stephanie Chan, Adam Santoro, Andrew Lampinen, Jane Wang, Aaditya Singh, Pierre Richemond,
  James McClelland, and Felix Hill. Data distributional properties drive emergent in-context learn-
  ing in transformers. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 35:18878–18891, 2022.
Damai Dai, Yutao Sun, Li Dong, Yaru Hao, Zhifang Sui, and Furu Wei. Why can gpt learn in-
  context? language models secretly perform gradient descent as meta optimizers. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2212.10559, 2022.
Qingxiu Dong, Lei Li, Damai Dai, Ce Zheng, Zhiyong Wu, Baobao Chang, Xu Sun, Jingjing Xu,
  and Zhifang Sui. A survey for in-context learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2301.00234, 2022.
Benjamin L Edelman, Ezra Edelman, Surbhi Goel, Eran Malach, and Nikolaos Tsilivis. The
  evolution of statistical induction heads: In-context learning markov chains. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2402.11004, 2024.
Shivam Garg, Dimitris Tsipras, Percy S Liang, and Gregory Valiant. What can transformers learn
  in-context? a case study of simple function classes. Advances in Neural Information Processing
  Systems, 35:30583–30598, 2022.
Louis Kirsch, James Harrison, Jascha Sohl-Dickstein, and Luke Metz. General-purpose in-context
  learning by meta-learning transformers. arXiv preprint arXiv:2212.04458, 2022.
Sewon Min, Xinxi Lyu, Ari Holtzman, Mikel Artetxe, Mike Lewis, Hannaneh Hajishirzi, and Luke
  Zettlemoyer. Rethinking the role of demonstrations: What makes in-context learning work? arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2202.12837, 2022.
Catherine Olsson, Nelson Elhage, Neel Nanda, Nicholas Joseph, Nova DasSarma, Tom Henighan,
  Ben Mann, Amanda Askell, Yuntao Bai, Anna Chen, et al. In-context learning and induction
  heads. arXiv preprint arXiv:2209.11895, 2022.
Jane Pan. What in-context learning “learns” in-context: Disentangling task recognition and task
  learning. Master’s thesis, Princeton University, 2023.
Allan Raventós, Mansheej Paul, Feng Chen, and Surya Ganguli. Pretraining task diversity and the
  emergence of non-bayesian in-context learning for regression. arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.15063,
  2023.


                                                11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Gautam Reddy. The mechanistic basis of data dependence and abrupt learning in an in-context
  classification task. arXiv preprint arXiv:2312.03002, 2023.
Zhenmei Shi, Junyi Wei, Zhuoyan Xu, and Yingyu Liang. Why larger language models do in-context
  learning differently?, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2405.19592.
Aaditya K Singh, Stephanie CY Chan, Ted Moskovitz, Erin Grant, Andrew M Saxe, and Fe-
  lix Hill. The transient nature of emergent in-context learning in transformers. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2311.08360, 2023.
Johannes Von Oswald, Eyvind Niklasson, Ettore Randazzo, João Sacramento, Alexander Mordv-
  intsev, Andrey Zhmoginov, and Max Vladymyrov. Transformers learn in-context by gradient
  descent. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 35151–35174. PMLR, 2023.
Kevin Wang, Alexandre Variengien, Arthur Conmy, Buck Shlegeris, and Jacob Steinhardt. Inter-
  pretability in the wild: a circuit for indirect object identification in gpt-2 small. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2211.00593, 2022.
Jerry Wei, Jason Wei, Yi Tay, Dustin Tran, Albert Webson, Yifeng Lu, Xinyun Chen, Hanxiao Liu,
   Da Huang, Denny Zhou, et al. Larger language models do in-context learning differently. arXiv
   preprint arXiv:2303.03846, 2023.
Sang Michael Xie, Aditi Raghunathan, Percy Liang, and Tengyu Ma. An explanation of in-context
  learning as implicit bayesian inference. In International Conference on Learning Representations,
  2021.


A     A PPENDIX
We present a detailed analysis of the minimal model outlined in the main text. Suppose the (D + 1)-
dimensional input tokens are t1 , t2 , . . . , tN +1 , where ti = (xi , ℓi ) for i ≤ N and tN +1 = (xN +1 , 0).
In the minimal model, we consider two logits zMLP = ϕ(xN +1 ) and
                                             N             T
                                             X     eβxj xN +1
                                    zATT =       PN               wℓj .                                   (17)
                                                        βxT
                                                          k xN +1
                                             j=1  k=1 e

ϕ is a multi-layer perceptron (MLP), which throughout our paper is a three-layer ReLU network with
hidden dimension 512. The final logit z used for classification is the sum of the contributions from
the MLP and the attention head, z = zMLP + zATT . The minimal model can be obtained from the
one-layer transformer model by (1) removing the LayerNorm operation, (2) the interaction strength
ansatz, i.e., by assuming the query, key and value matrices in the attention head have the form

                           T       βID×D 0D×1                    0D×D 0
                        K Q=                         , V =                    ,                  (18)
                                    01×D      01×1                 0      w
and (3) the independence ansatz, where the residual term xN +1 is processed by the MLP to produce
zMLP , the output of the attention head is zATT and these two logits are summed to produce the final
logit z. However, we stress that the minimal model serves as a phenomenological model and is not
derived from the one-layer transformer model.
To reproduce the phenomenology shown in Figure 3, we optimize β, w and the parameters of the
MLP ϕ using the same procedure used to train the full model. In particular, we use stochastic
gradient descent (SGD) with batch size 128, learning rate 0.01, weight-decay 10−10 , D = 63, N =
100 and MLP hidden dimension d = 512. To reproduce transience in Figure 3c with a fewer number
of iterations, we increase the weight-decay parameter on w and β to 10−3 .

A.1    T HEORETICAL ANALYSIS OF THE MINIMAL MODEL

To derive an analytical expression for the loss landscape of the minimal model, we assume (1) that
only one copy (say xc ) of the target xN +1 is present in the context, (2) that xN +1 .xi = 1 if i = c
and 0 otherwise, and (3) that the distributions of logits obtained when the MLP is applied to all the


                                                      12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


items in D with labels +1 and −1, (say, P + (ϕ) and P − (ϕ) respectively) are identical except for the
sign: P + (ϕ) = P − (−ϕ).
These three assumptions are justified when K ≫ N ≫ 1 and D → ∞. Note that in the simulations
presented in Figure 3, we use K > 103 , N = 100 and D = 63. Assumption (1) is justified when
K ≫ N as it is unlikely that more than one copy of the target is sampled from the dataset D
(|D| = K) in a single context of length N . Assumption (3) is justified when K ≫ 1 as all the items
in D are statistically identical irrespective of the label. Assumption (2) is justified when D → ∞
based on our sampling process, which will ensure that in this limit the norm of each item is one
and different items are orthogonal. For finite D, our theory will break down when N is sufficiently
large, though the precise scaling relationship between D and N for when the theory will break down
remains to be examined.
Let c be the index of the target’s copy in the context. Under the assumptions stated above,
                                                                       
                                       β
                                     e                   1      X
                   zATT = w  β               ℓc + β                 ℓj 
                                 e +N −1           e +N −1
                                                                j̸=c

                                     eβ

                                                        1
                        =w                   ℓ c +             (2n  +  − N − ℓc )   ,       (19)
                                eβ + N − 1         eβ + N − 1
where n+ is the number of tokens which have label +1 amongst the N tokens in the context. Sup-
pose we split the dataset D into two datasets D+ and D− containing items with +1 and −1 labels
respectively. The MLP (at any particular stage of training) when applied to the items from D±
produces two histograms of logits P ± (ϕ).
Recall that the binary cross-entropy loss for a given input sequence is − log σ(ℓc (zMLP +zATT )). The
average loss is obtained by averaging over the cases when the target is drawn from D+ and D− , and
by taking an expectation over n+ (which follows a binomial distribution, B(n+ )). Given that there
are n+ items with label +1 in the sequence, the target’s label is ℓc = ±1 with probability n+ /N
and 1 − n+ /N respectively. The average binary cross-entropy loss is then
         N
                                                    eβ

         X    n+                    +                              1
L=−               B(n+ ) log σ ϕ + w                        +               (2n+ − N − 1)
        n =0
               N                              eβ + N − 1 eβ + N − 1                               ϕ+ ∼P +
           +

      N
           N − n+                            eβ

      X                                                  1
  −               B(n+ ) log σ −ϕ− + w             +           (N − 2n + − 1)            ,
      n =0
             N                           eβ + N − 1 eβ + N − 1                   ϕ− ∼P −
       +

                                                                                              (20)
where the two sums consider the cases when the target’s label is +1 and −1. Given the symmetry
between positive and negative labels, the contribution to the loss when ℓc = −1 (the second sum) is
approximately equal to the loss when ℓc = +1 (the first sum). Formally, using P + (ϕ) = P − (−ϕ),
replacing n+ with N − n+ in the second sum and using the property B(n+ ) = B(N − n+ ), we get
          N
                                                   eβ

         X    n+                                                    1
L ≈ −2            B(n+ ) log σ ϕ+ + w                       +              (2n + − N  − 1)             .
        n =0
              N                               eβ + N − 1 eβ + N − 1                            ϕ+ ∼P +
           +

                                                                                 (21)
                                                                          √
When N ≫ 1, n+ /N is approximately Gaussian-distributed: n+ /N ≈ 1/2 + η/2 N , where
η ∼ N (0, 1). This gives
          *                                              √     !!+
                                       eβ − 1

                    η           +                      η N
   L≈−        1+ √       log σ ϕ + w              +                              ,
                     N               eβ + N − 1 eβ + N − 1                 +   + η∼N (0,1),ϕ ∼P
                                                                                                  (22)
which is presented in the main text (equation 5).

A.2    E XPANDING THE LOSS BEFORE ICL ACQUISITION
                                                                    β
                              0 where |w0 |, |β0 | ≪ 1. Define γ ≡ e − 1. Close to initialization, w, β
w, β are initialized at w0 , β√
satisfy γ/N ≪ 1 and |w|/ N ≪ 1. We compute the time it takes for the network to acquire ICL.


                                                    13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


ICL is acquired when w, β ≫ 1. From equation 22, since γ ≪ N , we have

                                 η            +         γ      η
                 L≈−        1+  √     log σ ϕ + w         + √               ,                  (23)
                                  N                     N      N       η,ϕ+

where the distributions from which η and ϕ+ are      drawn has been
                                                                   dropped for notational convenience.
                             √                         γ      η
Since γ/N ≪ 1 and |w|/ N ≪ 1, we have w N + √N ≪ 1. Using σ(x) = 1/(1 + e−x ) and
two Taylor expansions, we get

               η

                                           γ
                                 −ϕ+ −w N    + √η
L≈      1+   √       log 1 + e                   N            ,                                    (24)
                N                                        η,ϕ+
     *                                                                             2 !!+
                                                                    w2 γ

                η                 −ϕ+              γ        η                  η
  ≈     1+ √          log 1 + e         1−w            +√         −        +√                    ,
                N                                  N         N      2 N         N           η,ϕ+
                                                                                                   (25)
                               *                                                                          2 !!+
                                                                                           2

     D              +
                       E                 η                               γ      η       w      γ      η
  ≈ log(1 + e−ϕ )            +     1+ √         log 1 − σ(−ϕ+ ) w          +√         +            +√               ,
                         ϕ+              N                               N       N        2 N          N       η,ϕ+
                                                                                                   (26)
                                                        2

     D              +
                       E       c1                  c2 w
  ≈ log(1 + e−ϕ )            −      (1 + γ)w −              ,                                      (27)
                         ϕ +   N                      2
                                             c2 w2

     D              +
                       E       c1
  = log(1 + e−ϕ ) + −               eβ w −                                                         (28)
                         ϕ     N               2
where we define the two MLP-specific dynamical variables,
                                   c1 ≡ ⟨σ(−ϕ+ )⟩ϕ+ ,                                          (29)
                                                     + 2
                                   c2 ≡ 1 − ⟨σ(−ϕ ) ⟩ϕ+ /c1 .                                  (30)
In the second to last step, we have expanded log(1 + x) for small x, computed the expectation  √
over η and ignored higher order terms as the 1/N term is the dominant contribution (the 1/ N
contribution vanishes in expectation). Equation 28 is presented in the main text (equation 6).
Since σ(−x) = 1 − σ(x), c1 is one minus the probability of a correct classification, averaged over
the dataset. At initialization, the logits are centered around ϕ+ ≈ 0 so that σ(ϕ+ ) ≈ 1/2 and
therefore c1 , c2 ≈ 1/2. ϕ+ increases on average during training, which means c1 decreases and
c2 increases during training. c1 = 0 and c2 = 1 in the idealized scenario where the dataset is
perfectly memorized. We train an MLP in independent experiments to memorize D with the same
hyperparameters used for training the one-layer transformer. We verify empirically that our MLP
can near-perfectly memorize the dataset for dataset size K up to 104 (Figure A.2 and Supplementary
Figure A.3a).

A.3   ICL ACQUISITION

We consider ICL to be acquired when w, β ≫ 1. To compute the time taken to acquire ICL, we
consider gradient descent dynamics of w and β close to initialization. From equation 28, we get
                                      dw   c1 β
                                         =    e − c2 w ,                                       (31)
                                      dt   N
                                      dβ   c1
                                              weβ .

                                         =                                                     (32)
                                      dt   N
Numerical simulations (Figure A.1) with c1 , c2 fixed at 1/2 reveal qualitatively different dynamics
depending on whether |β0 | ≪ 1 or −β0 ≫ 1. Note that eβ0 − 1 ≪ N in both these cases, so that our
approximation equation 28 is still valid. We first examine the relevant case |β0 | ≪ 1. The analysis
of the second case −β0 ≫ 1 is presented further below for completeness.
Equations 31 and 32 cannot be solved exactly and we resort to approximations. When |β0 | ≪ 1
and |w0 | ≪ 1, we have eβ ≈ 1 and |w| ≪ 1 close to initialization. By definition, c2 < 1. Put


                                                14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


together, the w term on the right hand side of equation 31 can be ignored close to initialization.
Then, dw/dt ≈ (c1 /N )eβ . Dividing this by equation
                                                  p      32 and integrating, we get the conservation
equation w2 /2 − β = w02 /2 − β0 , so that w = 2(β − β0 + w02 /2). Substituting this expression
for w into equation 32, we have
                                          p
                                 dβ     c1 2(β − β0 + w02 /2) β
                                     ≈                            e .                           (33)
                                 dt                 N
Integrating this equation from β = β0 to β = ∞ allows us to estimate the time tICL it takes to
acquire ICL. Performing this integration, we get
                               √                         2
                             N 2Γ(1/2, w02 /2)e−β0 +w0 /2 ≈ IK (tICL )                          (34)
                                                                                        Rt
where Γ(., .) is the upper incomplete gamma function and we have defined IK (t) ≡ 2 0 c1 (t′ )dt′ .
The subscript K is introduced to highlight c1 ’s (and thus IK ’s) dependence on K. In the main text,
we examine the case when w0 = 0 so that tICL satisfies
                                       √
                                     N 2πe−β0 ≈ IK (tICL ).                                     (35)

When −β0 ≫ 1 and |w0 | ≪ 1, the dynamics can be split into two parts: 1) w converges from its
initial value to the nullcline, dw/dt = 0, where w = eβ /c2 , 2) w and β gradually increase along this
nullcline until β is large enough that the exponential dependence in equation 8 leads to abrupt ICL
acquisition. The first regime is shorter and tICL is dominated by the duration of the latter regime. In
the latter regime, since w = eβ /c2 , we get
                                           dβ    c1 2β
                                              =      e .                                          (36)
                                           dt   N c2
Integrating this equation, we get
                                                                 Z t
                                                                    c1 (t′ ) ′
                       N e−2β0 ≈ IK
                                  ′
                                    (tICL ),           ′
                                                where IK (t) =           ′
                                                                            dt .                  (37)
                                                                  0 c2 (t )

The e−β0 and e−2β0 scalings of tICL for |β0 | ≪ 1 and −β0 ≫ 1, respectively, are consistent with
those obtained when equations 31 and 32 are numerically integrated beginning from w0 = 0 (Figure
A.1). In these numerical simulations, we fix c1 = 1/2, c2 = 1/2, which is equivalent to setting
zMLP = 0 (i.e., the MLP does not contribute to the logit).

A.4   T RANSIENCE

We examine the influence of applying L2 regularization to the parameters of the attention head.
For simplicity, we assume regularization (with L2 regularization parameter λw ) is applied only to
w. Our goal in this section is to show that such a regularization parameter (however small) is
necessary to induce transience, and to delineate the values of λw for which transience is recapitulated
in the minimal model. A sufficiently large regularization parameter will of course also affect ICL
acquisition (Supplementary Figure A.6). Further analysis could delineate the range of values of λw
for which regularization will have a significant effect on ICL acquisition; this analysis is beyond the
scope of this paper.
We write down the dynamics of w after ICL is acquired. Re-writing the expression for the loss in
equation 22,
               *                                                   √      !!+
                                                 eβ − 1

                       η              +                          η N
         L≈−      1+ √       log σ ϕ + w                   +                          .    (38)
                        N                      eβ + N − 1 eβ + N − 1               +   η,ϕ
                                                                            √
Note that the terms involving η inside the logarithm are at most of order 1/ N . Since w, β ≫ 1
after ICL is acquired, the first term (eβ − 1)/(eβ + N − 1) ≈ 1 will be much larger than the term
involving η. This leads to

                                              η
                                                   log σ ϕ+ + w

                             L≈−         1+ √                          .                      (39)
                                               N                    ϕ+



                                                  15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Since ⟨η⟩ = 0, we have
                                      L ≈ − log σ ϕ+ + w ϕ+ ,

                                                                                                         (40)
                                         D                   E
                                        = log 1 + e−(ϕ +w)
                                                       +
                                                                  ,                                      (41)
                                                               ϕ+
                                         D    +
                                                E
                                        ≈ e−ϕ     +
                                                    e−w .                                                (42)
                                                   ϕ
                                +
                                                                                           D         +
                                                                                                         E
where we have used e−(ϕ +w) ≪ 1 and log(1 + x) ≈ x for x ≪ 1. Define c3 ≡                      e−ϕ            ,
                                                                                                         ϕ+
which is our third MLP-specific dynamical variable. c3 will decrease while the MLP memorizes the
dataset. Equation 42 implies that, without any regularization, w will continue to increase (albeit at a
decreasing rate) and ICL will not be transient.
Introducing an L2 regularization term, we have
                                                            λw w 2
                                            L ≈ c3 e−w +           .                                     (43)
                                                              2
The gradient descent dynamics of w is given by
                                       dw
                                          = c3 e−w − λw w.                                       (44)
                                       dt
With regularization, once the network sufficiently memorizes the dataset (i.e., c3 is sufficiently
small), w reaches a steady state, denoted wtr , which satisfies wtr ewtr = c3 /λw . Re-expressing this
relationship in terms of the Lambert W function, we have
                                             wtr ≈ W (c3 /λw ) .                                         (45)
             D     +
                     E
Since c3 =       e−ϕ          , we have c3 ≈ 1 at initialization. c3 will continue to decrease (however
                         ϕ+
slowly) after ICL is acquired while the loss in equation 43 is minimized. λw is typically chosen
to be a small value. Due to slow memorization (declining c3 ), wtr slowly declines while tracking
equation 45. ICL fades when wtr is of order one; since W (x) = 1 when x ≈ 3, i.e., some number
of order one, ICL fades when c3 ≈ λw . Our MLP simulations show that c3 can decay further than
10−5 (Supplementary Figure A.2c).
This analysis suggests that ICL is transient in our minimal model when the network sufficiently
memorizes the dataset (c3 is sufficiently small). Importantly, whether ICL is transient or not depends
both on the extent to which the network is able to memorize the dataset and how much regularization
is applied to each of the network elements. In transformer networks, how regularization may affect
each sub-circuit is hard to disentangle. For example, it is possible that the output of the attention
head passes through the MLP before producing the final logit. Increasing the regularization on MLP
parameters may decrease the rates at which the network memorizes and generalizes.

A.5   T HE RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN ICL AND IWL LOSS AFTER ICL ACQUISITION

Recall that IWL is measured on sequences where the item-label pairs are drawn from D but a copy
of the target item is (most likely) not in the sequence. This allows us to define an IWL loss LIWL ,
which corresponds to the binary cross-entropy loss of the network on such sequences. Similarly, we
define an ICL loss LICL , which is the binary cross-entropy loss on input sequences that contain N
novel item-label pairs and where the target is one of the N items in the sequence. Equation 45 hints
at a relationship between LICL and LIWL after ICL is acquired. We now provide a heuristic argument
to derive this relationship.
Immediately after ICL is acquired, the ICL loss is small, LICL ≪ 1. Our arguments in the previous
section show that ICL will be transient if the MLP that can sufficiently memorize the dataset and
appropriate regularization is applied. Once ICL fades and the network near-perfectly memorizes the
dataset, we expect LIWL ≪ 1.
We first consider the case when LICL ≪ 1, that is, after ICL is acquired but before it fades. ICL
acquisition corresponds to w, β ≫ 1. Recall from the independence ansatz that the final logit is
zMLP + zATT . IWL sequences do not contain a copy of the target in the sequence. Instead, since


                                                       16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


β ≫ 1, the target xN +1 will pay attention to a random item, say xi , in the input sequence that
maximizes the dot product xN +1 .xi . Item i’s label ℓi matches the target’s label ℓc with probability
half. In the case that it does match, zATT ≈ wℓi = wℓc . Since the MLP has not yet memorized D,
the typical logit from the MLP is small compared to w, |zMLP | ≪ w. The IWL loss when ℓi = ℓc is
− log σ(ℓc (zMLP + zATT )) ≈ − log σ(ℓc (wℓi )) = − log σ(w), which is negligible since w ≫ 1. In
the alternative case, ℓi = −ℓc , the IWL loss is − log σ(wℓi ℓc ) = − log σ(−w) = log(1 + ew ) ≈ w,
where we used w ≫ 1 in the final step. Since ℓi = ±ℓc with equal probability of 1/2, the expected
IWL loss is LIWL ≈ w/2.
On the other hand, ICL sequences do indeed contain a copy of the target in the sequence. In
this case, zATT = wℓc . Since |zMLP | ≪ w, the ICL loss is LICL = − log σ(ℓc (zMLP + zATT )) ≈
− log σ(ℓc (wℓc )) ≈ log(1 + e−w ) ≈ e−w , where we used log(1 + x) ≈ x for x ≪ 1 in the final
step. Putting the expressions for LIWL and LICL together, we get
                                                 1
                                       LIWL ≈ − log LICL                                                                      (46)
                                                 2
after ICL acquisition and before ICL fades away.
We now consider LIWL ≪ 1, that is, after ICL fades away and the network significantly memorizes
the dataset. In this case, since |w|, |β| ≪ 1, we have |zATT | ≪ |zMLP |. The loss on ICL sequences is
dominated by the logit produced by the MLP on novel items. Suppose that the typical magnitude of
the logit produced by the MLP is ξ. The IWL loss is LIWL ≈ − log σ(ξ) = log(1 + e−ξ ). LIWL ≪ 1
implies ξ ≫ 1 and thus LIWL ≈ e−ξ . For novel items, the MLP will produce either ±ξ irrespective
of the true label of the target. The ICL loss is either negligible or log(1 + eξ ), depending on whether
the sign of zMLP matches the target’s label or not. Since ξ ≫ 1, the ICL loss averaged over these
two cases is LICL ≈ ξ/2. We thus get
                                                 1
                                      LICL ≈ − log LIWL                                                                       (47)
                                                 2
after ICL fades away and the network significantly memorizes the dataset.

A.6   S UPPLEMENTARY F IGURES

               (a)                                              (b)
                        106
                                             tICL ∼ e−β0                                   0.0025
                        105                  tICL ∼ e−2β0
                                                                     Probability density


                                                                                           0.0020
                        104
                 tICL


                                                                                           0.0015
                        103
                                                                                           0.0010
                        102
                                                                                           0.0005
                        101

                              −4   −2        0    2         4                              0.0000
                                                                                                    0   500     1000   1500
                                        β0
                                                                                                         tICL (a.u)


Figure A.1: (a) tICL exhibits exponential dependence on the initial values of β0 . (b) Histogram
of tICL in the minimal model given normally distributed values of β0 . The distribution of tICL is
long-tailed due to its exponential dependence on β0 .


                                                                17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


(a)                                                            (b) 0.5                                                   (c)       100
         10−1
                                                                       0.4                                                        10−1
              −2
         10                                                                                                                       10−2


                                                                 1 − c2(t)
                                                                       0.3
 c1(t)


                                                                                                                          c3(t)
              −3
         10                                                                                                                       10−3
                                                                       0.2
              −4
         10                                                                                                                       10−4
                                                                       0.1
              −5
         10                                                                                                                       10−5
                                                                       0.0
                   103          104    105        106    107                   103   104        105        106     107                   103   104    105        106   107
                                 Iterations (t)                                       Iterations (t)                                            Iterations (t)


Figure A.2: MLPs were trained to memorize K item-label pairs drawn as in our transformer exper-
iments. We plot the time evolution of three MLP-specific “order parameters”. Each plot shows
                                                +                                + 2
        D threeE random seeds. (a) c1 ≡ ⟨σ(−ϕ )⟩ϕ+ . (b) c2 ≡ 1 − ⟨σ(−ϕ ) ⟩ϕ+ /c1 (c)
runs from
                                +
c3 (t) = e−ϕ                               . The variability across seeds is negligible.
                                      ϕ+


               (a)                                                                          (b)
                           10−1

                           10−2              K = 498                                                     101
                                             K = 900
                                                                                                IK (t)
                   c1(t)


                                             K = 1622
                           10−3              K = 2924
                                             K = 5268
                           10−4              K = 9490
                                             K = 17098
                                                                                                         100
                                             K = 30806
                                −5
                           10                K = 55504

                                      103         104          105           106     107                         103     104             105    106         107
                                                    Iterations (t)                                                         Iterations (t)



Figure A.3: (a) MLPs were trained to memorize K item-label pairs drawn as in our transformer
                                                                                         Rt
experiments. We plot c1 = ⟨e−ϕ+ ⟩ϕ+ for different K. (b) Time evolution of IK (t) = 2 0 c1 (t′ )dt′
(upto a constant prefactor) obtained by numerically integrating the curves in panel (a).


                                                                                           18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                           N = 50                                                                               N = 100                                                                                                       N = 150
  (a)                 0.25                                           (b)                                                                                                             (c)
                                                                                         0.3
                      0.20                                                                                                                                                                               0.15
        Probability


                                                                           Probability


                                                                                                                                                                                           Probability
                      0.15                                                               0.2
                                                                                                                                                                                                         0.10
                      0.10
                                                                                         0.1                                                                                                             0.05
                      0.05

                      0.00                                                               0.0                                                                                                             0.00
                         0.1        0.2    0.3       0.4       0.5                                              0.5               1.0              1.5                                                          0.5          1.0                  1.5          2.0            2.5
                                tICL (in iterations £105)                                                       tICL (in iterations £105)                                                                                 tICL (in iterations £105)

                                           N = 200                                                                              N = 250
  (d)                 0.20                                           (e)

                                                                                         0.15
                      0.15
                                                                           Probability
        Probability


                                                                                         0.10
                      0.10


                      0.05                                                               0.05


                      0.00                                                               0.00
                                    1            2         3                                                   1            2           3           4
                                tICL (in iterations £105)                                                          tICL (in iterations £105)



Figure A.4: For each N , we trained the model across at least 130 seeds and show that histograms of
tICL are long-tailed.


          (a)                                                                                   (b)                               N = 50                      (c)                               N = 100                       (d)                         N = 150
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           0.15
                                                                                                               0.25                                                    0.20
                                    Linear Fit
                      5
   tICL (in iterations £105)


                                                                                                               0.20
                                    Medians
                                                                                                 Probability


                                                                                                                                                         Probability


                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Probability


                                                                                                                                                                       0.15                                                                0.10
                                                                                                               0.15
                                                                                                                                                                       0.10
                      4                                                                                        0.10                                                                                                                        0.05
                                                                                                                                                                       0.05
                                                                                                               0.05

                                                                                                               0.00                                                    0.00                                                                0.00
                      3                                                                                               0.2        0.4    0.6   0.8
                                                                                                                       tICL (in iterations £105)
                                                                                                                                                                              0.5            1.0
                                                                                                                                                                                    tICL (in iterations £105)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    1.5                            1.5         2.0        2.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  tICL (in iterations £105)
                                                                                                (e)                            N = 200                          (f)                         N = 250
                                                                                                               0.20
                      2                                                                                                                                                0.15
                                                                                                               0.15
                                                                                                 Probability


                                                                                                                                                         Probability


                                                                                                                                                                       0.10
                      1                                                                                        0.10


                                                                                                               0.05                                                    0.05

                      0                                                                                        0.00                                                    0.00
                                                                                                                            2           3                                                  3                    4
                               50         100        150       200   250                                               tICL (in iterations £105)                                    tICL (in iterations £105)

                                                     N


Figure A.5: For a two-layer transformer, we replicate the finding that tICL scales linearly with context
length N . We trained the model across at least 29 seeds for each N and show that histograms of
tICL are broadly long-tailed.


                                                                                                                            19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                                                                     N/A

                                                                                                               ∞


                                                                     Transient iteration
                                                                                           4 × 106
                                                                                                                                                           no ICL
                                                                                                                                                           transient
                                                                                           3 × 106                                                         no transience


                                                                                           2 × 106

                                                                                           1 × 106

                                                                                                                    1          2         3      4              5
                                                                                                                              Weight Decay (×10−3)



Figure A.6: To explore the impact of L2 regularization on ICL transience, we trained models while
varying the weight decay λw applied on the self-attention layer. For each run, we compute the
iteration at which we observe transience, which we define as the first iteration after the model has
attained at least 99% ICL accuracy and after the model’s ICL accuracy has declined to 90%. The red
plus signs indicate runs in which the model never attains the ICL solution (never attains at least 99%
ICL accuracy). The yellow crosses indicate runs in which the model does attain the ICL solution but
we do not observe transience, as the time to observe transience is too long. The blue dots are runs
where we do observe transience, showing that increasing λw induces faster transience.


                                     N = 50                                                                                         N = 75                                                                    N = 100
   (a) 1.0                                                                          (b) 1.0                                                                            (c)                  1.0

                   0.9                                                                                    0.9                                                                               0.9
    ICL accuracy


                                                                                           ICL accuracy


                                                                                                                                                                             ICL accuracy


                   0.8                                                                                    0.8                                                                               0.8
                                                     Data                                                                                        Data                                                                         Data
                                                     Sigmoidal Fit                                                                               Sigmoidal Fit                                                                Sigmoidal Fit
                   0.7                                                                                    0.7                                                                               0.7

                   0.6                                                                                    0.6                                                                               0.6

                   0.5                                                                                    0.5                                                                               0.5
                         103             104                  105                                                       103              104                 105                                  103             104                  105
                                       K                                                                                              K                                                                         K


   (d)                                                                              (e)                                                                                (f)
                                     N = 150                                                                                        N = 200                                                                   N = 250
                   1.0                                                                                        1.0                                                                           1.0

                   0.9                                                                                        0.9                                                                           0.9
    ICL accuracy


                                                                                               ICL accuracy


                                                                                                                                                                             ICL accuracy


                   0.8                                                                                        0.8                                                                           0.8
                                                     Data                                                                                            Data                                                                     Data
                                                     Sigmoidal Fit                                                                                   Sigmoidal Fit                                                            Sigmoidal Fit
                   0.7                                                                                        0.7                                                                           0.7

                   0.6                                                                                        0.6                                                                           0.6
                   0.5                                                                                        0.5                                                                           0.5
                               104             105                                                                            104              105                                                      104             105
                                       K                                                                                              K                                                                         K


Figure A.7: ICL performance is measured for various N and K. For all N , we see a sharp transition
from memorization to generalization as K increases. We fit a sigmoid to the data to determine the
critical task diversity threshold K ∗ for each N .


                                                                                                                                    20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                         1.0

                                         0.9
                          ICL accuracy


                                         0.8

                                         0.7

                                         0.6

                                         0.5

                                               0             2             4
                                                   Training iterations (×105)


Figure A.8: ICL performance curves (for different random number seeds) for models trained on
our modified D′ , where every sequence contains exactly N/2 tokens with +1 and −1 labels for
K = 31336. We see novel intermediate suboptimal solutions, and many of the runs never acquire
ICL.


                                                           21
