Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


S PARSE COMPONENTS DISTINGUISH VISUAL PATH -
WAYS & THEIR ALIGNMENT TO NEURAL NETWORKS

 Ammar I Marvi ∗                      Nancy G Kanwisher                 Meenakshi Khosla
 MIT                                  MIT                               UCSD
 amarvi@mit.edu                       ngk@mit.edu                       mkhosla@ucsd.edu



                                                A BSTRACT

             The ventral, dorsal, and lateral streams in high-level human visual cortex are
             implicated in distinct functional processes. Yet, deep neural networks (DNNs)
             trained on a single task model the entire visual system surprisingly well, hint-
             ing at common computational principles across these pathways. To explore this
             inconsistency, we applied a novel sparse decomposition approach to identify the
             dominant components of visual representations within each stream. Consistent
             with traditional neuroscience research, we find a clear difference in component re-
             sponse profiles across the three visual streams—identifying components selective
             for faces, places, bodies, text, and food in the ventral stream; social interactions,
             implied motion, and hand actions in the lateral stream; and some less interpretable
             components in the dorsal stream. Building on this, we introduce Sparse Compo-
             nent Alignment (SCA), a new method for measuring representational alignment
             between brains and machines that better captures the latent neural tuning of these
             two visual systems. Using SCA, we find that standard visual DNNs are more
             aligned with ventral than either dorsal or lateral representations. SCA reveals these
             distinctions with greater resolution than conventional population-level geometry,
             offering a measure of representational alignment that is sensitive to a system’s
             underlying axes of neural tuning.


1       I NTRODUCTION

Understanding the differences in how the ventral, dorsal, and lateral visual streams process informa-
tion is crucial for building good models of human vision. Extensive evidence indicates that visual
information is processed along three functionally distinct cortical pathways: the ventral stream, im-
plicated in object recognition, the dorsal stream in visually guided action, and the lateral stream
in motion and social information processing (Mishkin & Ungerleider, 1982; Pitcher & Ungerlei-
der, 2021). In order to carry out such different functions, the ventral, dorsal, and lateral streams
surely represent visual information in fundamentally distinct ways: what are the precise compu-
tations underlying these functions, and how do visual representations differ across the three
pathways?
Over the last decade, deep neural networks (DNNs) trained for object classification have been shown
to exhibit similar internal activations (Yamins et al., 2014), functional selectivities (Blauch et al.,
2022; Dobs et al., 2022), and behavioral capabilities (Dobs et al., 2023; Rajalingham et al., 2018)
to the human ventral visual pathway. The hierarchy of cascading layers with shared convolutional
filters was inspired by known neural architecture (LeCun et al., 1989), and indeed standard measures
of similarity provide strikingly high alignment between visual representations in DNNs and the
ventral stream (Yamins & DiCarlo, 2016). However, recent studies have suggested that these same
and similar DNNs also capture responses in the dorsal and lateral stream similarly well (Finzi et al.,
2024; Conwell et al., 2024), see also (Margalit et al., 2024). How can the same computational model
capture the diversity of function across these pathways? Here we address two specific questions:
first, what—if anything—distinguishes the representations in the ventral, dorsal, and lateral
streams? And second, why do current measures of representational alignment between brains
and DNNs often fail to reflect these differences?
    ∗
        https://aimarvi.github.io/


                                                      1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


To answer the first question we applied a data-driven approach to identify the dominant components
of the fMRI response to natural images in the three visual pathways of human high-level cortex, and
in intermediate layers of DNNs. We observed qualitatively distinct response profiles in the three
visual streams, with often interpretable selectivities: scenes, faces, bodies, food, and text in the ven-
tral stream; group interactions, implied motion, hand actions, scenes, and reach-spaces in the lateral
stream; and scenes and implied motion in the dorsal stream. We also collected behavioral ratings
to provide a rigorous, quantitative evaluation of these interpretations. These findings recapitulate
known category selectivity (Kanwisher, 2010) and dissociations between the three visual pathways.


Figure 1: Schematic overview of the data-driven component modeling approach. (a) We used
Bayesian non-negative matrix factorization (NMF) to decompose a given voxel X stimuli matrix
into two lower rank matrices representing component responses R and the corresponding weights
of anatomical voxels W . (b) For each iteration, connectivity matrices C are created using rank-
ordered component responses, where each cell of the connectivity matrix ci,j represents whether a
pair of stimuli i, j maximally load onto the same component. Binary matrices are averaged across
all iterations to produce a single image connectivity matrix.

To answer the second question, we measured brain-model alignment using two standard meth-
ods: linear encoding models (Yamins et al., 2014) and representational similarity analysis (RSA)
(Kriegeskorte, 2008). Consistent with earlier work, both linear encoding and RSA suggest a high
degree of alignment between the visual representations in DNNs and each of the visual pathways.
However, these methods—due to inherent rotational invariances—are insensitive to the tuning prop-
erties of individual neurons, and so we developed a novel, complementary method for measuring
representational alignment that retains such sensitivity. Sparse Component Alignment (SCA) uses
dominant, data-driven components to capture the activity of sparse sub-populations of neurons, thus
providing an alternative measure of similarity that is specific to a system’s native axes of neural
tuning. SCA reveals clear alignment of DNNs to the ventral visual pathway but much weaker align-
ment to the lateral and dorsal pathways. These findings suggest that DNNs trained on natural images
better capture the computations of the ventral visual pathway, and they further raise the question of
what models might better capture the lateral and dorsal streams.

2     M ETHOD

2.1   BAYESIAN NON - NEGATIVE MATRIX FACTORIZATION

We applied data-driven Bayesian non-negative matrix factorization (NMF) (Schmidt et al., 2009)
to identify the dominant components of visual representations in each stream in four subjects of


                                                   2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


the Natural Scenes Dataset (NSD), a massive naturalistic fMRI dataset (Allen et al., 2022). This
method decomposes a neural response matrix into its dominant components, represented as the
product of two lower rank matrices consisting of anatomical voxel weights for each component
and the corresponding component responses. Importantly, NMF is free of any a priori hypotheses
regarding the dataset or the spatial layout of voxels, relying solely on the data’s inherent statistical
structure. Our method follows a similar approach as Norman-Haignere et al. (2015) and Khosla
et al. (2022) and makes minimal assumptions about the inferred components, requiring only that
both matrices in the decomposition contain non-negative entries.
The neural response matrix D ∈ RS,V with S images and V voxels is modeled as:
                                          RW + E :≈ D,                                              (1)
               S,C                                                                     C,V
where R ∈ R        is the component response matrix with C components, W ∈ R            is the voxel
weight matrix, and E ∈ RS,V is a residuals matrix. Bayesian NMF introduces priors for the pa-
rameters of all these matrices (R, W , E) to enable probabilistic inference. Specifically, following
Schmidt et al. (2009), we assume a normal likelihood for the data, where the residuals E are mod-
eled as zero-mean Gaussian noise with variance σ 2 :
                     p(D|R, W , E) ∼ Πs=1,..,S;v=1,..,V N (Ds,v ; (W R)s,v , σ 2 )

Independent exponential priors are placed on R and V , enforcing non-negativity:
                         p(R) ∼ Πs=1,..,S;c=1,..,C ρs,c exp(−ρs,c Rs,c ), Rs,c ∈ R≥0
              and      p(W ) ∼ Πc=1,..C;v=1,..,V γc,v exp(−γc,v Wc,v ), Wc,v ∈ R≥0
where ρs,c and γc,v are scale parameters. The posterior distributions for R and W are rectified
Gaussian, while the variance σ 2 has an inverse-gamma posterior. We infer these parameters via
Markov Chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) sampling.
The use of hypothesis-free methods to decompose high-dimensional data into more interpretable
components has become increasingly popular with the introduction of large-scale datasets, taking
advantage of statistical regularities within big data to find underlying, dominant response patterns.
Common methods like principal component analysis (PCA) aim to linearly decompose data along
an orthogonal set of dimensions, while others like t-SNE and autoencoders assume non-linearities
to explain complex relationships within a dataset under fewer constraints.
Our motivation in using Bayesian NMF to decompose brain data is four-fold. First, unlike PCA or
ICA, NMF-derived components are not constrained by orthogonality or independence, which better
aligns with empirical evidence suggesting that neural responses of distinct components are often
inter-dependent (Pnevmatikakis et al., 2016). Second, the non-negative constraint on matrices W
and R aids in biological interpretation of fMRI data. Negative response magnitudes in R are in-
consistent with neural responses in the ventral visual pathway, which usually increase after stimulus
presentation, and the presence of negative values in W violates our modeling assumption that this
matrix represents the relative anatomical weights of each component in every voxel. Third, while
PCA is invariant to rotations in neural space, NMF is not and recovers different components before
and after rotation—advantageous when modeling neural data that often consistently favor certain
axes or tuning functions over others. Finally, in comparison to standard NMF algorithms, Bayesian
NMF more readily discovers natural sparsity in the underlying data. Empirical studies of neu-
ronal spiking suggest that neural responses are inherently sparse, and biological wiring costs point
toward sparse connections between interacting brain regions (Olshausen & Field, 2004; Barlow,
2012; Chklovskii et al., 2002). As a result, downstream brain regions rarely have access to complete
upstream neural activity. Bayesian NMF is well-suited for discovering such sparsity and—unlike
standard NMF or PCA—infers sparse components that map well onto the original latent data. For
these reasons—which we validate in simulated data (see Figure 2)—we opted for Bayesian NMF
over other decomposition methods.
The Bayesian NMF algorithm is stochastic, so to reliably model dominant components we apply
N = 50 iterations of the NMF algorithm for each subject. A consensus set of weight and response
matrices is collected across these iterations, which is then aggregated to produce the final compo-
nent weight and response matrices (see A.1 for further details). The number of components in each
iteration is a free parameter, which we fix at C = 20 for consistency across subjects, streams, mod-
els, and layers. This was principally motivated by a previous study that used Bayesian information


                                                   3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


criteria to estimate the optimal number of components in modeling the ventral visual stream (Khosla
et al., 2022). However, we note that similar results also arise when deriving between 10 to 30 com-
ponents. We then identified the most consistent components across subjects using a shared set of
1, 000 images viewed by each subject.
We similarly applied the NMF algorithm to DNN feature activations extracted in response to the
same set of NSD stimuli. DNNs were pre-trained on ImageNet-1k (Deng et al., 2009) and varied in
architecture and objective. Model backbones included AlexNet (Krizhevsky et al., 2012), ResNet-
50 (He et al., 2016), and ViT (Dosovitskiy et al., 2020), and models were trained with category-
or self-supervision (ResNet-50 w/ MoCo-v2 (Chen et al., 2020b) & SimCLR (Chen et al., 2020a),
ViT w/ DINO (Caron et al., 2021)). Specifically, for each model we obtained feature activations
separately for each of the four subjects’ 10, 000 viewed images. The resulting unit X image matrix
was treated identically to the subject voxel X image matrix for further analysis.

2.2   R EPRESENTATIONAL ALIGNMENT

Measures of representational alignment fall into one of two broad categories: (A) measures that
establish an explicit mapping between single-neuron dimensions, and (B) measures that compare
stimulus X stimulus dissimilarities of a population (Sucholutsky et al., 2023; Harvey et al., 2023).
Linear encoding falls into the set of methods belonging to category A and involves linearly combin-
ing responses from model units to predict voxel responses by . This approach is well-established in
the neuroscience literature, as it aims to optimally align model and brain response spaces through
linear transformations while minimizing the introduction of complex non-linearities. These trans-
formations are often preferred due to the assumption that downstream readout mechanisms apply
approximately-linear functions on their inputs (Cao & Yamins, 2024). We extracted feature activa-
tions from the ultimate (AlexNet) or penultimate (ResNet-50) pooling layer of convolutional models,
or from the best performing attention head in vision transformers (ViT), and used the activations to
predict neural responses to a shared set of 1, 000 images viewed by each subject (via a ridge re-
gression with an 80/20 train/test split). Similarity between models and brains was calculated as the
coefficient of determination between predicted and actual neural responses in individual subjects.
RSA belongs to category B and characterizes the geometry of stimulus representations in a high-
dimensional neural space. We calculated the population-level dissimilarity of neural responses for
each pair of the shared 1, 000 images, which we summarized in a representational dissimilarity
matrix (RDM) for each subject and model. To assess the similarity between patterns of brain activity
across all stimuli, we utilized correlation as our measure. We measured the second-order similarity
between model representations and brain responses by extracting the upper triangular entries of each
RDM and calculating the Spearman’s rank correlation (ρ) between models and brains.
Importantly, both methods described above treat rotations as nuisance transformations and are thus
explicitly insensitive to the specific tuning of individual neurons (see Figure 2). While this invariance
may be useful in evaluating distributed, population-level responses, it is perhaps less desirable when
representations consistently favor certain axes over others, as is the case in functional regions of
interest selective for visual categories in the brain.

2.3   S PARSE COMPONENT ALIGNMENT

To systematically assess the consequences of rotational invariance, we propose a new technique
– Sparse Component Alignment (SCA) – that measures representational alignment while retaining
sensitivity to neural tuning. Of category B and similar to RSA, SCA assesses stimulus-level rep-
resentational dissimilarities using Bayesian NMF-derived sparse components. However, instead of
relying on population geometry, SCA computes pairwise distances between stimuli based on the
likelihood that they are processed by the same dominant component.
The SCA algorithm is described in Figure 1 and Algorithm 1. For each iteration of Bayesian NMF,
we decompose the neural response matrix into two lower-rank matrices representing voxel weights
W ∈ RC,V and component responses R ∈ RS,C . Using an overlapping set of images, we first
rank-order R and then construct a stimulus X stimulus matrix C ∈ RC,C , where each entry ci,j
takes a value of one or zero based on whether that pair of stimuli produce the highest response in the
same component. Mathematically, the connectivity matrices seek to partition images based on their


                                                   4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


most contributing basis component. We define each entry of the connectivity matrix C as,

                       1 if samples i, j maximally load onto the same component,
               cij =                                                                              (2)
                       0 otherwise
These matrices are averaged across all iterations of Bayesian NMF to produce a single Image Con-
nectivity Matrix (ICM), where the off-diagonal describes how frequently two stimuli are processed
by the same dominant component.
Finally, we extract the upper triangular entries of these connectivity matrices and measure the simi-
larity between systems using Pearson’s correlation coefficient (r).

Algorithm 1 Sparse Component Alignment (SCA)
 1: procedure C ONNECTIVITY M ATRIX(D)                                  ▷ Neural response matrix D
 2:    for n ← 1 : N do                                                          ▷ # of iterations N
 3:        C n := 0S,S                                                              ▷ # of stimuli S
 4:        Wn Rn :≈ D
 5:        for i, j ← 1 : C where i ̸= j do                                    ▷ # of components C
 6:            ri ← rank-sort(Ri,: )
 7:            rj ← rank-sort(Rj,: )
                  n
 8:            Ci,j  := 1ri [0]=rj [0]
 9:        end for
10:    end for P
                    N
11:    C := N1 t=1 C n                                                     ▷ Connectivity matrix C
12: end procedure
13:
14: corr(CA , CB )


Leveraging the sparse decomposition of neural representations, we compare SCA with another simi-
larity measure within category A: the Component Matching Score (CMS). This score optimizes over
permutations to align components between two representations, X and Y , as follows:
                                                          C
                                                      1 X
                                   S(X, Y ) = max(          rj ),
                                                  π   C j=1                                       (3)
                                   where rj = corr(X:,j , Y π:,j )
In this context, π represents a C × C permutation matrix, allowing us to find the optimal alignment
between the C extracted components, accounting for possible permutations. We also measure the
isolated effects of NMF pre-processing by using the components in traditional alignment metrics
(see A.2 and Figure 7 for further details).

2.3.1    B IOLOGICAL RELEVANCE OF SCA
Many measures of representational geometry implicitly assume that downstream brain regions have
access to the entire neural population response. However, biological systems face wiring constraints
that limit the number of connections between regions. In reality, neurons in downstream areas can
“read out” information from only a small subset of neurons in their input. By applying sparse
decompositions to neural representations, we aim to distill these population-level responses into bi-
ologically interpretable components. These sparse components may offer a more realistic reflection
of the information that downstream structures can access. Consequently, the image connectivity
matrices—as defined above—can be interpreted as capturing the likelihood that two stimuli are to
be routed to the same downstream neural structures, thus retaining sensitivity to neural tuning axes.

3     R ESULTS
3.1     S IMULATIONS

Through simulations, we first demonstrate the sensitivity of our proposed SCA framework to subtle
changes in the axes of representations, showing that small perturbations can significantly reduce


                                                 5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 2: Simulations of latent component recovery and rotation sensitivity Different methods
used to recover the latent components of simulated data X. (a) A sparse decomposition finds the op-
timal mapping of original-to-inferred components (top, red-outlined matrix entries). Unlike sparse
NMF (snmf), Bayesian NMF (bnmf) jointly infers sparsity in W and R (bottom, gray bars). (b)
NMF but not PCA components are dissimilar after correcting for rotation, measured via Pearson’s r.
(note: overlapping PCA components) (c) Sparse component alignment (SCA) demonstrates a clear
sensitivity to minor perturbations in the native axes of the representation; specifically, increasing the
extent of axis rotations (X → Xr )—whether through larger angles or a greater number of 2D planes
rotated—results in more substantial decreases in alignment.


alignment. To begin, we generate simulated data as a mixture of sparse latent components and
mixing coefficients. The data matrix X ∈ Rm,n is constructed as the product of two sub-matrices:
L ∈ Rm,k , which simulates the response of k components to m stimulus conditions, and A ∈ Rk,n ,
containing the mixing coefficients. The resulting equation, with added noise ϵ, is defined as:
                                             X = LA + ϵ                                              (4)

We then attempted to recover the latent components using four decomposition methods: PCA, stan-
dard NMF, sparse NMF, and Bayesian NMF (for further details, see A.3). Sparse NMF is similar
to Bayesian NMF but infers sparsity in only a single sub-matrix. Figure 2 shows that a sparse
decomposition indeed finds the optimal alignment between latent and inferred components.
Next, we introduce small adjustments to the native axes of representations in X through a rotation
matrix R parameterized by θi,j (for details, see A.4). We then apply these rotations:
                                              Xr = XR,                                               (5)
and derive components using both PCA and NMF. As expected, we find that PCA but not NMF
components remain unchanged after correcting for rotation (Figure 2, for details see A.5).
Finally, we study how the angle and number of 2D rotations affect the alignment between X and Xr
as measured using SCA and RSA. This sensitivity analysis serves as a proof of concept, revealing
that larger rotation angles (θi,j ) and an increased number of 2D rotations (c) correspond to a more
pronounced reduction in alignment with SCA (Figure 2). In contrast, axis-insensitive measures
like RSA deem all these rotated representations Xr as highly similar to X. These findings further
validate SCA’s strong sensitivity to rotations in the native axes of tuning in a representation.

3.2   H YPOTHESIS - FREE DISTINCTION OF VISUAL STREAMS

We first applied the NMF algorithm to decompose neural responses into their dominant components
using fMRI data from four subjects of the NSD. The resulting W and R matrices explained much of
the variance in the neural response and performs almost as well as PCA, which sets an upper bound
on the variance explained by any linear decomposition. We also empirically measured the sparsity
of the resulting decomposition via the dispersion of W and R following Hoyer (2004) (Figure 3,
see also A.6 and Figure 8).


                                                   6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 3: Examination of data decomposition. (a) Explained variance of an example neural re-
sponse matrix D in brain and models. (b) Bayesian priors produce sparse components in non-
negative matrix factorization (NMF). Measured sparsity of example weight W (top) response R
(bottom) matrices of components derivered from NMF, bayesian NMF, and PCA in the brain and
models. Note: bars for standard NMF are present but close to zero.


We extracted the most consistent components (median inter-subject consistency > 0.5) separately
in the dorsal, ventral, and lateral stream and qualitatively examined their response profiles (ie. the
images producing the highest and lowest responses in each component). A majority of the response
profiles offered highly interpretable category selectivities, which we further quantitatively tested
with behavioral saliency rating collected online (for details, see A.7). Component selectivity in the
ventral stream replicates previous studies (Khosla et al., 2022), while the components and interpre-
tations derived for the dorsal and lateral stream that we present here are wholly novel.
The response profiles of each component is plotted in Figure 4. The same 1, 000 images are repre-
sented in each subplot via individual sticks and are colored by the average saliency rating for their
respective category. Images are rank-ordered by component response magnitude (y-axis, arbitrary
units (a.u.)). Alongside each sub-plot, we display three of the images producing the highest re-
sponse, as well the correlation between normalized saliency ratings and component responses. We
find components selective for scenes (r = 0.632), faces (r = 0.799), bodies (r = 0.695), food
(r = 0.604), and text (r = 0.439) in the ventral stream; group interactions (r = 0.454), implied
motion (r = 0.660), hand actions (r = 0.448), scenes (r = 0.299), and reachspaces (r = 0.310) in
the lateral stream; and scenes (r = 0.393) and implied motion (r = 0.428) in the dorsal stream.
The component response profiles indicate distinct visual representations and functional roles for
each of the dorsal, ventral, and lateral streams. In particular, this method refines the role of the
lateral stream in social information processing, namely that separate components are selective for
group interactions, hand actions, and reachspaces. We emphasize that this three-way dissociation is
free of any a priori hypotheses regarding spatial layout and/or functional segregation, resulting only
from the statistics and biases within the data and stimuli.
We also examined the response profiles of components derived from the hidden layers of various
DNNs (see Figure 10). Untrained models seem selective for low-level features, while pre-trained
models showed selectivities with dominant motifs for a handful of categories including faces, scenes,
words, and various animals. Qualitatively, it’s clear that the response profiles in DNN components
are dominated by visual similarity. We note that variations in training objective and architecture did
not produce notably different response profiles in the models we tested here.

3.3   M ODEL -B RAIN ALIGNMENT

We quantified representational alignment between DNNs and each of the dorsal, ventral, and lateral
streams using linear encoding, RSA, and SCA and CMS. For clarity, we focus on the alignment of
pre-trained and untrained AlexNet models with the three visual streams, though the full set of models


                                                  7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 4: Component response profiles and preferred stimuli. Plots depicting the response pro-
files of the most consistent components across the four subjects in the (a) ventral (blue), (b) lateral
(red), and (c) dorsal (green) streams. Each subplot shows the same 1, 000 images (depicted as sticks)
rank-ordered by their evoked component response (y-axis, a.u) colored by their average saliency
rating to a component-specific prompt. The correlation between saliency ratings and component
responses are provided in each subplot, along with three of the component’s preferred stimuli. (d)
Visualization of the anatomical masks used to demarcate each visual stream.


exhibited similar patterns, as summarized in Figure 5. A linear readout suggests that pre-trained
models predict neural activity similarly well in the dorsal (r = 0.232), lateral (r = 0.179), and
ventral (r = 0.180) stream well above baseline alignment to an untrained model (dorsal: r = 0.120,
lateral: r = 0.096, ventral: r = 0.091). When using RSA, we observed similar though notably
higher levels of alignment to the ventral (r = 0.347) than dorsal (r = 0.199) or lateral (r = 0.222)
streams. Finally, SCA suggests a markedly higher alignment between standard vision models and
the ventral (r = 0.187) stream, and drops significantly in both the lateral (r = 0.047) and dorsal
(r = 0.058) streams to levels approaching that of an untrained baseline. This measure is non-trivially
related to the construction of connectivity matrices, as the same dominant components—following a
strict 1-1 mapping as used in CMS—show only a modest similarity across all streams (see also A.2
and Figure 7 for further tests of NMF pre-processing).
Past studies have shown that representational alignment extends across the processing hierarchy of
the ventral visual stream and DNNs. We sought to test if SCA also captured this hierarchical fit
by extracting intermediate layer activations from the pre-trained Alexnet model. As expected, later
layers in the model better captured neural responses in higher-level ventral visual stream, and this
pattern persisted in the dorsal and lateral streams though to far lesser extent.
Altogether, these results point toward two important conclusions. First—in contrast to standard
rotation-invariant measures, which suggest similar functional representations across the dorsal, ven-
tral, and lateral streams—SCA reveals much greater alignment to just the ventral pathway. Second,
this alignment is specific to models optimized for object recognition and drops for untrained models,
hinting at a shared design to capture visual similarity by both DNNs and the ventral visual pathway.

3.4   B EHAVIORAL SIMILARITY

While alignment with neural data provides valuable insight into a system’s internal mechanisms,
human behavior often offers a more explicit reflection of how we represent high-level visual infor-
mation. Tools like RSA are particularly well-suited to capture the similarity between neural repre-
sentations and behavior, which would otherwise be difficult to quantify. We leveraged this capability
to analyze the Meadows dataset—-a behavioral dataset from the NSD—-in which four participants


                                                  8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 5: Alignment of deep neural networks (DNNs) to the brain. The measured alignment
between visual representations in the brain—in dorsal, lateral, and ventral streams—and the same
set of 7 visual DNNs. The untrained model is in white, and pre-trained models are colored in various
shades of grey. (a) From left to right, similarity is measured by linear encoding, representational
similarity analysis (RSA), sparse component alignment (SCA), and the 1-1 component matching
score (CMS). (b) Alignment between each pathway and intermediate layers of a pre-trained AlexNet
model, using SCA.


arranged a subset of stimuli along two dimensions based on their perceived similarity. The pairwise
distances between stimuli were then used to construct a behavioral RDM.
We used either RDMs or ICMs derived from neural representations to better understand how differ-
ent stimulus-level representations align with high-level behavior, quantified by computing Pearson’s
correlation between the corresponding similarity matrices. With RSA, behavior is most aligned with
visual representations in the brain’s ventral stream and in models optimized for object recognition.
Alignment begins to drop for representations in the lateral stream, falls further in the dorsal stream,
and is lowest in models with untrained weights. Do the connectivity matrices used in SCA capture
similar patterns of information as the dissimilarity matrices used in RSA? As shown in Figure 6,
analysis using connectivity matrices results in a similar overall pattern, with the ventral stream and
task-optimized models showing the highest alignment to behavior. However, we don’t observe the
same intermediate levels of alignment with the lateral and dorsal stream. Importantly, Bayesian
NMF-derived connectivity matrices seem to capture similar information as representations used in
RSA while relying on a much sparser coding structure. All of this suggests that the connectivity
matrices derived using Bayesian NMF effectively capture behaviorally-relevant information.


4   D ISCUSSION

Here we sought to resolve the apparent contradiction between prior findings demonstrating (i) dis-
tinct functions of the ventral, lateral, and dorsal visual pathways in the brain, versus (ii) the similar
fit of all three pathways to artificial networks optimized for object recognition. First, we used a
sparse decomposition approach to identify the dominant components of visual representations in
four subjects from the NSD, an fMRI dataset containing neural responses to thousands of natural-
istic images. Separate analyses of the dorsal, lateral, and ventral visual pathways, as well as in a
suite of DNNs trained for object recognition, revealed distinct components for each pathway. We
then introduced Sparse Component Alignment (SCA) to measure the alignment of DNNs to visual
representations in the brain, and we found markedly higher alignment to the ventral than either the
lateral or dorsal streams. This finding is invisible to standard alignment metrics due to their rota-


                                                   9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 6: Alignment to behavior. (a) Using either representational dissimilarity matrices (light)
or image connectivity matrices (dark), we measured the alignment between brains (left) and models
(right) to high-level visual representations derived from the Meadows dataset. Connectivity matrices
capture similar patterns of alignment while maintaining a higher degree of sparsity. (b) Both con-
nectivity (top) and dissimilarity (bottom) matrices capture behaviorally-relevant categories. Face
(red) and scene (blue) images are depicted below each matrix as colored sticks.


tional invariance. We thus conclude that DNNs share similar axes of neural tuning as neurons in the
ventral visual stream.

4.1   F UNCTIONAL DIFFERENCES BETWEEN VENTRAL , LATERAL , AND DORSAL PATHWAYS

Using non-negative matrix factorization (NMF), we characterized neural response profiles free of
a priori functional and/or spatial hypotheses. Consistent with prior results, we find components
selective for faces, scenes, bodies, food, and words in the ventral stream. In addition, we offer
interpretation of novel components selective for group interactions, scenes, hand-related actions,
motion, and reachspaces in the lateral stream, and for group interactions and scenes in the dorsal
stream. These results reinforce a litany of existing neuroimaging, behavioral, electrophysiologi-
cal, and computational findings implicating the ventral stream in object recognition, the lateral in
dynamic social perception, and the dorsal in visually guided action.
The fine-grained functional organization in the lateral and dorsal streams has remained less clear
than in the ventral pathway. Our findings show that a sparse decomposition of even static snapshots
is well-suited for understanding these less-explored brain regions. At the same time, the methods we
used here do not fully capture the representations and computations of the dorsal and lateral streams,
which would require collecting neural responses to a wider variety of stimuli and tasks.

4.2   A LIGNMENT OF EACH PATHWAY TO DNN S

Our finding of distinct functional roles in each pathway heightens the mystery of how all three path-
ways could be similarly aligned to the same image-trained DNN. We argue that standard metrics of
alignment—due to rotational invariance and insensitivity to specific tuning axes—are insensitive to
the functional differences we find in the neural responses across pathways. We therefore introduce
SCA, a novel method that captures the tuning of neurons and network units. Using SCA, we find a
pattern of results implying that units in a DNN share similar tuning properties as category-selective
neurons in the ventral stream. That image-trained DNNs converge onto similar representations as the
ventral pathway suggests that computations in both of these systems are driven by statistical regular-
ities in static visual input, providing an intuitive explanation for our results. The relatively weaker
alignment to dorsal and lateral representations highlights the limitations of current task objectives,
architectures, and datasets, and may call for fundamentally different approaches to modeling visual
pathways. Perhaps video-trained networks would better fit neural responses that are sensitive to
motion, or Bayesian models of social cognition and physical scene understanding to better fit the
lateral and dorsal streams, respectively. Object recognition is just one piece of the broader puzzle of
human vision.


                                                  10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This work was made possible by funding from the NIH grant EY033843 to N.G.K. and the NSF
Science and Technology Center — Center for Brains, Minds, and Machines Grant CCF-1231216 to
N.G.K

C ODE AVAILABILITY
Code for the analyses performed in this study will be made available at https://github.com/
aimarvi/NSDstreams.

R EFERENCES
Emily J. Allen, Ghislain St-Yves, Yihan Wu, Jesse L. Breedlove, Jacob S. Prince, Logan T. Dow-
  dle, Matthias Nau, Brad Caron, Franco Pestilli, Ian Charest, J. Benjamin Hutchinson, Thomas
  Naselaris, and Kendrick Kay. A massive 7t fmri dataset to bridge cognitive neuroscience
  and artificial intelligence. Nature Neuroscience, 25:116–126, 1 2022. ISSN 15461726. doi:
  10.1038/s41593-021-00962-x.

H. B. Barlow. Possible Principles Underlying the Transformations of Sensory Messages, pp. 216–
  234. The MIT Press, 9 2012. doi: 10.7551/mitpress/9780262518420.003.0013.

Nicholas M. Blauch, Marlene Behrmann, and David C. Plaut. A connectivity-constrained computa-
  tional account of topographic organization in primate high-level visual cortex. Proceedings of the
  National Academy of Sciences, 119, 1 2022. ISSN 0027-8424. doi: 10.1073/pnas.2112566119.

Rosa Cao and Daniel Yamins. Explanatory models in neuroscience, part 1: Taking mechanistic
  abstraction seriously. Cognitive Systems Research, pp. 101244, 2024.

Mathilde Caron, Hugo Touvron, Ishan Misra, Hervé Jégou, Julien Mairal, Piotr Bojanowski, and
 Armand Joulin. Emerging properties in self-supervised vision transformers, 2021. URL https:
 //arxiv.org/abs/2104.14294.

Ting Chen, Simon Kornblith, Mohammad Norouzi, and Geoffrey Hinton. A simple framework
  for contrastive learning of visual representations, 2020a. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/
  2002.05709.

Xinlei Chen, Haoqi Fan, Ross B Girshick, and Kaiming He. Improved baselines with mo-
  mentum contrastive learning. ArXiv, abs/2003.04297, 2020b.  URL https://api.
  semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:212633993.

Dmitri B. Chklovskii, Thomas Schikorski, and Charles F. Stevens. Wiring optimization in cortical
 circuits. Neuron, 34:341–347, 4 2002. ISSN 08966273. doi: 10.1016/S0896-6273(02)00679-7.

William R. Clements, Peter C. Humphreys, Benjamin J. Metcalf, W. Steven Kolthammer, and Ian A.
 Walmsley. Optimal design for universal multiport interferometers. Optica, 3(12):1460–1465,
 Dec 2016. doi: 10.1364/OPTICA.3.001460. URL https://opg.optica.org/optica/
 abstract.cfm?URI=optica-3-12-1460.

Colin Conwell, Jacob S. Prince, Kendrick N. Kay, George A. Alvarez, and Talia Konkle. A
  large-scale examination of inductive biases shaping high-level visual representation in brains and
  machines. Nature Communications, 15(1):9383, Oct 2024. ISSN 2041-1723. doi: 10.1038/
  s41467-024-53147-y. URL https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-024-53147-y.

Jia Deng, Wei Dong, Richard Socher, Li-Jia Li, Kai Li, and Li Fei-Fei. Imagenet: A large-scale hier-
   archical image database. In 2009 IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition,
   pp. 248–255. IEEE, 6 2009. ISBN 978-1-4244-3992-8. doi: 10.1109/CVPR.2009.5206848.

Katharina Dobs, Julio Martinez, Alexander J. E. Kell, and Nancy Kanwisher. Brain-like functional
  specialization emerges spontaneously in deep neural networks. Science Advances, 8, 3 2022.
  ISSN 2375-2548. doi: 10.1126/sciadv.abl8913.


                                                11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Katharina Dobs, Joanne Yuan, Julio Martinez, and Nancy Kanwisher. Behavioral signatures of face
  perception emerge in deep neural networks optimized for face recognition. Proceedings of the
  National Academy of Sciences, 120, 8 2023. ISSN 0027-8424. doi: 10.1073/pnas.2220642120.
Alexey Dosovitskiy, Lucas Beyer, Alexander Kolesnikov, Dirk Weissenborn, Xiaohua Zhai, Thomas
  Unterthiner, Mostafa Dehghani, Matthias Minderer, Georg Heigold, Sylvain Gelly, Jakob Uszko-
  reit, and Neil Houlsby. An image is worth 16x16 words: Transformers for image recognition at
  scale. 10 2020.
Dawn Finzi, Eshed Margalit, Kendrick Kay, Daniel L K Yamins, and Kalanit Grill-Spector. A single
  computational objective drives specialization of streams in visual cortex. bioRxiv, 2024. doi: 10.
  1101/2023.12.19.572460. URL https://doi.org/10.1101/2023.12.19.572460.
Sarah E. Harvey, Brett W. Larsen, and Alex H. Williams. Duality of bures and shape distances with
  implications for comparing neural representations. 11 2023.
Kaiming He, Xiangyu Zhang, Shaoqing Ren, and Jian Sun. Deep residual learning for image recog-
  nition. In 2016 IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), pp.
  770–778. IEEE, 6 2016. ISBN 978-1-4673-8851-1. doi: 10.1109/CVPR.2016.90.
Patrik O. Hoyer. Non-negative matrix factorization with sparseness constraints. J. Mach. Learn.
  Res., 5:1457–1469, December 2004. ISSN 1532-4435.
Nancy Kanwisher. Functional specificity in the human brain: A window into the functional archi-
  tecture of the mind. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 107(25):11163–11170,
  2010. doi: 10.1073/pnas.1005062107. URL https://www.pnas.org/doi/abs/10.
  1073/pnas.1005062107.
Meenakshi Khosla, N. Apurva Ratan Murty, and Nancy Kanwisher. A highly selective response to
 food in human visual cortex revealed by hypothesis-free voxel decomposition. Current Biology,
 32:4159–4171.e9, 10 2022. ISSN 18790445. doi: 10.1016/j.cub.2022.08.009.
Dylan Kotliar, Adrian Veres, M Aurel Nagy, Shervin Tabrizi, Eran Hodis, Douglas A Melton, and
  Pardis C Sabeti. Identifying gene expression programs of cell-type identity and cellular activity
  with single-cell rna-seq. eLife, 8, 7 2019. ISSN 2050-084X. doi: 10.7554/eLife.43803.
Nikolaus Kriegeskorte. Representational similarity analysis – connecting the branches of systems
  neuroscience. Frontiers in Systems Neuroscience, 2008. ISSN 16625137. doi: 10.3389/neuro.06.
  004.2008.
Alex Krizhevsky, Ilya Sutskever, and Geoffrey E Hinton. Imagenet classification with deep
  convolutional neural networks. In F Pereira, C J Burges, L Bottou, and K Q Weinberger
  (eds.), Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 25. Curran Associates, Inc.,
  2012. URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper_files/paper/2012/
  file/c399862d3b9d6b76c8436e924a68c45b-Paper.pdf.
Yann LeCun, Bernhard E Boser, John S Denker, Donnie Henderson, Richard E Howard,
  Wayne E Hubbard, and Lawrence D Jackel. Handwritten digit recognition with a back-
  propagation network. In Neural Information Processing Systems, 1989. URL https://api.
  semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:2542741.
Eshed Margalit, Hyodong Lee, Dawn Finzi, James J. DiCarlo, Kalanit Grill-Spector, and Daniel L.K.
  Yamins. A unifying framework for functional organization in early and higher ventral visual
  cortex. Neuron, 5 2024. ISSN 08966273. doi: 10.1016/j.neuron.2024.04.018.
Mortimer Mishkin and Leslie G. Ungerleider. Contribution of striate inputs to the visuospatial
 functions of parieto-preoccipital cortex in monkeys. Behavioural Brain Research, 6:57–77, 9
 1982. ISSN 01664328. doi: 10.1016/0166-4328(82)90081-X.
Sam Norman-Haignere, Nancy G. Kanwisher, and Josh H. McDermott. Distinct cortical pathways
  for music and speech revealed by hypothesis-free voxel decomposition. Neuron, 88:1281–1296,
  2015. ISSN 10974199. doi: 10.1016/j.neuron.2015.11.035.


                                                12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


B Olshausen and D Field. Sparse coding of sensory inputs. Current Opinion in Neurobiology, 14:
  481–487, 8 2004. ISSN 09594388. doi: 10.1016/j.conb.2004.07.007.
Didier Pinchon and Pierre Siohan. Angular parametrization of rectangular paraunitary matri-
  ces. In Mathematics, 2016. URL https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:
  125926810.
David Pitcher and Leslie G. Ungerleider. Evidence for a third visual pathway specialized for social
  perception. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 25:100–110, 2 2021. ISSN 13646613. doi: 10.1016/j.
  tics.2020.11.006.
Eftychios A. Pnevmatikakis, Daniel Soudry, Yuanjun Gao, Timothy A. Machado, Josh Merel, David
  Pfau, Thomas Reardon, Yu Mu, Clay Lacefield, Weijian Yang, Misha Ahrens, Randy Bruno,
  Thomas M. Jessell, Darcy S. Peterka, Rafael Yuste, and Liam Paninski. Simultaneous denoising,
  deconvolution, and demixing of calcium imaging data. Neuron, 89:285–299, 1 2016. ISSN
  08966273. doi: 10.1016/j.neuron.2015.11.037.
Robin Quessard, Thomas Barrett, and William Clements. Learning disentangled represen-
  tations and group structure of dynamical environments.    In H. Larochelle, M. Ran-
  zato, R. Hadsell, M.F. Balcan, and H. Lin (eds.), Advances in Neural Information Pro-
  cessing Systems, volume 33, pp. 19727–19737. Curran Associates, Inc., 2020.      URL
  https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper_files/paper/2020/file/
  e449b9317dad920c0dd5ad0a2a2d5e49-Paper.pdf.
Rishi Rajalingham, Elias B. Issa, Pouya Bashivan, Kohitij Kar, Kailyn Schmidt, and James J. Di-
  Carlo. Large-scale, high-resolution comparison of the core visual object recognition behavior
  of humans, monkeys, and state-of-the-art deep artificial neural networks. The Journal of Neuro-
  science, 38:7255–7269, 8 2018. ISSN 0270-6474. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.0388-18.2018.
Mikkel N Schmidt, Ole Winther, and Lars Kai Hansen. Bayesian non-negative matrix factorization.
 In International Conference on Agents, 2009. URL https://api.semanticscholar.
 org/CorpusID:12871123.
Ilia Sucholutsky, Lukas Muttenthaler, Adrian Weller, Andi Peng, Andreea Bobu, Been Kim,
   Bradley C. Love, Erin Grant, Iris Groen, Jascha Achterberg, Joshua B. Tenenbaum, Katherine M.
   Collins, Katherine L. Hermann, Kerem Oktar, Klaus Greff, Martin N. Hebart, Nori Jacoby, Qi-
   uyi Zhang, Raja Marjieh, Robert Geirhos, Sherol Chen, Simon Kornblith, Sunayana Rane, Talia
   Konkle, Thomas P. O’Connell, Thomas Unterthiner, Andrew K. Lampinen, Klaus-Robert Müller,
   Mariya Toneva, and Thomas L. Griffiths. Getting aligned on representational alignment. 10 2023.
Daniel L K Yamins and James J DiCarlo. Using goal-driven deep learning models to understand
  sensory cortex. Nature Neuroscience, 19:356–365, 3 2016. ISSN 1097-6256. doi: 10.1038/nn.
  4244.
Daniel L. K. Yamins, Ha Hong, Charles F. Cadieu, Ethan A. Solomon, Darren Seibert, and James J.
  DiCarlo. Performance-optimized hierarchical models predict neural responses in higher visual
  cortex. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 111:8619–8624, 6 2014. ISSN 0027-
  8424. doi: 10.1073/pnas.1403112111.


                                                13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A     A PPENDIX

A.1   C ONSENSUS P ROCEDURE FOR AGGREGATING R ESULTS ACROSS BAYESIAN NMF
      I TERATIONS

Following the approach of Kotliar et al. (2019) and Khosla et al. (2022), we aggregate results across
N = 50 iterations of Bayesian NMF using a consensus algorithm. This algorithm processes the
estimated component response matrices from all runs by horizontally stacking them into a large
matrix, where each row represents a stimulus and each column corresponds to a component from
one of the iterations. The total number of columns equals the number of iterations (50) multiplied
by the number of components per iteration (20).
To ensure the stability of the components, the algorithm first identifies and removes unreliable com-
ponents through an outlier detection procedure. Components are considered outliers if their Eu-
clidean distance from the nearest neighbors exceeds a threshold of 0.8, indicating they cannot be
replicated across runs.
Once outliers are removed, the remaining components from all iterations are grouped into C clusters.
The median of each cluster is then selected as the consensus response profile for the corresponding
component.
To obtain the final voxel (or unit) weight matrix for each subject (or network), we identify—in each
individual Bayesian NMF run—the component indices that show the highest correlation with the C
consensus component response profiles. The voxel/unit weights for these indices are normalized (to
sum to 1) and averaged across runs, yielding the consensus voxel/unit weights for each component.


Figure 7: Standard alignment measures using Bayesian NMF components. Representational
alignment between DNNs and the dorsal, lateral, and ventral streams, as measured by (a) linear
encoding and (b) representational similarity alignment (RSA). In contrast to Figure 5, these methods
use component responses in place of unit/voxel responses.


A.2   E VALUATION OF BAYESIAN NMF PRE - PROCESSING

To further assess the effect of our chosen matrix decomposition method, we measured representa-
tional alignment using standard measures but with component—rather than unit/voxel—responses
(Figure 7). Bayesian NMF pre-processing has some effect on the general pattern of alignment but
does not completely account for the results given by Image Connectivity Matrices and SCA.

A.3   S IMULATIONS ON THE R ECOVERY OF S PARSE L ATENT C OMPONENTS

We evaluated the effectiveness of various matrix factorization techniques in recovering the true latent
factors from data generated as a mixture of sparse latent components and sparse mixing coefficients.
We construct the data matrix X ∈ Rm,n as a product of two sparse matrices: L ∈ Rm,k which
simulates the response of k components to m stimulus conditions and A ∈ Rk,n , which contains the
mixing coefficients. An additive noise component ϵ is included, resulting the following equation:
                                           X = LAT + ϵ


                                                  14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Here, each entry of the matrices {L, A} is drawn independently from a random uniform distribution,
while the noise term ϵ is sampled from a normal distribution with σ = 0.01.
Subsequently, we applied three matrix factorization methods—principal component analysis (PCA),
non-negative matrix factorization (NMF), and Bayesian NMF—on the simulated data matrix X,
setting the number of components to k for each method. To assess the similarity of the inferred
component response matrix L′ from each method and the ground truth latent factor matrix L, we
computed the following similarity score:
                                                                      k
                                                                1X
                                      S(L, L′ ) = max(                rj )
                                                         π      k j=1
                                    where       rj = corr(L·,j , L′ π·,j )

In this context, π represents a k × k permutation matrix, allowing us to find the optimal alignment
between the recovered and true component matrices under permutations.

A.4   ROTATION MATRICES

We construct the rotations in n dimensions as the product of n(n−1)
                                                                2   plane rotations (Pinchon &
Siohan, 2016; Clements et al., 2016; Quessard et al., 2020):

                                                                n−1
                                                                Y         n
                                                                          Y
                          f (θ1,2 , θ1,3 , . . . , θn−1,n ) =                 Ri,j (θi,j )
                                                                i=1 j=i+1


where Ri,j (θi,j ) denotes the rotation in the i, j plane embedded within the n-dimensional repre-
sentation, characterized by the angle θi,j . Each 2D rotation affects only two coordinates at a time,
leaving the others unchanged. For example, to rotate a 3-dimensional representation, we combine
individual rotations across each 2D plane within the 3-dimensional space. By parameterizing these
rotations with angles (θ1,2 , θ1,3 , θ2,3 ), we can express R1,3 (θ1,3 ) as follows:

                                                   cos θ1,3       0 sin θ1,3
                                                                                   !
                              R1,3 (θ1,3 ) =          0           1    0
                                                  − sin θ1,3      0 cos θ1,3

The overall rotation matrix can then be obtained by multiplying these matrices:


                                 R = R1,2 (θ1,2 )R1,3 (θ1,3 )R2,3 (θ2,3 )

By sampling rotation matrices in this manner, we control θi,j to set the magnitude of each 2D
rotation. We set θi,j to be constant across all i, j, choosing from {π/20, π/40, π/60, π/80}. For
each of these angles, we construct the final rotation matrices by composing a varying number (c) of
2D rotations, where c is drawn from 10 linearly spaced values between 0 and n(n−1)  2   . Here, c =
n(n−1)
   2    corresponds  to the rotation across all possible planes in an n-dimensional representational
space.

A.5   S IMILARITY OF ROTATED COMPONENTS

We derived components from the same set of simulated data before and after applying a set of
random rotations (see A.4). We used both PCA and Bayesian NMF to derive two components from
sparse, three-dimensional data, and applied the appropriate inverse transform to correct for rotation.
Finally, we find the optimal mapping of original to rotated components, and measured their similarity
using Pearson’s r. We also measured the relationship between components using cosine similarity
and found similar results.


                                                       15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 8: Empirical measurements of sparsity in NMF decomposition. We measured the sparsity
of NMF-derived components by characterizing the distributions of W and R by their (a) dispersion,
(b) kurtosis, and (c) skewness


A.6   E MPIRICAL MEASUREMENT OF SPARSITY

We characterized the distribution of W and R for each decomposition using empirical measures of
sparsity and statistical measures of kurtosis and skew.
We follow the method defined by Hoyer (2004) to measure the dispersion of a given vector x ∈ Rn :

                                             √                 pP
                                                                 (x2i )
                                                      P
                                                 n − ( (|xi |)/
                            sparsity(x) =              √                ,
                                                         n−1

which measures relationships between the L1 and L2 norm and evaluates to 1 if x contains only a
single non-zero element.
We also used the rth sample moment mr to quantitatively measure the statistical properties of x.
Specifically we used m2 , m3 , and m4 to measure excess kurtosis κ and skewness γ:

                                                   n
                                                1X
                                      mr =            (xi − x)r ,
                                                n i=1
                                          m4                  m23
                                     κ=           and    γ=
                                          m22                 m22

A.7   B EHAVIORAL SALIENCY RATINGS

To further test our interpretations of component response profiles, we collected subjective salience
ratings to the shared set of 1, 000 images viewed by all four subjects. Ratings were collected from a


                                                   16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 9: Extended response profiles of neural components. Ten of the images that produced the
highest response for a given component in each of the four subjects. Response profiles are shown for
the components with highest inter-subject consistency in the (a) ventral, (b) lateral, and (c) dorsal
streams.


total of 125 subjects via Prolific, an online crowd-sourcing platform. In the experiment, participants
were asked to rate a random sample of 250 images according to a single prompt on a Likert scale of
1 (not at all) to 7 (very much). Prior to the onset of the first trial, a prompt was randomly sampled
from the following list:

      1. To what extent is motion occurring in this image?
      2. How prominent are hands and/or hand-directed actions in this image?
      3. To what extent could you reach the contents of this image moving only your arms
      4. To what extent does the image depict a place (either indoor or outdoor)?
      5. How prominent in this image are groups of people interacting with each other and/or groups
         or people engaged in a joint activity?

The initial prompt was kept the same throughout the experiment. Images remained on-screen until
the participant provided a response. Next, we displayed feedback showing the given score, followed
by a 500 millisecond inter-stimulus interval.
In addition to the behavioral data we collected here, we also used a set of saliency ratings obtained
in an earlier project that included prompts on scenes, faces, bodies, text, and food. Images were
similarly rated by online participants, or by two independent experts in scene-selective cortex who
were asked to predict how strongly the image would drive the scene-selective cortex. Further details
on the experimental method can be found in Khosla et al. (2022).


                                                 17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 10: Response profiles of model components. Ten of the images that produced the highest
response for a given component in each model. Separate activations were extracted for each of the
four subject’s 10, 000 images, leading to four sets of components for each model. Response profiles
are shown for the components with highest inter-subject consistency in an (a) untrained AlexNet,
and pre-trained (b) AlexNet, (c) ResNet-50 (w/ MOCOv2), (d) ResNet-50 (supervised), (e) Vision
transformer (ViT, supervised), ViT (w/ DINO), and ResNet-50 (w/ SimCLR) models.


                                                18
