Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


C A N N EU R A L N ET WO R K S AC HI E V E O PT I -
M A L C O M P U TAT I O N A L - S TAT I S T I C A L T R A D E -
O F F ? A N A N A LY S I S O N S I N G L E - I N D E X M O D E L

 Siyu ChenвҲ—1 , Beining WuвҲ— 2 , Miao Lu3 , Zhuoran Yang1 , Tianhao Wang4
 1
  Yale University, 2 University of Chicago, 3 Stanford University, 4 Toyota Technological Institute at Chicago
 {siyu.chen.sc3226, zhuoran.yang}@yale.edu, beiningw@uchicago.edu
 miaolu@stanford.edu, tianhao.wang@ttic.edu



                                               ABSTRACT
              In this work, we tackle the following question: Can neural networks trained with
              gradient-based methods achieve the optimal statistical-computational tradeoff
              in learning Gaussian single-index models? Prior research has shown that any
              polynomial-time algorithm under the statistical query (SQ) framework requires
                    вӢҶ
              в„Ұ(ds /2 вҲЁd) samples, where sвӢҶ is the generative exponent representing the intrinsic
              difficulty of learning the underlying model. However, it remains unknown whether
              neural networks can achieve this sample complexity. Inspired by prior techniques
              such as label transformation and landscape smoothing for learning single-index
              models, we propose a unified gradient-based algorithm for training a two-layer
              neural network in polynomial time. Our method is adaptable to a variety of loss and
              activation functions, covering a broad class of existing approaches. We show that
              our algorithm learns a feature representation that strongly aligns with the unknown
                                                   r sвӢҶ /2 вҲЁ d), matching the SQ lower bound up
              signal ОёвӢҶ , with sample complexity O(d
              to a polylogarithmic factor for all generative exponents sвӢҶ вүҘ 1. Furthermore,
                                                                                  вҲҡ            we
              extend our approach to the setting where ОёвӢҶ is k-sparse for k = o( d) by introduc-
              ing a novel weight perturbation technique that leverages the sparsity structure. We
              derive a corresponding SQ lower bound of order в„Ұ(k  r sвӢҶ ), matched by our method
              up to a polylogarithmic factor. Our framework, especially the weight perturba-
              tion technique, is of independent interest, and suggests potential gradient-based
              solutions to other problems such as sparse tensor PCA.


1         INTRODUCTION
The success of neural networks is largely attributed to their remarkable ability to learn rich and
useful features from data during gradient-based training (Girshick et al., 2014). This feature-learning
capability allows them to outperform traditional methods like kernel-based approaches, which rely
on predefined features (Allen-Zhu & Li, 2019; Ghorbani et al., 2019; Refinetti et al., 2021). However,
when trained using (stochastic) gradient descent, neural networks can sometimes fall into a вҖңkernel
regimeвҖқ, where their behavior resembles that of a fixed kernel method, constrained by their random
initialization (Jacot et al., 2018; Chizat et al., 2019). In this regime, the ability of the network to learn
complex representations is severely limited, undermining the primary advantage of deep learning.
Therefore, it is crucial to understand when and how neural networks trained with gradient-based
method can perform effective feature learning to unlock their full potential, particularly in scenarios
where a balance between computational efficiency and statistical performance is essential.
In this work, we approach this question in the context of Gaussian single-index models, a canonical
class of problems in statistics and learning (MacCullagh & Nelder, 1989; Ichimura, 1993; Hristache
et al., 2001; HaМҲrdle et al., 2004). The model is defined as follows: for covariates z вҲј N (0, Id ), the out-
put y depends on the inner product вҹЁОёвӢҶ , zвҹ© with an unknown signal ОёвӢҶ вҲҲ Rd through a link distribution
p, i.e., y вҲј p(В· | вҹЁОёвӢҶ , zвҹ©). The goal is to recover ОёвӢҶ using i.i.d. samples (z1 , y1 ), . . . , (zn , yn ) gener-
ated by the underlying model. While n = в„Ұ(d) samples suffice to recover ОёвӢҶ information-theoretically
     вҲ—
         Equal Contribution


                                                       1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                                                                       1.02
                             2.7 Г— 10 5                                           80% accuracy                   1.75
                                                                                                                                s * = 1 SQ lower bound              s* 2
                                                                                  70% accuracy         0.90                     s * 2 SQ lower bound
                                                                                  60% accuracy                   1.50
                             1.6 Г— 10 5                                                                0.78                     s * = 1 success region
 n (Number of Data Points)                                                                                       1.25           s * 2 success region


                                                                                                             Average Accuracy
                                                                                                       0.66                     Conjecture region


                                                                                                     logn/logd
                             9.9 Г— 10 4                                                                          1.00           k= d
                                                                                                       0.54                                               Conjecture
                                                                                                                 0.75
                             6.0 Г— 10 4                                                                0.42
                                                                                                                 0.50
                                                                                                                                                               s * = 1 (information)
                                                                                                       0.30
                             3.6 Г— 10 4                                                                                                                          fail
                                                                                                       0.180.25
                                                                                                       0.060.000.0                  0.2         0.4      0.6            0.8     1.0
                                          37       45   55      67      81       99   122
                                                        d (Dimension of Input)                                                                  logk/logd
                                           (a) Scatter plot of (d, n)                                                                 (b) (n, k) paradigm

Figure 1: (a) The contour plots of (log d, log n, acc(d, n)) for Algorithm 1 under model y =
вҹЁz, ОёвӢҶ вҹ©2 exp(вҲ’вҹЁz, ОёвӢҶ вҹ©2 ), which has generative exponent sвӢҶ = 4 (Example 2.2). Here acc(d, n)
is the average of the largest 8 values of the alignment between the neuron weights and the unknown
signal ОёвӢҶ . The slopes of these contour lines are all close to 2, indicating a sample complexity n вүҲ d2
for sвӢҶ = 4. (b) The paradigm of sample complexity achieved by our algorithm for different generative
exponent sвӢҶ and sparsity level k, illustrating the success of achiving computational-statistical tradeoff.

(Bach, 2017; Damian et al., 2024), achieving this efficiently is difficult for polynomial-time algo-
rithms, where the required sample size also depends on properties of the link distribution p, creating
a computational-statistical gap. For example, when y is a polynomial of вҹЁОёвӢҶ , zвҹ©, it has been shown
                                                           вӢҶ
that two-layer neural networks with square loss need dОҳ(q ) samples (Arous et al., 2021; Bietti et al.,
                                       вӢҶ
2022; Damian et al., 2023), where q is the information exponent of the polynomial link function
(Arous et al., 2021; Dudeja & Hsu, 2018). Such sample complexity is indeed inevitable under the
correlational statistical query (CSQ) framework, leading to a computational-statistical gap for q вӢҶ вүҘ 2.
However, the CSQ framework does not capture the fundamental limits of all gradient-based algorithms.
Recent works have shown that by leveraging higher-order terms in the gradient, neural networks can
learn polynomials with as few as O(d)r     samples (Lee et al., 2024; Arnaboldi et al., 2024). It turns out
that the intrinsic learning difficulty is captured by another quantity called the generative exponent sвӢҶ ,
which is at most 2 for polynomial link functions, and the corresponding SQ lower bound on the sample
                          вӢҶ
complexity is n = в„Ұ(ds /2 )1 (Damian et al., 2024). Thus, there is no computational-statistical gap up
to poly-log factors for learning polynomial single-index models. However, for general single-index
models with sвӢҶ вүҘ 3, no gradient-based algorithm for neural networks has been shown to match the
SQ lower bound, leaving it an open problem (Arnaboldi et al., 2024; Lee et al., 2024).
Furthermore, learning the Gaussian single-index model can benefit from additional structures in the
signal ОёвӢҶ , such as sparsity, which can significantly reduce the sample complexity compared to those
depending on the ambient dimension d (CandeМҖs et al., 2006; Donoho et al., 2009; Raskutti et al.,
2012). Recent work by Vural & Erdogdu (2024) examines the effectiveness of pruning in learning
                                                                                                     вӢҶ
sparse features,
         вҲҡ       demonstrating that it matches the correlated statistical query (CSQ) lower bound dq
for k вүӘ d. However, the method fails to achieve the CSQ lower bound in non-sparse settings. For
sparse single-index models with information exponent q вӢҶ = 1, gradient descent on diagonal linear
networks nearly achieves the information-theoretic lower bound thanks to its implicit regularization
effect (Fan et al., 2023). Nonetheless, how to achieve the optimal sample complexity for general
sвӢҶ вүҘ 1 is also unknown under the sparse setting.
Contributions. Towards characterizing the fundamental feature learning capability of neural networks
in the Gaussian single-index model, our main contributions are as follows:
1. We propose a unified recipe of gradient-based algorithms for training a two-layer neural network
   to learn the Gaussian single-index model. Our method integrates a general gradient oracle with
   a weight perturbation technique, carefully designed to exploit the underlying structure of the
                                               вӢҶ
    This в„Ұ(ds /2 ) sample complexity lower bound is essentially for the detection problem. Dudeja & Hsu
                         1

(2021) shows that there is an estimation-detection gap for tensor PCA under the SQ framework, though it is
unclear whether such gap exists universally. Throughout the paper, we always refer to the SQ lower bound as the
detection lower bound, since detection in general is assumed to be easier than estimation.


                                                                                                 2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


   Gaussian single-index model. This allows the neural network to perform feature learning of the
   unknown signal ОёвӢҶ in a computationally efficient manner. Our framework encompasses many
   existing approaches as special cases, such as batch reusing (Dandi et al., 2024; Lee et al., 2024),
   label transformation (Chen & Meka, 2020), and landscape smoothing (Damian et al., 2023).
2. We show that for an unknown link distribution p with any generative exponent sвӢҶ вүҘ 1, the
   weights of the neural network achieve strong recovery of the true signal ОёвӢҶ after training by our
                     r sвӢҶ /2 вҲЁ d) samples and polynomial running time. Our method achieves the SQ
   algorithm using O(d
   lower bound up to a polylogarithmic factor, and is the first gradient-based algorithm for training
   two-layer neural networks that attains the nearly optimal computational-statistical tradeoff for
   Gaussian single-index models with any sвӢҶ вүҘ 1. Figure 1 (a) illustrates an example for sвӢҶ = 4.
3. Furthermore, our method is able to take advantage of additional structural information
                                                                                   вҲҡ      of the true
   signal ОёвӢҶ . Specifically, we consider the case where ОёвӢҶ is k-sparse for k = o( d), and develop
   a novel weight perturbation procedure tailored to the sparsity of ОёвӢҶ . Equipped with this, we
   show that the weights of the neural network can achieve strong recovery of the sparse signal ОёвӢҶ
                       r sвӢҶ ) samples in polynomial time for any generative exponent sвӢҶ вүҘ 1. This
   after training with O(k
   sample complexity is also nearly optimal according to the sample complexity lower bound we
   establish for SQ algorithms, which might be of independent interest. Also, our method suggests a
   new approach to achieve the computational-statistical tradeoff for sparse tensor PCA.
In summary, our work provides a unified framework for training neural networks that can achieve
the nearly optimal computational-statistical tradeoff for the Gaussian single-index model with any
generative exponent sвӢҶ вүҘ 1. Our method not only tackles the intrinsic difficulty of learning the under-
lying model posed by the link distribution p, but also leverages the additional structural information
of the true singal ОёвӢҶ that benefits the learning process. Integrating these results, our method attains
nearly optimal balance between computational efficienty and statistical performance across almost all
regimes of sparsity levels and generative exponent sвӢҶ вүҘ 1, as illustrated in Figure 1 (b).

2    PROBLEM SETUP
We begin by introducing the notation used in the paper, and then describe the problem setup. For a
probability distribution P, we denote by L2 (P) the space of square-integrable functions with respect to
       L2 (P)
P, and = means equality in L2 (P). We denote the normalized probabilistвҖҷs Hermite polynomials by
                                           s     2
                                                        ds вҲ’x2 /2
{hs (В·)}sвүҘ0 , where each hs (x) := (вҲ’1)
                                      вҲҡ
                                        s!
                                             В· ex /2 В· dx se      . These polynomials form an orthonormal
basis for L2 (N (0, 1)), i.e., the space of square-integrable functions under the Gaussian measure.
Gaussian single-index model. We study the following Gaussian single-index model: The environment
first samples an unobservable signal ОёвӢҶ вҲј ПҖ from some known prior ПҖ вҲҲ P(SdвҲ’1 ). Then i.i.d. data
(z1 , y1 ), . . . , (zn , yn ) вҲҲ Rd Г— R are generated according to the following distribution PОёвӢҶ given ОёвӢҶ :
                                PОёвӢҶ :   z вҲј N (0, Id ),   y вҲј p(В· | вҹЁОёвӢҶ , zвҹ©).                        (2.1)
Here p(В· | В·) : R 7вҶ’ P(R) is referred to as the link distribution. A canonical example is the additive
model where y = П•(вҹЁОёвӢҶ , zвҹ©) + Пө for some deterministic link function П• : R вҶ’ R and random noise Пө.
See Damian et al. (2024) for more complicated examples.
Generative exponent. The following discussion on the generative exponent is based on the work of
Damian et al. (2024). We aim to learn (2.1) where the link distribution p has generative exponent
sвӢҶ вүҘ 1 , a measure of the computational-statistical gap for learning single-index models. We let
x = вҹЁОёвӢҶ , zвҹ©. Notice that PОёвӢҶ (y, z) = P(y, x) В· N (z вҠҘ ; 0, IdвҲ’1 ) where we use P to denote the joint
distribution of (x, y) as this joint distribution is independent of ОёвӢҶ . As the marginal distribution of y
is also independent of ОёвӢҶ , we define the null distribution
                                                     R       Q(y, z) := N (z; 0, Id ) вҠ— Q(y) and denote
Q(y, x) := N (x; 0, 1) вҠ— Q(y) where Q(y) = R P(y, x)dx. Under a square-integrable condition
under Q, the likelihood ratio admits a Hermite expansion with coefficient functions {О¶s (y)}sвүҘ1 , i.e.,
                                   2
                PОёвӢҶ (y,z) P(y,x) L (Q) PвҲһ
                 Q(y,z) = Q(y,x)  =     s=0 О¶s (y) В· hs (x),    where О¶s (y) = EP [hs (x)|y],         (2.2)
and EQ [О¶s (y)2 ] вүӨ 1 for all s вүҘ 1. Note that (2.2) makes sense only when we are working with the
inner product of P/Q and a square-integrable function under the null distribution Q.
Definition 2.1 (Generative exponent). For the Gaussian single-index model defined in (2.1), the
generative exponent sвӢҶ of the link distribution p is defined as sвӢҶ (p) := min{s вүҘ 1 : EQ [О¶s (y)2 ] > 0}.


                                                     3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Example 2.2 (Example 2.7, Damian et al. (2024)). Consider the special case of the Gaussian single-
index model (2.1) where y = П•(вҹЁОёвӢҶ , zвҹ©) for a deterministic link function П• : R вҶ’ R. When П• is
a polynomial function, it holds that sвӢҶ (П•) вүӨ 2, and the equality holds if and only if f is an even
polynomial. In particular, sвӢҶ (hs ) = 1 for odd s and sвӢҶ (hs ) = 2 for even s. While for the example of
П•(x) = x2 exp(вҲ’x2 ), which is not a polynomial, it has generative exponent sвӢҶ (П•) = 4.

Two-layer neural networks. We consider using a two-layer neural network with M hidden neurons
to learn the single-index model (2.1). The weight vector for each neuron m вҲҲ [M ] is Оёm вҲҲ Rd ,
and the weights of the second layer are a1 , . . . , aM вҲҲ R. We collect all the weights and denote
Оё = (Оё1 , . . . , ОёM ) вҲҲ RdГ—M , a = (a1 , . . . , aM )вҠӨ вҲҲ RM . Now for any input z вҲҲ Rd , the output of
                                       PM
the network is given by f (z; Оё, a) := m=1 am В· Пғ(вҹЁz, Оёm вҹ©), where Пғ : R вҶ’ R is the activation.

3     OV E RV I E W O F T E C H N I Q U E S
In this work, we apply gradient-based methods to learn Gaussian single-index models, with a focus
on feature learning in neural networks and the corresponding computational-statistical tradeoff. To
motivate the techniques involved, we begin by discussing an illustrative example that highlights such
tradeoffs. For this overview, we focus on sвӢҶ > 2 and the uniform prior ПҖ = Unif(SdвҲ’1 ). It has been
shown that a gap exists between the information-theoretic lower bound в„Ұ(d) and the SQ lower bound
      вӢҶ
в„Ұ(ds /2 ) under this setting when sвӢҶ > 2 (Bach, 2017; Damian et al., 2024).
For illustration, let us consider training a two-layer network with a single neuron under the population
square loss. When the weight of the second layer is small, the rescaled negative gradient g satisfies
                                     2
g = вҲ’(2a)вҲ’1 вҲҮОё f (z; Оё, a) вҲ’ y = вҲ’ a В· Пғ(вҹЁz, Оёвҹ©) вҲ’ y В· Пғ вҖІ (вҹЁz, Оёвҹ©) В· z = (yПғ вҖІ (вҹЁz, Оёвҹ©) + err) В· z,


where we take yПғ вҖІ (вҹЁz, Оёвҹ©) as the signal term and treat вҲ’aПғ(вҹЁz, Оёвҹ©)Пғ вҖІ (вҹЁz, Оёвҹ©) as the error term since
it scales with a.2 We ignore the error term in the following discussion. Taking expectation over
(z, y) вҲј PОёвӢҶ and using the likelihood ratio decomposition in (2.2), we have
                                                X
    EPОёвӢҶ [g] вүҲ EQ [y] В· EQ [Пғ вҖІ (вҹЁz, Оёвҹ©) В· z] +      EQ [yО¶s (y)] В· EQ [hs (вҹЁОёвӢҶ , zвҹ©) В· Пғ вҖІ (вҹЁz, Оёвҹ©) В· z], (3.1)
               |           {z               }        |                      {z                          }
                                                sвүҘsвӢҶ
                          bias                                   informative queries
where we use the fact that y and z are independent under the null distribution Q. Note that the
bias term does not contain any information about ОёвӢҶ , and it can be easily removed by a debiasing
procedure, so we assume for simplicity that E[y] = 0.
Failure of vanilla online minibatch SGD. We first Pnconsider the vanilla online minibatch SGD,
which updates the weight vector Оё by Оё вҶҗ Оё вҲ’ О· i=1 gi for a minibatch of size n. The sample
complexity of gradient-based methods is determined by the signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) of the one-
sample gradient, which in our case is defined as SNR := E[вҹЁg, ОёвӢҶ вҹ©]2 /E[вҲҘgвҲҘ22 ]. This is the square of
the alignment between g and ОёвӢҶ , governed primarily by the informative query corresponding to the
lowest degree sвӢҶ in (3.1) assuming that EQ [yО¶sвӢҶ (y)] Мё= 0. It can be shown that the inner product
between the lowest-degree informative query in (3.1) and the signal ОёвӢҶ satisfies (see Lemma H.1)
                                                                           вӢҶ                        вӢҶ
     EQ [hsвӢҶ (вҹЁОёвӢҶ , zвҹ©) В· Пғ вҖІ (вҹЁz, Оёвҹ©) В· вҹЁz, ОёвӢҶ вҹ©] вүҲ sвӢҶ В· Пғ
                                                          psвӢҶ В· вҹЁОёвӢҶ , Оёвҹ©s вҲ’1 = Пғ
                                                                               psвӢҶ В· O(dвҲ’(s вҲ’1)/2 ),               (3.2)
      psвӢҶ is the sвӢҶ -th coefficient in the Hermite expansion of Пғ. While for вҲҘgвҲҘ2 , we have
where Пғ
                           EPОёвӢҶ вҲҘgвҲҘ22 вүҲ d В· EQ y 2 Пғ вҖІ (вҹЁz, Оёвҹ©)2 = в„Ұ(d),


where the high-order terms in the likelihood ratio decomposition are ignored and we come back to
this point later. Now we can argue why vanilla online minibatch SGD has difficulty achieving the
SQ lower bound for generative exponent sвӢҶ > 2: Suppose EQ [yО¶sвӢҶ (y)] and Пғ    psвӢҶ are both nonzero
                                                вӢҶ
constants. Then the one-sample SNR is O(dвҲ’s ). For a minibatch with n samples, the SNR of the
                                                                                        вӢҶ
gradient averaged over the minibatch is roughly n times the one-sample SNR3 , i.g., ndвҲ’s . To ensure
    2
      A rigorous derivation of the error term with multiple neurons and general loss function в„“ can be found in the
proof of Example 4.6 in Appendix C.2.2.
    3
      This argument is not fully rigorous because EPОёвӢҶ [вҲҘgвҲҘ22 ] also includes вҖңbiasвҖқ вҲҘEPОёвӢҶ [g]вҲҘ22 besides the
fluctuations, but it remains valid as long as вҲҘgвҲҘ22 is dominated by fluctuations from all d directions at initialization.


                                                           4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025



                                                                                  вҲҡ
one update step achieves alignment, i.e., the square root of the n-sample SNR, ndвҲ’sвӢҶ , exceeding
                                                                                вӢҶ
the trivial dвҲ’1/2 threshold attained by a random vector, it requires at least ds вҲ’1 samples. Note that
                                                        вӢҶ
the sample complexity would become even worse if s < argminsвүҘsвӢҶ {s : EQ [yО¶s (y)] Мё= 0}. This
                                             вӢҶ
contrasts with the sample complexity O(ds /2 ) suggested by the SQ lower bound.
The above failure of vanilla online minibatch SGD exposes three key challenges:
  (i) (Non-polynomial) How to handle the infinite sum of high-order terms in the likelihood ratio?
 (ii) (Low SNR) How to enhance the SNR to achieve the SQ lower bound?
(iii) (Zero correlation) How to ensure that the algorithm still works if EQ [yО¶sвӢҶ (y)] = 0?
Below we discuss our techniques for addressing these challenges.
Label transformation via general gradient oracle. The idea to fix the zero correlation problem is to
apply a nonlinear transformation T : R вҶ’ R to y such that T (y) has nonzero correlation with О¶sвӢҶ (y).
This label transformation technique has been widely used in the literature (Lu & Li, 2020; Mondelli
& Montanari, 2018; Dudeja & Hsu, 2018; Chen & Meka, 2020; Damian et al., 2024). In particular,
Lee et al. (2024) show that the label transformation can be automatically realized by running two
gradient steps on the same batch, a technique termed as batch-reusing (Dandi et al., 2024; Arnaboldi
et al., 2024). In this work, we study a more general class of gradient-based methods with gradient of
form g = ПҲ(y, вҹЁОё, zвҹ©)z, which is an abstract form of the transformed gradient T (y)Пғ вҖІ (вҹЁz, Оёвҹ©)z. The
desired condition becomes EQ [ПҲpsвӢҶ вҲ’1 (y)О¶sвӢҶ (y)] Мё= 0, where ПҲps (y) is the s-th Hermite coefficient
function of ПҲ(y, x) in the Hermite basis of x. One particular way to obtain such a gradient is to use a
modified loss function, similar to the approach in Joshi et al. (2024), while in our case the specific
choice of ПҲ is also related to the other two challenges addressed as follows.
Exploration by weight perturbation with high-pass activation. The low-SNR challenge corre-
sponds to the fact that points on the equator of SdвҲ’1 orthogonal to ОёвӢҶ are all saddle points in terms of
|вҹЁОё, ОёвӢҶ вҹ©|, and random initialization typically lies near this equator. To efficiently escape from such
saddle points, we perform random weight perturbation, akin to the approach in Jin et al. (2017) for
non-convex optimization. To understand the effectiveness of weight perturbation, we still stick to the
                                                                                                      4
squared loss and the two-layer neural network for the following second-moment calculation.              Specifi-
cally, suppose the activation Пғ is high-pass and has the lowest degree sвӢҶ , i.e., Пғ(x) = sвүҘsвӢҶ Пғ
                                                                                            P
                                                                                                      ps hs (x),
and consider for simplicity the case of odd sвӢҶ . In the extreme case where Оё is perturbed into i.i.d.
pure noise Оё1 , . . . , ОёL вҲј Unif(SdвҲ’1 ), we compute the gradient for each Оёl and aggregate them into
g = LвҲ’1 (g1 + В· В· В· + gL ). Using the properties of the Gaussian noise operator (see Appendix B for
details), the second moment of this aggregated gradient satisfies
                     PL
  E вҲҘgвҲҘ22 вүҲ Ld2 l,lвҖІ =1 EQ [y 2 ] В· EQ [Пғ вҖІ (вҹЁz, Оёl вҹ©)Пғ вҖІ (вҹЁz, ОёlвҖІ вҹ©)] вүҲ d sвүҘsвӢҶ s В· Пғ
                                                                                    ps2 В· EОё,ОёвҖІ [вҹЁОё, ОёвҖІ вҹ©sвҲ’1 ],
                                                                          P

where Оё, ОёвҖІ are drown independently from Unif(SdвҲ’1 ). Since вҹЁОё, ОёвҖІ вҹ© вүҲ dвҲ’1/2 , we have E[вҲҘgвҲҘ22 ] вүҲ
       вӢҶ
O(dвҲ’(s вҲ’3)/2 ), yielding a higher one-sample SNR as the first moment remains unchanged and
pushing the sample complexity towards the SQ lower bound. Moreover, we also see from the
above calculation that the weight perturbation resolves the non-polynomial issue thanks to the near-
orthogonality of the perturbed weights. The above heuristics can be made rigorous for polynomially
large L, thereby handling non-polynomial link and activation functions.
Our approach also draws inspiration from the landscape smoothing method in Damian et al. (2024),
but in constrast to their problem setup, we do not require full knowledge of the link distribution in
advance. Instead, it suffices to know the generative exponent sвӢҶ to construct a high-pass activation
function as well as the gradient oracle ПҲ. See Example 4.6 for a detailed discussion on this.


4        G R A D I E N T- B A S E D A L G O R I T H M F O R U N I F O R M P R I O R

We first present our method and results for the case of ОёвӢҶ вҲј Unif(SdвҲ’1 ), or equivalently, when there is
no structural information on ОёвӢҶ . Motivated by the discussion in Section 3, we propose a gradient-based
meta algorithm (Algorithm 1) that can train a two-layer neural network to learn the unknown signal
          r sвӢҶ /2 вҲЁ d) sample complexity, nearly matching the corresponding SQ lower bound. This
ОёвӢҶ with O(d
    4
        The label transformation only affects the second moment by a constant factor as we show in Appendix C.1.


                                                         5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Algorithm 1 Meta-Algorithm for Gradient-based Feature Learning for Uniform Signal Prior
                                         (0)          (0)                                       (0) i.i.d.
 1: Input: Initialization Оё (0) = (Оё1 , . . . , ОёM ) вҲҲ RdГ—M , where Оёm
                                                                   вҲј Unif(SdвҲ’1 ), a = a В· 1 вҲҲ
    RM , number of iterations T вҲҲ N, learning rate О· > 0, batch size n вҲҲ N, polarization level
    Оі вҲҲ (0, 1), number of perturbation L вҲҲ N.
 2: For t = 0, 1, . . . , T вҲ’ 1, in the t-th iteration:
                                                     (t) (t)
 3:      Sample a fresh mini-batch of data {(zi , yi )}ni=1 .
                                   (t)         (t)    (t)              (t)         (t)               (t) i.i.d.
 4:        Perturb weights wm,l = (ОіОёm + Оҫm,l )/вҲҘОіОёm + Оҫm,l вҲҘ2 , Оҫm,l вҲј Unif(SdвҲ’1 ) for all m, l.
                                         (t)                (t)        (t)        (t)                  (t)            (t)
 5:        Compute the gradients gm,l,i = (ПҲ(yi , вҹЁwm,l , zi вҹ©) + errm,l,i ) В· zi for all m, l, i.
                                     (t)         Pn PL           (t)            (t) (t)
 6:        Aggregate the gradients: gm = (nL)вҲ’1 i=1 l=1 (gm,l,i вҲ’ ПҲp1 (yi )wm,l ) for all m.
                                                (t)     (t)           (t)
 7:     Normalize the update step: gsm = gm /вҲҘgm вҲҘ2 for all m.
                            (t+1)             (t)           (t)
 8:     Update the weights Оёm     = (Оё(t) + О·s
                                             gm )/вҲҘОё(t) + О·s
                                                           gm вҲҘ2 for all m.
                                  (T )
 9: Output: Final model weights Оё .


meta-algorithm (Algorithm 1) covers an extensive family of gradient-based methods including the
batch-reusing and gradient descent with label transformation or modified loss.


4.1     G R A D I E N T- B A S E D T R A I N I N G A L G O R I T H M ( A L G O R I T H M 1 )

                                         (0)                                                    (t)
We initialize each neuron m with Оёm вҲј Unif(SdвҲ’1 ), and we set am вүЎ a for some sufficiently small
a > 0 throughout the training. In each iteration t вҲҲ [T ], we sample a new data batch of size n.
Weight perturbation. Before calculating the gradients, we first perturb the weights of each neuron to
get L noisy replica, by injecting uniform noise from the sphere SdвҲ’1 as in Line 4. There is a simple
rule for choosing the polarization level Оі. In the previous section, we discussed how EPОёвӢҶ [вҲҘgвҲҘ22 ] in
the one-sample SNR depends on the following quantity:

               (t)     (t)     вӢҶ                (t)    sвӢҶ вҲ’1                                   (t)      (t)       вӢҶ               вӢҶ
EОҫ(t) ,Оҫ(t) вҹЁwm,l , wm,lвҖІ вҹ©s вҲ’1 вүІ Оі 2 вҲҘОёm вҲҘ22                     + EОҫ(t) ,Оҫ(t) вҹЁОҫm,l , Оҫm,lвҖІ вҹ©s вҲ’1 вүҲ (Оі 2 вҲЁ dвҲ’1/2 )s вҲ’1 .
  m,l   m,lвҖІ                                                                m,l   m,lвҖІ


In this context, Оі 2 represents the bias from the exploitation of the learned search direction, and dвҲ’1/2
accounts for the variance from the exploration for the unknown signal. In fact, Оі should be set as
large as possible to maximize exploitation while still ensuring that the exploration noise dominates.
This balance is necessary to fully gain the SNR enhancement from weight    вҲҡ perturbation. This gives
                         r вҲ’1/4 ). Moreover, it suffices to set L = в„Ұ(n
rise to the choice Оі = Оҳ(d                                             r     d) as stated in Theorem 4.2.
                                                                                                                            (t)
Gradient aggregation and debiasing. Then for each neuron m and its perturbed weights wm,l , we
                             (t)
calculate the gradient gm,l,i for every sample (Line 5). Here, we express the gradient as a sum of an
                 (t)     (t)       (t)                                 (t)
oracle term ПҲ(yi , вҹЁzi , wm,l вҹ©) and an error term errm,l,i , which we will discuss in more detail in the
next paragraph. Next, we aggregate the gradients for each neuron m by averaging over the n samples
                            (t)                                                                (t)    (t)
and L perturbations to get gm as shown in Line 6. Here we additionally subtract a term ПҲp1 (yi )wm,l
to debias the gradient, where ПҲp1 (y) is the first coefficient function in the Hermite expansion of the
                                                                                         (t)
oracle function ПҲ(y, x) with respect to x. Finally, we update Оёm according to Line 7 and Line 8.
Implementation for a general loss function. The gradient step in Line 5 is an implicit decomposition
of the actual implementation, and we present the meta-algorithm in this way for the purpose of
theoretical analysis. Specifically, for a general loss function в„“(y, f (z; Оё, a)) evaluated on the two-
                                   (t)
layer neural network, the actual gm,l,i is the negative gradient of the loss rescaled by aвҲ’1
                                                                                          m , i.e.,


 (t)                (t)     (t)   (t)           вҖІ (t)     (t)   (t)              (t)    (t)     (t)
gm,l,i = вҲ’aвҲ’1
                                                                           вҖІ
           m вҲҮОёm в„“ yi , f (zi ; {wm,l }, a) = вҲ’в„“ yi , f (zi ; {wm,l }, a) В· Пғ (вҹЁwm,l , zi вҹ©) В· zi ,



                                                                  6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


where we denote by в„“вҖІ (y, f ) the partial derivative of the loss function with respect to the output f .
Correspondingly, the oracle term and the error term are given by
       (t)    (t)   (t)             (t)            (t)       (t)
   ПҲ(yi , вҹЁwm,l , zi вҹ©) = вҲ’в„“вҖІ (yi , 0) В· Пғ вҖІ (вҹЁwm,l , zi вҹ©),
                                                                            вҖІ
                   (t)          (t)            (t)      (t)  (t)                  (t)    (t)
              errm,l,i = в„“вҖІ (yi , 0) вҲ’ в„“вҖІ yi , f (zi ; {wm,l }M  m=1 , a)  В· Пғ (вҹЁwm,l , zi вҹ©).
              (t)
Note that errm,l,i can be made small by setting a to be small. Again, we emphasize that these two
terms are not calculated explicitly, but rather from an implicit decomposition of the actual gradient.
Beyond the above example, the meta-algorithm encompasses more general gradient-based methods,
and the theoretical results presented later are valid as long as the actual gradient can be decomposed
in the same way such that the assumptions of our main theorem are satisfied.

4.2     F E AT U R E A L I G N M E N T A N D S TAT I S T I C A L C O M P L E X I T Y
                                                                        PвҲһ
For any ПҲ вҲҲ L2 (Q), we write its Hermite expansion as ПҲ(y, x) = s=0 ПҲps (y) В· hs (y) in the L2 (Q)
                                                                вҲһ
sense, where ПҲps (y) is the s-th coefficient function and s=0 EQ [ПҲps (y)2 ] < вҲһ.
                                                             P

Assumption 4.1. For the Gaussian single-index model in (2.1) with generative exponent sвӢҶ вүҘ 1, the
oracle ПҲ : R Г— R вҶ’ R satisfies the following conditions:
(a) (Quadruple-integrable under Q). Both ПҲ(y, x) В· x and ПҲ(y, x) belong to L4 (Q).
(b) (High-pass under Q). For all s = 1, . . . , sвӢҶ вҲ’2, the s-th coefficient function is zero, i.e., ПҲps (y) вүЎ 0.
     In addition, there exists a constant C > 0 such that |EQ [О¶sвӢҶ (y) В· ПҲpsвӢҶ вҲ’1 (y)]| вүҘ C.
 (c) (Polynomial-like tail under P and Q). There exists a constant C > 0 such that for all r вүҘ 1,
     max{EP [|ПҲ(y, x)|r ] , EQ [|ПҲ(y, x)|r ]} вүӨ C В· rCr .
The quadruple-integrability condition (Assumption 4.1(a)) ensures that the decomposition of the
likelihood ratio in (2.2) is well defined for calculations involving the second moment, i.e.,
                              h                      i                     PвҲһ
     EP ПҲ(y, x)2 x2 = EQ ПҲ(y, x)2 x2 В· Q(y,x) P(y,x)
                                                       = EQ ПҲ(y, x)2 x2 В· s=0 О¶s (y)hs (x) .

The high-pass condition (Assumption 4.1(b)) has been motivated in Section 3 and guarantees noise
reduction for the second moment. The polynomial-like tail condition (Assumption 4.1(c)) is used
for concentration arguments in the proof. Note that this condition is analogue to the Gaussian
hypercontractivity property, where ExвҲјN (0,1) [|f (x)|r ] вүІ rDr/2 if f (x) is a polynomial of degree at
most D. In particular, ПҲ can be constructed as ПҲ(y, x) = в„“вҖІ (y)Пғ вҖІ (x), where в„“ is the loss function and
Пғ is the activation in the two-layer network. It suffices to use a loss в„“ with bounded derivative and a
polynomial activation Пғ for the polynomial-like tail condition (see Section 4.2.1 and 4.2.2).
Now we are ready to state our first main result on the sample complexity of Algorithm 1 for uniform
prior. See Appendix D for a proof sketch for even sвӢҶ вүҘ 2 and Appendix E for a detailed proof.
Theorem 4.2 (Sample complexity for uniform prior). Under Assumption 4.1, set the initializa-
                          (0)        (0) i.i.d.                                                (t)
tion of the weights as Оё1 , . . . , ОёM вҲј Unif(SdвҲ’1 ). Suppose that the event E = {|errm,l,i | вүӨ
       вӢҶ
dвҲ’10s , вҲҖ(m, l, i, t) вҲҲ [M ] Г— [L] Г— [n] Г— [T ]} holds with probability at least 1 вҲ’ O(dвҲ’c0 ) for some
constant c0 > 0 with (M, L, n, T ) specified as follows. Set the learning rate О· > 2, the polarization
level Оі = dвҲ’1/4 (log d)1/4 , and the number of neurons M = Оҳ(1). Suppose
                           вӢҶ               вӢҶ                              вӢҶ
              n = Оҳ (ds /2 (log d)1+s /2 ) вҲЁ d(log d)2 , L = Оҳ d(s +1)/2 log d .


Define П„ = О· вҲ’2 /(1 вҲ’ О· вҲ’1 )2 , and let вҲҶ = (log d)вҲ’1/2 if sвӢҶ вүӨ 2 and вҲҶ = dвҲ’1/4 (log d)1/4 if sвӢҶ вүҘ 3.
Then with probability at least 1 вҲ’ O(dвҲ’c ) for some constant c > 0, after running Algorithm 1 for
T = O(log d + log(вҲҶвҲ’1 )/ log(П„ вҲ’1 )) steps, there are at least в„Ұ(M ) neurons having alignment
   (T )              вҲҡ
|вҹЁОёm , ОёвӢҶ вҹ©| вүҘ 1 вҲ’ O( вҲҶ).
Theorem 4.2 shows that the sample complexity of Algorithm 1 is nT = Оҳ(d   r sвӢҶ /2 вҲЁ d), matching the
                                             вӢҶ
SQ sample complexity lower bound for all s вүҘ 1 established by Damian et al. (2024). Compared to
the partial trace method in Damian et al. (2024), our algorithm does not require special warm-start
                                                                                    r sвӢҶ +1/2 вҲЁd2 ).
initialization. Meanwhile, the computational complexity of Algorithm 1 is M LnT = Оҳ(d
Indeed, one is allowed to choose О· = +вҲһ, which resembles tensor power iteration. So far the gradient


                                                         7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


oracle ПҲ is still an abstract object, and next we will instantiate the above general theorem with concrete
examples of ПҲ that yield implementable algorithms. We consider the special case of polynomial link
functions with sвӢҶ вүӨ 2 in Section 4.2.1, and then the general case for any sвӢҶ вүҘ 1 in Section 4.2.2.
Remark 4.3 (Benefit of overparametrization). Algorithm 1 trains a two-layer neural network with
constant width M , involving L times of perturbation for every neuron in each step. Indeed,   this is
                                                                       вӢҶ
equivalent to train a two-layer neural network with width LM = Оҳ d(s вҲ’1)/2 вҲЁ (d log d)1/2 , where
we divide the neurons into L groups, each having M neurons. In each iteration we perturb the weights
and compute the gradients, and then aggregate the gradients within each group of M neurons. This
combination of weight perturbation and gradient sharing exploits the benefit of overparametrization.

4.2.1     O N L I N E S G D W I T H B AT C H R E U S I N G
The oracle function ПҲ can be specialized to two consecutive gradient descent steps on the same batch
under square loss to handle polynomial link functions corresponding to sвӢҶ вүӨ 2 (Lee et al., 2024).
Example 4.4 (Batch-reusing: ПҲ for polynomial link functions). Suppose that the link distribution is
a polynomial of degree q. We consider ПҲ induced by batch-reusing on single neuron, i.e., ПҲ(y, x) =
yПғ вҖІ (x) + yПғ вҖІ (x + yПғ вҖІ (x)) (see Section 4.2 of Lee et al. (2024) for deduction) and choose Пғ вҖІ (x) =
PCq
   i=0 ci hi (x) where Cq вҲҲ N is a constant depending only on q and each ci вҲј Unif([0, 1]).
Corollary 4.5 (Batch-reusing for polynomial link function). Suppose that the link distribution is
given by a polynomial link function. Under the same setups in Theorem 4.2 with the oracle ПҲ given by
Example 4.4, the sample complexity of Algorithm 1 is Оҳ(d),
                                                      r     recovering the result of Lee et al. (2024).
The proof is deferred to Appendix C.2.1. However, batch-reusing may not be optimal for sвӢҶ вүҘ 3 due
to violation of the high-pass condition, necessitating a more general approach to construct ПҲ.

4.2.2     L A B E L T R A N S F O R M AT I O N V I A M O D I F I E D L O S S
We discuss another approach to construct ПҲ by modifying the loss function, a universal method for
arbitrary generative exponent sвӢҶ вүҘ 1. Additional details and proofs are postponed to Appendix C.2.2.
Example 4.6 (ПҲ based on modified loss). Let ПҲ(y, x) = в„“вҖІ (y)Пғ вҖІ (x) with в„“(y) being certain loss
function and Пғ(x) being some activation function. Such a form corresponds to the gradient of the
loss в„“(y вҲ’ f (z; Оё)) (assuming that a is fixed and has small entries), since
                              вҖІ
                                               вҖІ                      вҖІ      вҖІ
aвҲ’1

  m вҲҮОёm в„“ y вҲ’ f (z; Оё) = вҲ’в„“ y вҲ’ f (z; Оё) В· Пғ (вҹЁОёm , zвҹ©) В· z = вҲ’ в„“ (y) В· Пғ (вҹЁОёm , zвҹ©) В·z + errm В· z,
                                                                     |       {z    }
                                                                               :=ПҲ(y,вҹЁОёm ,zвҹ©)

where errm :=[в„“вҖІ (y) вҲ’ в„“вҖІ (y вҲ’ f (z; Оё, a))] В· Пғ вҖІ (вҹЁОёm , zвҹ©) = O(f (z; Оё, a)) В· Пғ вҖІ (вҹЁОёm , zвҹ©) denotes small
error for sufficiently small a. In Appendix C.2.2, we provide specific choice of the activation function
Пғ(x) (order-sвӢҶ Hermite polynomial) and the loss function в„“(y) (a carefully designed random loss
function), satisfying all the conditions in Assumption 4.1.
Corollary 4.7 (Modified loss for general sвӢҶ ). The oracle ПҲ given by Example 4.6 satisfies all the
assumptions of Theorem 4.2, thus the results of Theorem 4.2 hold for Algorithm 1 using this ПҲ.
To satisfy the high-pass condition with high probability, we construct a random loss function based
on the spectral properties of О¶sвӢҶ in the likelihood ratio decomposition, as detailed in Appendix C.2.2.
Furthermore, we show an equivalence between direct label transformation and modified loss functions
(see Appendix C.1.1 for details). Therefore, using a random label transformation with the standard
squared loss can also achieve a similar effect. (See Appendix C.4 for a discussion on the limitations.)


5    E X P L O I T I N G T H E S T R U C T U R E : A L G O R I T H M F O R S PA R S E P R I O R

We have seen that when the prior on ОёвӢҶ is uninformative, our method nearly achieves the SQ lower
bound that scales with the ambient dimension d. It is natural to ask whether our method can benefit
from extra structural information on ОёвӢҶ , one classic example being sparsity. To this end, we consider
an extension of the framework in the previous section toвҲҡthe setting where ОёвӢҶ is a k-sparse vector. We
first introduce the algorithm for extreme sparsity k = o( d) and then discuss the general sparse case.


                                                     8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025



                                                                           вҲҡ
Gaussian single-index model with sparse signal. Given sparsity level k = o( d), we consider the
Gaussian single-index model in (2.1) with ОёвӢҶ drawn from a k-sparse prior:
                      ПҖk : ОёвӢҶ | П•вӢҶ вҲј Unif SkвҲ’1 (П•вӢҶ ) , П•вӢҶ вҲј Unif(Sk ),

                                                                                          (5.1)
wherePSk :={П• вҠӮ [d] : |П•| = k} is the collection of all k-sparse support sets, and SkвҲ’1 (П•) :={x вҲҲ
Rd : iвҲҲП• x2i = 1, xj = 0, вҲҖj вҲҲ
                             / П•} is the associated k-dimensional unit sphere for any П• вҲҲ Sk .
We show that Algorithm 1 for the uniform prior can be easily adapted to leverage the sparsity of ОёвӢҶ ,
                                                                 r sвӢҶ ) sample complexity.
striking a nearly optimal computational-statistical balance with O(k

5.1    A L G O R I T H M D E S I G N : H O W T O L E V E R A G E S PA R S I T Y ?

Note that Algorithm 1 can also learn the k-sparse Gaussian single-index model, albeit with O(d r sвӢҶ /2 вҲЁ
d) samples, which is apparently suboptimal in light of the classic example of sparse linear regression.
Here the key challenge is support identification of П•вӢҶ , and the issue of Algorithm 1 lies in the weight
perturbation using noise Оҫ вҲј Unif(SdвҲ’1 ), thus unaware of the sparsity of ОёвӢҶ . Below we discuss how
to calibrate the weight perturbation with the sparse prior.
Perturbation by replicating the prior is not enough. An intuitive first-cut attempt is to use perturba-
tion noise from the same distribution as the sparse prior ПҖk in (5.1), which turns out to be suboptimal
as well. To illustrate this, we assume for simplicity a balanced ОёвӢҶ where every nonzero entry of ОёвӢҶ is
equal to k вҲ’1/2 , and consider i.i.d. Оҫ1 , . . . , ОҫL вҲј ПҖk . For each j вҲҲ П•вӢҶ , consider the j-th entry of the
lowest-degree informative query (analogous to (3.2)), whose first moment satisfies
                                                                                     вӢҶ
                                           PL                вӢҶ        E    [вҹЁОё вӢҶ ,Оёвҹ©s вҲ’1 ]     2   вҲ’(sвӢҶ вҲ’1)
                                   psвӢҶ В· L1 l=1 вҹЁОёвӢҶ , Оёl вҹ©s вҲ’1 Оёj вүҲ ОёвҲјПҖk вҲҡk
    EPОёвӢҶ [gj ] вүҲ EQ [yО¶s (y)] В· sвӢҶ Пғ                                                       вүғ kd В· k вҲҡk ,
where the last step follows from direct calculation for Оё вҲј ПҖk . Similarly, the second moment satisfies
                                                                              2       вӢҶ
                                         Пғs )2 В· EОё,ОёвҖІ вҲјПҖk [вҹЁОё, ОёвҖІ вҹ©sвҲ’1 ] вүғ kd В· k вҲ’(s вҲ’1) ,
                 EPОёвӢҶ [gj2 ] вүҲ sвүҘsвӢҶ s В· (p
                              P

where Оё and ОёвҖІ are drawn independently from the prior pПҖk . This calculation implies that the fluctuation
                                                                    вӢҶ
of each entry of the aggregated gradient is of order k 2 /d В· k вҲ’(s вҲ’1)/2 В· nвҲ’1/2 for batch size n. To
successfully identify the true support П•вӢҶ , the signal must be larger than the fluctuation for entries
in П•вӢҶ , resulting in a sample complexity of n = O(k   r sвӢҶ В· d/k 2 ). In comparison to the SQ lower
bound in Theorem 5.4, this is suboptimal by a factor d/k 2 . However, for sвӢҶ = 1, we observe that
EPОёвӢҶ [gj ] = в„Ұ(k вҲ’1 ) for j вҲҲ П•вӢҶ and EPОёвӢҶ [gj2 ] = O(1), indicating that the support П•вӢҶ can still be
identified using O(k)
                  r     samples. The form of the perturbation does not matter here since both вҹЁОёвӢҶ , Оёвҹ©
and вҹЁОё, Оё вҹ© are degree zero in terms of k вҲ’1 . Therefore, we conjecture that our algorithm succeeds for
          вҖІ

sвӢҶ = 1 even without weight perturbation as outlined in Conjecture 5.3.
Perturbation by groups that cover the prior. The suboptimality of the previous stragety originates
from the fact that П•вӢҶ is sampled from a uniform distribution over kd different k-sparse support sets,
making it unlikely for two independent sets to overlap (only with k 2 /d probability). Then how to
perturb the weights in a way that guarantees a significant overlap with П•вӢҶ ? The solution is to construct
a polynomial-size cover for the prior ПҖk . Specifically, we divide Sk into d subsets, where the j-th
subset is define as Sk,j := {П• вҲҲ Sk | j вҲҲ П•}, which contains all k-sparse support sets that include
the j-th coordinate. Now suppose ОёвӢҶ вҲҲ Sk,j , then for any perturbed weight Оёl with support from the
same subset Sk,j , its support overlaps with П•вӢҶ almost surely, thereby eliminating the d/k 2 factor.
In particular, considering a two-layer neural network with width d, the above strategy can be carried
out by perturbing each neuron m using Оёm,1 , . . . , Оёm,L whose support sets are sampled from the
same group Sk,m . As a result, at least k neurons will have one or more overlapping coordinates with
the true signal ОёвӢҶ . For these neurons, the signal in the aggregated gradient would be strong enough
for simple thresholding methods to correctly identify the true support П•вӢҶ with O(kr вӢҶ ) samples. We
further refine this by first projecting the aggregated gradient for each neuron onto its top-k support,
and then selecting the strongest projected gradient to update the weights.
Combining theseP yields Algorithm 2 for the sparse case, where we define the support projection
matrix PП• := iвҲҲП• ei eвҠӨ  i and the top-k operator Topk (v) := argmaxП•вҠӮSk вҲҘPП• (v)вҲҘ1 , which extracts
the k-sparse support П• corresponding to the largest (in absolute value) k entries of v. We set the
polarization level Оі = k вҲ’1/2 , following the same balance between exploitation and exploration as in
the uniform case, since the exploration noise is now of order k вҲ’1 .


                                                      9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Algorithm 2 Meta Algorithm for Gradient-based Feature Learning for Sparse Signal Prior
                                      (0)       (0)                      (0)
 1: Input: Initialization Оё (0) = (Оё1 , . . . , ОёM ) вҲҲ RdГ—M , where Оёm = em , a = a В· 1 вҲҲ RM with
    number of neurons M = d, number of iterations T вҲҲ N, batch size n вҲҲ N, polarization level
    Оі вҲҲ (0, 1), number of perturbation L вҲҲ N.
 2: for iteration t = 0, 1, . . . , T вҲ’ 1 do
                                          (t) (t)
 3:   Sample a fresh mini-batch {(zi , yi )}ni=1 .
                                                 (t) i.i.d.                                i.i.d.
 4:    Perturb as Line 4 in Algorithm 1 with Оҫm,l вҲј Unif(SkвҲ’1 (П•m,l )) and П•m,l вҲј Unif(Sk,m ).
                                                           (t)
 5:    Compute and aggregate the gradients to get gm , same as Line 5&6 in Algorithm 1.
                                  (t)             (t)          (t)   (t)        (t)
 6:    Find the top-k support of gm and project: П•m = Topk (gm ), grm = PП•(t) (gm ) for all m.
                                                                                       m
                                               (t)                        (t)
 7:   Locate the neuron with the largest вҲҘr
                                          gm вҲҘ2 : m
                                                  p = argmaxm вҲҘr     gm вҲҘ2 .
                                            (t+1)     (t)     (t)
 8:   Update weights by gradient sharing: Оёm      = grm
                                                      x     g
                                                          /вҲҘrmx 2 вҲҘ for all m.
 9: end for
10: Output: Model weights Оё (T ) .


5.2    S A M P L E C O M P L E X I T Y A N A LY S I S F O R S PA R S E P R I O R
Theorem 5.1 (Sample complexity for sparse prior). UnderвҲҡ     Assumption 4.1, consider the sparse prior
in (5.1) with sparsity level k satisfying Пү(dО№ ) < k < o( d) for a small О№ > 0. Suppose that the
                (t)            вӢҶ
event E = {|errm,l,i | вүӨ dвҲ’10s , вҲҖ(m, l, i, t) вҲҲ [M ] Г— [L] Г— [n] Г— [T ]} holds with probability at least
1 вҲ’ O(dвҲ’c0 ) for some constant c0 > 0 with (M, L, n, T ) specified as follows. Let Оі = k вҲ’1/2 , n =
              вӢҶ                         вӢҶ              вӢҶ
в„Ұ((k log3 k)s В·log d), and L = в„Ұ(k (s +3)/2 В·log(k)s вҲ’1 ). Then with probability at least 1вҲ’O(k вҲ’c )
for some c > 0, after running Algorithm 2 with T = 2 iterations, there are at least в„Ұ(M ) neurons
                        (T )                                              вӢҶ
that have alignment |вҹЁОёm , ОёвӢҶ вҹ©| вүҘ 1 вҲ’ O(вҲҶ), where вҲҶ = k вҲ’1 вҲЁ k вҲ’(s вҲ’1)/2 В· log(k)вҲ’3/2 = o(1).


                                                                                   вӢҶ
Theorem 5.1 shows that the sample complexity of Algorithm 2 is n = O(k   r s ), matching the SQ lower
bound established in Theorem 5.4 which will be presented below. Here for simplicity, we essentially
use an infinitely large learning rate when updating the weights in Line 8 of Algorithm 2, so it takes
only two iterations to achieve strong alignment. This is equivalent to running the same algorithm with
a finite learning rate but with a larger number of iterations, which is omitted for brevity.
Remark 5.2 (Implication for sparse tensor PCA). The connection between the Gaussian single-index
model and tensor PCA has been discussed in Damian et al. (2023), by showing that estimating
ОёвӢҶ corresponds to a tensor PCA problem defined over the empirical Hermite tensors. Our weight
perturbation technique can be potentially applied to iteratively solve sparse tensor PCA problems.
Conjecture 5.3. If dО№ < k < o(d) for a small О№ > 0 and sвӢҶ = 1, Algorithm 2 succeeds with sample
complexity n = O(k).
                  r      Furthermore, the same guarantee applies even without perturbing the weights.
Finally, we present the following SQ lower bound for the sparse prior, complementing Theorem 5.1.
Theorem 5.4 (SQ lower bound). Consider the Gaussian single-index model in (2.1) with generative
exponent sвӢҶ вүҘ 1. Suppose ОёвӢҶ is k-sparse for Пү((log d)2 ) вүӨ k вүӨ d/2. Take c > 2 as a constant. For
any (stochastic) algorithm using exp(в„Ұ((log d)c )) calls to the VSTAT(PОёвӢҶ , n) oracle with sample
                                                   p ОёвӢҶ вҹ©| > ПҒ with probability at least 2/3, it requires
size n, in order to achieve nontrivial alignment |вҹЁОё,
                          sвӢҶ                                                 p
                n вүі (logkd)csвӢҶ , where ПҒ = Пү   r (k вҲ’1 ) if (log d)2 < k < d(log d)c ,               (5.2)
                        sвӢҶ /2                                  p
              n вүі (logdd)csвӢҶ /2 , where ПҒ = Пү  r (dвҲ’1/2 ) if d(log d)c вүӨ k вүӨ d/2.                    (5.3)
                                                                     вҲҡ
More discussion on Theorem 5.4 is available in Remark G.8. For k = o( d), running Algorithm 2вҲҡwill
              r sвӢҶ ) samples, matching the lower bound in (5.2) for every sвӢҶ вүҘ 1. For k = в„Ұ( d),
succeed with O(k
running Algorithm 1 will succeed         r sвӢҶ /2 ) samples, matching the lower bound in (5.3) for
                                   with O(d
                                 вҲҡ
sвӢҶ вүҘ 2. In addition, for k = в„Ұ( d) with sвӢҶ = 1, we conjecture n = O(k)
                                                                     r    samples to be sufficient,
where the information-theoretic lower bound is в„Ұ(k log(d/k)) (Neykov et al., 2016). This gives rise
to the paradigm in Figure 1 (b).


                                                      10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


REFERENCES
Emmanuel Abbe, Enric Boix Adsera, and Theodor Misiakiewicz. Sgd learning on neural networks:
 leap complexity and saddle-to-saddle dynamics. In The Thirty Sixth Annual Conference on Learning
 Theory, pp. 2552вҖ“2623. PMLR, 2023. 19, 20

Zeyuan Allen-Zhu and Yuanzhi Li. What can resnet learn efficiently, going beyond kernels? Advances
  in Neural Information Processing Systems, 32, 2019. 1

Anima Anandkumar, Yuan Deng, Rong Ge, and Hossein Mobahi. Homotopy analysis for tensor pca.
  In Conference on Learning Theory, pp. 79вҖ“104. PMLR, 2017. 19

Luca Arnaboldi, Yatin Dandi, Florent Krzakala, Luca Pesce, and Ludovic Stephan. Repetita iuvant:
  Data repetition allows sgd to learn high-dimensional multi-index functions. In High-dimensional
  Learning Dynamics 2024: The Emergence of Structure and Reasoning, 2024. 2, 5

GeМҒrard Ben Arous, Alexander S Wein, and Ilias Zadik. Free energy wells and overlap gap property in
  sparse pca. In Conference on Learning Theory, pp. 479вҖ“482. PMLR, 2020. 19

Gerard Ben Arous, Reza Gheissari, and Aukosh Jagannath. Online stochastic gradient descent on
  non-convex losses from high-dimensional inference. Journal of Machine Learning Research, 22
  (106):1вҖ“51, 2021. 2, 19, 20

Jimmy Ba, Murat A Erdogdu, Taiji Suzuki, Zhichao Wang, and Denny Wu. Learning in the presence
  of low-dimensional structure: a spiked random matrix perspective. Advances in Neural Information
  Processing Systems, 36, 2023. 19

Francis Bach. Breaking the curse of dimensionality with convex neural networks. Journal of Machine
  Learning Research, 18(19):1вҖ“53, 2017. 2, 4, 19

Jinho Baik, GeМҒrard Ben Arous, and Sandrine PeМҒcheМҒ. Phase transition of the largest eigenvalue for
   nonnull complex sample covariance matrices. The Annals of Probability, 33(5):1643 вҖ“ 1697, 2005.
  19

Afonso S Bandeira, Ahmed El Alaoui, Samuel Hopkins, Tselil Schramm, Alexander S Wein, and
  Ilias Zadik. The franz-parisi criterion and computational trade-offs in high dimensional statistics.
  Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 35:33831вҖ“33844, 2022. 19

Alberto Bietti, Joan Bruna, Clayton Sanford, and Min Jae Song. Learning single-index models with
  shallow neural networks. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 35:9768вҖ“9783,
  2022. 2, 19

Giulio Biroli, Chiara Cammarota, and Federico Ricci-Tersenghi. How to iron out rough landscapes
  and get optimal performances: averaged gradient descent and its application to tensor pca. Journal
  of Physics A: Mathematical and Theoretical, 53(17):174003, 2020. 19

Emmanuel J CandeМҖs, Justin Romberg, and Terence Tao. Robust uncertainty principles: Exact signal
  reconstruction from highly incomplete frequency information. IEEE Transactions on information
  theory, 52(2):489вҖ“509, 2006. 2

Minshuo Chen, Yu Bai, Jason D Lee, Tuo Zhao, Huan Wang, Caiming Xiong, and Richard Socher.
 Towards understanding hierarchical learning: Benefits of neural representations. Advances in
 Neural Information Processing Systems, 33:22134вҖ“22145, 2020. 19

Sitan Chen and Raghu Meka. Learning polynomials in few relevant dimensions. In Conference on
  Learning Theory, pp. 1161вҖ“1227. PMLR, 2020. 3, 5

Lenaic Chizat, Edouard Oyallon, and Francis Bach. On lazy training in differentiable programming.
  Advances in neural information processing systems, 32, 2019. 1

Davin Choo and Tommaso dвҖҷOrsi. The complexity of sparse tensor pca. Advances in Neural
  Information Processing Systems, 34:7993вҖ“8005, 2021. 19


                                                 11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Alex Damian, Eshaan Nichani, Rong Ge, and Jason D Lee. Smoothing the landscape boosts the
  signal for sgd: Optimal sample complexity for learning single index models. Advances in Neural
  Information Processing Systems, 36, 2023. 2, 3, 10, 19, 20
Alex Damian, Loucas Pillaud-Vivien, Jason D Lee, and Joan Bruna. The computational complexity
  of learning gaussian single-index models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.05529, 2024. 2, 3, 4, 5, 7, 19,
  31, 64, 83
Alexandru Damian, Jason Lee, and Mahdi Soltanolkotabi. Neural networks can learn representations
  with gradient descent. In Conference on Learning Theory, pp. 5413вҖ“5452. PMLR, 2022. 19, 20
Yatin Dandi, Florent Krzakala, Bruno Loureiro, Luca Pesce, and Ludovic Stephan. How two-layer
  neural networks learn, one (giant) step at a time. In NeurIPS 2023 Workshop on Mathematics of
  Modern Machine Learning, 2023. 19
Yatin Dandi, Emanuele Troiani, Luca Arnaboldi, Luca Pesce, Lenka Zdeborova, and Florent Krzakala.
  The benefits of reusing batches for gradient descent in two-layer networks: Breaking the curse of
  information and leap exponents. In Forty-first International Conference on Machine Learning,
  2024. 3, 5, 19
Alexandre dвҖҷAspremont, Laurent Ghaoui, Michael Jordan, and Gert Lanckriet. A direct formulation
  for sparse pca using semidefinite programming. Advances in neural information processing systems,
  17, 2004. 19
David L Donoho, Arian Maleki, and Andrea Montanari. Message-passing algorithms for compressed
  sensing. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 106(45):18914вҖ“18919, 2009. 2
Rishabh Dudeja and Daniel Hsu. Learning single-index models in gaussian space. In Conference On
  Learning Theory, pp. 1887вҖ“1930. PMLR, 2018. 2, 5, 19
Rishabh Dudeja and Daniel Hsu. Statistical query lower bounds for tensor pca. Journal of Machine
  Learning Research, 22(83):1вҖ“51, 2021. 2
Jianqing Fan, Zhuoran Yang, and Mengxin Yu. Understanding implicit regularization in over-
   parameterized single index model. Journal of the American Statistical Association, 118(544):
   2315вҖ“2328, 2023. 2, 19
Vitaly Feldman. A general characterization of the statistical query complexity. In Conference on
  learning theory, pp. 785вҖ“830. PMLR, 2017. 19
Vitaly Feldman, Elena Grigorescu, Lev Reyzin, Santosh S Vempala, and Ying Xiao. Statistical
  algorithms and a lower bound for detecting planted cliques. Journal of the ACM (JACM), 64(2):
  1вҖ“37, 2017. 19, 62, 63
Gerald B Folland. How to integrate a polynomial over a sphere. The American Mathematical Monthly,
 108(5):446вҖ“448, 2001. 77
David Gamarnik and Ilias Zadik. Sparse high-dimensional linear regression. algorithmic barriers and
  a local search algorithm. arXiv preprint arXiv:1711.04952, 2017. 19
Behrooz Ghorbani, Song Mei, Theodor Misiakiewicz, and Andrea Montanari. Limitations of lazy
  training of two-layers neural network. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 32,
  2019. 1
Ross Girshick, Jeff Donahue, Trevor Darrell, and Jitendra Malik. Rich feature hierarchies for accurate
  object detection and semantic segmentation. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer
  vision and pattern recognition, pp. 580вҖ“587, 2014. 1
Wolfgang HaМҲrdle, Marlene MuМҲller, Stefan Sperlich, Axel Werwatz, et al. Nonparametric and semi-
 parametric models, volume 1. Springer, 2004. 1
Marian Hristache, Anatoli Juditsky, and Vladimir Spokoiny. Direct estimation of the index coefficient
 in a single-index model. Annals of Statistics, pp. 595вҖ“623, 2001. 1


                                                 12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Hidehiko Ichimura. Semiparametric least squares (sls) and weighted sls estimation of single-index
  models. Journal of econometrics, 58(1-2):71вҖ“120, 1993. 1
Arthur Jacot, Franck Gabriel, and CleМҒment Hongler. Neural tangent kernel: Convergence and gen-
  eralization in neural networks. Advances in neural information processing systems, 31, 2018.
  1
Chi Jin, Rong Ge, Praneeth Netrapalli, Sham M Kakade, and Michael I Jordan. How to escape saddle
  points efficiently. In International conference on machine learning, pp. 1724вҖ“1732. PMLR, 2017.
  5
Iain M Johnstone and Arthur Yu Lu. On consistency and sparsity for principal components analysis
   in high dimensions. Journal of the American Statistical Association, 104(486):682вҖ“693, 2009. 19
Nirmit Joshi, Theodor Misiakiewicz, and Nathan Srebro. On the complexity of learning sparse
  functions with statistical and gradient queries. arXiv preprint arXiv:2407.05622, 2024. 5
Achim Klenke and Lutz Mattner. Stochastic ordering of classical discrete distributions. Advances in
  Applied probability, 42(2):392вҖ“410, 2010. 66
Jason D Lee, Kazusato Oko, Taiji Suzuki, and Denny Wu. Neural network learns low-dimensional
  polynomials with sgd near the information-theoretic limit. arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.01581, 2024.
  2, 3, 5, 8, 19, 26, 27
Yue M Lu and Gen Li. Phase transitions of spectral initialization for high-dimensional non-convex
  estimation. Information and Inference: A Journal of the IMA, 9(3):507вҖ“541, 2020. 5
P MacCullagh and JA Nelder. Generalized linear models. Monographs on statistics and applied
  probability (37), 1989. 1
Marco Mondelli and Andrea Montanari. Fundamental limits of weak recovery with applications to
 phase retrieval. In Conference On Learning Theory, pp. 1445вҖ“1450. PMLR, 2018. 5
Alireza Mousavi-Hosseini, Denny Wu, Taiji Suzuki, and Murat A Erdogdu. Gradient-based feature
  learning under structured data. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 36:71449вҖ“
  71485, 2023. 19
Alireza Mousavi-Hosseini, Denny Wu, and Murat A Erdogdu. Learning multi-index models with
  neural networks via mean-field langevin dynamics. arXiv preprint arXiv:2408.07254, 2024. 19
Matey Neykov, Zhaoran Wang, and Han Liu. Agnostic estimation for misspecified phase retrieval
 models. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 29, 2016. 10, 19
Ryan OвҖҷDonnell. Analysis of boolean functions. Cambridge University Press, 2014. 18
Garvesh Raskutti, Martin J Wainwright, and Bin Yu. Minimax-optimal rates for sparse additive
  models over kernel classes via convex programming. Journal of machine learning research, 13(2),
  2012. 2
Maria Refinetti, Sebastian Goldt, Florent Krzakala, and Lenka ZdeborovaМҒ. Classifying high-
 dimensional gaussian mixtures: Where kernel methods fail and neural networks succeed. In
 International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 8936вҖ“8947. PMLR, 2021. 1
Ryszard Szekli. Stochastic ordering and dependence in applied probability, volume 97. Springer
  Science & Business Media, 2012. 66
Tomas Vaskevicius, Varun Kanade, and Patrick Rebeschini. Implicit regularization for optimal sparse
  recovery. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 32, 2019. 19
Nuri Mert Vural and Murat A Erdogdu. Pruning is optimal for learning sparse features in high-
  dimensions. arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.08658, 2024. 2, 65
Tengyao Wang, Quentin Berthet, and Richard J Samworth. Statistical and computational trade-offs in
  estimation of sparse principal components. The Annals of Statistics, 44(5):1896 вҖ“ 1930, 2016. 19
Peng Zhao, Yun Yang, and Qiao-Chu He. High-dimensional linear regression via implicit regulariza-
  tion. Biometrika, 109(4):1033вҖ“1046, 2022. 19


                                                13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


CONTENTS

1   Introduction                                                                                     1

2   Problem Setup                                                                                    3

3   Overview of techniques                                                                           4

4   Gradient-based Algorithm for Uniform Prior                                                       5
    4.1   Gradient-based Training Algorithm (Algorithm 1) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .        6
    4.2   Feature Alignment and Statistical Complexity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       7
          4.2.1    Online SGD with Batch Reusing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       8
          4.2.2    Label Transformation via Modified Loss . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      8

5   Exploiting the Structure: Algorithm for Sparse Prior                                             8
    5.1   Algorithm design: How to leverage sparsity? . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      9
    5.2   Sample Complexity Analysis for Sparse Prior . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       10

A Numerical Experiments                                                                             15

B Notation, Preliminaries and Related Works                                                         17
    B.1 Background on Hermite Polynomials . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .         18
    B.2 Additional Related Works . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      19

C Supplementary Proofs for the Main Context                                                         19
    C.1 Proofs for Section 3 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    19
          C.1.1    Equivalence between Direct Label Transformation and Modified Loss Function 20
          C.1.2    Moment Calculation around Initialization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     20
          C.1.3    Heuristic Derivation of Sample Complexity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      22
          C.1.4    Failure of High-Pass Assumption . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      24
    C.2 Proofs for Examples of Oracle Function . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .        24
          C.2.1    Batch-reusing for polynomial link function . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     25
          C.2.2    Modified loss for general sвӢҶ вүҘ 1 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   28
    C.3 Debiasing the gradient estimator for Unknown Oracle . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .         30
    C.4 Summary of Limitations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .        31

D Proof Sketch of the Main Theorem for Uniform Prior                                                31

E Proof of the Main Theorem for the Uniform Prior                                                   32
    E.1 Properties of the Gradient Step . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     33
    E.2 Proof of the Main Theorem for Uniform Prior . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .         35
    E.3 Proof of Key Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      40


                                                  14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


F Proof of the Main Theorem for the Sparse Prior                                                        46
    F.1     Proof Outline and Preliminaries . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       46
    F.2     Properties of the Gradient Step . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     48
    F.3     Proof of the Main Theorem . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       49
    F.4     Proof of the Key Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      54
    F.5     Proofs for Technical Results in the Sparse Case . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       59

G Statistical Query Lower Bound for Sparse Signal Recovery                                              62
    G.1 Proof of Technical Lemmas for SQ Lower Bound . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .                65

H Supporting Lemmas on Moment Calculations                                                              67

I   Technical Results                                                                                   72
    I.1     Technical Results for Hermite Tensor . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      72
    I.2     Technical Results for Uniform Distribution on the Sphere . . . . . . . . . . . . . .        77
    I.3     Technical Results on Polarized Random Vectors . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .         79

J Auxiliary Lemmas                                                                                      82

A     NUMERICAL EXPERIMENTS
We conduct extensive simulation experiments to validate the sample complexity result established in
Theorem 4.2. In specific, for a fixed Gaussian single-index model, we run Algorithm 1 extensively
over a variety of problem instances with diverse scales and report the average accuracy in terms of
the alignment. We lay out the details of the experiment setting as follows.

вҖў Gaussian single-index model. We focus on the Gaussian single-index model introduced in (2.1)
with a deterministic link function p and Gaussian additive noise. Here we set p(x) = x2 В·exp(вҲ’x2 )+Пө
where Пө вҲј N (0, Пғ 2 ) with Пғ 2 = 0.5. As shown in Example 2.2, the generative exponent of the function
p is sвӢҶ (p) = 4. In addition, the signal parameter ОёвӢҶ is uniformly sampled from the unit sphere in Rd .

вҖў Neural network architecture. We adopt the two-layer neural network introduced in Section 2 with
M set to 15 and am = 1 for all m вҲҲ [M ] in all experiments. Since sвӢҶ (p) = 4, we set the activation
function as Пғ(x) = h4 (x), i.e., the fourth-order Hermite polynomial.

вҖў Training using Algorithm 1. In Algorithm 1, we set ПҲ(x, y) = y В· Пғ вҖІ (x), as stated in Example 4.6.
Such a ПҲ is justified by considering the following alignment loss:
                                                            M
                                                            X
                        L(Оё) = 1 вҲ’ y В· f (z; Оё, a) = 1 вҲ’          a В· Пғ(вҹЁz, Оёm вҹ©) В· y,                (A.1)
                                                            m=1
where recall that each entry of a is equal to a. As a result, by (A.1) we have
                        aвҲ’1 В· вҲҮОёm L(Оё) = y В· Пғ вҖІ (вҹЁz, Оёm вҹ©) В· z = ПҲ(вҹЁz, Оёm вҹ©, y) В· z.
As a result, we can alternatively interpret the gradients in Algorithm 1 as those with respect to the
alignment loss L(Оё). Thus, the choice of a does not matter in this case, and we set a = 1 for simplicity.
Furthermore, other details of Algorithm 1 are specified as follows:

          вҖў The parameters {Оёn }mвҲҲ[M ] are initialized as i.i.d. random vectors in Rd uniformly sampled
            from the unit sphere.
          вҖў We fix M = 15, a = 1, О· = 3, T = 24, and L = 500 throughout all experiments with
            different values of n and d.


                                                     15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


               вҖў We enumerate n and d over a grid with d вҲҲ [32, 499] and n вҲҲ [5 Г— 103 , 3 Г— 106 ]. Note that
                 log d вҲҲ (3, 7), our choice of T satisfies the requirement in Theorem 4.2.


вҖў Choices of (d, n). We select 40 different values of d and 30 different values of n within the ranges
d вҲҲ [32, 499] and n вҲҲ [5 Г— 103 , 3 Г— 106 ], respectively. These values form an evenly spaced grid in
terms of log n and log d. See Figure 2 for an illustration.

     3.00 Г— 10 5
                                                                            12.00
     2.50 Г— 10 5

     2.00 Г— 10 5                                                            11.00


                                                                   log(n)
     1.50 Г— 10 5
 n


                                                                            10.00
     1.00 Г— 10 5

     5.00 Г— 10 4                                                             9.00
              0
                      100     200       300       400   500                         3.50   4.00    4.50        5.00   5.50   6.00
                                    d                                                                     log(d)

                     (a) Scatter plot of (d, n)                                       (b) Scatter plot of (log d, log n)

Figure 2: Scatter plots of (d, n) and (log d, log n). In (a) we plot n against d and in (b) we plot log n
agains log d. As shown in (b), we choose n and d such that they form an evenly-spaced grid after
logarithm.


вҖў Evaluation. We report the accuracy of Algorithm 1 based on 25 repeated experiments for every
choice of (n, d). We report two types of accuracy metrics:
                                                        PM
           (i) Average accuracy: We report M вҲ’1                       вӢҶ
                                                          m=1 |вҹЁОёm , Оё вҹ©| in each experiment and then average
               over the 25 experiments.
          (ii) Top-8 accuracy: Given {Оёm }mвҲҲ[M ] returned by the algorithm, we sort the alignment values
               {|вҹЁОёm , ОёвӢҶ вҹ©|}mвҲҲ[M ] . Then we report the average of the largest 8 numbers. The rationale is
               that if the top-8 accuracy is close to one, at least half of the neurons correctly find ОёвӢҶ .

Contour plots. After calculating these two versions of accuracy for every (d, n) pair, we generate
the contour plots based on (log d, log n, acc(d, n)), where acc(d, n) is one of the two versions of
average accuracy introduced above. We report these two contour plots in Figure 3 and Figure 4, where
in Figure 3 we zoom in to a smaller range of d for better visualization. In these plots, points with the
same color indicate (log d, log n) with the same level of accuracy.
                      вӢҶ
           r s /2 ) sample complexity. As shown in these figures, the average accuracy and the top-8
Validate Оҳ(d
accuracy clearly exhibit a linear relationship. That is, for a fixed accuracy level Оҙ, (d, n) satisfying
acc(d, n) = Оҙ is a line segment. That is, log n = c1 В· log d + c2 . To determine c1 and c2 , we further
fit linear models for (log d, log n) with the same accuracy level Оҙ, where Оҙ вҲҲ {0.6, 0.7, 0.8}. For both
the average accuracy and the top-8 accuracy, the coefficient c1 in the linear models is close to 2. We
report the linear models corresponding to different accuracy levels in Table 1. This finding indicates
that n вҲқ d2 . Note that sвӢҶ = 4. Moreover, since we compute the accuracy for all (d, n) on the grid.
                                          r sвӢҶ /2 ) sample complexity is sharp.
The fact that c1 вүҲ 2 indicates that the Оҳ(d

Table 1: Fitted linear equations of the form log n = c1 В· log d + c2 for n, d with the desired accuracy
                                                                                                   вӢҶ
level. Notably, the slopes of these equations are all close to sвӢҶ /2 = 2, which shows that n вҲқ ds /2 .

       Accuracy level                Average accuracy                                          Top-8 accuracy
            0.8              log(n) = 1.9058 В· log(d) + 4.4516                        log(n) = 1.8201 В· log(d) + 4.6218
            0.7              log(n) = 1.9103 В· log(d) + 4.3273                        log(n) = 1.9343 В· log(d) + 4.0790
            0.6              log(n) = 1.9640 В· log(d) + 4.0361                        log(n) = 1.9653 В· log(d) + 3.8901



                                                              16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        1.02
                              2.7 Г— 10 5                                                80% accuracy       0.96                                                  2.7 Г— 10 5                                              80% accuracy
                                                                                        70% accuracy                                                                                                                     70% accuracy   0.90
                                                                                        60% accuracy                                                                                                                     60% accuracy
                              1.6 Г— 10 5                                                                   0.80                                                  1.6 Г— 10 5                                                             0.78
  n (Number of Data Points)


                                                                                                                                     n (Number of Data Points)
                                                                                                                 Average Accuracy


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Average Accuracy
                                                                                                           0.64                                                                                                                         0.66
                              9.9 Г— 10 4                                                                                                                         9.9 Г— 10 4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        0.54
                                                                                                           0.48
                              6.0 Г— 10 4                                                                                                                         6.0 Г— 10 4                                                             0.42
                                                                                                           0.32
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        0.30
                              3.6 Г— 10 4                                                                                                                         3.6 Г— 10 4
                                                                                                           0.16                                                                                                                         0.18
                                                                                                           0.00                                                                                                                         0.06
                                                37    45     55      67         81    99    122                                                                                    37    45   55      67         81    99    122
                                                             d (Dimension of Input)                                                                                                           d (Dimension of Input)

                                                          (a) Average accuracy                                                                                                          (b) Top-8 accuracy

Figure 3: The contour plots of (log d, log n, acc(d, n)), where acc(d, n) is either the average
accuracy and top-8 accuracy. Here we zoom in to a smaller subset of dвҖҷs for better visualization. We
also plot the lines containing (log d, log n) with the same accuracy level among {0.6, 0.7, 0.8}. The
slopes of these lines are all close to 2. This indicates that n вүҲ d2 samples are sufficient and necessary
for accurate estimation.

                              2.7 Г— 10 5                                                80% accuracy                                                             2.7 Г— 10 5
                                                                                                           0.96                                                                                                          80% accuracy   0.96
                                                                                        70% accuracy                                                                                                                     70% accuracy
                              1.6 Г— 10 5
                                                                                        60% accuracy                                                             1.6 Г— 10 5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         60% accuracy
                                                                                                           0.80                                                                                                                         0.80
 n (Number of Data Points)


                                                                                                                                    n (Number of Data Points)
                              9.9 Г— 10 4                                                                                                                         9.9 Г— 10 4
                                                                                                                 Average Accuracy


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Average Accuracy
                              6.0 Г— 10 4                                                                   0.64                                                  6.0 Г— 10 4                                                             0.64
                              3.6 Г— 10 4                                                                   0.48                                                  3.6 Г— 10 4                                                             0.48
                              2.2 Г— 10 4                                                                                                                         2.2 Г— 10 4
                                                                                                           0.32                                                                                                                         0.32
                              1.3 Г— 10 4                                                                                                                         1.3 Г— 10 4
                                                                                                           0.16                                                                                                                         0.16
                              8.1 Г— 10 3                                                                                                                         8.1 Г— 10 3
                                                                                                           0.00                                                                                                                         0.00
                                           33        55        90         148         245      403                                                                            33        55      90         148         245      403
                                                             d (Dimension of Input)                                                                                                           d (Dimension of Input)
                                                     (a) Scatter plot of (d, n)                                                                                               (b) Scatter plot of (log d, log n)

Figure 4: The contour plots of (log d, log n, acc(d, n)), where acc(d, n) is either the average
accuracy and top-8 accuracy. We also plot the lines containing (log d, log n) with the same accuracy
level among {0.6, 0.7, 0.8}. The slopes of these lines are all close to 2. This indicates that n вүҲ d2
samples are sufficient and necessary for accurate estimation.


B                                  N O TAT I O N , P R E L I M I N A R I E S A N D R E L AT E D W O R K S

Notations. We use N to denote the set of positive integers and N0 to denote the set of nonnegative
integers. For vector z вҲҲ Rd , we denote by Rn [z] the set of polynomials of degree at most n in z with
real coefficients. For s вҲҲ N, we denote by О s the symmetric group of all permutations of [s]. We
denote by Nd (В·) and N (В·) the standard normal distribution in Rd and R, respectively.
For two tensors S вҲҲ (Rd )вҠ—s and T вҲҲ (Rd )вҠ—t where s вүҘ t,
                                                                                                     d
                                                                                                     X
                                                                  (S[T ])j1 ,...,jsвҲ’t :=                       Sj1 ,...,jsвҲ’t ,i1 ,...,it Ti1 ,...,it .
                                                                                               i1 ,...,it =1

Here, S[T ] produces a tensor of order s вҲ’ t and dimension d. We also define the symmetrization
operation for a tensor T вҲҲ (Rd )вҠ—t as
                                                                                                         1 X
                                                                            Sym(T )i1 ,...,it :=             TiПҖ(1) ,...,iПҖ(t) .
                                                                                                         t!
                                                                                                               ПҖвҲҲО t


The followings are some notations for the relationship between two quantities (or matrices):


                                                                                                         17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


a вүғ b: There exists a constant C = O(1) such that a вүӨ Cb and b вүӨ Ca. Note that a and b should
        have the same sign. a = Оҳ(b) also has the same meaning.
a вүҠ b: a вүӨ polylog(d) В· b and b вүӨ polylog(d) В· a, and the same for a = Оҳ(b).
                                                                       r
a вүІ b: There exists a constant C = O(1) such that a вүӨ Cb, and the same for a = в„Ұ(b). The use of
        a вүі b is similar.
a вӘ… b: a вүӨ polylog(d) В· b, and the same for a = O(b).
                                                r     The use of a вӘҶ b and a = в„Ұ(b)
                                                                               r    is similar.
a вүӘ b: a вүӨ (polylog(d))вҲ’1 В· b. The use of a вү« b is similar.

In addition, we denote by a = b Вұ Оө, a вүғ b Вұ Оө, a вүҠ b Вұ Оө that b вҲ’ Оө вүӨ a вүӨ b + Оө, a вҲ’ Оө вүІ b вүІ a + Оө,
a вҲ’ Оө вӘ… b вӘ… a + Оө, respectively.
For square matrices A and B, A вӘҜ B means that B вҲ’ A is positive semi-definite, and A вүҫ B means
that there exists a constant C = O(1) such that C В· B вҲ’ A is positive semidefinite.

B.1    B A C K G R O U N D O N H E R M I T E P O LY N O M I A L S

The probabilistвҖҷs Hermite polynomials satisfy the following recurrence relations
                      вҲҡ                             вҲҡ                   вҲҡ
            hs (x)вҖІ = s В· hsвҲ’1 (x), x В· hs (x) = s + 1 В· hs+1 (x) + s В· hsвҲ’1 (x),                       (B.1)
where we adopt the convention that hвҲ’1 (x) вүЎ 0.
For any function f вҲҲ L2 (N (0, 1)), its Hermite expansion is given by
                                                     вҲһ
                                                     X
                                           f (x) =         fps В· hs (x),
                                                     s=0

where we denote by fps the s-th coefficient of the Hermite expansion of f .

Gaussian noise operator. For ПҒ вҲҲ [вҲ’1, 1], define the Gaussian noise operator as
                                                      p
                       UПҒ f (x) = ExвҖІ вҲјN (0,1) f (ПҒx + 1 вҲ’ ПҒ2 В· xвҖІ ) .


Proposition 11.37 of OвҖҷDonnell (2014) shows that the Hermite expansion of UПҒ f is given by
                                                        вҲһ
                                           L2 (N (0,1)) X s
                                UПҒ f (x)       =               ПҒ В· fps В· hs (x).
                                                       s=0
A direct implication of this identity is
                                                                                   вҲһ
                                                                                   X
                  ExвҲјN (0,1) [UПҒ f (x)g(x)] = ExвҲјN (0,1) [f (x)UПҒ g(x)] =                ПҒs fps gps .   (B.2)
                                                                                   s=0

As a result, for any fixed w, Оё вҲҲ SdвҲ’1 , it holds that
            EzвҲјN (0,Id ) [f (вҹЁw, zвҹ©)hs (вҹЁОё, zвҹ©)] = ExвҲјN (0,1) [UПҒ f В· hs (x)] = вҹЁw, Оёвҹ©s В· fps .         (B.3)

Hermite tensor. Corresponding to the Hermite polynomials defined for scalar variables, we define
the Hermite tensors over z вҲҲ Rd :
                            (вҲ’1)s вҲҘzвҲҘ22 /2            2
                  hs (z) := вҲҡ     В·e       В· вҲҮs eвҲ’вҲҘzвҲҘ2 /2 вҲҲ (Rd )вҠ—s , for s вүҘ 0.
                              s!
The scalar-valued Hermite polynomials and the tensor-valued Hermite tensors are related as follows:
                               hs (вҹЁОё, zвҹ©) = hs (z)[ОёвҠ—s ],          вҲҖОё вҲҲ SdвҲ’1 .                         (B.4)
              d
Now let f : R вҶ’ R be a s-times differentiable function such that for all k вүӨ s, every component of
вҲҮk f belongs to L2 (N (0, Id )). Then it follows from integration by parts that
                                                     1
                       EzвҲјN (0,Id ) [f (z)hs (z)] = вҲҡ В· EzвҲјN (0,Id ) [вҲҮs f (z)] .                       (B.5)
                                                      s!
This is a version of SteinвҖҷs lemma for tensor-valued functions.


                                                      18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


B.2    A D D I T I O N A L R E L AT E D W O R K S

Related Works. Our work contributes to the recent research on the computation-statistical tradeoff
in learning single-index models. The information-theoretic limit for estimating the latent signal is
n = в„Ұ(d) (Bach, 2017; Damian et al., 2024), but the sample complexity lower bound varies across
computational models, potentially revealing a computational-statistical gap.
The information exponent q вӢҶ (Dudeja & Hsu, 2018; Arous et al., 2021) governs the sample complexity
for learning Gaussian single-index models in the CSQ framework (Chen et al., 2020; Bietti et al.,
2022; Damian et al., 2022; Dandi et al., 2023; Abbe et al., 2023; Ba et al., 2023). Notably, Arous
et al. (2021) show that online SGD has a sample complexity of n = O(dr qвӢҶ вҲ’1 ), which is worse than
                                вӢҶ
the CSQ lower bound n = в„Ұ(dq /2 ) (Abbe et al., 2023; Damian et al., 2022). This gap can be closed
by a loss landscape smoothing technique (Damian et al., 2023) originally developed for tensor PCA
(Anandkumar et al., 2017; Biroli et al., 2020).
Our work extends beyond the CSQ framework, aligning with more general SQ algorithms (Feldman
                                                                                  вӢҶ
et al., 2017; Feldman, 2017), where the sample complexity lower bound is в„Ұ(ds /2 ), with sвӢҶ as the
generative exponent (Damian et al., 2024). In this context, online SGD with batch reusing suffices for
learning polynomial link functions (Dandi et al., 2024; Lee et al., 2024), while for sвӢҶ вүҘ 3, only the
partial trace estimator proposed by Damian et al. (2024) can match the SQ lower bound.
In the sparse setting, including sparse linear models (Vaskevicius et al., 2019; Zhao et al., 2022;
Gamarnik & Zadik, 2017), sparse PCA (Arous et al., 2020), and planted models (Bandeira et al.,
2022), computational-statistical gaps also exist. For example, in matrix PCA, the best rank-1 estimator
achieves a near-optimal sample complexity of O(d)  r     due to the BBP transition (Baik et al., 2005;
Choo & dвҖҷOrsi, 2021). Under extreme sparsity, however, sparse estimators require O(k    r 2 ) samples,
utilizing methods such as diagonal thresholding (Johnstone & Lu, 2009) or semidefinite relaxation
(dвҖҷAspremont et al., 2004). These approaches improve upon the O(d) r    sample complexity but reveal a
notable computational-statistical gap relative to the information-theoretic lower bound of в„Ұ(k log d)
(Wang et al., 2016).
Related to our work, Fan et al. (2023) provide a O(k)
                                                  r     sample complexity for learning single index
models with q вӢҶ = 1 using diagonal linear networks, and Neykov et al. (2016) report a O(k
                                                                                       r 2 ) result
for phase retrieval where q вӢҶ = 2. However, as previously noted, the information exponent does not
fully characterize the intrinsic computational-statistical tradeoff. Our work completes the picture
by providing a gradient-based framework that simultaneously handles all sparsity levels and any
generative exponent sвӢҶ вүҘ 1.
On the other hand, Ba et al. (2023) and Mousavi-Hosseini et al. (2023) demonstrate
                                                                                вӢҶ
                                                                                     that additional
structures in the data, such as spiked covariance in the input, can break the dp sample complexity
lower bound compared to the standard Gaussian single-index model. A promising direction for future
                                                                                                 вӢҶ
research is to explore whether similar structural properties could be utilized to surpass the ds /2
sample complexity lower bound in the SQ setting.
Other works show manifold method can break CSQ or SQ lower bounds. Mousavi-Hosseini et al.
(2024) investigate learning multi-index models using two-layer neural networks trained with the
Mean-Field Langevin Algorithm (MFLA). In a Riemannian setting, constraining weights to a compact
manifold allows MFLA to achieve polynomial-time convergence while surpassing the CSQ sample
complexity lower bound.

C     S U P P L E M E N TA R Y P R O O F S F O R T H E M A I N C O N T E X T
C.1    PROOFS FOR SECTION 3

In this section, we first argue why ExвҲјN (0,1) [yО¶sвӢҶ (y)] = 0 is the major difficulty for vanilla (stochas-
tic) gradient descent to achieve the information-theoretical lower bound O(d) (the same for SQ lower
bound) when the information exponent q вӢҶ is larger than 2. It has been shown by Damian et al. (2024)
that the generative exponent sвӢҶ for polynomial model is either 1 or 2. Consider the information
exponent q вӢҶ > 2. We have the following lemma saying that the correlation ExвҲјN (0,1) [yО¶s (y)] = 0
for any s < q вӢҶ .


                                                    19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Lemma C.1. Recall that О¶s is the coefficient function for degree s in the decomposition of the
                                                   вӢҶ
                    Py)/Q(x, y) in (2.2). For any q вүҘ 2, consider the GaussianвӢҶ single-index model
likelihood ratio P(x,
given by y = ОІ0 + pвүҘpвӢҶ ОІp hp (x) with x вҲј N (0, 1). Then for any 1 вүӨ s < p , EQ [yО¶s (y)] = 0.


Proof. The proof can be done by noting that О¶s (y) = EQ [P(x, y)/Q(x, y) В· hs (x) | y], and
                             h      h P(x, y)             ii
           EQ [yО¶s (y)] = EQ y В· EQ             В· hs (x) y = EP [y В· hs (x)]
                                      Q(x, y)
                                                      X
                        = ОІ0 В· ExвҲјN (0,1) [hs (x)] +     ОІi В· ExвҲјN (0,1) [hi (x)hs (x)] = 0,
                                                          iвүҘpвӢҶ

where the second equality follows from the independence between x and y under Q.


Therefore, the first nonzero term in the informative queries of (3.1) is of order at least pвӢҶ . This gives
                              вӢҶ                                                        вӢҶ
rise to sample complexity dp вҲ’1 for vanilla online SGD (Arous et al., 2021) and dp /2 for SGD after
                                                                             вӢҶ
smoothing the landscape (Damian et al., 2023). This sample complexity dp /2 matches the correlated
statistical query (CSQ) lower bound with gradient of the form yП•(z) (Abbe et al., 2023; Damian
et al., 2022).

C.1.1     E Q U I VA L E N C E B E T W E E N D I R E C T L A B E L T R A N S F O R M AT I O N A N D
          MODIFIED LOSS FUNCTION

In this derivation, we focus on a single neuron f (z; Оё, a) = aПғ(вҹЁОё, zвҹ©) with Оё вҲҲ SdвҲ’1 and sufficiently
small a вҲҲ R. A more general case with multiple neurons is handled in the proof of Example 4.6 in
Appendix C.2.2. We consider the following cases:

     (i) L2 loss with direct label transformation y вҶ’ T (y).
     (ii) Label transformation with modified loss function в„“(f (x), y).

Let в„“вҖІ (f, y) denote the partial derivative of в„“(f, y) with respect to f . We have the following observa-
tions:
Lemma C.2. Take T (В·) = в„“вҖІ (0, В·). Assume в„“вҖІ (f, В·) is B-Lipschitz with respect to f . The gradients
obtained from both cases (i) and (ii) are the same up to a small error term that scales with a.


Proof. For case (i), the rescaled negative gradient is obtained as
             g = вҲ’aвҲ’1 В· вҲҮОё (T (y) вҲ’ f (z; Оё, a))2 = (T (y) вҲ’ f (z; Оё, a)) В· Пғ вҖІ (вҹЁОё, zвҹ©) В· z
               = T (y) В· Пғ вҖІ (вҹЁОё, zвҹ©) В· z вҲ’ a В· Пғ(вҹЁОё, zвҹ©) В· Пғ вҖІ (вҹЁОё, zвҹ©) В· z
For case (ii), the gradient is given by
           g = вҲ’aвҲ’1 В· вҲҮОё в„“(f (z; Оё, a), y) = вҲ’в„“вҖІ (f (z; Оё, a), y) В· Пғ вҖІ (вҹЁОё, zвҹ©) В· z
             = вҲ’в„“вҖІ (0, y) В· Пғ вҖІ (вҹЁОё, zвҹ©) В· z + a В· (в„“вҖІ (0, y) вҲ’ в„“вҖІ (f (z; Оё, a), y)) В· Пғ вҖІ (вҹЁОё, zвҹ©) В· z,
where |в„“вҖІ (0, y) вҲ’ в„“вҖІ (f (z; Оё, a), y)| вүӨ |a В· B В· Пғ(вҹЁОё, zвҹ©)|. Therefore, in the following we just focus on
case (i) and omit the error term that scales with a for simplicity.


The assumption on the Lipschitz constant B is just for the sake of simplicity, which is not required in
our main results.

C.1.2     M O M E N T C A L C U L AT I O N A R O U N D I N I T I A L I Z AT I O N

In the following, we provide a detailed calculation of the first and second moments of the gradient
g = T (y)Пғ вҖІ (вҹЁОё, zвҹ©) В· z.


                                                       20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Without Weight Perturbation. Consider gradient g = T (y)Пғ вҖІ (вҹЁОё, zвҹ© В· z for a single neuron with
weight Оё вҲҲ SdвҲ’1 and input z вҲҲ Rd , where we omit the error term for simplicity. The first moment of
the gradient is given by
     EPОёвӢҶ [T (y) В· Пғ вҖІ (вҹЁОё, zвҹ©) В· z]
              пЈ®                                 пЈ«                           пЈ¶пЈ№
                                                    X
         = EQ пЈ°T (y) В· Пғ вҖІ (вҹЁОё, zвҹ©) В· z В· пЈӯ1 +             О¶s (y)hs (вҹЁОёвӢҶ , zвҹ©)пЈёпЈ»
                                                    sвүҘsвӢҶ
                                                X
         = EQ [T (y) В· Пғ вҖІ (вҹЁОё, zвҹ©) В· z] +       EQ [T (y)О¶s (y)] В· EQ [Пғ вҖІ (вҹЁОё, zвҹ©)hs (вҹЁОёвӢҶ , zвҹ©)z] .
           |           {z              }       вӢҶ
                                                 |                     {z                         }
                                           sвүҘs
                     bias                                    informative queries
The right-hand side of the above equation gives rise to (3.1) in the main text. From the above
derivation, we can see clearly that using a direct label transformation or a modified loss function can
handle the zero correlation issue EQ [yО¶s (y)] = 0 for the informative queries. Invoking Lemma H.1
with ПҲ(y, вҹЁw, zвҹ©) = Пғ вҖІ (вҹЁОё, zвҹ©) where we replace w вҶ’ Оё and Оё вҶ’ ОёвӢҶ in the lemma statement, we
obtain
                                        вҲҡ                                  вҲҡ y
 EQ [Пғ вҖІ (вҹЁОё, zвҹ©) В· hs (вҹЁОёвӢҶ , zвҹ©) В· z] = s + 1 В· (Пғ
                                                 y  вҖІ)            вӢҶ s
                                                       s+1 В· вҹЁОё, Оё вҹ© В· Оё +  s В· (Пғ вҖІ )sвҲ’1 В· вҹЁОё, ОёвӢҶ вҹ©sвҲ’1 В· ОёвӢҶ ,

where (Пғ
       y  вҖІ ) is the s-th coefficient of the Hermite expansion of Пғ вҖІ , and we have by a simple calculation
             s
        вҖІ) =
               вҲҡ
that (Пғ
     y
          s       s+1В·Пғ   ps+1 . Since we are only interested in the alignment between the informative
queries and the unknown signal ОёвӢҶ , we only need to focus on the second term for s = sвӢҶ as the
remaining terms are of higher order in вҹЁОё, ОёвӢҶ вҹ© = dвҲ’1/2 at initialization. With a debiasing procedure
(Line 6 in Algorithm 1), we can also cancel the bias term in the first moment of the gradient. For
simplicity, we just assume EQ [T (y)] = 0 in the following calculations while the more general version
is handled in the proofs of both Theorem 4.2 and Theorem 5.1. This gives rise to the first moment
                                                               вӢҶ             вӢҶ               вӢҶ
                                              psвӢҶ В· вҹЁОё, ОёвӢҶ вҹ©s вҲ’1 + O(dвҲ’s /2 ) = O(dвҲ’(s вҲ’1)/2 ).
    EPОёвӢҶ [вҹЁg, ОёвӢҶ вҹ©] = EQ [T (y)О¶s (y)] В· sвӢҶ В· Пғ                                                         (C.1)
For the second moment, we have
                       EPОёвӢҶ [вҲҘgвҲҘ22 ] = EPОёвӢҶ T (y)2 В· Пғ вҖІ (вҹЁОё, zвҹ©)2 В· вҲҘzвҲҘ22 = O(d),


where вҲҘzвҲҘ22 contributes to the O(d) term.

With Weight Perturbation. Let wl = (ОіОё + Оҫl )/вҲҘОіОё + Оҫl вҲҘ2 for l вҲҲ [M ] with Оҫl вҲј Unif(SdвҲ’1 )
and Оі = dвҲ’1/4 . As the norm вҲҘОіОё + Оҫl вҲҘ2 вҲҲ [1 вҲ’ Оі, 1 + Оі] thanks to the triangle inequality, we can
just focus on numerator, i.e., wl вүҲ ОіОё + Оҫl . For given wl , we denote the previous calculated gradient
as gl , i.e., gl = T (y)Пғ вҖІ (вҹЁwl , zвҹ©) В· z. Then, the aggregated gradient over all L perturbed weights is
                   PL
given by g = L1 l=1 gl . For the following calculation, we focus on sвӢҶ being an odd number and
larger than 1 for simplicity. In the formal proof of Theorem 4.2, we handle the remaining cases
separately. Following from the same calculation for (C.1), the first moment now becomes
                        L
                     1X                                        вӢҶ          вӢҶ             вӢҶ
 EPОёвӢҶ [вҹЁg, ОёвӢҶ вҹ©] =         psвӢҶ EQ [T (y)О¶s (y)] В·sвӢҶ вҹЁwl , ОёвӢҶ вҹ©s вҲ’1 + O(dвҲ’s /2 ) = O(dвҲ’(s вҲ’1)/2 ), (C.2)
                           Пғ
                     L     |        {z        }
                       l=1
                                   Мё= 0
which gives the same order as (C.1). The things are quite different for the second moment. Note
that in the first moment, only the sвӢҶ -th coefficient of the Hermite expansion of Пғ contributes to the
alignment with ОёвӢҶ , while the lower order terms are canceled out due to the fact that the likelihood
ratio P(x, y)/Q(x, y) has the lowest nonzero order sвӢҶ . The second moment is now given by
                                         L
                                 1 X
               EPОёвӢҶ [вҲҘgвҲҘ22 ] =       EPОёвӢҶ T (y)2 В· Пғ вҖІ (вҹЁwl , zвҹ©) В· Пғ вҖІ (вҹЁwlвҖІ , zвҹ©) В· вҲҘzвҲҘ22

                                  2
                                 L вҖІ
                                       l,l =1
                                    L
                                 d X
                                      EPОёвӢҶ T (y)2 В· Пғ вҖІ (вҹЁwl , zвҹ©) В· Пғ вҖІ (вҹЁwlвҖІ , zвҹ©) .

                             вүғ    2
                                 L вҖІ
                                       l,l =1



                                                       21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


The approximation in the second line is a heuristic calculation for the second moment, and the rigorous
version is available in the proof of Proposition E.4 in Appendix E.3. Now, we plug in the likelihood
ratio P(x, y)/Q(x, y), and under certain regularity assumption (See Item Assumption 4.1(c) for
details) we obtain
                               пЈ®                                           пЈ«                          пЈ¶пЈ№
                       L
                  d   X                                                         X
  EPОёвӢҶ [вҲҘgвҲҘ22 ] вүғ 2        EQ пЈ°T (y)2 В· Пғ вҖІ (вҹЁwl , zвҹ©) В· Пғ вҖІ (вҹЁwlвҖІ , zвҹ©) В· пЈӯ1 +    О¶s (y)hs (вҹЁОёвӢҶ , zвҹ©)пЈёпЈ»
                 L вҖІ                                                             вӢҶ
                         l,l =1                                                        sвүҘs
                          L
                    d     X
                                   EQ T (y)2 В· EQ [Пғ вҖІ (вҹЁwl , zвҹ©) В· Пғ вҖІ (вҹЁwlвҖІ , zвҹ©)]

               =                                                                                              (C.3)
                    L2
                         l,lвҖІ =1
                                L
                          d X X
                                         EQ T (y)2 О¶s (y) В· EQ [Пғ вҖІ (вҹЁwl , zвҹ©) В· Пғ вҖІ (вҹЁwlвҖІ , zвҹ©) В· hs (вҹЁОёвӢҶ , zвҹ©)] .

                     +     2
                          L вҖІ                               |                         {z                        }
                             l,l =1 sвүҘsвӢҶ
                                                                          higher order term
Here, we remark that when comparing the two terms on the right-hand side, the higher-order terms
                                     вӢҶ
s вүҘ sвӢҶ are of order at least d В· dвҲ’s /2 due to the fact that both wl and wlвҖІ have a correlation with ОёвӢҶ
           вҲ’1/2
of order d      at initialization. Therefore, when considering the first term in (C.3) only, we have
                               пЈ«                                                                               пЈ¶
                                        L
                                   d   X                         d   X
EPОёвӢҶ [вҲҘgвҲҘ22 ] вүғ EQ T (y)2 В· пЈӯ 2 В·         EQ Пғ вҖІ (вҹЁwl , zвҹ©)2 + 2 В·        EQ [Пғ вҖІ (вҹЁwl , zвҹ©) В· Пғ вҖІ (вҹЁwlвҖІ , zвҹ©)]пЈё .

                                  L                             L       вҖІ
                                               l=1                              lМё=l

The first term in the bracket is of order d/L since EQ [Пғ вҖІ (вҹЁwl , zвҹ©)2 ] = O(1). With large L, the main
contribution comes from the second term in the bracket. Suppose the lowest nonzero Hermite
coefficient of Пғ is r, then we have by noting that EОҫl ,ОҫlвҖІ [вҹЁwl , wlвҖІ вҹ©r ] вүӨ O(Оі 2r + EОҫl ,ОҫlвҖІ [|вҹЁОҫl , ОҫlвҖІ вҹ©|r ]) =
O dвҲ’r/2 for constant r and hence


        d X                                               d X
         2
            В·     EQ [Пғ вҖІ (вҹЁwl , zвҹ©) В· Пғ вҖІ (вҹЁwlвҖІ , zвҹ©)] вүғ 2 В·   вҹЁwl , wlвҖІ вҹ©rвҲ’1 вүӨ O(dвҲ’(rвҲ’3)/2 ),               (C.4)
       L        вҖІ
                                                         L    вҖІ
             lМё=l                                                  lМё=l

where in the first approximation, we ignore the higher order terms. One would like to pick the largest
possible r, which will be sвӢҶ as (C.2) requires Пғ
                                               psвӢҶ Мё= 0. This leads to the second moment
                                                                      вӢҶ
                                             EPОёвӢҶ [вҲҘgвҲҘ22 ] = O(dвҲ’(s вҲ’3)/2 ).
The case for r < sвӢҶ will be discussed ilater. Here, we remark that the label transformation T (В·) is
only changing the second moment up to some constant factor as the only difference that occurs for not
using label transformation would be changing EQ [T (y)2 ] to EQ [y 2 ] in the above calculation. This is
also the reason why we can stick to the standard L2 loss in the discussion of the weight perturbation
in Section 3 for showing how the weight perturbation can help boost the signal-to-noise ratio (SNR)
in the second moment.

C.1.3      H E U R I S T I C D E R I VAT I O N O F S A M P L E C O M P L E X I T Y
In the following, we first discuss what is the thresholding SNR for developing a O(1) alignment
between the neuron weight Оё and the unknown signal ОёвӢҶ . Then, we provide a heuristic derivation
                                 вӢҶ
of the sample complexity O(ds /2 ) for the case with weight perturbation. We still focus on the
two-layer neural network with a single neuron f (z; Оё, a) = aПғ(вҹЁОё, zвҹ©) as in the previous discussion.
We asssume the following to hold in the following discussion:

      (i) sвӢҶ is an odd number greater than 1.
     (ii) The activation function Пғ satisfies the high-pass assumption, i.e., the lowest nonzero Hermite
          coefficient of Пғ is r.
    (iii) The alignment |вҹЁОё, ОёвӢҶ вҹ©| = o(1) (to ensure the previous simplified results are valid).
    (iv) The label transformation T (В·) is such that EQ [T (y)] = 0 and EQ [T (y)О¶sвӢҶ (y)] Мё= 0.
     (v) The number of perturbation L is sufficiently large.

We will follow the update in Algorithm 1 and take learning rate О· = вҲһ, which means directly
updating the weight by the gradient at each step.


                                                             22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Sample Complexity from the View of SNR Recursion. Let us first consider r = sвӢҶ , i.e., Assump-
tion 4.1(b) holds. At step t, let the weight be g (tвҲ’1) /вҲҘg (tвҲ’1) вҲҘ2 and the perturbed weight be
                                                                               (t)
                                      (t)          Оі В· g (tвҲ’1) /вҲҘg (tвҲ’1) вҲҘ2 + Оҫl
                                     wl     =                                 (t)
                                                вҲҘОі В· g (tвҲ’1) /вҲҘg (tвҲ’1) вҲҘ2 + Оҫl вҲҘ2
       (t)
with Оҫl вҲј Unif(SdвҲ’1 ). Following the same procedure as in (C.2), we have the first moment of the
gradient as
                                L
                             1 X (t) вӢҶ sвӢҶ вҲ’1                                                 вӢҶ
    EPОёвӢҶ [вҹЁg (t) , ОёвӢҶ вҹ©] вүғ      вҹЁwl , Оё вҹ©    вүғ (Оі В· |вҹЁg (tвҲ’1) /вҲҘg (tвҲ’1) вҲҘ2 , ОёвӢҶ вҹ©| + dвҲ’1/2 )s вҲ’1 ,
                             L
                               l=1
where the last equality follows from the fact that sвӢҶ вҲ’ 1 is an even number, and вүғ hides some constant
factors. A proof of this calculation can be found in Lemma H.4. Following the similar derivation in
(C.3)-(C.4), the second moment is given by
                                     d X                                              вӢҶ
                EPОёвӢҶ [вҲҘg (t) вҲҘ22 ] вүғ 2 В·    вҹЁwl , wlвҖІ вҹ©rвҲ’1       вүғ d В· (Оі 2 + dвҲ’1/2 )s вҲ’1 ,
                                    L     вҖІ                r=sвӢҶ
                                            lМё=l
where вүғ hides some constant factors that depends on sвӢҶ . The last equality follows from the observation
                 вӢҶ       p                sвӢҶ вҲ’1      p                    sвӢҶ вҲ’1                         вӢҶ
that вҹЁwl , wlвҖІ вҹ©s вҲ’1 =       вҹЁwl , wlвҖІ вҹ©2         вүғ    Оі 4 + вҹЁОҫl , ОҫlвҖІ вҹ©2       вүғ (Оі 2 + |вҹЁОҫl , ОҫlвҖІ вҹ©|)s вҲ’1 , and a
concentration of |вҹЁОҫl , ОҫlвҖІ вҹ©|s for s вүӨ sвӢҶ вҲ’ 1. Hence, the one-sample SNR is given by
                                                                                               sвӢҶ вҲ’1
                   EPОёвӢҶ [вҹЁg (t) , ОёвӢҶ вҹ©]2            Оі В· |вҹЁg (tвҲ’1) /вҲҘg (tвҲ’1) вҲҘ2 , ОёвӢҶ вҹ©|2 + dвҲ’1
                                                    2
            (t)                              C
      SNR =                              =      В·                                                      ,
                    EPОёвӢҶ [вҲҘg (t) вҲҘ22 ]       d                    Оі 2 + dвҲ’1/2
where C is some constant factor that depends on sвӢҶ . One can replace |вҹЁg (tвҲ’1) /вҲҘg (tвҲ’1) вҲҘ2 , ОёвӢҶ вҹ©|2 by
nSNR(tвҲ’1) as the square root of the n sample SNR is roughly the alignment between the gradient and
the unknown signal. Under this replacement, we always have nSNR(tвҲ’1) = o(1) by our assumption
(iii). We also obtain the recursion
                                                                            !sвӢҶ вҲ’1
                    1/2       (t)    Cn     Оі 2 d1/2 В· nd1/2 В· SNR(tвҲ’1) + 1
                 nd В· SNR = sвӢҶ /2 В·                                                .
                                    d                   Оі 2 d1/2 + 1
Viewing the term inside the bracket as a function of x = Оі 2 d1/2 , and taking Оұ(t) = nd1/2 В· SNR(t) ,
we have
                                                       Оұx + 1
                                           f (x; Оұ) =         .
                                                        x+1
For Оұ < 1, f is a decreasing function of x, and for Оұ > 1, f is an increasing function of x. At
initialization, the alignment is of order dвҲ’1/2 , which means Оұ(0) = nd1/2 SNR(0) = O(dвҲ’1/2 ) вүӘ 1.
The best choice is x = 0 and f (x; Оұ(0) ) = 1, and the corresponding next-step SNR is given by
                                                       Cn
                                              Оұ(1) = sвӢҶ /2 .
                                                      d
            вӢҶ
If n вүӘ ds /2 , then Оұ(1) вүӘ 1, and the same argument applies for Оұ(2) вүӘ 1 and so on. This means
                                                                                        вӢҶ
that the alignment cannot break the barrier O(dвҲ’1/4 ). On the other hand, when n вү« ds /2 , we have
Оұ(1) вү« 1. Suppose we can choose x as large as possible such that f (x; Оұ(1) ) = Оұ(1) , then we have
another recursion:
                                               Cn               вӢҶ
                                      Оұ(t) = sвӢҶ /2 В· (Оұ(tвҲ’1) )s вҲ’1 ,
                                              d
which means that the alignment can grow exponentially with t.

Polarization Level as a Trade-off. From the above discussion, we can see that when Оұ вүӘ 1, we
want to choose x as small as possible such that f (x; Оұ) = 1 and when Оұ вү« 1, we want to choose x
as large as possible such that f (x; Оұ) = Оұ. In fact, setting x = 1, i.e., Оі = dвҲ’1/4 , is a good choice to
balace the two cases, as it is easy to check that
                                                   1
                                                      , if Оұ вүӘ 1,
                                      f (1; Оұ) = 2Оұ
                                                    2 , if Оұ вү« 1,
which is optimal in the sense that it only introduces a 1/2 factor when compared to the best choice.


                                                            23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Heuristic Derivation of Sample Complexity from Alignment. Previously, we derive from the
                             вӢҶ
SNR recursion that why O(ds /2 ) samples are necessary to achieve nontrivial alignment with weight
perturbation and why Оі = dвҲ’1/4 is a good choice for the polarization level. Now, we provide an
                                                         вӢҶ
alternative view to understand the sample complexity ds /2 from the perspective of the alignment
                                                     вӢҶ
between the perturbed weight and the unknown signal Оё . The following discussion is more heuristic
in nature when compared to the SNR recursion. We still follow the assumptions (i)-(v) as in the
previous discussion. We set Оі = dвҲ’1/4 .
Consider the case of an infinitely large learning rate О·, where at each step, the weight is approximately
given by the gradient from the previous step, i.e., w вүҲ Оіg/вҲҘgвҲҘ2 + Оҫ, where g is the gradient from
the previous step, and Оҫ is a perturbed noise. Here, our goal is for the perturbed weight to exhibit
nontrivial alignment with ОёвӢҶ . Specifically, we require

                          вҹЁw, ОёвӢҶ вҹ© вүҲ Оі В· вҹЁg/вҲҘgвҲҘ2 , ОёвӢҶ вҹ© + вҹЁОҫ, ОёвӢҶ вҹ© вү« O(dвҲ’1/2 ).

                           вҲ’1/2
Since вҹЁОҫ, ОёвӢҶ вҹ© is of order
                     вҲҡ d        , it follows that we need Оі В· вҹЁg/вҲҘgвҲҘ2 , ОёвӢҶ вҹ© вү« O(dвҲ’1/2 ). This translates
into the condition nSNR вү« dвҲ’1/4 . From our previous moment calculations, we know that
                                                     вҲ’(sвӢҶ вҲ’1)
                            EPОёвӢҶ [вҹЁg, ОёвӢҶ вҹ©]2          d                       вӢҶ
                     SNR =                    =O                   = O(dвҲ’(s +1)/2 ),
                             EPОёвӢҶ [вҲҘgвҲҘ22 ]           dвҲ’(sвӢҶ вҲ’3)/2
                                                                     вҲҡ
which leads to the condition n = O(d  r sвӢҶ /2 ) when combined with nSNR вү« dвҲ’1/4 .
The rationale behind this criterion is that if Оі В· вҹЁg, ОёвӢҶ вҹ© does not sufficiently exceed вҹЁОҫ, ОёвӢҶ вҹ©, then the
perturbed noise will dominate. In such a case, the successive gradient updates would not provide
more information than those derived from random initialization.

C.1.4     FA I L U R E O F H I G H - PA S S A S S U M P T I O N
                                                                   вӢҶ
Previously, we heuristically derive the sample complexity O(ds /2 ) for the case with weight perturba-
tion and the activation function Пғ satisfying the high-pass assumption, i.e., r = sвӢҶ . Here, we discuss
what happens when the high-pass assumption is violated, i.e., 1 вүӨ r < sвӢҶ . We still focus on sвӢҶ being
an odd number greater than 1. Here, we have r вүҘ 1 as by definition, r is the lowest nonzero Hermite
coefficient of Пғ. This is akin to the case where Assumption 4.1(b) is not satisfied. We still assume
     psвӢҶ Мё= 0 as this is needed for the signal term to survive in the first moment calculation. Using the
that Пғ
second moment calculation in (C.4), we have
                                                    вҲ’(sвӢҶ вҲ’1)
                            EPОёвӢҶ [вҹЁg, ОёвӢҶ вҹ©]2        d                         вӢҶ
                  SNR =                 2    =O      вҲ’(rвҲ’3)/2
                                                                  = O(dвҲ’(2s вҲ’r+1)/2 ).
                             EPОёвӢҶ [вҲҘgвҲҘ2 ]          d
                                        вҲҡ
Combined with the same condition nSNR вү« dвҲ’1/4 , we obtain n = O(d               r (2sвӢҶ вҲ’r)/2 ). Hence, for
                                                                                вӢҶ               вӢҶ
general 1 вүӨ r вүӨ sвӢҶ , the sample complexity interpolates between O(ds /2 ) and O(ds вҲ’1/2 ). We
would like to point out that the above calculation is heuristic, and a formal proof is left for future work.
However, we believe that the above calculation provides sufficient insight on the sample complexity
when the high-pass assumption is violated.
On the other hand, if r вүҘ sвӢҶ , this is equivalent to the case where the generative exponent is r (as the
terms in the decomposition of the likelihood ratio with degree less than r donвҖҷt have any effect on
both the first and second moment). Hence, we obtain a sample complexity n = O(d   r r/2 ). In summary,
the sample complexity is
                                                     вӢҶ
                                           n вүғ d((2s вҲ’r)вҲЁr)/2 .
Notably, if the activation has the lowest nonzero degree r, the oracle ПҲ, defined as ПҲ(y, x) =
T (y)Пғ вҖІ (x), has the lowest degree r вҲ’ 1.

C.2     PROOFS FOR EXAMPLES OF ORACLE FUNCTION

Here we complete the discussions of the specific examples of ПҲ in Example 4.4 and Example 4.6.


                                                    24
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


C.2.1     B AT C H - R E U S I N G F O R P O LY N O M I A L L I N K F U N C T I O N
We consider a polynomial link function y = p(x) = qвӢҶ вүӨqвҖІ вүӨq ОІqвҖІ hqвҖІ (x) for general q вӢҶ вҲҲ N and
                                                           P

ОІqвҖІ вҲҲ R, where q вӢҶ is the information exponent of the link function, and we also denote it by q вӢҶ (p)
in the sequel. For batch-reusing, we take ПҲ(y, x) = yПғ вҖІ (x) + yПғ вҖІ (x + yПғ вҖІ (x)), where activation
function Пғ(x) satisfies that
                                     Cq                              Cq
                                     X                               X
                                                           вҖІ
                                                                        p
                           Пғ(x) =          Оұj В· hj (x),   Пғ (x) =            j В· Оұj В· hjвҲ’1 (x).                   (C.5)
                                     j=0                             j=1

Here the degree Cq вҲҲ N+ only depends on the degree q of the link function and is specified later,
and each coefficient Оұj вҲј Unif([0, 1]). The second equality in (C.5) follows from the property
                                                   (t)
of Hermite polynomials in (B.1). The error term errm,l,i now comes from the difference between
    (t)       (t)   (t)       (t)
ПҲ(yi , вҹЁwm,l , zi вҹ©) В· zi and the exact form of the update step obtained from two consecutive
gradient descent steps on the same data under the square loss. More specifically, let us consider a
single neuron whose weight is wm,l and a single data point (zi , yi ). Here we omit the time index t
for convenience. Then two gradient descent step on (zi , yi ) gives
                  Re
                     (zi , yi ) = yi вҲ’ f (zi ; {wm,l }mвҲҲ[M ] ) В· Пғ вҖІ (вҹЁwm,l , zi вҹ©) В· zi

               вҲ’gm,l
                                                      +
                                                         }mвҲҲ[M ] ) В· Пғ вҖІ (вҹЁwm,l
                                                                              +

                                   + yi вҲ’ f (zi ; {wm,l                            , zi вҹ©) В· zi , (C.6)
         +
where wm,l   = wm,l + О·iRe В· (yi вҲ’ f (zi ; {wm,l }mвҲҲ[M ] )) В· Пғ вҖІ (вҹЁwm,l , zi вҹ©) В· zi . Here О·iRe is the learning
rate for batch reusing, different from the learning rate О· in our algorithm. More specifically, to
fit the gradient form (C.6) into our general framework with oracle function ПҲ(y, x), we take the
batch-reusing learning rate О·iRe = 1/вҲҘzi вҲҘ22 . Then the error term is given by
                       Re
          errm,l,i = вҲ’gm,l (zi , yi ) вҲ’ ПҲ(yi , вҹЁwm,l , zi вҹ©) = errm,l,i,1 + errm,l,i,2 + errm,l,i,3 ,             (C.7)
where errm,l,i,1 , errm,l,i,2 , and errm,l,i,3 are given by
                          errm,l,i,1 = вҲ’f (zi ; {wm,l }mвҲҲ[M ] ) В· Пғ вҖІ (вҹЁwm,l , zi вҹ©),
                                                  +
                          errm,l,i,2 = вҲ’f (zi ; {wm,l }mвҲҲ[M ] ) В· Пғ вҖІ (вҹЁwm,l
                                                                         +
                                                                             , zi вҹ©),
                          errm,l,i,3 = yi Пғ вҖІ вҹЁwm,l , zi вҹ© + yi Пғ вҖІ (вҹЁwm,l , zi вҹ©) + errm,l,i,1


                                          вҲ’ yi Пғ вҖІ вҹЁwm,l , zi вҹ© + yi Пғ вҖІ (вҹЁwm,l , zi вҹ©) .

                                                                                                                  (C.8)

Proof of Corollary 4.5. To prove Corollary 4.5, it suffices to show that (i) Assumption 4.1 holds, and
(ii) the event E holds with the desired high probability. In the following, we first verify Assumption 4.1,
and then check the event E.
Verifying Assumption 4.1. Note that the fact of y = p(x) being a polynomial immediately implies
that both the square-integrable condition (Assumption 4.1(a)) and the polynomial-like tail condition
(Assumption 4.1(c)) are satisfied. It remains to check the high-pass condition (Assumption 4.1(b)).
Since now sвӢҶ вүӨ 2, we only need to check the condition that |EQ [О¶sвӢҶ (y) В· ПҲpsвӢҶ вҲ’1 (y)]| > 0.
Case 1: sвӢҶ = 2. In this case, we have that
                   h                                 i
   ПҲp1 (y) = ExвҲјN x В· yПғ вҖІ (x) + yПғ вҖІ x + yПғ вҖІ (x)
                              Cq
                              X                                    Cq
                                                                   X
                                                                           j В· Оұj В· x В· hjвҲ’1 x + yПғ вҖІ (x)
                                     p                                p
              = y В· ExвҲјN                 j В· Оұj В· x В· hjвҲ’1 (x) +                                                  (C.9)
                               j=1                                 j=1

For the first summation in (C.9), only the first summand is nonzero, so we obtain
                                    Cq
                                                                  вҲҡ
                                   X
                                        p
                        y В· ExвҲјN           j В· Оұj В· x В· hjвҲ’1 (x) = 2Оұ2 В· y.                                      (C.10)
                                             j=1

For the second summation in (C.9), we have the following expansion,
                XCq
                                            вҖІ

      y В· ExвҲјN      j В· Оұj В· x В· hjвҲ’1 x + yПғ (x)
                     j=1


                                                           25
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                             Cq
                             X                        jвҲ’1
                                                      X
                                                                                            вҖІ
                                                                                                 k
             = y В· ExвҲјN                j В· Оұj В· x В·         rjвҲ’1,k В· hjвҲ’kвҲ’1 (x) В· yПғ (x)
                                 j=1                  k=0
                       пЈұ                                                       пЈј
                Cq вҲ’1 пЈІ    Cq                      h                          iпЈҪ
                 X         X                                                k
                           j В· Оұj В· rjвҲ’1,k В· ExвҲјN x В· hjвҲ’kвҲ’1 (x) В· Пғ вҖІ (x)       В·y k+1 .

             =                                                                                                    (C.11)
                   пЈі                                                           пЈҫ
               k=0   j=k+1
                   |                             {z                            }
                                              := ПӮk (Оұ)
where ПӮ0 (Оұ), . . . , ПӮCq вҲ’1 (Оұ) are just polynomials of Оұ = (Оұ1 , В· В· В· , ОұCq ) (recall the definition of Пғ вҖІ (x)
in (C.5)) and each rjвҲ’1,k is a positive number. Combining (C.10) and (C.11), we get the following
decomposition of ПҲp1 (y):
                                                                     Cq вҲ’1
                                                   вҲҡ                 X
                                       ПҲp1 (y) =       2Оұ2 В· y +             ПӮk (Оұ) В· y k+1 .
                                                                     k=0

Further using y = p(x) and the definition of О¶2 (y), we get
    EQ [О¶2 (y) В· ПҲp1 (y)] = EP [h2 (x) В· ПҲp1 (y)]
                                                                             Cq вҲ’1
                                 вҲҡ                                           X
                                                                                     ПӮk (Оұ) В· ExвҲјN h2 (x) В· p(x)k+1 .

                           =         2Оұ2 В· ExвҲјN [h2 (x) В· p(x)] +
                                                                             k=0

According to Proposition 5 of Lee et al. (2024), we can set Cq вҲҲ N+ (only depending on q) such
that there exists a smallest I вүӨ Cq such that the information exponent q вӢҶ (pI ) вүӨ 2. We notice that
in this case sвӢҶ (p) = 2, where we abuse the notation and let sвӢҶ (p) be the generative exponent of the
polynomial p. In fact, sвӢҶ (p) = 1 means EP [T (y) В· h1 (x)] вүЎ 0 for all label transformation T . Hence,
the only possibility is that q вӢҶ (pI ) = 2 since pI is just a special case of label transformation and we
cannot get any first-order term from pI . Therefore, we further simplify the target quantity as
                                                                        Cq
                                      вҲҡ                                X
                                                                           ПӮkвҲ’1 (Оұ) В· ExвҲјN h2 (x) В· p(x)k

   EQ [О¶sвӢҶ (y) В· ПҲpsвӢҶ вҲ’1 (y)] =           2Оұ2 В· ExвҲјN [h2 (x) В· p(x)] +
                                                |      {z          }
                                                                       k=I
                                                                                      |      {z           }
                                                      := b1                                 := bk
                                                       Cq
                                           вҲҡ           X
                                  = b1 В·       2Оұ2 +         bk В· ПӮkвҲ’1 (Оұ),                                       (C.12)
                                                       k=I

where bI Мё= 0 according to the definition of I. Now we take a closer look at the polynomials
                        Cq вҲ’1
{ПӮk (Оұ1 , В· В· В· , ОұCq )}k=IвҲ’1 . We claim that: (i) they are different polynomials and are linearly indepen-
dent, and (ii) especially, they are all nonzero. To see these, recall that
                                     Cq                        h
                                     X                                                   k i
                                         j В· Оұj В· rjвҲ’1,k В· ExвҲјN x В· hjвҲ’kвҲ’1 (x) В· Пғ вҖІ (x)
                                        p
       ПӮk (Оұ1 , В· В· В· , ОұCq ) =                                                              ,
                                  j=k+1
                  PCq вҲҡ                                                                                           вҲҡ
where Пғ вҖІ (x) = j=1 j В· Оұj В· hjвҲ’1 (x). We can calculate that for k = 0, ПӮ0 (Оұ1 , В· В· В· , ОұCq ) =                      2Оұ2
which is a non-zero polynomial. For k = 1, we have that
                                 Cq
                                 X
                                           j В· Оұj В· rjвҲ’1,1 В· ExвҲјN [x В· hjвҲ’2 (x) В· Пғ вҖІ (x)]
                                    p
      ПӮ1 (Оұ1 , В· В· В· , ОұCq ) =
                                 j=2
                                                   Cq
                                                   X
                                                            j В· Оұj В· rjвҲ’1,1 В· ExвҲјN [x В· hjвҲ’2 (x) В· Пғ вҖІ (x)]
                                                      p
                           = 2r1,1 В· Оұ22 +
                                                   j=3

which is non-zero (since in the summation from j = 3 to Cq there would be no term in the form of
c22 ) and is linearly independent of of ПӮ0 because each terms in the summation here has degree exactly
2. Now consider for k вүҘ 2,
                                p
        ПӮk (Оұ1 , В· В· В· , ОұCq ) = 2(k + 1)k В· rk,k В· Оұ1kвҲ’1 Оұ2 Оұk+1


                                                                26
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                              Cq                       h
                                              X                                                  k i
                                                      jОұj rjвҲ’1,k В· ExвҲјN x В· hjвҲ’kвҲ’1 (x) В· Пғ вҖІ (x)
                                                 p
                                        +                                                            .
                                            j=k+2

Again, this polynomial is non-zero (since in the summation from j = k + 2 to Cq there would be no
term in the form of Оұ1kвҲ’1 Оұ2 Оұk+1 ) and is linearly independent of ПӮ0 , В· В· В· , ПӮkвҲ’1 due to the fact that the
highest degree of these polynomials is no larger than k, and the order for each term in ПӮk is exactly
k + 1. Thus we have proved the two claims by induction. Now recall that we are aiming at proving the
RHS of (C.12) is non-zero. By our two claims just proved, the RHS of (C.12) is a linear combination
of Cq вҲ’ I + 2 linearly independent and non-zero polynomials where at least one of the combination
coefficient is non-zero (which is bI ). Thus we obtain that the RHS of (C.9) is a non-zero polynomial
of (Оұ1 , В· В· В· , ОұCq ) and its zeros form a zero-measure set. This proves that with probability 1 over the
randomness of (Оұ1 , В· В· В· , ОұCq ), the high-pass condition holds.
Case 2: sвӢҶ = 1. For this case of sвӢҶ = 1, the proof is almost the same as that for sвӢҶ = 2, where we
additionally utilize the fact that polynomial link function with generative exponent sвӢҶ = 1 can not be
an even polynomial (Example 2.2) and thus there always exists some I вүӨ Cq вҲҲ N+ such that the
information exponent q вӢҶ (pI ) = 1 (see Proposition 5 of Lee et al. (2024)). With this fact, repeating
the above argument can give the desired high-pass property.
Verifying the event E. Now we verify that the desired event
                         (t)            вӢҶ
                E = |errm,l,i | вүӨ dвҲ’10s , вҲҖ(m, l, i, t) вҲҲ [M ] Г— [L] Г— [n] Г— [T ]


holds with probability at least 1 вҲ’ O(dвҲ’c0 ) for some constant c0 > 0 that we specify later. With (C.7)
                                                             (t)          (t)              (t)
and (C.8), it suffices to look at each of the error terms errm,l,i,1 , errm,l,i,2 , and errm,l,i,3 respectively.
        (t)
For errm,l,i,1 ,
                                               M
                                (t)                                     (t)                (t)
                                               X
                         errm,l,i,1 вүӨ                 |amвҖІ | В· Пғ(вҹЁwmвҖІ ,l , zi вҹ©) В· Пғ вҖІ (вҹЁwm,l , zi вҹ©)          (C.13)
                                              mвҖІ =1
                   (t)                                                              (t)
Note that {вҹЁwm,l , zi вҹ©}mвҲҲ[M ] are standard Gaussians since {wm,l }mвҲҲ[M ] вҠӮ SdвҲ’1 . Therefore, with
probability at least 1 вҲ’ dвҲ’c0 for some constant c0 > 0, we have that |вҹЁwm,l , zi вҹ©| = O(1).
                                                                                      r     Meanwhile,
since that Пғ and Пғ вҖІ are both polynomials with constant order and bounded coefficients, and that
                                         вӢҶ
M = O(d), then by taking am = dвҲ’11s , we conclude from (C.13) that
                                                       (t)       r вҲ’10sвӢҶ ).
                                                    errm,l,i,1 вүӨ O(d                                           (C.14)
                                        (t)
For the second error term errm,l,i,2 , similarly we have that
                  (t)                                (t)                        (t)
                              X
               errm,l,i,2 вүӨ            |amвҖІ | В· Пғ(вҹЁ(wmвҖІ ,l )+ , zi вҹ©) В· Пғ вҖІ (вҹЁ(wm,l )+ , zi вҹ©) .               (C.15)
                                        mвҖІ вҲҲ[M ]

Note that the one-step updated weights satisfy that
                      (t)               (t)                      (t)              (t)
                   вҹЁ(wm,l )+ , zi вҹ© = вҹЁwm,l , zi вҹ© + yi В· Пғ вҖІ (вҹЁwm,l , zi вҹ©) + errm,l,i,1 = O(1),
                                                                                            r                  (C.16)

with probability at least 1 вҲ’ dвҲ’c0 since yi = p(вҹЁОёвӢҶ , zi вҹ©) and p is also a polynomial of constant degree
and coefficients. Therefore, with the choice of am вҖҷs, by (C.15), we conclude that
                                                       (t)                     вӢҶ
                                                                 r вҲ’10s ).
                                                    errm,l,i,2 вүӨ O(d                                           (C.17)
                          (t)
Finally, regarding errm,l,i,3 , note that with the same argument as (C.16), we know that with probability
                                  (t)                        (t)              (t)            (t)             (t)
at least 1 вҲ’ dвҲ’c0 , both вҹЁwm,l , zi вҹ© + yi В· Пғ вҖІ (вҹЁwm,l , zi вҹ©) + errm,l,i,1 and вҹЁwm,l , zi вҹ© + yi В· Пғ вҖІ (вҹЁwm,l , zi вҹ©)
are O(1).
     r     Since Пғ вҖІ is a polynomial, it is O(1)-Lipschitz
                                             r                   continuous for inputs that are O(1).
                                                                                                  r        Therefore,
combined with (C.14) that we have proved, we can obtain that
                                (t)                 r |err(t) | = O(d     r вҲ’10sвӢҶ ).

                             errm,l,i,3 вүӨ |yi | В· O           m,l,i,1                                         (C.18)


                                                                   27
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Finally, combining (C.14), (C.17), and (C.18), we obtain that for given (m, l, i, t), with probability at
least 1 вҲ’ O(dвҲ’c0 ), it holds that
                                                (t)                   вӢҶ
                                                        r вҲ’10s ).
                                             errm,l,i = O(d
Finally, taking c0 as a constant that is larger than 2 and applying a union bound argument, we can
obtain that
                                                                                                   вҖІ
                                  r вҲ’c0 ) вүҘ 1 вҲ’ Оҳ(d
              Pr(E) вүҘ 1 вҲ’ M LnT В· O(d                   r вҲ’c0 ) вүҘ 1 вҲ’ O(d
                                                r 2 ) В· O(d           r вҲ’c0 )

for some other constant cвҖІ0 > 0. Here we have applied our choice of (M, L, n, T ) in our algorithm
(see Algorithm 1, Algorithm 2). Thus we verify the property of the event E, proving Corollary 4.5.

C.2.2      M O D I F I E D L O S S F O R G E N E R A L sвӢҶ вүҘ 1
Here we give a specific choice of the activation function Пғ and the loss function в„“. We mainly focus on
the situation where Qy has a continuous cumulative distribution function FQy with bounded density
fQy . For the situation where Qy is a discrete distribution (e.g., classification task), we discuss them in
                                                                               вҲҡ
the end of this section. For the activation function Пғ, we let Пғ(x) := (1/ sвӢҶ ) В· hsвӢҶ (x). Since then,

      ПҲps (y) = EQ [ПҲ(x, y) В· hs (x) | y] = EQ [Пғ вҖІ (x) В· hs (x)] В· в„“вҖІ (y) = 0,         вҲҖs < sвӢҶ вҲ’ 1.        (C.19)
Regarding the choice of the loss function в„“, we remark that if one chooses a fixed loss function, there
always exist instances such that the second assumption in the high-pass condition fails. To address
this issue, we propose to construct a random loss function в„“. To rule out pathological examples of the
underlying distribution P, we make the following assumption on the coefficient function О¶sвӢҶ .
Assumption C.3. We assume that the expansion of О¶rsвӢҶ := О¶sвӢҶ в—Ұ F вҲ’1 : [0, 1] 7вҶ’ R on the Fourier
                                                                                 Qy
basis {ПҶi (x)}iвүҘ0 of [0, 1] has a non-zero coefficient of order at most D = O(1).

We then choose the loss function в„“ as the following,
                             D
                             X
                  в„“вҖІ (y) =         Оұi В· ПҶi в—Ұ FQy (y),   Оұi вҲј Unif([0, 1]),         вҲҖ0 вүӨ i вүӨ D.
                             i=0

Notice that FQy can be estimated from data using a one dimensional density estimator. Thus here we
directly assume the accessibility of the function FQy . This further gives that
                                                             D
                                                             X                      h                  i
     EQ [О¶sвӢҶ (y) В· ПҲpsвӢҶ вҲ’1 (y)] = EQ [О¶sвӢҶ (y) В· в„“вҖІ (y)] =                                  y ) В· ПҶi (r
                                                                   Оұi В· EUnif([0,1]) О¶rsвӢҶ (r         y) ,   (C.20)
                                                             i=0

which is a non-zero polynomial of the coefficients {Оұi }iвүӨD due to Assumption C.3.

Proof of Corollary 4.7. To prove Corollary 4.7, it suffices to show that (i) Assumption 4.1 holds, and
(ii) the event E holds with the desired high probability. In the following, we first verify Assumption 4.1,
and then check the event E.
Verifying Assumption 4.1. First, since Пғ вҖІ is a polynomial and в„“вҖІ is bounded (the Fourier basis is
bounded and D = O(1)), we know that both Assumption 4.1(a) and Assumption 4.1(c) are satisfied.
Then, by the discussions before the proof, we know from (C.19) that the first condition in the high-pass
assumption (Assumption 4.1(b)) is satisfied. Furthermore, according to (C.20) and Assumption C.3,
EQ [О¶sвӢҶ (y) В· ПҲpsвӢҶ вҲ’1 (y)] is a non-zero polynomial of the coefficients {Оұi }iвүӨD and thus its zeros form
a measure-zero set. This means that with probability 1 over the randomness of (Оұ1 , В· В· В· , ОұD ), the
second condition in the high-pass assumption is also satisfied. This verifies Assumption 4.1.
Verifying the event E. Recall our definition in Example 4.6, the error term is defined as

                 (t)                                  (t)                     (t)
              errm,l,i = в„“вҖІ (yi ) вҲ’ в„“вҖІ yi вҲ’ f (zi ; {wm,l }mвҲҲ[M ] }) В· Пғ вҖІ (вҹЁwm,l , zi вҹ©).
              (t)              (t)                                              (t)
First, since wm,l вҲҲ SdвҲ’1 , вҹЁwm,l , zi вҹ© is a standard Gaussian and therefore |вҹЁwm,l , zi вҹ©| = O(1)
                                                                                              r    with
                           вҲ’c0                                    вҖІ
probability at least 1 вҲ’ d     for some constant c0 > 0. Since Пғ is a polynomial of constant degree,


                                                        28
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                            (t)
we then obtain that |Пғ вҖІ (вҹЁwm,l , zi вҹ©)| = O(1)
                                           r     with probability at least 1 вҲ’ dвҲ’c0 . Second, consider that
                                              вҖІвҖІ
the second derivative of the loss function в„“ (y) is given by
                                           D
                                           X
                                 вҖІвҖІ
                                                 Оұi В· ПҶвҖІi FQy (y) В· fQy (y),

                                в„“ (y) =
                                           i=0

which satisfies |в„“вҖІвҖІ (y)| = O(1) since the derivative of the Fourier basis is still bounded and that the
density of Qy is assumed to be bounded. Therefore, we have

                                     (t)                            (t)
        в„“вҖІ (yi ) вҲ’ в„“вҖІ yi вҲ’ f (zi ; {wm,l }mвҲҲ[M ] }) = O f (zi ; {wm,l }mвҲҲ[M ] })
                                                            M
                                                                                       !
                                                                             (t)
                                                           X
                                                     =O        |am | В· Пғ(вҹЁwm,l , zi вҹ©) .
                                                                 m=1

                                                           (t)
Since Пғ is a polynomial of constant degree and вҹЁwm,l , zi вҹ© are all standard Gaussians, we have that
      (t)
|Пғ(вҹЁw , zi вҹ©)| = O(1)
      m,l
                  r    with probability at least 1 вҲ’ O(dвҲ’c0 ). Now given that M = O(d) and taking
             вӢҶ
am = dвҲ’11s , we have that

                                                    (t)              r вҲ’10sвӢҶ ),
                       в„“вҖІ (yi ) вҲ’ в„“вҖІ yi вҲ’ f (zi ; {wm,l }mвҲҲ[M ] }) = O(d

with probability at least 1 вҲ’ O(dвҲ’c0 ). Therefore, for any given (m, l, i, t), with probability at least
1 вҲ’ O(dвҲ’c0 ), it holds that
                                 (t)     r вҲ’10sвӢҶ ) В· O(1)
                              errm,l,i = O(d         r      r вҲ’10sвӢҶ ).
                                                          = O(d

Finally, as in the proof of Corollary 4.5, we take c0 as a constant that is larger than sвӢҶ + 1, and apply
a union bound argument, by which we can obtain that

                                         r sвӢҶ +1/2 ) В· O(d
                           r вҲ’c0 ) вүҘ 1 вҲ’ Оҳ(d
       Pr(E) вүҘ 1 вҲ’ M LnT В· O(d                                       r вҲ’cвҖІ0 )
                                                       r вҲ’c0 ) вүҘ 1 вҲ’ O(d

for some other constant cвҖІ0 > 0. Thus we verify the property of the event E, proving Corollary 4.7.

Remark C.4 (Discrete labels). For the case of discrete label y that supports on a finite set Y (e.g.,
classification tasks), the construction of ПҲ is somehow more direct. In this case, we can still consider
an oracle function inвҲҡthe form of ПҲ(y, x) = Пғ вҖІ (x) В· ПҶ(y) for some function ПҶ(y). The activation
function Пғ(x) = (1/ sвӢҶ ) В· hsвӢҶ (x) and the function ПҶ(y) is a random function given by

                                      ПҶ(y) вҲј Unif([0, 1]),       вҲҖy вҲҲ Y.                            (C.21)

On the one hand, we can directly conclude as in (C.19) that ПҲps (y) = 0 for all s < sвӢҶ вҲ’ 1. On the
other hand, we have that
                                                                X
             EQ [О¶sвӢҶ (y) В· ПҲpsвӢҶ вҲ’1 (y)] = EQ [О¶sвӢҶ (y) В· ПҶ(y)] =   Qy (y) В· О¶sвӢҶ (y) В· ПҶ(y).
                                                                   yвҲҲY

By the definition of generative exponent (Definition 2.1), EQy [О¶sвӢҶ (y)2 ] > 0 and thus at least one of
{Qy (y) В· О¶sвӢҶ (y)}yвҲҲY is non-zero. Thus under (C.21), EQ [О¶sвӢҶ (y) В· ПҲpsвӢҶ вҲ’1 (y)] is non-zero with proba-
bility 1 over the randomness in ПҶ. Thus we have verified Assumption 4.1(b). Assumption 4.1(a) and
Assumption 4.1(c) can be verified in the same way as for the continuous case, and thus Assumption 4.1
is checked. Finally, we remark that in the discrete case we do not attempt to reduce the oracle function
from certain loss derivative and thus we simply set the error terms err as zero. Thus all the conditions
in Theorem 4.2 hold and Corollary 4.7 is proved.
Remark C.5. (Non-monotonicity of the loss function) Note that this loss function constructed above
is not monotonically decreasing as f approaches y. However, this non-monotonicity does not impact
our analysis since our primary objective is to learn the feature direction.


                                                      29
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


C.3    D E B I A S I N G T H E G R A D I E N T E S T I M AT O R F O R U N K N O W N O R A C L E

In Algorithm 1, we propose a meta-algorithm that incorporates weight perturbation at each gradient
step. Specifically, as outlined in Line 6, after computing the gradient estimator
                             (t)           (t)    (t) (t)        (t)      (t)
                            gm,l,i = ПҲ(yi , вҹЁwm,l , zi вҹ©) + errm,l,i В· zi ,
we aggregate the gradients and remove bias through the following operation:
                                         n  L
                             (t)      1 X X (t)              (t)    (t)
                            gm   =            gm,l,i вҲ’ ПҲp1 (yi ) В· wm,l .
                                     nL i=1
                                              l=1
We would like to demonstrate that the debiasing operation is only needed for sвӢҶ вүӨ 2, as the high-pass
assumption already guarantees that the bias term is zero for sвӢҶ > 2. Therefore, we only need to
consider the case where sвӢҶ вүӨ 2. In the two examples presented in Example 4.4 and Example 4.6
(where the modified loss в„“ is known), we demonstrated that the oracle ПҲ(y, x) can be derived in
closed form. Consequently, calculating ПҲp1 (y) to debias the gradient poses no significant challenges
in such scenarios.
However, in cases where the gradient oracle is not readily available in closed form, additional
complexity arises. Examples include scenarios where mini-batch SGD involves multiple passes over
the same batch, or when label transformations are applied using a neural network. To handle such
cases, we propose to use a debiasing technique based on the U statistics.
To simplify the notation, we omit the time index t. Additionally, we drop the dependence on the
neuron index m and the perturbation index l. For a given mini-batch {(zi , yi )}ni=1 , we retain {yi }ni=1
and resample {rzj }N
                   j=1 from an isotropic Gaussian distribution. Taking the product of these two sets,
we obtain a dataset of size nN :
                                     D = {(rzj , yi )}iвҲҲ[n],jвҲҲ[N ] .

The gradient calculated for each sample (r
                                         zj , yi ) is given by:
                                  gi,j = (ПҲ(yi , вҹЁw, zrj вҹ©) + erri,j ) В· zrj .
                                                                           вӢҶ
                                                      r вҲ’10s ) under the assumptions of both
Note that here the error term is uniformly bounded by O(d
Theorem 4.2 and Theorem 5.1.
Leveraging the independence between {r     zj }N             n
                                               j=1 and {yi }i=1 , and noting that ПҲ(y, x)x has a polyno-
mial tail (as established in Assumption 4.1(c)), we apply Lemma J.3 to obtain the following result
with probability at least 1 вҲ’ Оҙ:
                                           " n             #     r
  1        X                                X                       log Оҙ вҲ’1 r вҲ’1         1 X
                   вҹЁgi,j , wвҹ© вҲ’ ExвҲјN (0,1)       ПҲ(yi , x)x вүӨ               +O(N )+               |erri,j |
 nN                                         i=1
                                                                       N                 nN i,j
      iвҲҲ[n],j=вҲҲ[N ]

By choosing N large enough (e.g., N = dC for some large constant C), the estimation error becomes
negligible and can be safely absorbed into the error term for our analysis. Note that this debiasing
procedure is only needed once at each iteration for a single perturbed weight, and we donвҖҷt need to
repeat it for each neuron or perturbation as the distribution of вҹЁw, zrj вҹ© is the same for all neurons
and perturbations. It is also worth noting that N only affects computational complexity, not sample
complexity. Furthermore, the computational complexity remains polynomial in d.
In summary, suppose the gradient oracle is not available in closed form, we can instead implement
the following procedure for sвӢҶ вүӨ 2 at each iteration of Algorithm 1:

                                            zj }N
      1. Sample isotropic Gaussian vectors {r   j=1 .
      2. On synthetic sample {(r zj , yi )}iвҲҲ[n],jвҲҲ[N ] , perform a gradient backward to obtain each gi,j
         for weight w1,1 , which is the first perturbation of the first neuron.
                                               1
                                                   P
      3. Compute the debiasing term ОҪ = nN           iвҲҲ[n],j=вҲҲ[N ] вҹЁgi,j , w1,1 вҹ©.

                                                                    (t)          Pn      PL        (t)
After this procedure, in Line 6 of Algorithm 1, we compute gm = (nL)вҲ’1             i=1    l=1     gm,l,i вҲ’ ОҪ В·
 (t)
wm,l instead. The other steps of the meta algorithm remain the same.


                                                      30
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


C.4    S U M M A R Y O F L I M I TAT I O N S

Failure of standard methods. Although being a gradient-based method, our approach is extensively
modified to adapt to the structure of the problem. Although we have shown in 4.2.2 that some fatal
issues prevent the vanilla mini-batch SGD from efficiently learning ОёвӢҶ , it remains unknown whether
there is any standard gradient-based methods (for example noisy-SGD) that can succeed in this
problem.

Minimizing the expected loss. Current work focuses on estimating ОёвӢҶ using the two-layer neural
networks. However, training the second layer with learned feature goes beyond the scope of this
work. We leave it as a future direction to investigate whether a learned feature enables minimizing
the expected error efficiently.

Misspecification of the gradient oracle. The validity of Theorem 4.2 is based on that the order of
the gradient oracle is correctly specified as the generative exponent sвӢҶ , i.e., Assumption 4.1(b). In
general estimating tasks where the link distribution is unknown, the generative exponent is beyond
the access and requires additional identification. In Appendix C.1.4, we heuristically derive that size
             вӢҶ
n = в„Ұ(d(2s вҲ’r)вҲЁr)/2 ) samples are required for a order-r high-pass oracle to obtain a non-trivial SNR.
This indicates that both the optimistic or pessimistic specification of the gradient oracle deteriorates
the sample efficiency of our algorithm. To address the issue of unknown generative exponent, Damian
et al. (2024) propose to run their partial-trace algorithm with different order and compare the quality
of the estimated feature on the hold-out validation set. We expect that a similar strategy for our
algorithm can also tackle this issue. However, this brute-force approach is computationally inefficient.
It is an interesting future direction to construct an efficient and adaptive algorithm that works for
unknonw sвӢҶ .

Constructing modified loss in general cases. In Appendix C.2.2, we provide an example of loss
function which provably satisfies Assumption 4.1. However, the construction of this loss function
involves a random linear combination of Fourier basis, which is unnatural and is rarely adopted
in practice. Additionally, this construction requires access to the marginal distribution of y under
P that needs an ad-hoc estimation. It is unclear whether using an estimated version of Py would
cause the failure of previous argument. Besides, the minimal order of non-zero Fourier coefficient in
Assumption C.3 is involved in the construction, which is typically inaccessible in practice. It would
be an interesting future direction to investigate if there is any natural choice of loss function that
generally follows Assumption 4.1.

D     PROOF SKETCH OF THE MAIN THEOREM FOR UNIFORM PRIOR
In the following proof sketch, we only focus on the case sвӢҶ being an even integer and sвӢҶ вүҘ 2. The
other cases only differs technically and we defer readers to Appendix E.2 for a detailded proof. For
                    (t)      (t)
simplicity, denote ПҒm := вҹЁОёm , ОёвӢҶ вҹ©, the alignment between the weights of neuron m and the signal
 вӢҶ
Оё at time t. Recall from Line 8 in Algorithm 1 that the update for neuron m at time step t is
                                                     (t)       (t)
                                         (t+1)      Оёm + О·s
                                                          gm
                                        Оёm     =    (t)       (t)
                                                                     .                            (D.1)
                                                   вҲҘОёm + О·s
                                                          gm вҲҘ2
                                                           (t+1)
This implies that the alignment of the next iteration, ПҒm , is a convex combination of the previous
            (t)                                           (t)          (t)        (t)
alignment ПҒm and the alignment of the update step вҹЁs     gm , ОёвӢҶ вҹ© = вҹЁgm , ОёвӢҶ вҹ©/вҲҘgm вҲҘ2 . Therefore, to
                                                                                               (t)
show that the alignment improves after one iteration, we need to first analyze the scale of вҹЁgm , ОёвӢҶ вҹ©
       (t)                                                               (t)
and вҲҘgm вҲҘ2 ; then we will be able to characterize the improvement of ПҒm across iterations.

                                  (t)
Alignment of the update step вҹЁsgm , ОёвӢҶ вҹ©. To this end, we calculate the first moment and and second
            (t)                                     (t) (t)
moment of gm over the randomness of the data {(zi , yi )}ni=1 , and combining these leads to the
                   (t) вӢҶ     (t)                                                (t)
concentration of вҹЁgm , Оё вҹ©/вҲҘgm вҲҘ2 . More specifically, for the first moment of gm , we have
                                                                         вӢҶ
                                  (t)                             вҲ’1/2 s вҲ’2
                          вҹЁEPОёвӢҶ [gm   ], ОёвӢҶ вҹ© вүҲ ПҒ(t)      (t)
                                                 m Оі В· (|ПҒm |Оі + d    )     ,


                                                    31
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                     (t)
while the magnitude of EPОёвӢҶ [gm ] in any other direction orthogonal to ОёвӢҶ is of strictly higher order. For
                        (t)               r вҲ’1/4 ), it can be shown that for any direction v вҲҲ SdвҲ’1 ,
the second moment of gm , setting Оі = Оҳ(d
                            вӢҶ
        (t)          r вҲ’(s вҲ’1)/2 ). Now chooing n = в„Ұ(d
EPОёвӢҶ [вҹЁgm , vвҹ©2 ] = O(d                                   r sвӢҶ /2 ), it follows from a Bernstein-type
                                                   (t)                           r вҲ’sвӢҶ /2+1/4 ) for any
concentration inequality that the fluctuation of вҹЁgm , vвҹ© is of the same order O(d
                 dвҲ’1
direction v вҲҲ S . Therefore, with high probability,
                                                                              вӢҶ                 вӢҶ
                       (t) вӢҶ                             вҲ’1/2 s вҲ’2    r вҲ’s /2+1/4 ),
                     вҹЁgm  , Оё вҹ© вүҘ ПҒ(t)         (t)
                                    m Оі В· (|ПҒm |Оі + d         )     вҲ’ O(d
                                                                вӢҶ                                                        (D.2)
                                                                      r вҲ’sвӢҶ /2+3/4 ).
                       вҲҘg (t) вҲҘ2 вүӨ ПҒ(t) Оі В· (|ПҒ(t) |Оі + dвҲ’1/2 )s вҲ’2 + O(d
                           m               m          m


Phase 1: from dвҲ’1/2 to weak alignment. Due to random initialization, it holds with high prob-
                (0)
ability that ПҒm = O(dвҲ’1/2 ) for в„Ұ(M ) many neurons. Therefore, it suffices to consider a neuron
       (t)                                     (t)
with ПҒm = в„Ұ(dвҲ’1/2 ). When в„Ұ(dвҲ’1/2 ) вүӨ ПҒm вүӨ O(1), by choosing Оі = Оҳ(d         r вҲ’1/4 ), we can ensure
                                             (t) вӢҶ                          r вҲ’sвӢҶ /2+1/4 ) fluctuation.
that the first term in the lower bound for вҹЁgm , Оё вҹ© in (D.2) dominates the O(d
                                                             (t) вӢҶ       (t) вӢҶ     (t)              (t)
Based on this, we can leverage (D.2) to further show that вҹЁsgm , Оё вҹ© = вҹЁgm , Оё вҹ©/вҲҘgm вҲҘ2 вүҘ (1+c)ПҒm
for a constant c > 0. Consequently, it follows from (D.1) that
                               ПҒ(t+1)
                                m     вүҘ (1 + c)ПҒ(t)
                                                m                  for some constant c > 0.
                                                           (t)
Therefore, it takes O(log d) many steps for ПҒm to increase from dвҲ’1/2 to O(1). During this period,
the dynamics will go through two phases separated by a critical alignment level ПҒвӢҶ such that
                                                                    вӢҶ                   вӢҶ
                                                 вҲ’1/2 s вҲ’2   r вҲ’s /2+3/4 ),
                               ПҒ(t)      (t)
                                m Оі В· (|ПҒm |Оі + d    )     вүҲ O(d

which gives that ПҒвӢҶ = Оҳ(dr вҲ’1/4 ). After the alignment ПҒ(t)           вӢҶ
                                                         m reaches ПҒ , there is a short period where
  (t)                   (t+1)         (t)     вӢҶ                                             вӢҶ
ПҒm grows rapidly as ПҒm /ПҒвӢҶ вүҘ (ПҒm /ПҒвӢҶ )s вҲ’1 , until the alignment reaches dвҲ’1/4+1/4(s вҲ’1) . The
length of this period is very short compared to the other periods on the road to weak alignment.

                                                                                  (t)
Phase 2: from weak to strong alignment. Finally, after ПҒm grows to a constant scale, we need to
                        (t)                                           (t+1)                  (t)
track the value of 1 вҲ’ ПҒm . Again using (D.2), we can show that 1 вҲ’ ПҒm      вүӨ (1 + c)(1 вҲ’ ПҒm ) for
some constant c > 0. Hence, it takes another O(log d) steps to eventually achieve strong alignment.

E     PROOF OF THE MAIN THEOREM FOR THE UNIFORM PRIOR
Now we present the proof for Theorem 4.2. We introduce a shorthand ПҒ = вҹЁОё, ОёвӢҶ вҹ© for the alignment
                                                                                              (t)
between Оё and ОёвӢҶ . This shorthand inherits the subscript and superscript of Оё as well, i.e., ПҒm =
  (t)
вҹЁОёm , ОёвӢҶ вҹ©.
                                                                                                          (t)     (t)    (t)
Recall from Algorithm 1 that at the t-th step, given the normalized gradient step gm = gm /вҲҘgm вҲҘ2 ,
the updated weight parameter is given by
                                                           (t)          (t)       (t)
                                            (t+1)         Оёm + О·gm /вҲҘgm вҲҘ2
                                           Оёm     =       (t)           (t)       (t)
                                                                                            .
                                                      Оёm + О·gm /вҲҘgm вҲҘ2 2
                                (t+1)                                                                             (t)
Note that the alignment вҹЁОёm , ОёвӢҶ вҹ© depends on the alignment of the previous iterate вҹЁОёm , ОёвӢҶ вҹ© and
                                           (t)  (t)
the alignment of the current update step вҹЁgm /вҲҘgm вҲҘ, ОёвӢҶ вҹ©, so we first need to analyze the latter.
Here, we stop to introduce an immediate result that is crucial in characterizing the alignment.

                                                                                                                        (t)
Almost orthogonality of smoothing noise. Recall that the perturbated weights are wm,l =
    (t)              (t)                                  i.i.d.
(ОіОёm + Оҫm,l )/вҲҘОіОёm + Оҫm,l вҲҘ2 , where Оҫm,l вҲј Unif(SdвҲ’1 ). Due to the high dimensionality, Оҫm,l is
almost orthogonal to any designated direction with high probability. In the context, we are primarily
                                                                     (t)
interested in the alignment with ОёвӢҶ . Correspondingly, we decompose gm with respect to the following
orthonormal basis
               (t)             (t)                                                                  (t)     (t)
            {vm,1 = ОёвӢҶ , vm,2 = (1 вҲ’ ПҒ2 )вҲ’1/2 В· (Оёm
                                                  (t)     (t) вӢҶ
                                                      вҲ’ вҹЁОёm  , Оё вҹ© В· ОёвӢҶ ), vm,3 , . . . , vm,d }                          (E.1)


                                                                   32
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


We justify this property by defining the following nice event for Пө > 0:
                                     n                                   o
                            (t)                      (t)
                          Em    (Пө) = max |вҹЁОҫm,l , vm,i вҹ©| < Пө, вҲҖl вҲҲ [L] .
                                                1вүӨiвүӨd

                                                                                                (t)
This event helps in characterizing the alignment between the expected gradient EPОёвӢҶ [gm ] and the
signal ОёвӢҶ . Additionally, we define another event for r  Пө > 0:
                          (t)
                                                        Пө, вҲҖl, lвҖІ вҲҲ [L] s.t. l Мё= lвҖІ .

                        Erm    Пө) = |вҹЁОҫm,l , Оҫm,lвҖІ вҹ©| < r
                              (r
This event controls the correlation between the noise vectors, which helps in controlling the fluctuation
of the gradient. The following lemma provides some direct benefits of these events.
Lemma E.1 (Polarized weight on the nice event). For the orthonormal directions
       (t)            (t)                                                                (t)       (t)
{ОёвӢҶ , vm,2 , . . . , vm,d } defined in (E.1), suppose that the corresponding nice event Em (Пө) вҲ© Erm (rПө)
holds and the polarization level Оі вҲҲ (0, 1/2). Then we have for any l вҲҲ [L] that
                                                                         q
               (t)                                      (t)                       (t)
          |вҹЁwm,l , ОёвӢҶ вҹ©| вүӨ 2(Оі|вҹЁОёm (t) вӢҶ
                                      , Оё вҹ©| + Пө), |вҹЁwm,l , vm,1 вҹ©| вүӨ 2 Оі 1 вҲ’ вҹЁОёm , ОёвӢҶ вҹ©2 + Пө ,
                                          (t)       (t)
                                    |вҹЁwm,l , vm,i вҹ©| вүӨ 2 В· Пө,            2 вүӨ i вүӨ d.

Additionally, for any l Мё= lвҖІ , we have that
                                          (t)        (t)
                                     вҹЁwm,l , wm,lвҖІ вҹ© вүӨ 4(Оі 2 + 2ОіПө + r
                                                                     Пө).

Proof of Lemma E.1. See Appendix E.3.

                    (t)                             (t)                  (t)
Characterizing вҹЁgm , ОёвӢҶ вҹ©. Note that gm = nвҲ’1
                                                                  P
                                                                      i gm,i , where

                               L
                      (t)    1X     (t)   (t)    (t)     (t)       (t)
                    gm,i =       ПҲ(yi , вҹЁwm,l , zi вҹ©) В· zi вҲ’ ПҲp1 (yi ) В· wm,l .
                             L
                                  l=1

                                        (t)                (t)
We characterize the alignment вҹЁgm , ОёвӢҶ вҹ©/вҲҘgm вҲҘ2 in Appendix E.1 with two steps, stated in two key
propositions as follows:
                                                                                   (t)             (t)
      1. In Proposition E.3, we analyze the magnitude of EPОёвӢҶ [вҹЁgm , ОёвӢҶ вҹ©] and вҲҘEPОёвӢҶ [PОёвҠҘвӢҶ вҹЁgm , ОёвӢҶ вҹ©]вҲҘ.
                                                                             (t)
      2. In Proposition E.4, we control the fluctuation of вҹЁgm , ОёвӢҶ вҹ© around its expectation using the
         polynomial-tail like property in Assumption 4.1(c).
                                                          (t)      (t)
Both propositions are established under the nice event Em (Пө) вҲ© Erm (r Пө). The proof of these propo-
sitions is deferred to Appendix E.3. Finally, with these two propositions, we prove Theorem 4.2 in
Appendix E.2.

E.1    P RO P E RT I E S O F T H E G R A D I E N T S T E P
                                                                                   (t)   (t)
In this part, we characterize the alignment of normalized update gm /вҲҘgm вҲҘ with the signal ОёвӢҶ , given
 (t)
Оёm . Since we are focusing on the one step behavior for a fixed neuron m вҲҲ [M ], we omit the neuron
index m and time index t in the sequel. To facilitate the presentation, we propose the following
simplified setup that extract all the essential elements to describe the one-step behavior.
Definition E.2. Fix Оё and ОёвӢҶ and let ПҒ = вҹЁОё, ОёвӢҶ вҹ©. Suppose the data points (z1 , y1 ), . . . , (zn , yn ) are
                                                                                                         i.i.d.
i.i.d. generated from PОёвӢҶ . Define wl = (ОіОё + Оҫl )/вҲҘОіОё + Оҫl вҲҘ2 for l = 1, . . . , L, where Оҫ1 , . . . ОҫL вҲј
Unif(SdвҲ’1 ) are independent of {(zi , yi )}ni=1 . Given the oracle ПҲ : R Г— R вҶ’ R, we define
                                     n  L
                                  1 XX
                            g=            ПҲ(yi , вҹЁwl , zi вҹ©) В· zi вҲ’ ПҲp1 (yi ) В· wl .
                                 nL i=1
                                              l=1



                                                                 33
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


To describe the associated good event, we fix an orthonormal basis:
                                                 Оё вҲ’ ПҒОёвӢҶ
                                  v1 = ОёвӢҶ , v2 = p        , v3 , . . . , vd ,
                                                   1 вҲ’ ПҒ2
and define
                           n                                                             o
                     E(Пө) = |вҹЁОҫl , ОёвӢҶ вҹ©| < Пө,        max |вҹЁОҫl , vi вҹ©| < Пө,       вҲҖl вҲҲ [L] ;
                                                     2вүӨiвүӨd
                     r Пө) = {|вҹЁОҫl , ОҫlвҖІ вҹ©| < r
                     E(r                     Пө,     вҲҖl, lвҖІ вҲҲ [L]      s.t.   l Мё= lвҖІ } .

As mentioned in Appendix D, we can reduce this problem to first characterizing EPОёвӢҶ [g], and then
control the fluctuation of g around its expectation. To this end, we first introduce a lemma that
characterizes the first moment of the gradient step. This lemma is valid for both the non-sparse and
sparse setting and is helpful in understanding the structure of the expected gradient.
Lemma H.2 (Decomposition of the first moment). Suppose that we are working with the setting in
Definition E.2, where the oracle function ПҲ follows Assumption 4.1. Then it holds that
                                                           вҲҡ XL
                            X                               s
                EPОёвӢҶ [g] =       EQ [О¶s (y) В· ПҲpsвҲ’1 (y)] В·      вҹЁwl , ОёвӢҶ вҹ©sвҲ’1 В· ОёвӢҶ
                               вӢҶ
                                                           L
                           sвүҘs                                       l=1
                                                                     вҲҡ          L
                                  X                                      s+1X
                              +          EQ [О¶s (y) В· ПҲps+1 (y)] В·            вҹЁwl , ОёвӢҶ вҹ©s В· wl .
                                                                         L
                                  sвүҘsвӢҶ                                         l=1


Proof of Lemma H.2. See Appendix H.

One can easily see that the first summation term corresponds to the signal, while the second corre-
sponds to the resilience of current weight. The structure of wl guarantees вҹЁwl , ОёвӢҶ вҹ© is small, therefore
only the leading term in the geometric series above is dominant. Also we note that the leading term
from the signal is larger than the leading term from the resilience, which indicates that the expected
gradient is highly aligned with the true signal. This is justified in the next proposition.
Before stating it, we fix M to be a sufficiently large constant that does not scale with d and T =
O(log d). The involvement of M, T here is merely for the union bound argument in Appendix E.2.
Proposition E.3 (Alignment of expected gradient). Suppose that we are working with the setting in
                вӢҶ        вӢҶ               ПҲ follows Assumption 4.1. Additionally, we set Оі = o(1),
Definition E.2, where the oracle function
                                                                                               вӢҶ
L = в„Ұ (Пө вҲЁ Оі)s вҲ’1 В· ds /2 вҲЁ (d log d) and Пө = o(1) is chosen such that Pr(E(Пө)) = 1 вҲ’ O(dвҲ’s /2 ).
                                                                          вҲ’c      вҲ’1
Then there exists a {Оҫl }lвҲҲ[L] -measurable event E1 with Pr(E1 ) вүҘ 1 вҲ’ d (M T ) , such that on the
event E1 вҲ© E(Пө), it holds that
                                                              вӢҶ
                                         ОіПҒ В· (Оі|ПҒ| + dвҲ’1/2 )s вҲ’2 if sвӢҶ is even;

                                  вӢҶ
                      вҹЁEPОёвӢҶ [g], Оё вҹ© вүғ                   вӢҶ
                                         (Оі|ПҒ| + dвҲ’1/2 )s вҲ’1        if sвӢҶ is odd,
and that
                                                                                       вӢҶ
                           вҲҘEPОёвӢҶ [g]вҲҘ2 вҲ’ |вҹЁEPОёвӢҶ g, ОёвӢҶ вҹ©| вүІ (Оі|ПҒ| + dвҲ’1/2 )s ,
as long as Оі|ПҒ| = Пү(dвҲ’1 ).

Proof of Proposition E.3. See Appendix E.3.

From this proposition, it is already clear that the expected gradient is highly aligned with the signal
ОёвӢҶ in the sense that вҲҘPОёвҠҘвӢҶ EPОёвӢҶ [g]вҲҘ2 < |вҹЁEPОёвӢҶ [g], ОёвӢҶ вҹ©| whenever Оі|ПҒ| = Пү(dвҲ’1 ). Later we will see
that this is indeed the case during the trajectory of Algorithm 1.
Proposition E.4 (Fluctuation of mini-batch gradient). Under the simplified setting introduced in
Definition E.2 where ПҲ : R Г— R вҶ’ R follows Assumption 4.1. Suppose that we choose Пө and r        Пө such
that
                                         Пө2 вүӨ r
                                              Пө вүӘ 1;          2ОіПө вүӨ r
                                                                    Пө.


                                                       34
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Also, suppose that sample size
                                          вӢҶ          вҲ’1
                                       Пө)s вҲ’1 + LвҲ’1
                          n = в„Ұ (Оі 2 + r                В· log(d)2Cp +2

where Cp is defined in Assumption 4.1(c). Then there exists a {(yi , zi )}iвҲҲ[n] -measurable event E2
with Pr(E2 c ) вүӨ dвҲ’c В· (M T )вҲ’1 . And it holds on E2 вҲ© E(Пө) вҲ© E(r
                                                               r Пө) that
                                                s
                        вӢҶ                 вӢҶ               Пө)sвӢҶ вҲ’1 + LвҲ’1 В· log(d)
                                                   (Оі 2 + r
                   вҹЁg, Оё вҹ© вҲ’ вҹЁEPОёвӢҶ [g], Оё вҹ© вүІ                                     ,
                                                                  n
and that
                                           s
                                                      Пө)sвӢҶ вҲ’1 + LвҲ’1 В· d log(d)
                                               (Оі 2 + r
                        g вҲ’ EPОёвӢҶ [g] 2 вүІ                                       .
                                                              n

Proof of Proposition E.4. See Appendix E.3.

E.2    PROOF OF THE MAIN THEOREM FOR UNIFORM PRIOR

Now we are ready to present the proof of Theorem 4.2.

Proof of Theorem 4.2. We first establish the good events required for the proof, characterize the
properties of the update step on these events, and then put things together to establish the alignment
of the model weights with the signal.

Preparations. To start with, we clarify the event we will work with by verifying that our configu-
ration is compatible with the conditions  in Proposition E.3 and Proposition E.4. Recall that we set
            вӢҶ
L = в„Ұ d(s вҲ’1)/2 вҲЁ (d log d)1/2 and is at most polynomial in d, the scale of L clearly satisfy that

                вӢҶ
L = в„Ұ (d1/2 Пө)s вҲЁ (d log d) . During our algorithm, Оі = (dвҲ’1 В· log d)1/4 = o(1) is fixed. Choosing


Пө = dвҲ’1/2 log d, we have by Lemma J.6 that for any t and m, it holds that
                                 (t)
                                     (Пө)) вүӨ Ld В· exp(вҲ’d/16) + dвҲ’ log d/4 ,

                       1 вҲ’ Pr(Em
which decays  faster than any constant-degree polynomial in d. Therefore, for sufficiently large d, it
                 (t)   c           вӢҶ
holds that Pr Em (Пө) = O(dвҲ’s /2 ). So far, we see that all the conditions in Proposition E.3 are
                                                    (t)
satisfied and we denote the associated event as Em,1 .
                                                                 q
                                                             Пө = 4 c + logd (M T L2 ) В· dвҲ’1 log d,
Next, we verify the conditions in Proposition E.4. We choose r
then it holds by Lemma J.6 that
                                                               2
                           (t)
                                Пө) вүӨ L2 В· exp(вҲ’d/16) + dвҲ’rПө В·log d/4 вүІ dвҲ’c /M T.

                1 вҲ’ Pr Erm     (r

Additionally, we see that both Пө2 вүӨ r
                                    Пө вүӘ 1 and 2ОіПө вүӨ rПө is
                                                         satisfied for sufficiently large d. It is easily
                                      вӢҶ
verified that our choice of L = в„Ұ d(s +1)/2 вҲЁ (d log d) clearly meets the condition that
                                                вӢҶ         вӢҶ
                                  L вүі (Пө вҲЁ Оі)s вҲ’1 В· ds /2 вҲЁ d log d
we have that the sample size threshold is now
                                log(d)2Cp +2                          вӢҶ
                                                  вүІ log(d)2Cp +2 В· d(s вҲ’1)/2 ,
                                  Пө)sвӢҶ вҲ’1 + LвҲ’1
                           (Оі 2 + r
                                                    вӢҶ
which is satisfied by our choice n = Оҳ (d log d)s /2 вҲЁ d log d log d . Hence, all the conditions in
                                                                        (t)
Proposition E.4 are satisfied and we denote the associated event as Em,2 .


                                                    35
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                                                            (t)
Recalling that the gradient in Definition E.2 does not include the error term errm,l,i , we additionally
                                                              (t)                                 (t)
need an event that controls the norm of the inputs zi 2 , which helps to control вҲҘerrm,l,i В· zi вҲҘ2 . For
this purpose, we define
                                                            вҲҡ

                                   (t)             (t)
                                  Em,3 = maxвҲҘzi вҲҘ2 вүӨ d .
                                                 iвҲҲ[n]

                                                     c (t)
                                                             вүӨ Ld В· exp{вҲ’d/8} = O(exp{вҲ’C вҖІ d})

By standard BernsteinвҖҷs inequality, we have that Pr Em,3
           вҖІ
for some C > 0. To put things together, we work on the following event:
                              M \
                                T
                                                                 (t)    (t)    (t)
                              \
                                          (t)         (t)
                       E=                Em   (Пө) вҲ© Erm    Пө) вҲ© Em,1 вҲ© Em,2 вҲ© Em,3 ,
                                                          (r
                             m=1 t=1

which is of Pr(E) вүҘ 1 вҲ’ O(dвҲ’c ) for some c > 0 by the union bound argument. Denote
                               n   L
                   (t)      1 XX     (t)   (t)    (t)     (t)       (t)
                 gsm   =          ПҲ(yi , вҹЁwm,l , zi вҹ©) В· zi вҲ’ ПҲp1 (yi ) В· wm,l ,
                           nL i=1
                                   l=1
       (t)                             (t) (t)
then gsm and the mini-batch data {(yi , zi )}iвҲҲ[n] match the definition in Definition E.2, which
                                                                             (t)
allows us to apply Proposition E.3 and Proposition E.4. Thanks to the event Em,3 , we always have for
           dвҲ’1
any v вҲҲ S      that
                                (t)          (t)          (t)        (t)
                              вҹЁgm   , vвҹ© вҲ’ вҹЁs
                                            gm   , vвҹ© вүӨ вҲҘgm   вҲҘ2 вҲ’ вҲҘs
                                                                    gm   вҲҘ2
                                                                                  (t)
                                                         вүӨ d1/2 В· max |errm,l,i |
                                                                            l,i
                                                                    вӢҶ
                                                         вүӨ dвҲ’9s .                                       (E.2)

In the sequel, we restrict our attention to neurons that have dвҲ’1/2 /2 alignment, i.e., the index m such
         (0)
that |вҹЁОёm , ОёвӢҶ вҹ©| вүҘ dвҲ’1/2 /2. From now on, we will drop the neuron index m and the iteration index
(t) in the following analysis for simplicity. The updated weight parameter is denoted as ОёвҖІ , and the
alignment after the update is denoted as ПҒвҖІ = вҹЁОёвҖІ , ОёвӢҶ вҹ©. Note that for large M вү« 1, the number of
neurons with initial alignment |ПҒ| вүҘ dвҲ’1/2 /2 is at least в„Ұ(M ). For our convenience, in the following
we will denote by
                                              n
                            Оә :=            sвӢҶ /2           В· (log d)вҲ’1 = в„Ұ(1).
                                  (d log d)       вҲЁ d log d
Under the preceding configuration, Proposition E.4 and Eq. (E.2) together imply that the fluctuations
of вҹЁg, ОёвӢҶ вҹ© can be further bounded by
                                       r
                вӢҶ                вӢҶ               Пө)sвӢҶ вҲ’1 + LвҲ’1 ) В· log(d)
                                         ((Оі 2 + r
           вҹЁg, Оё вҹ© вҲ’ EPОёвӢҶ [вҹЁs
                            g , Оё вҹ©] вүІ                                    + вҹЁs g , ОёвӢҶ вҹ© вҲ’ вҹЁg, ОёвӢҶ вҹ©
                                                          n
                                       r
                                         (dвҲ’1 log d)(sвӢҶ вҲ’1)/2 В· log(d)        вӢҶ
                                     вүІ                                  + dвҲ’9s
                                                        n
                                         вҲ’(2sвӢҶ вҲ’1)/4
                                        d             В· (log d)вҲ’1/4 В· ОәвҲ’1/2 if sвӢҶ вүҘ 2,
                                     =                                                             (E.3)
                                        dвҲ’1/2 В· (log d)вҲ’1/2 В· ОәвҲ’1/2          if sвӢҶ = 1.
On the other hand, we have by Proposition E.3 and Eq. (E.2) that
                      EPОёвӢҶ [вҹЁg, ОёвӢҶ вҹ©] вүі EPОёвӢҶ [вҹЁs
                                               g , ОёвӢҶ вҹ©] вҲ’ вҹЁg, ОёвӢҶ вҹ© вҲ’ EPОёвӢҶ [вҹЁs
                                                                             g , ОёвӢҶ вҹ©]
                                                                        вӢҶ               вӢҶ
                                       вүҘ |ПҒ|Оі(|ПҒ|Оі + dвҲ’1/2 )s вҲ’2 вҲ’ dвҲ’9s
                                                вӢҶ
                                       вүҘ dвҲ’(2s вҲ’1)/4 В· (log d)1/4 ,
whenever |ПҒ|Оі = в„Ұ(dвҲ’3/4 ). Therefore, when Оә is sufficiently large, we have the fluctuations to be
strictly bounded by half of the signal strength. Thus, we have
                                                      1
                                       |вҹЁg, ОёвӢҶ вҹ©| вүҘ               g ], ОёвӢҶ вҹ©|.
                                                        В· |вҹЁEPОёвӢҶ [s
                                                      2


                                                         36
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


For the norm of g, we have that
        вҲҘgвҲҘ2 вүӨ вҲҘgвҲҘ2 вҲ’ вҲҘs
                       g вҲҘ2 + вҲҘs
                               g вҲҘ2 вҲ’ вҲҘEPОёвӢҶ [s
                                             g ]вҲҘ2
                    + вҲҘEPОёвӢҶ [s
                             g ]вҲҘ2 вҲ’ EPОёвӢҶ [вҹЁs                  g , ОёвӢҶ вҹ©]
                                            g , ОёвӢҶ вҹ©] + EPОёвӢҶ [вҹЁs
                      вӢҶ
              вүӨ dвҲ’9s + вҲҘs  g вҲ’ EPОёвӢҶ [s
                                     g ]вҲҘ2 + вҲҘEPОёвӢҶ [s               g ], ОёвӢҶ вҹ© + |вҹЁEPОёвӢҶ [s
                                                     g ]вҲҘ2 вҲ’ вҹЁEPОёвӢҶ [s                   g ], ОёвӢҶ вҹ©]|
                                                         r
                                                   вӢҶ       (dвҲ’1 log d)(sвӢҶ вҲ’1)/2 В· d log d
                       g , ОёвӢҶ вҹ©] + (Оі|ПҒ| + dвҲ’1/2 )s +
              вүІ EPОёвӢҶ [вҹЁs                                                                   ,          (E.4)
                                                                          n
where in the second inequality, we apply Eq. (E.2) and the triangular inequality that вҲҘs     gвҲҘ вҲ’
        g ] вүӨ gs вҲ’ EPОёвӢҶ [s
  EPОёвӢҶ [s                  g ] . And the last inequality is deduced by combining the result Propo-
                                     вӢҶ         вӢҶ
sition E.3 and the fact that dвҲ’9s вүӘ dвҲ’s /2 . For the leading term, it holds by Proposition E.3
that
                                                           вӢҶ
                                           (|ПҒ|Оі + dвҲ’1/2 )s вҲ’1     if sвӢҶ is odd,

                            g ], ОёвӢҶ вҹ©| вүғ
                    |вҹЁEPОёвӢҶ [s                           вҲ’1/2 sвӢҶ вҲ’2                           (E.5)
                                           |ПҒ|Оі(|ПҒ|Оі + d     )     if sвӢҶ is even.
Recall that the alignment admits the following iterative update rule:
                                                         |вҹЁG, ОёвӢҶ вҹ©| вҲ’ О· вҲ’1 |вҹЁОё, ОёвӢҶ вҹ©|

                       вҖІ вӢҶ          Оё + О·G      вӢҶ
                    |вҹЁОё , Оё вҹ©| =             ,Оё       вүҘ                               ,
                                   вҲҘОё + О·GвҲҘ2                      1 + О· вҲ’1
where G = g/вҲҘgвҲҘ2 . In the following, we will define ПҒвӢҶ = dвҲ’1/4 (log d)1/4 as a critical threshold
before the weak alignment. Specifically, in the phase I of weak alignment, we assume that |ПҒ| вүӨ ПҒвӢҶ .
                                                                                           g , ОёвӢҶ вҹ©] вүӮ
When the training process goes across this critical threshold, the dominant term in EPОёвӢҶ [вҹЁs
    1{sвӢҶ is even}        вҲ’1/2 вӢҶвҲ’1вҲ’1{sвӢҶ is even}                        вҲ’1/2
(ОіПҒ)              (ОіПҒ + d    )                  becomes ОіПҒ instead of d     .

Stage I of weak alignment. Case I: sвӢҶ Мё= 1, sвӢҶ is odd.          Combining the results in Eq. (E.3), (E.4)
and (E.5), we conclude that for sвӢҶ вүҘ 3 being odd,
                                                   вӢҶ
      |вҹЁg, ОёвӢҶ вҹ©| вүі (|ПҒ| В· (d log d)вҲ’1/4 + dвҲ’1/2 )s вҲ’1 ,
                                                   вӢҶ              вӢҶ
          вҲҘgвҲҘ2 вүІ (|ПҒ| В· (d log d)вҲ’1/4 + dвҲ’1/2 )s вҲ’1 + dвҲ’(2s вҲ’3)/4 В· (log d)вҲ’1/4 В· ОәвҲ’1/2 .
It is important to note that here вҖңвүівҖқ and вҖңвүІвҖқ only hides constants that are independent of d and n.
Combining these two inequalities, we have that
                                                                        вӢҶ
                |вҹЁg, ОёвӢҶ вҹ©|                  (|ПҒ|d1/4 (log d)вҲ’1/4 + 1)s вҲ’1
                           вүі
                  вҲҘgвҲҘ2       (|ПҒ|d1/4 (log d)вҲ’1/4 + 1)sвӢҶ вҲ’1 + d1/4 (log d)вҲ’1/4 В· ОәвҲ’1/2
                                                   вӢҶ
                                    (|ПҒ|/ПҒвӢҶ + 1)s вҲ’1
                          =                                .
                              (|ПҒ|/ПҒ + 1)sвӢҶ вҲ’1 + ОәвҲ’1/2 /ПҒвӢҶ
                                    вӢҶ

Thus, if |ПҒ| вүӨ ПҒвӢҶ and take Оә to be a sufficiently large constant, after the first gradient update, the
alignment will grow to at least ПҒвӢҶ by noting that |вҹЁg, ОёвӢҶ вҹ©|/вҲҘgвҲҘ2 вүі ПҒвӢҶ Оә1/2 and that
                                           ПҒвӢҶ Оә1/2 вҲ’ О· вҲ’1 |ПҒ|
                                      |ПҒвҖІ | вүі
                                               1 + О· вҲ’1
                                               вҲҡ
                                            вӢҶ    Оә вҲ’ О· вҲ’1
                                          вүҘПҒ В·              вүҘ ПҒвӢҶ .
                                                1 + О· вҲ’1
As a summary of Case I(a), with one step of gradient update, the alignment will grow to at least ПҒвӢҶ if
|ПҒ| вүӨ ПҒвӢҶ .

Stage I of weak alignment. Case II: sвӢҶ is even.             In the case where sвӢҶ is even, we have by the
previous arguments that
                                                                                    вӢҶ
                  |вҹЁg, ОёвӢҶ вҹ©| вүі |ПҒ| В· (d log d)вҲ’1/4 В· (|ПҒ| В· (d log d)вҲ’1/4 + dвҲ’1/2 )s вҲ’2 ,
                                                                                    вӢҶ
                     вҲҘgвҲҘ2 вүІ |ПҒ| В· (d log d)вҲ’1/4 В· (|ПҒ| В· (d log d)вҲ’1/4 + dвҲ’1/2 )s вҲ’2
                                          вӢҶ
                                 + dвҲ’(2s вҲ’3)/4 В· (log d)вҲ’1/4 В· ОәвҲ’1/2


                                                       37
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Here, we use the following fact that
                      вӢҶ                       вӢҶ                                        вӢҶ
     (|ПҒ|Оі + dвҲ’1/2 )s вүІ (|ПҒ|Оі + dвҲ’1/2 )s вҲ’2 В· (ПҒ2 Оі 2 + dвҲ’1 ) вүІ (|ПҒ|Оі + dвҲ’1/2 )s вҲ’2 |ПҒ|Оі,

where the last inequality holds since |ПҒ| вүҘ dвҲ’1/2 /2. Thus, we conclude that
                                                                            вӢҶ
                      |вҹЁg, ОёвӢҶ вҹ©|         |ПҒ| В· (|ПҒ|d1/4 (log d)вҲ’1/4 + 1)s вҲ’2
                                 вүі
                        вҲҘgвҲҘ2       |ПҒ| В· (|ПҒ|d1/4 (log d)вҲ’1/4 + 1)sвӢҶ вҲ’2 + ОәвҲ’1/2
                                                                вӢҶ
                                            |ПҒ| В· (|ПҒ|/ПҒвӢҶ + 1)s вҲ’2
                                    =                                 .                          (E.6)
                                      |ПҒ| В· (|ПҒ|/ПҒвӢҶ + 1)sвӢҶ вҲ’2 + ОәвҲ’1/2
                                                             вӢҶ  вҲ’1/2
Note that Оә = в„Ұ(1). Hence before the alignment reaches   вҲҡ ПҒ ,Оә       will dominate the denominator in
                                      вӢҶ
Eq. (E.6), which gives us that |вҹЁg, Оё вҹ©|/вҲҘgвҲҘ2 вүі |ПҒ| В· Оә. Importantly, the вҖңвүівҖқ hides constants that
are independent of d and Оә. Thus, by taking Оә to be a sufficiently large constant, we can conclude that
                                                  вҲҡ
                                                    Оә вҲ’ О· вҲ’1
                                    |ПҒвҖІ | вүҘ |ПҒ| В·            вүҘ 2|ПҒ|.
                                                   1 + О· вҲ’1
As a summary of Case II(a), before the alignment
                                                 reaches ПҒвӢҶ , the alignment will grow exponentially
fast, and this phase takes at most O log(d) steps. In the following, we consider the case when
|ПҒ| вүҘ ПҒвӢҶ for both cases I and II.

Stage II of weak alignment. Case I&II combined. Now we consider the case when |ПҒ| вүҘ ПҒвӢҶ
for both cases I and II, i.e., sвӢҶ вүҘ 2. For this case, we have |ПҒ|/ПҒвӢҶ + 1 вүғ |ПҒ|/ПҒвӢҶ . Let us define
r = |ПҒ|/ПҒвӢҶ вүҘ 1 and rвҖІ = |ПҒвҖІ |/ПҒвӢҶ , and it follows that
                                                            вӢҶ
                                      |вҹЁg, ОёвӢҶ вҹ©|         rs вҲ’1
                                                 вүі sвӢҶ вҲ’1             ,
                                        вҲҘgвҲҘ2      r      + ОәвҲ’1/2 /ПҒвӢҶ
and consequently:
                                        вӢҶ         вӢҶ
                                вҖІ rs вҲ’1 В· (rs вҲ’1 ПҒвӢҶ + ОәвҲ’1/2 )вҲ’1 вҲ’ О· вҲ’1 r
                             r вүі
                                                   1 + О· вҲ’1
                                   вҲҡ      sвӢҶ вҲ’1
                                  ( ОәВ·r         ) вҲ§ ПҒвӢҶ вҲ’1 вҲ’ О· вҲ’1 r
                               вүҘ
                                              1 + О· вҲ’1
                                                                  вҲҡ   вӢҶ
It can be noted that the maximal ratio r вүӨ (ПҒвӢҶ )вҲ’1 , and also Оә В· rs вҲ’1 вүҘ 2О· вҲ’1 r given that Оә is
sufficiently large and r вүҘ 1. Thus, we conclude that in this case
                                            вҲҡ        вӢҶ
                                     rвҖІ вүі ( Оә В· rs вҲ’1 ) вҲ§ ПҒвӢҶ вҲ’1 .
For this case,
            the growth of the alignment will be also at least exponentially fast, until it reaches
в„Ұ (ПҒвӢҶ )вҲ’1 , i.e., |ПҒ| = C for some constant C. This phase takes at most O(log(d)) steps.

Strong alignment. Case I&II combined. We need a more careful analysis for this case in order to
achieve strong alignment. When the alignment is on a constant level, we can deduce from its original
form that
                                                                        вӢҶ
                                  g ], ОёвӢҶ вҹ©| = B(ПҒ, {Оҫl }lвҲҲ[L] ) В· (|ПҒ|Оі)s вҲ’1 + E1 ,
                          |вҹЁEPОёвӢҶ [s
where B(ПҒ, {Оҫl }lвҲҲ[L] ) = в„Ұ(1) is a constant that depends on ПҒ and the random perturbations {Оҫl }lвҲҲ[L]
                                               вӢҶ
and the error term follows that |E| вүӨ O(dвҲ’s ). . In the following, we will drop the dependency on ПҒ
and {Оҫl }lвҲҲ[L] and use B for simplicity. We have by Eq. (E.3) that
                                       вӢҶ
                                                       вӢҶ

                 |вҹЁg, ОёвӢҶ вҹ©| вүҘ B(|ПҒ|Оі)s вҲ’1 вҲ’ O dвҲ’(2s вҲ’1)/4 В· (log d)вҲ’1/4 В· ОәвҲ’1/2
                                       вӢҶ
                                                            вӢҶ       вӢҶ

                            = B(|ПҒ|Оі)s вҲ’1 вҲ’ O (d log d)вҲ’s /4 В· Оі s вҲ’1 В· ОәвҲ’1/2
                                 вӢҶ
                                             вӢҶ                 вӢҶ

                            = Оі s вҲ’1 В· B|ПҒ|s вҲ’1 вҲ’ (d log d)вҲ’s /4 В· O(ОәвҲ’1/2 ) ,


                                                      38
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


and also
                          вӢҶ
                                         вӢҶ        вӢҶ

           вҲҘgвҲҘ2 вүӨ B(|ПҒ|Оі)s вҲ’1 + O (|ПҒ|Оі)s + dвҲ’(2s вҲ’3)/4 В· (log d)вҲ’1/4 В· ОәвҲ’1/2
                          вӢҶ
                                         вӢҶ      вӢҶ                 вӢҶ        вӢҶ

                вүӨ B(|ПҒ|Оі)s вҲ’1 + O (|ПҒ|Оі)s + dвҲ’(s вҲ’2)/4 В· (log d)вҲ’s /4 В· Оі s вҲ’1 В· ОәвҲ’1/2
                     вӢҶ              вӢҶ                вӢҶ                 вӢҶ
                вүӨ Оі s вҲ’1 В· (B|ПҒ|s вҲ’1 + O(dвҲ’(s вҲ’2)/4 В· (log d)вҲ’s /4 В· ОәвҲ’1/2 )).
Therefore, once the alignment reaches a constant level |ПҒ| вүҘ O(1), we have
                                                                вӢҶ           вӢҶ
                                        |вҹЁg, ОёвӢҶ вҹ©|       B|ПҒ|s вҲ’1 вҲ’ O(dвҲ’s /4 )
                      |вҹЁG, ОёвӢҶ вҹ©| =                 вүҘ
                                          вҲҘgвҲҘ2       B|ПҒ|sвӢҶ вҲ’1 + O(dвҲ’1/4 (log d)1/4 )
                                                 вүҘ 1 вҲ’ O(dвҲ’1/4 (log d)1/4 ) =: 1 вҲ’ вҲҶ.

Here, вҲҶ вүғ dвҲ’1/4 (log d)1/4 . Thus, as long as О· > 2, after one step gradient,
                                           вҹЁG + О· вҲ’1 Оё, ОёвӢҶ вҹ©2
                  |ПҒвҖІ |2 =
                             вҹЁG + О· вҲ’1 Оё, ОёвӢҶ вҹ©2 + вҲҘPОёвҠҘвӢҶ (G + О· вҲ’1 Оё)вҲҘ22
                                                             вҲ’1     2
                                                   (1 вҲ’ вҲҶ вҲ’ О· |ПҒ|)
                         вүҘ                             p                    p
                             (1 вҲ’ вҲҶ вҲ’ О· вҲ’1 |ПҒ|)2 + (     1 вҲ’ (1 вҲ’ вҲҶ)2 + О· вҲ’1 1 вҲ’ ПҒ2 )2
                                           (1 вҲ’ О· вҲ’1 вҲ’ вҲҶ)2
                         вүҘ                                     вҲҡ
                           (1 вҲ’ О· вҲ’1 вҲ’ вҲҶ)2 + О· вҲ’2 (1 вҲ’ ПҒ2 ) + 2 2вҲҶ + 2вҲҶ2
                                   (1 вҲ’ О· вҲ’1 )2             вҲҡ
                         =        вҲ’1 2     вҲ’2      2
                                                      вҲ’ O( вҲҶ).
                           (1 вҲ’ О· ) + О· (1 вҲ’ ПҒ )
Here, the first equality holds by the Pythagorean theorem, the first inequality holds by the triangle
                                                                                                 вҲҡ
inequality, and in the last line, we separate the major term and the error term that scales with вҲҶ,
where we use the fact that 1 вҲ’ О· вҲ’1 > 1/2 with О· > 2. In addition, by letting П„ = О· вҲ’2 /(1 вҲ’ О· вҲ’1 )2 ,
we have
                                                  (1 вҲ’ О· вҲ’1 )2            вҲҡ
                       1 вҲ’ (ПҒвҖІ )2 = 1 вҲ’         вҲ’1   2    вҲ’2     2
                                                                    + O( вҲҶ)
                                          (1 вҲ’ О· ) + О· (1 вҲ’ ПҒ )
                                       П„ (1 вҲ’ ПҒ2 )        вҲҡ
                                  =                2
                                                      + O( вҲҶ)
                                     1 + П„ (1 вҲ’ ПҒ )
                                                       вҲҡ
                                  вүӨ П„ (1 вҲ’ ПҒ2 ) + O( вҲҶ).
Therefore, we conclude
              вҲҡ        that as long as П„ < 1, i.e., О· > 2, 1 вҲ’ ПҒ2 will exponentially decrease to
O((1 вҲ’ П„ ) В· вҲҶ), and achieves strong alignment in O((log вҲҶвҲ’1 )/(log П„ вҲ’1 )) steps.
          вҲ’1


Weak & strong alignment. Case III: sвӢҶ = 1. In this case, we conclude from the previous
arguments that regardless of the alignment level, it always holds that
                                                  g ], ОёвӢҶ вҹ©| = B = O(1),
                                          |вҹЁEPОёвӢҶ [s
which gives us
                             |вҹЁg, ОёвӢҶ вҹ©| вүҘ B вҲ’ O(dвҲ’1/2 В· (log d)вҲ’1/2 В· ОәвҲ’1/2 ),
and
                         вҲҘgвҲҘ2 вүӨ B + O(dвҲ’1/4 (log d)1/4 + (log d)вҲ’1/2 В· ОәвҲ’1/2 ),
where we use the fact that n = Оә В· d(log d)2 . Therefore, we also have
                                   |вҹЁg, ОёвӢҶ вҹ©|
                    |вҹЁG, ОёвӢҶ вҹ©| =              вүҘ 1 вҲ’ O((log d)вҲ’1/2 В· ОәвҲ’1/2 ) = 1 вҲ’ вҲҶ,
                                     вҲҘgвҲҘ2
where in this case, we also have вҲҶ вүғ (log d)вҲ’1/2 just like sвӢҶ = 2 in the previous case, and the rest
of the proof follows the same arguments as in the previous case for the strong alignment.


                                                         39
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


E.3    P R O O F O F K E Y R E S U LT S

Proof of Lemma E.1. We begin with proving the first part of the lemma. For conciseness, we drop the
supscript (t) and simply denote Оёm as the present weight. We have the projection of wm,l onto ОёвӢҶ as
                                              ОівҹЁОёm , ОёвӢҶ вҹ© + вҹЁОҫm,l , ОёвӢҶ вҹ©
                         |вҹЁwm,l , ОёвӢҶ вҹ©| =                                вүӨ 2(Оі|ПҒm | + Пө).
                                                 вҲҘОіОёm + Оҫm,l вҲҘ2
For direction vm,2 , by definition we have
                                                 ОівҹЁОёm , vm,2 вҹ© + вҹЁОҫm,l , vm,2 вҹ©
                          |вҹЁwm,l , vm,2 вҹ©| =
                                                       вҲҘОіОёm + Оҫm,l вҲҘ2
                                                                Оё m вҲ’ ПҒm Оё вӢҶ

                                              вүӨ 2 В· Оі Оёm ,                        + Пө
                                                               вҲҘОёm вҲ’ ПҒm ОёвӢҶ вҲҘ2
                                                    p
                                              = 2 Оі 1 вҲ’ ПҒ2m + Пө .
For the remaining directions, we always have
                                                   ОівҹЁОёm , vm,i вҹ© + вҹЁОҫm,l , vm,i вҹ©
                          |вҹЁwm,l , vm,i вҹ©| =                                      вүӨ 2 В· Пө,
                                                        вҲҘОіОёm + Оҫm,l вҲҘ2
where we use the fact that вҹЁОёm , vm,i вҹ© = 0 for i вүҘ 2. This completes the proof for the first part.
On the joint nice event Erm (r
                             Пө), we have that
                       |вҹЁwm,l , wm,lвҖІ вҹ©| вүӨ 4 В· вҹЁОіОёm + Оҫm,l , ОіОёm + Оҫm,lвҖІ вҹ©
                                            вүӨ 4(Оі 2 + r
                                                      Пө + ОівҹЁОёm , Оҫm , lвҹ© + ОівҹЁОёm , Оҫm,lвҖІ вҹ©).
On the other hand, it holds on the event Em (Пө) that
                             p                                   p
          |вҹЁОёm , Оҫm,l вҹ©| = |вҹЁ 1 вҲ’ ПҒ2 В· vm,2 + ПҒvm,1 , Оҫm,l вҹ©| вүӨ ( 1 вҲ’ ПҒ2 + |ПҒ|) В· Пө вүӨ 2Пө.
Therefore, we have for any l Мё= lвҖІ that
                                      |вҹЁwm,l , wm,lвҖІ вҹ©| вүӨ 4(Оі 2 + 4ПөОі + r
                                                                        Пө).



Proof of Proposition E.3. Invoking Lemma H.2 with the fact that вҲҘОёвӢҶ вҲҘ2 = 1, we can decompose
вҹЁEPОёвӢҶ [g], ОёвӢҶ вҹ© as
                                              вҲҡ          L
                                вӢҶ
                                       X          s+1X
                   вҹЁEPОёвӢҶ [g], Оё вҹ© =                    EQ [О¶s (y) В· ПҲps+1 (y)] В· вҹЁwl , ОёвӢҶ вҹ©s+1
                                                  L
                                       sвүҘsвӢҶ             l=1

                                           X вҲҡs X      L
                                       +                   EQ [О¶s (y) В· ПҲpsвҲ’1 (y)] В· вҹЁwl , ОёвӢҶ вҹ©sвҲ’1
                                                  L
                                           sвүҘsвӢҶ       l=1
                                                                   вҲҡ      L
                                                                     sвӢҶ X              вӢҶ
                                    = EQ [О¶sвӢҶ (y) В· ПҲpsвӢҶ вҲ’1 (y)] В·          вҹЁwl , ОёвӢҶ вҹ©s вҲ’1 + R,           (E.7)
                                                                    L
                                                                         l=1

where all the remainder terms are collected by R, defined as
               вҲҡ         L
         X         s + 1 X
   R=                       EQ [О¶s (y) В· ПҲps+1 (y)]вҹЁwl , ОёвӢҶ вҹ© + EQ [О¶s+1 (y) В· ПҲps (y)] В· вҹЁwl , ОёвӢҶ вҹ©s .
                    L
        sвүҘsвӢҶ              l=1

Below we will analyze the scale of each term in Eq. (E.7), and show that the remainder R is negligible
compared to the first term in Eq. (E.7) with high probability over the randomness of the injected noise
Оҫ1 , . . . , Оҫ L .


                                                             40
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Analysis for the remainder term R in Eq. (E.7). To bound |R|, we apply the triangle inequality
with the fact that |вҹЁwl , ОёвӢҶ вҹ©| вүӨ 1 to get
                        вҲҡ          L
                  X s+1X                 h                                          i
          |R| вүӨ                       EQ |О¶s (y) В· ПҲps+1 (y)| + |О¶s+1 (y) В· ПҲps (y)| В· |вҹЁwl , ОёвӢҶ вҹ©|s .
                     вӢҶ
                            L
                   sвүҘs          l=1

Since EQ [О¶s+1 (y)2 ] вүӨ 1 for all s вүҘ 0 by the property of the decomposition of the likelihood ratio,
we have
                      EQ [|О¶s+1 (y) В· ПҲps (y)|] вүӨ EQ [О¶s+1 (y)2 ]1/2 В· EQ [ПҲps (y)2 ]1/2
                                              вүӨ EQ [ПҲps (y)2 ]1/2
                                                v
                                                uвҲһ
                                                uX
                                              вүӨt        E[ПҲps (y)2 ] = O(1),
                                                    s=0
                                                                                 P       вҲҡ
and similarly for EQ [|О¶s (y) В· ПҲps+1 (y)|]. It then suffices to bound             sвүҘsвӢҶ ( s + 1)/L В·
PL            вӢҶ s
  l=1 |вҹЁwl , Оё вҹ©| . Recall that we restrict ourselves to the following nice event

                     E(Пө) : |вҹЁОҫl , ОёвӢҶ вҹ©| < Пө, max |вҹЁОҫl , vi вҹ©| < Пө, вҲҖl вҲҲ [L] ,
                                                  2вүӨiвүӨd
                                     p
                  вӢҶ              вӢҶ
where {v1 = Оё , v2 = (Оё вҲ’ ПҒОё )/ 1 вҲ’ ПҒ2 , v3 , . . . vd } is an orthonormal basis. Since we assume
that Оі = o(1), it follows from Lemma E.1 that |вҹЁwl , ОёвӢҶ вҹ©| < 1/2 for all l вҲҲ [L] on E(Пө). Consequently,
it holds on E(Пө) that
                   вҲҡ        L                                  sвҲ’sвӢҶ          L
             X s+1X                         XвҲҡ                1          1X                 вӢҶ
                                      вӢҶ s
                              |вҹЁwl , Оё вҹ©| вүӨ       s+1В·                 В·       |вҹЁwl , ОёвӢҶ вҹ©|s
                вӢҶ
                      L                        вӢҶ
                                                              2          L
            sвүҘs           l=1                 sвүҘs                               l=1
                                                  L
                                              1   X                     вӢҶ
                                          вүІ             |вҹЁwl , ОёвӢҶ вҹ©|s ,                          (E.8)
                                              L
                                                  l=1
where вүІ hides a constant that depends on sвӢҶ . Now it reduces to upper bound the right hand side in
Eq. (E.8). To proceed, we define

                                        wl if supi |вҹЁwl , vi вҹ©| < Пө;
                                wrl =
                                        0   otherwise.
                               rl = wl for any l вҲҲ [L] on E(Пө), and {w
It can be easily verified that w                                     rl }lвҲҲ[L] is a sequence of
independent and bounded random vectors. By Lemma E.1, we have that
                                            rl , ОёвӢҶ вҹ©| вүӨ 2Оі вҲЁ Пө.
                                          |вҹЁw
To find its second moment, we have by definition that
                                     вӢҶ                    вӢҶ
                          rl , ОёвӢҶ вҹ©2s ] = Ewl вҹЁwl , ОёвӢҶ вҹ©2s В· 1 sup |вҹЁwl , vi вҹ©| вүӨ Пө

                   Ewrl [вҹЁw
                                                                            i
                                                        вӢҶ 2sвӢҶ
                                      вүӨ Ewl [вҹЁwl , Оё вҹ©          ]
                                                    вҲ’1/2 2sвӢҶ
                                      вүғ (|ПҒ|Оі + d          )        ,
where the last line holds by Lemma H.4. Therefore, we can apply the BernsteinвҖҷs inequality
(Lemma J.1) to the right hand side of Eq. (E.8) restricted to E(Пө). We deduce from it that there
exists a event E1,1 with Pr(E1,1 ) вүҘ 1 вҲ’ dвҲ’c /(M T ), and it holds on E1,1 вҲ© E(Пө) that
               L                      L
           1X                 вӢҶ    1X                  вӢҶ
                 |вҹЁwl , ОёвӢҶ вҹ©|s =           rl , ОёвӢҶ вҹ©|s
                                         |вҹЁw
           L                      L
             l=1                     l=1
                                                                             вӢҶ
                                        p                         вӢҶ  (Пө вҲЁ Оі)s log d
                                вүІ 1 + LвҲ’1 log d В· (|ПҒ|Оі + dвҲ’1/2 )s +
                                                                           L
                                                     вӢҶ
                                вүІ (|ПҒ|Оі + dвҲ’1/2 )s                                               (E.9)
        use the fact that  M
Here we                        and T are at most
                                              polynomial in d and the last line holds since we choose
          1/2             sвӢҶ
L = в„Ұ d В· (Пө вҲЁ Оі)            В· log d вҲЁ log d .


                                                    41
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Analysis for the dominant term in Eq. (E.7). We then consider the major term
   PL              вӢҶ
LвҲ’1 l=1 вҹЁwl , ОёвӢҶ вҹ©s вҲ’1 . By the definition of wrl , we can approximate its expectation as follows:
                                вӢҶ                       вӢҶ
                      rl , ОёвӢҶ вҹ©s вҲ’1 ] = Ewl вҹЁwl , ОёвӢҶ вҹ©s вҲ’1 В· 1 sup |вҹЁwl , vi вҹ©| вүӨ Пө

               Ewrl [вҹЁw
                                                                   i
                                                    вӢҶ sвӢҶ вҲ’1

                                      вүғ Ewl [вҹЁwl , Оё вҹ©      ] Вұ Pr sup |вҹЁwl , vi вҹ©| > Пө
                                                                     i
                                                        вӢҶ              c
                                      вүғ Ewl [вҹЁwl , ОёвӢҶ вҹ©s вҲ’1 ] Вұ Pr E(Пө) ,
                                          вӢҶ                                                       c
where we use the fact that |вҹЁwl , ОёвӢҶ вҹ©|s вҲ’1 вүӨ 1 and the event {supi |вҹЁwl , vi вҹ©| > Пө} вҠӮ E(Пө) . Again,
we have by Lemma H.4 that
                                          (                 вӢҶ
                              вӢҶ sвӢҶ вҲ’1       (|ПҒ|Оі + dвҲ’1/2 )s вҲ’1     if sвӢҶ is odd;
                  Ewl [вҹЁwl , Оё вҹ©      ]вүғ               вҲ’1/2 sвӢҶ вҲ’2
                                            ПҒОі(|ПҒ|Оі + d      )      if sвӢҶ is even.

Similarly, we have for the second moment that
                                  вӢҶ                         вӢҶ
                      rl , ОёвӢҶ вҹ©2(s вҲ’1) ] = Ewl вҹЁwl , ОёвӢҶ вҹ©2(s вҲ’1) В· 1 sup |вҹЁwl , vi вҹ©| вүӨ Пө

               Ewrl [вҹЁw
                                                                                     i
                                                            вӢҶ 2(sвӢҶ вҲ’1)
                                      вүӨ Ewl [вҹЁwl , Оё вҹ©                   ]
                                                        вҲ’1/2 2(sвӢҶ вҲ’1)
                                      вүғ (|ПҒ|Оі + d              )             .
Given the boundedness on E(Пө) and the second moment characterization, the BernsteinвҖҷs inequality
(Lemma J.1) implies that there exists E1,2 with Pr(E1,2 ) вүҘ 1 вҲ’ dвҲ’c /(M T ). Furthermore, it holds on
E1,2 вҲ© E(Пө) that
                                 L                             L
                             1X           вӢҶ     1X            вӢҶ
                               вҹЁwl , ОёвӢҶ вҹ©s вҲ’1 =     rl , ОёвӢҶ вҹ©s вҲ’1
                                                   вҹЁw
                             L                  L
                                l=1                           l=1
                                                                                 вӢҶ
                                                      =Ewl [вҹЁwl , ОёвӢҶ вҹ©s вҲ’1 ] + E,
where the error term E is absolutely bounded as
                                                           вӢҶ
                                           r
                              вҲ’1/2 sвӢҶ вҲ’1     log d (Пө вҲЁ Оі)s вҲ’1 log d           c
              |E| вүІ (|ПҒ|Оі + d      )     В·        +                  + Pr E(Пө)
                                               L           L
                                          вӢҶ           (t)
                   вүІ (|ПҒ|Оі + dвҲ’1/2 )s + Pr(E m (Пө))
                                          вӢҶ
                   вүІ (|ПҒ|Оі + dвҲ’1/2 )s .
                                                              вӢҶ       вӢҶ

                                                      (Пө вҲЁ Оі)s вҲ’1 В· ds /2 log d вҲЁ d log d and the last line

Here, the second line holds because L = в„Ұ
                                 вӢҶ
holds because Pr(E(Пө)) вүӨ dвҲ’s /2 .
So far, we have obtained that on the event E(Пө) вҲ© E1,1 вҲ© E1,2 , the following holds:
                                                                    вӢҶ
                             EPОёвӢҶ [вҹЁg, ОёвӢҶ вҹ©] вүғ Ewl [вҹЁwl , ОёвӢҶ вҹ©s вҲ’1 ] + E + R,
                                      вӢҶ                                                  c
where |E| + |R| вүІ (|ПҒ|Оі + dвҲ’1/2 )s given our configuration of L and Pr(E(Пө) ). On the other hand,
provided that |ПҒ|Оі вү« dвҲ’1 , we have that
                        вӢҶ                  вӢҶ
        (|ПҒ|Оі + dвҲ’1/2 )s = (|ПҒ|Оі + dвҲ’1/2 )s вҲ’2 В· (|ПҒ|Оі)2 + dвҲ’1 + 2 В· |ПҒ|Оі В· dвҲ’1/2

                                                  вӢҶ
                            = (|ПҒ|Оі + dвҲ’1/2 )s вҲ’2 В· |ПҒ|Оі В· (|ПҒ|Оі + dвҲ’1 В· (|ПҒ|Оі)вҲ’1 + 2dвҲ’1/2 )
                                                  вӢҶ
                            вүӘ (|ПҒ|Оі + dвҲ’1/2 )s вҲ’2 В· |ПҒ|Оі.
Therefore, EPОёвӢҶ [вҹЁg, ОёвӢҶ вҹ©] is always the major term no matter whether sвӢҶ is even or odd, and we have
that
                                                              вӢҶ
                                         ОіПҒ В· (Оі|ПҒ| + dвҲ’1/2 )s вҲ’2 if sвӢҶ is even;

                     EPОёвӢҶ [вҹЁg, ОёвӢҶ вҹ©] вүғ                   вӢҶ
                                         (Оі|ПҒ| + dвҲ’1/2 )s вҲ’1       if sвӢҶ is odd.


                                                        42
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


We now turn to the norm of EPОёвӢҶ [g]. We have already shown the projection of EPОёвӢҶ [g] onto ОёвӢҶ . Next,
define PОёвҠҘвӢҶ = I вҲ’ ОёвӢҶ ОёвӢҶвҠӨ as the projection matrix onto the orthogonal complement of the space
spanned by ОёвӢҶ . Now, it follows from Eq. (H.6) that
                                                                вҲҡ    L
                               X                                  s+1X
            вҲҘPОёвҠҘвӢҶ EPОёвӢҶ [g]вҲҘ2 вүӨ      |EQ [О¶s (y) В· ПҲps+1 (y)]| В·        вҹЁwl , ОёвӢҶ вҹ©s В· wl
                                  вӢҶ
                                                                  L
                                      sвүҘs                                       l=1              2
                                             вҲҡ          L
                                      X          s+1    X
                                 вүІ                            |вҹЁwl , ОёвӢҶ вҹ©|s .
                                                 L
                                      sвүҘsвӢҶ              l=1
Here, the first inequality holds by noting that the second term in Eq. (H.6) lies exactly along the
direction of ОёвӢҶ and thus does not contribute to the norm of PОёвҠҘвӢҶ EPОёвӢҶ [g], while for the first term in
Eq. (H.6), we use the triangle inequality and the fact that вҲҘPОёвҠҘвӢҶ vвҲҘ2 вүӨ вҲҘvвҲҘ2 for any v вҲҲ Rd . In the
second inequality, we also use the triangle inequality and the fact that вҲҘwl вҲҘ2 = 1 for all l вҲҲ [L]. Here,
the вҖңвүІвҖқ hides a constant that depends on the boundedness of EQ [О¶s (y) В· ПҲps+1 (y)] as we have shown
in the previous analysis.
                           вҲҡ      PL
Note that the term sвүҘsвӢҶ s+1                      вӢҶ s
                   P
                              L      l=1 |вҹЁwl , Оё вҹ©| is already handled in Eq. (E.8) and (E.9) under the
success of event E(Пө) вҲ© E1,1 , on which we have
                                                вҲҡ         L
                                          X s+1X                                             вӢҶ
                                  вӢҶ
       вҲҘEPОёвӢҶ [g]вҲҘ2 вҲ’ |вҹЁEPОёвӢҶ [g], Оё вҹ©| вүІ                      |вҹЁwl , ОёвӢҶ вҹ©|s вүІ (|ПҒ|Оі + dвҲ’1/2 )s .
                                             вӢҶ
                                                   L
                                                  sвүҘs               l=1
Setting E1 = E1,1 вҲ© E1,2 gives the desired event.



Proof of Proposition E.4. The polynomial-tail property allows us to control the fluctuation of the
gradient estimator g in each direction at the level that is determined by the sample size n and the
corresponding variance. To this end, we begin with calculating the variance of g along each direction.

Calculating the second moment. Given Оё and ОёвӢҶ , recall that we consider the following d orthonor-
mal directions:
                                         ОёвӢҶ , v2 , v3 , . . . , vd ,
where we set v2 = (Оё вҲ’ вҹЁОё, Оё вҹ©Оё )/вҲҘОё вҲ’ вҹЁОё, ОёвӢҶ вҹ©ОёвӢҶ вҲҘ2 and vi for i вүҘ 3 are orthogonal to ОёвӢҶ and v2 .
                              вӢҶ вӢҶ

Our goal is to show that g has small variance on each of these directions.
As each sample (zi , yi ) is independently drawn from PОёвӢҶ , we just need to consider the variance of
                                             L
                                       1X
                               g1 =       ПҲ(y1 , вҹЁwl , z1 вҹ©) В· z1 вҲ’ ПҲp1 (y1 ) В· wl
                                       L
                                            l=1
                                      вӢҶ
in the direction of v for v вҲҲ {Оё , v1 , . . . , vdвҲ’1 } as
                               VarPОёвӢҶ [вҹЁg1 , vвҹ©] = EPОёвӢҶ [вҹЁg1 , vвҹ©2 ] вҲ’ EPОёвӢҶ [вҹЁg1 , vвҹ©]2
                                           вүӨ EPОёвӢҶ [вҹЁg1 , vвҹ©2 ].
From this we see that it suffices to bound the second moment of вҹЁg1 , vвҹ©, which is given by
                         L                                                     L
                    1 X                                                   1 X           h                          i
EPОёвӢҶ [вҹЁg1 , vвҹ©2 ] вүІ 2        EPОёвӢҶ ПҲ(y, вҹЁwl , zвҹ©)ПҲ(y, вҹЁwlвҖІ , zвҹ©)вҹЁz, vвҹ©2 + 2         EPОёвӢҶ ПҲp1 (y)2 вҹЁwl , vвҹ©вҹЁwlвҖІ , vвҹ©

                   L вҖІ                                                    L вҖІ
                      l,l =1                                                l,l =1

                    1 X                                                   X
                  = 2       EQ ПҲ(y, вҹЁwl , zвҹ©)ПҲ(y, вҹЁwlвҖІ , zвҹ©)вҹЁz, vвҹ©2 В· 1 +     О¶s (y)hs (вҹЁОёвӢҶ , zвҹ©)
                   L      вҖІ                                                 вӢҶ
                        lМё=l                                                       sвүҘs
                                L
                          1     X                                              1 X
                                      EQ ПҲ(y, вҹЁwl , zвҹ©)ПҲ(y, вҹЁwl , zвҹ©)вҹЁz, vвҹ©2 + 2    EQ [ПҲp1 (y)2 ]вҹЁwl , vвҹ©вҹЁwlвҖІ , vвҹ©

                      +
                          L2                                                  L   вҖІ
                                l=1                                                       lМё=l
                                L
                          1     X
                      +               EQ [ПҲp1 (y)2 ]вҹЁwl , vвҹ©2 .
                          L2
                                l=1


                                                               43
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


As ПҲ(y, z)z is quadruple-integrable by Assumption 4.1, the above integral is well-defined. We split
the summation into two parts: l = lвҖІ and l Мё= lвҖІ . For l = lвҖІ , we directly have an O(LвҲ’1 ) bound for
each direction ОёвӢҶ , v2 , . . . , vd thanks to the polynomial-like tail property of ПҲ in Assumption 4.1.
For l Мё= lвҖІ , Lemma E.1 implies that we have on the nice event E(r
                                                               r Пө) that

                                             |вҹЁwl , wlвҖІ вҹ©| вүӨ 4(Оі 2 + 2ОіПө + r
                                                                           Пө)
                                                              вүӨ 8(Оі 2 + r
                                                                        Пө) := Пө2 .

Invoking Lemma H.3, for any v вҲҲ {ОёвӢҶ , v2 , . . . , vd }, it holds on E(r
                                                                      r Пө) that
                                                  X
                                       2                            вӢҶ
 EQ ПҲ(y, вҹЁwl , zвҹ©)ПҲ(y, вҹЁwlвҖІ , zвҹ©)вҹЁz, vвҹ© В· 1 +          О¶s (y)hs (вҹЁОё , zвҹ©)
                                                              sвүҘsвӢҶ
                                 2  sвӢҶ вҲ’1                     2  sвӢҶ вҲ’2 2                         !
              вӢҶ          Пө21    Пө1                           Пө1         Пө0
         вүІ Пөs2 вҲ’1 В·   1+     +                         вӢҶ
                                          В· Пө + 1(v вҠҘ Оё ) В·           В·        2           вӢҶ
                                                                           В· (Пө1 + Пө1 В· 1(s вүҘ 4))
                         Пө2     Пө2                           Пө2         Пө2
                                                                                             (E.10)
where we also define Пө1 := max{|вҹЁwl , ОёвӢҶ вҹ©|, |вҹЁwlвҖІ , ОёвӢҶ вҹ©|}, Пө0 := max{|вҹЁwl , vвҹ©|, |вҹЁwlвҖІ , vвҹ©|}. If the nice
event E(Пө) also holds, on which the following holds for all l вҲҲ [L]:
                                          |вҹЁОҫl , ОёвӢҶ вҹ©| < Пө,       max |вҹЁОҫl , vi вҹ©| < Пө,
                                                                  2вүӨiвүӨd

then we have by Lemma E.1 that
                                                      p
    |вҹЁwl , ОёвӢҶ вҹ©| вүІ Оі|ПҒ| + Пө,         |вҹЁwl , v2 вҹ©| вүІ    1 вҲ’ ПҒ2 Оі + Пө,            |вҹЁwl , vi вҹ©| вүІ Пө,   вҲҖi вүҘ 3,          вҲҖl вҲҲ [L].
Consequently, we can set Пө1 вүғ Оі|ПҒ| + Пө = o(1) and
                                                  if v = ОёвӢҶ ,
                                    пЈұ
                                    пЈІОі|ПҒ|
                                        p + Пө,
                              Пө0 вүғ Оі 1 вҲ’ ПҒ + Пө, if v = v2 ,
                                               2
                                    пЈі
                                      Пө,          otherwise.
Therefore, we have the ratio
                                                                (Оі|ПҒ|+Пө)2      2      2
                                                                                        +Пө2
                                                              пЈұ
                                                                     2 +r   вүғ Оі Оі|ПҒ|2 +rПө ,              if v = ОёвӢҶ ,
                                                              пЈІ вҲҡ8(Оі    Пө )
                                                              пЈҙ
   Пө21                2          2    2      2
                                                    Пө20
                                                              пЈҙ
             (Оі|ПҒ| + Пө)    Оі |ПҒ| + Пө                              (Оі    1вҲ’ПҒ2 +Пө)2      2      2
                                                                                                )+Пө2
   Пө2
         вүғ
              4(Оі 2 + r
                      Пө)
                         вүғ
                             Оі2 + r
                                  Пө
                                     ,
                                                    Пө2
                                                          вүғ
                                                              пЈҙ      8(Оі 2 +r
                                                                            Пө)     вүғ Оі (1вҲ’ПҒ
                                                                                         Оі 2 +rПө     ,   if v = v2 ,
                                                                     Пө2          Пө2
                                                              пЈҙ
                                                                         Пө) вүғ Оі 2 +rПө,                   otherwise.
                                                              пЈі
                                                                  4(Оі 2 +r

Since Пө2 вүӨ rПө, we can conclude that Пө21 /Пө2 вүІ 1 and Пө20 /Пө2 вүІ 1. Hence, the right-hand side of Eq. (E.10)
                  вӢҶ                 вӢҶ
is bounded by Пөs2 вҲ’1 вүғ (Оі 2 + r Пө)s вҲ’1 for all v вҲҲ {ОёвӢҶ , v2 , . . . , vd }.
Similarly, let us consider the term LвҲ’2 В· lМё=lвҖІ EQ [ПҲp1 (y)2 ]вҹЁwl , vвҹ©вҹЁwlвҖІ , vвҹ©. On the good event E(Пө),
                                             P
we have
                    1 X
                      В·     EQ [ПҲp1 (y)2 ]вҹЁwl , vвҹ©вҹЁwlвҖІ , vвҹ© вүІ Пө20 В· 1{sвӢҶ вүӨ 2}
                   L2     вҖІ
                          lМё=l

                                                                           вүІ Пө2 1(sвӢҶ вүӨ 2)
                                                                                       вӢҶ
                                                                                    Пө)s вҲ’1 В· 1{sвӢҶ вүӨ 2}.
                                                                           вүІ (Оі 2 + r

The first inequality holds because ПҲp1 (y) = 0 whenever sвӢҶ вүҘ 2 because of Assumption 4.1(b) and the
second inequality holds due to the condition that Пө2 вүӨ rПө
Lastly for all the terms that take a single summation over l вҲҲ [L], we have them bounded by 1/L as
each term in the summation can be upper bounded by 1. Combining the results for l = lвҖІ and l Мё= lвҖІ ,
we have on the event E(Пө) вҲ© E(r r Пө) that
                                                                       вӢҶ       1
                                                      Пө)s вҲ’1 +
         VarPОёвӢҶ [вҹЁg1 , vвҹ©] вүӨ EPОёвӢҶ [вҹЁg1 , vвҹ©2 ]вүІ(Оі 2 + r                          ,   вҲҖv вҲҲ {ОёвӢҶ , v2 , . . . , vd }.
                                                                               L

                                                                  44
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Concentration. The first thing is to control the variation of g in the direction of ОёвӢҶ , where we need
to upper bound the Lr (PОёвӢҶ )-norm of вҹЁg1 , vвҹ©. To this end, we define G : (R Г— R) Г— R вҶ’ R as
                        G(z, y, w) = |ПҲ(y, вҹЁw, z, )вҹ© В· вҹЁz, vвҹ©| + |ПҲp1 (y) В· вҹЁw, vвҹ©|.
Also we define the empirical measure dВө(w) = LвҲ’1 l Оҙ(wl ), then it holds by integral MinkowskiвҖҷs
                                                       P
inequality that
                              Z              Z                            r  1/r
                     r 1/r
       EPОёвӢҶ [вҹЁg1 , vвҹ© ]    вүӨ      dPОё (y, z)
                                      вӢҶ           dВө(w) В· G(z, y, w)
                             Z          Z                                1/r
                           вүӨ dВө(w)         dPОёвӢҶ (y, z) В· G(z, y, w)r
                                1X                                  1/r   1X
                                   EPОёвӢҶ |ПҲ(y, вҹЁwl , zвҹ©) В· вҹЁz, vвҹ©|r

                            вүІ                                           +    |вҹЁwl , vвҹ©|.                   (E.11)
                                L                                         L
                                    l                                                l

For the second term, we have on E(Пө) that |вҹЁwl , vвҹ©| вүӨ 2Оі + 2Пө вүӨ 1. Applying the Cauchy-Schwarz
inequality, we have for the summand of the first term in Eq. (E.11) that
   EPОёвӢҶ [|ПҲ(y, вҹЁwl , zвҹ©) В· вҹЁwl , zвҹ©|r ]1/r вүӨ EPОёвӢҶ [|ПҲ(y, вҹЁwl , zвҹ©)|2r ]1/2r В· EPОёвӢҶ [|вҹЁwl , zвҹ©|2r ]1/2r .
Note that EPОёвӢҶ [|вҹЁwl , zвҹ©|2r ]1/2r вүӨ (2rвҲ’1)!!1/(2r) вүІ r1/2 , it suffices to deal with EPОёвӢҶ [|вҹЁwl , zвҹ©|2r ]1/2r .
To proceed, we can decompose вҹЁwl , zвҹ© to components that are correlated and independent with y as
                             вҹЁwl , zвҹ© = вҹЁwl вҲ’ вҹЁwl , ОёвӢҶ вҹ©ОёвӢҶ , zвҹ© + вҹЁwl , ОёвӢҶ вҹ©вҹЁОёвӢҶ , zвҹ©
                                        p
                                      = 1 вҲ’ вҹЁwl , ОёвӢҶ вҹ©2 В· xвҖІ + вҹЁwl , ОёвӢҶ вҹ©xвҖІ
where x = вҹЁОёвӢҶ , zвҹ© вҲј N (0, 1) is independent to xвҖІ = (1 вҲ’ вҹЁwl , ОёвӢҶ вҹ©2 )вҲ’1/2 В· вҹЁwl вҲ’ вҹЁwl , ОёвӢҶ вҹ©ОёвӢҶ , zвҹ© вҲј
N (0, 1) . Therefore, we define a Gaussian noise operator as UПҒ ПҲ(y, x) = ExвҖІ вҲјN (0,1) [ПҲ(y, ПҒx +
p
  1 вҲ’ ПҒ2 xвҖІ )]. And it holds that
       EPОёвӢҶ [ПҲ(y, вҹЁwl , zвҹ©)2r ] = EP [UвҹЁОёвӢҶ ,wl вҹ© ПҲ(y, x)2r ]

                                                             P(x, y)
                                = EQ UвҹЁОёвӢҶ ,wl вҹ© ПҲ(y, x)2r В·
                                                             Q(x, y)

                                                               P(x, y)
                                = EQ ПҲ(y, x)2r В· UвҹЁОёвӢҶ ,wl вҹ©
                                                               Q(x, y)
                                                                          P(x, y)   2 1/2
                                                          "                          #!
                                                  4r
                                вүӨ EQ [ПҲ(y, x) ] В· EQ         UвҹЁОёвӢҶ ,wl вҹ©                   ,     (E.12)
                                                                          Q(x, y)
where the second line follows from the property of the Gaussian noise operator in (B.2). By assumption
of the tail bound in Assumption 4.1, we have that EQ [ПҲ(y, x)4r ] вүӨ Cp (4r)4Cp r . For the second term,
we have by the ParsevalвҖҷs identity that
                   "                           #
                                   P(x, y)   2          X
                                                            вҹЁОёвӢҶ , wl вҹ©2 В· EQ О¶s (y)2 вүӨ2.

                EQ    UвҹЁОёвӢҶ ,wl вҹ©                 =1+
                                   Q(x, y)                вӢҶ sвүҘs
where we use the property that on the good event E(Пө) we have |вҹЁwl , ОёвӢҶ вҹ©| вүӨ Оі|ПҒ| + Пө вүӨ Оі + Пө < 1/2
and also EQ [О¶s (y)2 ] вүӨ 1. And in conclusion, we get for the first term in Eq. (E.11) that
                         1X
                               EPОёвӢҶ [|ПҲ(y, вҹЁwl , zвҹ©) В· вҹЁwl , zвҹ©|r ]1/r вүІ rCp +1/2 .
                         L
                                l
Combining everything, we have
                       EPОёвӢҶ [|вҹЁg1 , vвҹ©|r ]1/r вүІ rCp +1/2 , вҲҖv вҲҲ {ОёвӢҶ , v2 , . . . , vd }.
Thus, by Lemma J.3, there exists a {(zi , yi )}iвҲҲ[n] -measurable event E2,1 with Pr(E2,1 ) вүҘ 1 вҲ’
dвҲ’c /(M T ) and it holds on E2 that
   |вҹЁg, ОёвӢҶ вҹ© вҲ’ EPОёвӢҶ [вҹЁg, ОёвӢҶ вҹ©]|
           r
              EPОёвӢҶ [вҹЁg1 , ОёвӢҶ вҹ©2 ] В· log(dc M T ) log(dc M T ) В· log(dc M T n)Cp +1/2
        вүІ                                       +
                              n                                    n
           r
                      Пө)sвӢҶ вҲ’1 + LвҲ’1 ) В· log(d) log(d)Cp +3/2
              ((Оі 2 + r
        вүІ                                        +                , вҲҖv вҲҲ {ОёвӢҶ , v1 , . . . , vdвҲ’1 }. (E.13)
                                n                         n


                                                       45
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


where we utilize the fact T, M, n all have polynomial dependency on d. Moreover, since we assume
that
                                            вӢҶ           вҲ’1
                         n = в„Ұ (Оі 2 + r  Пө)s вҲ’1 + LвҲ’1      В· log(d)2Cp +1 ,

we have that the first term in Eq. (E.13) dominates, which further implies that
                                                   r
                           вӢҶ               вӢҶ          ((Оі 2 + rПө)sвӢҶ вҲ’1 + LвҲ’1 ) В· log(d)
                     |вҹЁg, Оё вҹ© вҲ’ EPОёвӢҶ [вҹЁg, Оё вҹ©]| вүІ                                       .
                                                                       n
Meanwhile, for the в„“2 -norm of g, we have by the JensenвҖҷs inequality that for any r вүҘ 1,
                                        X                    r/2  1/r
    EPОёвӢҶ [вҲҘg1 вҲҘr2 ]1/r = EPОёвӢҶ                     вҹЁg1 , vвҹ©2
                                       vвҲҲ{Оё вӢҶ ,v2 ,...,vd }
                                                                                          1/r
                         вҲҡ                                                                          вҲҡ

                                      1            X
                     вүӨ       dВ·         В·                          EPОёвӢҶ [|вҹЁg1 , vвҹ©|r ]          вүІ       d В· (r)Cp +1/2 .
                                      d
                                            vвҲҲ{Оё вӢҶ ,v2 ,...,vd }

This polynomial tail bound enables us to apply Lemma J.3 for the в„“2 -norm of g, which implies that
there exists some event E2,2 with Pr(E2,2 ) вүҘ 1 вҲ’ dвҲ’c /(M T ), and it holds on E2,2 that
                                        s
                                                    Пө)sвӢҶ вҲ’1 + LвҲ’1 В· d В· log(d)
                                             (Оі 2 + r
                      g вҲ’ EPОёвӢҶ [g] 2 вүІ                                         .
                                                             n
Setting E2 = E2,1 вҲ© E2,2 gives the desired event. This concludes the proof of Proposition E.4.

F      P R O O F O F T H E M A I N T H E O R E M F O R T H E S PA R S E P R I O R
F. 1    PROOF OUTLINE AND PRELIMINARIES

In this section, we provide a detailed proof for Theorem 5.1. We begin with some good events that
we will work with.

Signal concentration. We begin with a good event on which the signal spreads almost evenly
within its support. Define a series of event:
                                  E0,r := {вҲҘОёвҲҘrr вүӨ Cr В· k 1вҲ’r/2 };
                              E0,вҲһ := {вҲҘОёвӢҶ вҲҘвҲһ вүӨ CвҲһ В· k вҲ’1/2 log(k)1/2 };
                                       nX               1       ko
                               E0,вҷҜ :=      1 |ОёjвӢҶ | вүҘ вҲҡ     вүҘ     .
                                                         2k     4
                                                  jвҲҲ[d]

The following lemma guarantees that the all the events above hold with high probability.
              вҲҡ signal). Suppose that k is sufficiently large such that k/ log(k) вүҘ 32c(r вҲЁ 1),
Lemma F.1 (Good
k/ logr+2 k вүҘ 2c + 2, then it holds that
                       Pr(E0,r ) вҲ§ Pr(E0,вҲһ ) вүҘ 1 вҲ’ O k вҲ’c0,1 ;


                                     Pr(E0,вҷҜ ) вүҘ 1 вҲ’ O exp{вҲ’c0,2 k} ,
for some constants c0,1 , c0,2 > 0.

Proof of Lemma F.1. See Appendix F.5.

For fixed sвӢҶ , we collect all the indices r such
                                               that the corresponding nice event E0,r will be involved
in the coming analysis. Define S(sвӢҶ ) = sвӢҶ вҲ’ 1, sвӢҶ вҲ’ 1{sвӢҶ odd}, 2sвӢҶ , 4sвӢҶ . And we will stick to
the following high probability event
                                       E0 := E0,вҲһ вҲ© E0,вҷҜ вҲ© (вҲ©rвҲҲS(sвӢҶ ) E0,r ).
With Lemma F.1, we have that Pr(E0 ) вүҘ 1 вҲ’ O(k вҲ’c0 ) for some constant c0 > 0.


                                                                   46
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Preparation for characterizing one-step gradient. Following the same manner as the proof for
the non-sparse case, we first characterize the alignment of the gradient step (without adversarial error
        (t)
term errm,l,i ). We begin with the definition of a minimal setup, that collects all the essential elements
to form the one-step gradient. The following definition is the sparse analogue of Definition E.2.
Apart from the method of generating the noise, in the sparse case, we will analyze the gradient in a
coordinate-wise manner to adapt to the sparse structure.
Definition F.2. Fix k-sparse vectors Оё, ОёвӢҶ вҠӮ SdвҲ’1 with П• = supp(Оё) and П•вӢҶ = supp(ОёвӢҶ ). Let
ПҒ = вҹЁОё, ОёвӢҶ вҹ©. Suppose that a single batch of data {(zi , yi )}iвҲҲ[n] is i.i.d. generated from PОёвӢҶ . We
                                                                                    i.i.d.
fix the index m as the current neuron. We first sample П•m,1 , П•m,2 , . . . П•m,L вҲј Unif(Sk,m ), i.e.,
uniform distribution over all k-sparse supports with m-th index always included. Given these random
supports, we sample independent noises Оҫm,l вҲј Unif(SkвҲ’1 (П•m,l )) for l вҲҲ [L]. Now, for each l вҲҲ [L]
and Оі = o(1), we define wm,l = (ОіОё + Оҫm,l )/вҲҘОіОё + Оҫm,l вҲҘ2 . Then our target is
                                  n  L
                               1 XX
                        gsm =          ПҲ(yi , вҹЁwm,l , zi вҹ©) В· zi вҲ’ ПҲp1 (yi ) В· wm,l .               (F.1)
                              nL i=1
                                           l=1
The associated good event is defined as
        Em (Пө) = {sup |вҹЁОҫm,l , ej вҹ©| вүӨ Пө};                                                          (F.2)
                        l,j
                    n                                                                    o
                        max sup |П•m,l вҲ© П•m,lвҖІ |, sup |П•m,l вҲ© П•вӢҶ |, sup |П•m,l вҲ© П•| вүӨ log k .

            Erm =                                                                                   (F.3)
                               lМё=lвҖІ                     l                    l

Almost orthogonality. Recall that our perturbation noise Оҫm,l is sampled from Unif(SkвҲ’1 (П•m,l )),
which is approximately isotropic. One can presume that each Оҫm,l is evenly distributed among different
coordinates. Additionally, we expect that (Оҫm,l , П•m,l ) and (Оҫm,lвҖІ , П•m,lвҖІ ) should have a negligible
overlap. These two qualitative properties, which can help simplify the analysis, are captured by
Eq. (F.2) and Eq. (F.3) in Definition F.2. The following lemma characterizes the property of the
perturbated weights wm,l on the nice event Em (Пө) вҲ© E.  r
Lemma F.3 (Polarized weight on nice event, sparse case). Consider the setting in Definition F.2 with
Оі < 1/2. Suppose that the nice event Em (Пө) вҲ© Erm holds and вҲҘОёвӢҶ вҲҘвҲһ вүӨ 1/ log k, then we have that
                                   sup |вҹЁwm,l , ej вҹ©| вүӨ 2(Оі|Оёj | + Пө);
                                           l,j

                                          sup |вҹЁwm,l , ОёвӢҶ вҹ©| вүӨ 2(Оі|ПҒ| + Пө).
                                           l
Additionally, we have that
                                  sup |вҹЁwm,l , wm,lвҖІ вҹ©| вүӨ 4(Оі 2 + Пө2 log k).
                                  lМё=lвҖІ


Proof of Lemma F.3. See Appendix F.5.

This lemma, serving as the counterpart of Lemma E.1, controls the behavior of the perturbated weight
wm,l in its coordinates and alignment with ОёвӢҶ . Additionally, they are approximately orthogonal with
each other, which allows for good characterization to the second moment of the gradient.
One may notice that the definition of Er differs from the non-sparse case, where we explicitly bound
the correlation between different Оҫm,l . This is the benefit of the sparse structure, as two randomly
sampled k-sparse supports are naturally of low overlap.
Before delving into the component-wise analysis, we begin with a proposition that will be frequently
used to calculate the average contribution of each term in the gradient. This proposition serves as the
counterpart of Lemma H.4 in the sparse case.
Proposition F.4.  Suppose that the polarization level Оі = o(1) and the noise (Оҫm,l , П•m,l ) вҲј
Unif SkвҲ’1 (П•m,l ) вҠ— Unif(Sk,m ). Let ПҒ = вҹЁОё, ОёвӢҶ вҹ© where Оё is the polarized direction in wm,l . Assume
that the event E0,sвҲ’1{s odd} holds. Then we have that
                                       ОіПҒ В· Оі|ПҒ| + k вҲ’1/2 |Оёm
                                                            вӢҶ
                                                              | + k вҲ’1 ОҙsвҲ’1 )sвҲ’1 if s odd;

            Ewm,l [вҹЁwm,l , ОёвӢҶ вҹ©s ] вүғ             вҲ’1/2 вӢҶ
                                       (Оі|ПҒ| + k     |Оёm | + k вҲ’1 Оҙs )s          if s even,
where Оҙs = (k 2 /d)1/s = o(1) for any s = O(1).


                                                         47
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Proof of Proposition F.4. See Appendix F.5.
                                                                                T
Recall that we define the good event over the signal as E0 = E0,вҲһ вҲ© E0,вҷҜ вҲ© rвҲҲS(sвӢҶ ) E0,r , where
S(sвӢҶ ) = {sвӢҶ вҲ’ 1, sвӢҶ вҲ’ 1{sвӢҶ odd}, 2sвӢҶ , 4sвӢҶ }. This definition facilitates our defered analysis where
we need to control multiple moments of different orders and we collect all the necessary good events
in E0 in the first place.

F. 2    P RO P E RT I E S O F T H E G R A D I E N T S T E P

In this section, we preview some properties regarding the gradient defined in Eq. (F.1). The following
proposition deals with the first moment.
Proposition F.5 (First-order moment of the gradient). Suppose that ОёвӢҶ is fixed such that the nice
                                                                                  c            вӢҶ
event E0 holds. Under Definition F.2, we choose Оі вүӨ Пө = o(1) such that Pr Em (Пө) вүӨ O(k вҲ’s )
and
                                                    вӢҶ      вӢҶ
                            L = в„Ұ log(d) В· k вҲЁ (Пөs вҲ’1 В· k s +1 ) .

Then there exists a {Оҫm,l }lвҲҲ[L] -measurable event Em,1 with Pr(Em,1 ) вүҘ 1 вҲ’ O(k вҲ’c1 ) for some
constant c1 > 0, such that on Em,1 вҲ© Em (Пө) вҲ© Erm , it holds for any j вҲҲ [d] that
                                                      вҲҡ                          вӢҶ
                                                                     rm,l , ОёвӢҶ вҹ©s вҲ’1 ]ОёjвӢҶ + Rm,j ,
             gm ], ej вҹ© = EQ [О¶sвӢҶ (y) В· ПҲpsвӢҶ вҲ’1 (y)] В· sвӢҶ В· Ewrm,l [вҹЁw
      вҹЁEPОёвӢҶ [s
where the expectation
                                      (                                           sвӢҶ вҲ’2 вӢҶ
                      вӢҶ sвӢҶ вҲ’1             ОіПҒ В· Оі|ПҒ| + k вҲ’1/2 |Оёm
                                                               вӢҶ
                                                                 | + k вҲ’1 ОҙsвӢҶ вҲ’2        В·Оё   if sвӢҶ is even;
            rm,l , Оё вҹ©
   Ewrm,l [вҹЁw                   ]вүғ
                                                    вҲ’1/2 вӢҶ        вҲ’1 вӢҶ
                                                                            sвӢҶ вҲ’1 вӢҶ j
                                           Оі|ПҒ| + k     |Оёm | + k Оҙs вҲ’1            В· Оёj      if sвӢҶ is odd,
and Rm,j is the remainder that can be bounded by
                                                                           sвӢҶ вҲ’1       вӢҶ

  |Rm,j | вүІ k вҲ’1 вҲЁ (Оі|ПҒ| + k вҲ’1/2 |ОёmвӢҶ
                                       |) В· Оі|ПҒ| + k вҲ’1/2 |Оёm
                                                            вӢҶ
                                                              | + k вҲ’1 Оҙ+        + k вҲ’s В· |ОёjвӢҶ |


                                                           вӢҶ                                                 вӢҶ
                  + (Оі|ПҒ| + k вҲ’1/2 |Оёm
                                     вӢҶ
                                       | + k вҲ’1 Оҙ+ )s В· (Оі|Оёj | + k вҲ’1/2 В· (k/d)1{jМё=m}/2 ) + k вҲ’(s +1) .

Proof of Proposition F.5. See Appendix F.4.

The statement of this proposition clarifies the leading term explicitly, which enables us to track the
leading term in the strong alignment more precisely. To complete this section, we provide a proposition
that characterizes the fluctuation of the gradient, serving as the counterpart of Proposition E.4.
Proposition F.6 (Fluctuation of mini-batch gradient). Under the simplified setting Definition F.2
where ПҲ follows Assumption 4.1. Additionally, suppose that the sample size
                                             вӢҶ           вҲ’1
                    n = в„Ұ (Оі 2 + Пө2 log k)s вҲ’1 + LвҲ’1         В· log(d)2Cp +2 ,

where Cp is the order of the polynomial tail in Assumption 4.1(c). Then there exists a {(zi , yi )}iвҲҲ[n] -
measurable event Em,2 with Pr(Em,2 ) вүҘ 1 вҲ’ O(dвҲ’(c+1) /T ), such that on Em,2 вҲ© Em (Пө) вҲ© Erm , it
holds that
                                               s
                                                 (Оі 2 + Пө2 log k)sвӢҶ вҲ’1 + LвҲ’1 В· log(d)
              вҹЁs
               gm , ej вҹ© вҲ’ вҹЁEPОёвӢҶ [s
                                  gm ], ej вҹ© вүӨ                                         ,
                                                                   n
for any v вҲҲ {e1 , e2 , . . . , ed }

Proof of Proposition F.6. See Appendix F.4.

With these propositions, we have completed the preparation for the analysis of the gradient step and
are ready to move on to the proof of the main theorem.


                                                            48
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


F. 3   PROOF OF THE MAIN THEOREM

Proof of Theorem 5.1.

Preparations. We first clarify the final good event that we will use throughout the proof. We first
fix Пө = k вҲ’1/2 В· log k, then it holds by Lemma J.6 that for each m and t, we have
                                         c

                           Pr Em  (t)
                                      (Пө) вүӨ Ld В· O(exp{вҲ’ck} + k вҲ’ log k/4 ).

     L and
Since
          c
            d are at most polynomials in k, we see that for sufficiently large k, it holds that
                    вӢҶ
      (t)
Pr Em (Пө) вүӨ k вҲ’s . Additionally, we see that Оі = k вҲ’1/2 is fixed and our parameter config-
uration
                                 вӢҶ
                                                       вӢҶ                вӢҶ
                n = в„Ұ (k log3 k)s В· log d , L = в„Ұ(k (s +3)/2 В· log(k)s вҲ’1 )

are clearly compatible with the conditions in Proposition F.5 and Proposition F.6. At the t-th step, the
               (t) (t)              (t)
mini-batch {(zi , yi )}iвҲҲ[n] , Оё = Оёm and the error-free gradient
                                 L     n
                    (t)       1 XX      (t)   (t)    (t)     (t)       (t)    (t)
                  gsm   =            ПҲ(yi , вҹЁwm,l , zi вҹ©) В· zi вҲ’ ПҲp1 (yi ) В· wm,l                                    (F.4)
                             nL  i=1
                                 l=1
                                                                                                   (t)         (t)
together form an instance of Definition F.2, for which we can find the event Em,1 and Em,2 , both with
                                                                  (t)          (t)
probability at least 1 вҲ’ O(dвҲ’cвҲ’1 /T ), such that on Em,1 вҲ© Em,2 the results in Proposition F.5 and
Proposition F.6 hold.
                                                                                                     (t)       (t)
The gradient we use in the algorithm differs from Eq. (F.4) by the error term errm,l,i В· zi . To control
this difference, we define
                                     (t)
                                             n
                                                    (t)
                                                            вҲҡ o
                                    Em,3 = supвҲҘzi вҲҘ вүӨ d .
                                                    i
                                              (t)                        (t)
Given our specification on supm,l,i,t errm,l,i , it holds on Em,3 that for any v вҲҲ SdвҲ’1 :
                 (t)        (t)         (t)          (t)           (t)     (t)
               вҲҘgm   вҲҘ2 + вҲҘs
                           gm   вҲҘ2 вҲЁ |вҹЁgm   , vвҹ© вҲ’ вҹЁs
                                                    gm   , vвҹ©| вүӨ вҲҘgm   вҲ’ gsm   вҲҘ2
                                                                                         (t)             (t)
                                                                        вүӨ supвҲҘzi вҲҘ В· supвҲҘerrm,l,i вҲҘ2
                                                                               i               l
                                                                                     вӢҶ
                                                                        вүӨ dвҲ’9s .                                     (F.5)
Our final event is fixed to be
                                         T
                                                                 (t)    (t)    (t)
                                       \ \
                                                (t)
                     E = E0 вҲ©                  Em   (Пө) вҲ© Erm вҲ© Em,1 вҲ© Em,2 вҲ© Em,3 .
                                  mвҲҲ[d] t=1

With union bound, we have that Pr(E) вүҘ 1 вҲ’ O(dвҲ’c ) for some constant c > 0.
                                                        (t)                (t)
To avoid confusion, we denote for each m that gqm = EPОёвӢҶ [s    gm ]. Later we will encounter some data
                               (t)
dependent index mp and using gqm
                               x   avoids the ambiguity   of the  expectation. With our choice of n and
L, Proposition F.6 guarantees that for any m, t, j, it holds that
                                     (t)   (t)                вӢҶ
                                  gsm,j вҲ’ gqm,j вүІ k вҲ’(s вҲ’1/2) В· logвҲ’3/2 k.                                           (F.6)
In the sequel, we will drop the superscript t whenever there is no ambiguity. We will frequently
          (t)                (t)
involve grm = PTop (g(t) ) (gm ).
                     k   m



Weak alignment. The proof towards the weak alignment in the initial step comprises three parts. In
                                                                                             вӢҶ       вҲ’1/2
the first place, we will show that the index of the gradient we choose m p guarantees that |Оёm
                                                                                             x| вүі k       .
Thereby, the corresponding gradient exhibits good alignment towards the signal. Based on this, we
can show that the support we choose Topk (gm    x ) is of considerable quality by successfully identifying



                                                        49
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025



                         вҲҡ
П•вӢҶвӢҶ = {j : |ОёjвӢҶ | вүҘ 1/ 2k}. Combining these elements, we can show that the gradient grm
                                                                                      x is
well-aligned with the signal ОёвӢҶ .
We begin with analyzing the quality of gm    x where m p = argmaxm вҲҘr   gm вҲҘ2 . With this objective in mind,
                                                                                                  вӢҶ      вӢҶ
we first work on deriving a signal-dependent upper bound for вҲҘr     x Note that ПҒm = вҹЁОёm , Оё вҹ© = |Оёm |,
                                                                   gm  вҲҘ.
where Оёm = em is the initial weight. Applying Proposition F.5, we have for any П•, |П•| = k that
 X
                    вҲ’1/2 вӢҶ       2 1{sвӢҶ even}
                                                                       2(sвӢҶ вҲ’1вҲ’1{s even}) X вӢҶ 2
       |q
        gm    2
         x,j | вүІ (k     |Оёmx ||)              В· k вҲ’1/2 |Оёm
                                                         вӢҶ
                                                         x| + k
                                                                вҲ’1
                                                                   Оҙ+                     В·    Оёj
  jвҲҲП•                                                                                                          jвҲҲП•
                                                                                     вӢҶ           вӢҶ               X вӢҶ2
                              вҲ’2           вҲ’1/2               вҲ’1/2 вӢҶ       вҲ’1
                       + k         вҲЁ (k             вӢҶ 2
                                                  |Оёm
                                                    x |) В· (k     |Оёm
                                                                    x| + k    Оҙ+ )2(s вҲ’1) + k вҲ’2s                 Оёj
                                                                                                                 jвҲҲП•
                                                       вӢҶ               X
                              вҲ’1/2            вҲ’1                                                                вҲ’(2sвӢҶ +1)
                       + (k            вӢҶ
                                     |Оёm
                                       x| + k    Оҙ+ )2s В· k вҲ’1                   Оёj2 + В·(k/d)1{jМё=m}       +k
                                                                       jвҲҲП•

Note that we have вҲҘОёвӢҶ вҲҘвҲһ вүІ k вҲ’1/2 В· log k, it holds that
                                                                                  вӢҶ            вӢҶ                вӢҶ
             k вҲ’2 вҲЁ (k вҲ’1 В· |Оёm
                              вӢҶ 2
                              x | ) В· (k
                                         вҲ’1/2 вӢҶ
                                             |Оёm
                                               x| + k
                                                      вҲ’1
                                                         Оҙ+ )2(s вҲ’1) вүІ k вҲ’2s В· log(k)2s .

For any П• such that |П•| = k, we have jвҲҲП• Оёj2 вүӨ 1 for any Оё such that вҲҘОёвҲҘ0 = k. Therefore, we can
                                        P
further upper bound this quantity by
                     X                                         вӢҶ          вӢҶ          вӢҶ
                                         вҲ’1/2 вӢҶ       вҲ’1
                sup      |q
                          gm     2
                            x,j | вүІ (k       |Оёm
                                               x| + k    Оҙ+ )2s вҲ’2 + k вҲ’2s В· log(k)2s
                    |П•|=k jвҲҲП•
                                                                                      вӢҶ
                                                   + (k вҲ’1/2 |Оёm
                                                               вӢҶ
                                                               x| + k
                                                                      вҲ’1
                                                                         Оҙ+ )2s В· k вҲ’1
                                                                                  вӢҶ
                                           вүІ (k вҲ’1/2 |Оёm
                                                       вӢҶ
                                                       x| + k
                                                              вҲ’1
                                                                 Оҙ+ )2s вҲ’2
                                                          вӢҶ        вӢҶ                   вӢҶ           вӢҶ
                                                   + k вҲ’2s В· logs /2 k + k вҲ’2s В· log(k)2s .                                 (F.7)
Now we combined Eq. (F.7), Eq. (F.6) and Eq. (F.5) to conclude that
         X                                                                     X
                   2                          2                         2                2
     sup    |gm
              x,j | вүІ k В· sup |gmx,j вҲ’ g x,j | + k В· sup |s
                                        sm                 x,j вҲ’ g
                                                          gm     qmx,j | + sup   |qx,j |
                                                                                  gm
        |П•|=k jвҲҲП•                      j                                 j                         |П•|=k jвҲҲП•
                                       вӢҶ                                     вӢҶ             вӢҶ               вӢҶ
                            вүІ k вҲ’(s вҲ’1) В· (|Оёm
                                             вӢҶ
                                             x| + k
                                                    вҲ’1/2
                                                         Оҙ+ )2s вҲ’2 + k вҲ’2s В· log(k)2s .
By definition of grm , we can further conclude that
                                          X
                                2                         2
                          вҲҘrx вҲҘ2 = sup
                           gm                |вҹЁgmx , ej вҹ©|
                                             |П•|=k jвҲҲП•
                                                  вӢҶ
                                                           вӢҶ 2(sвӢҶ вҲ’1)           вӢҶ
                                           вүІ k вҲ’(s вҲ’1) В· |Оёm          + o k вҲ’2(s вҲ’1) .

                                                           x|                                                               (F.8)

On the other hand, for m вҲҲ П•вӢҶвӢҶ , we have (Оі|ПҒ| + k вҲ’1/2 |Оёm
                                                          вӢҶ
                                                            | + k вҲ’1 Оҙ+ )r вүі k вҲ’r . Then it holds by
Proposition F.5 that
                                                   вӢҶ
                                                          r вҲ’2sвӢҶ ),
                            X
                                   gm,j |2 вүі k вҲ’2(s вҲ’1) вҲ’ O(k
                                  |q
                                      jвҲҲП•вӢҶ

and by Eq. (F.6) and (F.5), we have that
                                                           вӢҶ
                                           вҲҘr                     r вҲ’2sвӢҶ ).
                                            gm вҲҘ22 вүі k вҲ’2(s вҲ’1) вҲ’ O(k                                                       (F.9)
Now, combinig Eq. (F.9) with Eq. (F.8) by the definition of m,
                                                            p we have that
                    вӢҶ           вӢҶ               вӢҶ              вӢҶ
               k вҲ’(s вҲ’1) |Оёm
                           вӢҶ 2(s вҲ’1)
                                     + o k вҲ’2(s вҲ’1) вүі k вҲ’2(s вҲ’1) вҲ’ O(kr вҲ’2sвӢҶ ).

                           x|

We conclude the first step from the last inequality that there exists a global constant c1 > 0 such that
for sufficiently large k:
                                            вҲ’2(sвӢҶ вҲ’1) sвӢҶ вҲ’1  1/2(sвӢҶ вҲ’1)
                    вӢҶ
                  |Оёm
                    x | вүҘ   c 1 В· 1 вҲ’ o(1) В·k          В·k                   вүҘ cвҖІ1 k вҲ’1/2 .        (F.10)


                                                              50
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                                   вӢҶ      вҲ’1/2
Now we move on to the support identification. We have shown that |Оёm
                                                                   x| вүі k      . To establish
 вӢҶвӢҶ
П• вҠӮ П• = Topk (gm
     p         x ), it is sufficient to demonstrate that

                                              sup |gm
                                                    x,j | вүӨ infвӢҶ |gm
                                                                   x,j |.                                                           (F.11)
                                                / вӢҶ
                                              j вҲҲП•                    jвҲҲП•

In the following, we will bound each side separately. Consider j вҲҲ  / П•вӢҶ , we have by Proposition F.5
that
                         вҲ’1/2 вӢҶ       вҲ’1
                                             sвӢҶ                                     вӢҶ
                                                В· k вҲ’1/2 |Оёj | + (k/d)вҲ’1/2 + k вҲ’(s +1) .

             |qx,j | вүІ k
              gm             |Оёm
                               x| + k    Оҙ+
Combining this upper bound with Eq. (F.10) and Eq. (F.6) gives us that
             |gm
               x,j | вүӨ |gm
                         x,j вҲ’ g
                               smx,j | + |sx,j вҲ’ g
                                          gm     qmx,j | + |qx,j |
                                                            gm
                                                 вӢҶ                                  вӢҶ
                    вүІ (k вҲ’1/2 В· |Оёm
                                  вӢҶ      вҲ’1
                                            Оҙ+ )s В· k вҲ’1/2 |Оёj | + (k/d)вҲ’1/2 + k вҲ’(s +1)

                                  x| + k
                                 вӢҶ               вӢҶ
                         + dвҲ’9s + k вҲ’(s вҲ’1/2) В· logвҲ’3/2 k
                           вӢҶ
                                                r вҲ’(sвӢҶ +1) ).
                    вүІ k вҲ’(s вҲ’1/2) В· logвҲ’3/2 k + O(k                                                                                 (F.12)

On the other hand, for j вҲҲ П•вӢҶвӢҶ , we have that
                                                                                       вӢҶ
                                             вҲ’1/2 вӢҶ   вҲ’1
                                |qx,j | вүі |k
                                 gm              Оёm
                                                  x+k    Оҙ+ |s вҲ’1 В· |ОёjвӢҶ |
                                                       вӢҶ
                                              вүі k вҲ’(s вҲ’1/2)
Similarly, it holds that
                           |gm
                             x,j | вүі |qx,j | вҲ’ |gm
                                      gm         x,j вҲ’ g
                                                       smx,j | вҲ’ |sx,j вҲ’ g
                                                                  gm     qmx,j |
                                                вӢҶ                               вӢҶ
                                     вүі k вҲ’(s вҲ’1/2) вҲ’ o(k вҲ’(s вҲ’1/2) ).                                                               (F.13)
Comparing Eq. (F.12) and Eq. (F.13), we successfully validate Eq. (F.11) holds, and consequently
П•вӢҶвӢҶ вҠӮ П•.
      p
                                                                                        вӢҶ
We complete our proof of weak alignment by analyzing the inner product between grm
                                                                                 x and Оё and the
                                  вӢҶ        вҲ’1/2
          x respectively. Since |Оё m
norm of grm                         x| вүі k      , we have that
                                          вӢҶ                                                                  вӢҶ                          вӢҶ    вӢҶ
           вҲ’1/2              вҲ’1
    x| + k
(Оі|ПҒm           В· |ОёвӢҶ m
                      x| + k    Оҙ+ )s вҲ’1 вҲ§ (Оі|ПҒm
                                               x| + k
                                                      вҲ’1/2
                                                           В· |ОёвӢҶ m
                                                                 x| + k
                                                                        вҲ’1
                                                                           Оҙ+ )s вҲ’2 В· |ОіПҒm | вүі k вҲ’(s вҲ’1)/2 В· |Оёm
                                                                                                               вӢҶ s вҲ’1
                                                                                                               x|

                                                    p and each j вҲҲ П•вӢҶвӢҶ and get that
For the inner product, we apply Proposition F.5 for m
                                                вӢҶ                      вӢҶ
                          вӢҶ    вӢҶ2    вҲ’(s вҲ’1)/2     вӢҶ s вҲ’1         вӢҶ
                   x,j В· Оёj вүғ Оёj В· k
                  gm                           В· |Оёm
                                                   x|     В· sign(Оёm
                                                                  x)
                                                                                вӢҶ
                                 вҲ’ |Rm
                                     x,j | + |gm
                                               x,j вҲ’ g
                                                     smx,j | + |sx,j вҲ’ g
                                                                gm     qmx,j | В· |Оёj |.                                             (F.14)

Since П•вӢҶвӢҶ вҠӮ П•p1 , we can lower bound the summation of the leading term as
                              вӢҶ
                                         вӢҶ sвӢҶ вҲ’1                 вӢҶ
                                                                            вӢҶ sвӢҶ вҲ’1
              X 2                                  X 2
                   ОёjвӢҶ В· k вҲ’(s вҲ’1)/2 В· |Оёm
                                         x|      вүі    ОёjвӢҶ В· k вҲ’(s вҲ’1)/2 В· |Оёm
                                                                            x|
               jвҲҲП•
                 p1                                                 pвӢҶвӢҶ
                                                                  jвҲҲП•
                                                                            вӢҶ                      вӢҶ
                                                              вүі k вҲ’(s вҲ’1)/2 В· |Оёm
                                                                                вӢҶ s вҲ’1
                                                                                x|     В· k вҲ’1 В· |П•вӢҶвӢҶ |
                                                                            вӢҶ                      вӢҶ
                                                              вүҘ k вҲ’(s вҲ’1)/2 В· |Оёm
                                                                                вӢҶ s вҲ’1
                                                                                x|     ,                                            (F.15)
where the last line holds by the definition of E0,вҷҜ вҠӮ E0 . For the term associated with Rm
                                                                                         x,j , we have
by the characterization in Proposition F.5 that
     X                           вӢҶ         вӢҶ       вӢҶ   X
         |Rm,j | В· |ОёjвӢҶ | вүІ (k вҲ’s В· log(k)s + k вҲ’s ) В·      |ОёjвӢҶ |2
     jвҲҲП•
       p1                                                              jвҲҲП•вӢҶ
                                      вӢҶ                 вӢҶ
                                                                             X
                             + k вҲ’s В· log(k)s В· k вҲ’1/2 В·                                   |Оёj | В· |ОёjвӢҶ | + |ОёjвӢҶ | В· (k/d)1{jМё=m}
                                                                                    jвҲҲП•
                                                                                      p1
                                       вӢҶ              X
                             + k вҲ’(s +1) В·                  |ОёjвӢҶ |.
                                                     jвҲҲП•
                                                       p1



                                                                51
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Applying the Cauchy-Schwarz inequality, we have that
    X                                       X                 X
         |ОёjвӢҶ | В· |ОёjвӢҶ | + (k/d)1{jМё=m} вүӨ (   |ОёjвӢҶ |2 )1/2 В· (  |Оёj |2 )1/2 + (1 + k 3 /d2 )1/2


     jвҲҲП•
       p1                                          jвҲҲ[d]                      jвҲҲ[d]

                                              = O(1).                                               (F.16)
And therefore
                                                 вӢҶ         вӢҶ      вӢҶ
                                                                     r вҲ’(sвӢҶ +1/2) ).
                    X
                          |Rm,j | В· |ОёjвӢҶ | вүІ k вҲ’s В· log(k)s + k вҲ’s + O(k                            (F.17)
                   jвҲҲП•
                     p1

For the rest of the error terms, we have by Eq. (F.6) and Eq. (F.5) that
          X                                                  X               вӢҶ
                                                               |ОёjвӢҶ | В· k вҲ’(s вҲ’1/2) В· log(k)вҲ’3/2
                                                    вӢҶ
                 |gm
                   x,j вҲ’ g
                         smx,j | + |sx,j вҲ’ g
                                    gm     qmx,j | В· |Оёj | вүІ
         jвҲҲП•
           p1                                                          jвҲҲП•вӢҶ
                                                                              вӢҶ
                                                                  вүӨ k вҲ’(s вҲ’1) В· log(k)вҲ’3/2 .        (F.18)
Combining Eq. (F.14), Eq. (F.15), Eq. (F.17) and Eq. (F.18), we have that
                                                   вӢҶ                   вӢҶ              вӢҶ
                                           вҲ’(s вҲ’1)/2     вӢҶ s вҲ’1
                           |вҹЁr     вӢҶ
                              x , Оё вҹ©| вүі k
                             gm                      В· |Оёm
                                                         x|     вҲ’ o(k вҲ’(s вҲ’1) ).
For the norm, we already have in Eq. (F.8) that
                                               вӢҶ                   вӢҶ                  вӢҶ
                                       вҲ’(s вҲ’1)/2     вӢҶ (s вҲ’1)
                            вҲҘrx вҲҘ2 вүІ k
                             gm                  В· |Оёm
                                                     x|       + o(k вҲ’(s вҲ’1) ).

Combining last two inequalities, we concludes that
                                       вӢҶ               вӢҶ                   вӢҶ
                          |вҹЁPП•p1 gm
                                  x , Оё вҹ©|
                                                вӢҶ s вҲ’1
                                              |Оёx |    вҲ’ o(k вҲ’(s вҲ’1)/2 )
                                             вүі mвӢҶ s вҲ’1 + o(k вҲ’(sвӢҶ вҲ’1)/2 )
                                                    вӢҶ                     = Оҳ(1),
                            вҲҘPП•p1 gm
                                   xвҲҘ         |Оёm
                                                x|

                    вҖІ вҲ’1/2
             вӢҶ
             x | вүҘ c1 k
given that |Оёm             for some constant cвҖІ1 > 0. This concludes the proof of weak alignment.

Strong Alignment. Starting from the second step, we have by Algorithm 2 that all the neurons
share the same weight parameter. Let Оё be the weight parameter in any step after the first step and we
suppose that ПҒ = вҹЁОё, ОёвӢҶ вҹ© = Оҳ(1). From Proposition F.5, we see that now the choice of the gradient
should not change the quality of the gradient significantly, as Оі|ПҒ| вү« k вҲ’1/2 |ОёmвӢҶ
                                                                                   | for any m вҲҲ [d].
Therefore, we start by analyzing the alignment increment using any gm . This alteration does not
affect the alignment increment, but substantially simplifies the analysis.
We additionally define a support П•вҖ  = {j вҲҲ [d] : |ОёjвӢҶ | вүҘ k вҲ’1 }. In the following, we fix an arbitrary
m вҲҲ [d]. We begin with analyzing the magnitude of gm,j for j вҲҲ П•вҖ  \ {m}. Since |ПҒ| = в„Ұ(1), it
holds that
                                        вӢҶ                                                  вӢҶ            вӢҶ
(Оі|ПҒ| + k вҲ’1/2 В· |Оёm
                   вӢҶ
                     | + k вҲ’1 ОҙsвӢҶ вҲ’1 )s вҲ’1 вүғ (Оі|ПҒ| + k вҲ’1/2 В· |Оёm
                                                                вӢҶ
                                                                  | + k вҲ’1 ОҙsвӢҶ вҲ’2 )s вҲ’2 В· (Оі|ПҒ|) вүғ k вҲ’(s вҲ’1)/2 .
With triangle inequality, Proposition F.5 indicates that, for j вҲҲ П•вҖ  :
                |gm,j | вүҘ |q
                           gm,j | вҲ’ |s
                                     gm,j вҲ’ gqm,j | вҲ’ |s
                                                       gm,j вҲ’ gm,j |
                                вӢҶ                          вӢҶ
                       вүҘ k вҲ’(s вҲ’1)/2 В· |ОёjвӢҶ | вҲ’ k вҲ’s /2 В· |ОёjвӢҶ |
                                    вӢҶ
                                                                         r вҲ’(sвӢҶ вҲ’1/2) ).
                             вҲ’ k вҲ’(s +1)/2 В· (|Оёj | + (k/d)1{jМё=m}/2 ) вҲ’ O(k
                         / П•вӢҶ that
Similarly, we have for j вҲҲ
                  |gm,j | вүӨ |q
                             gm,j | + |s
                                       gm,j вҲ’ gqm,j | + |s
                                                         gm,j вҲ’ gm,j |
                                 вӢҶ
                                                                      r вҲ’(sвӢҶ вҲ’1/2) ).
                          вүІ k вҲ’(s +1)/2 В· (|Оёj | + (k/d)1{jМё=m}/2 ) + O(k
Comparing last two inequalities, we have that |Оёj | > k вҲ’1 implies that |gm,j | вүҘ maxj вҲҲП•
                                                                                       / вӢҶ |gm,j | for
sufficiently large k, and therefore
                                             min |gm,j | > maxвӢҶ |gm,j |,
                                            jвҲҲП•вҖ                 j вҲҲП•
                                                                  /



                                                           52
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


which means that П•вҖ  вҠӮ П•pm = Topk (Оёm ). Thereby, we have
                            X                X
                               |ОёjвӢҶ |2 вүҘ 1 вҲ’      |ОёjвӢҶ |2 вүҘ 1 вҲ’ k вҲ’1 .
                                     jвҲҲП•
                                       pm                          / вҖ 
                                                                 j вҲҲП•


We then move on to the alignment analysis. Retreat to Eq. (F.23), we define
                                                               вҲҡ                           вӢҶ

                           вӢҶ       EQ [О¶sвӢҶ (y) В· ПҲpsвӢҶ вҲ’1 (y)] В· sвӢҶ В· Ewrm,l [вҹЁwm , l, ОёвӢҶ вҹ©s вҲ’1 ]
    ОІm (ПҒ, {Оҫm,l }lвҲҲ[L] , Оё , Оё) =                                                               ;
                                                 sign(ПҒ)1{sвӢҶ even} В· (Оі|ПҒ|)sвӢҶ вҲ’1
                                                                                       вӢҶ                   вӢҶ
                                             gm , ej вҹ©] вҲ’ ОёjвӢҶ В· (Оі|ПҒ|)s вҲ’1 В· sign(ПҒ)1{s even} В· ОІm .
    rm,j (ПҒ, {Оҫm,l }lвҲҲ[L] , ОёвӢҶ , Оё) = EPОёвӢҶ [вҹЁs                                                                         (F.19)
Then it follows from Proposition F.5 that whenever |ПҒ| = в„Ұ(1), we have that ОІm > 0 and
                                                    вҲ’1
                                             ОІ m вҲЁ ОІm  <B
                                                               a      b
                                                    |rm,j | вүӨ rm,j + rm,j ,
where
                                            вӢҶ
                              a
                                  вүӨ Ca k вҲ’(s +1)/2 В· |Оёj | + (k/d)1{jМё=m}/2 ;

                             rm,j
                                                                     вӢҶ
                              b
                             rm,j вүӨ Cb В· |ОёjвӢҶ | В· (Оі|ПҒ|)s                                                              (F.20)
with some global positive constant B, Ca and C0 , whenever the designated parameters are compatible
with the definition of our nice event. With this representation, we can deduce by Eq. (F.6) and Eq. (F.5)
that
                 X                       X
  gm , ОёвӢҶ вҹ©| =         gm , ej вҹ© В· ОёjвӢҶ +                                                 gm , ej вҹ©| В· |ОёjвӢҶ |

|вҹЁr                  вҹЁq                       |вҹЁgm , ej вҹ© вҲ’ вҹЁs
                                                             gm , ej вҹ©| + |вҹЁs
                                                                            gm , ej вҹ© вҲ’ вҹЁq
                jвҲҲП•
                  pm                         jвҲҲП•
                                               pm


                 X                           X                              вӢҶ
           вүҘ            gm , ej вҹ© В· ОёjвӢҶ вҲ’
                       вҹЁq                           |ОёjвӢҶ | В· O(k вҲ’(s вҲ’1/2) В· logвҲ’3/2 k)
                jвҲҲП•
                  pm                         jвҲҲП•вӢҶ
                             вӢҶ        X                  X                                         вӢҶ
           вүҘ ОІm В· (Оі|ПҒ|)s вҲ’1 В·               |ОёjвӢҶ |2 вҲ’               |rm,j | В· |ОёjвӢҶ | вҲ’ O(k вҲ’(s вҲ’1) В· logвҲ’3/2 k)
                                      jвҲҲП•
                                        pm               jвҲҲП•вӢҶ
                                 вӢҶ                       вӢҶ           X                                 вӢҶ           вӢҶ
           вүҘ ОІm В· (Оі|ПҒ|)s вҲ’1 вҲ’ Cb В· (Оі|ПҒ|)s                                 |ОёjвӢҶ |2 вҲ’ 2Ca В· k вҲ’(s +1)/2 вҲ’ O(k вҲ’(s вҲ’1) В· logвҲ’3/2 k).

                                                                 В·
                                                                     jвҲҲП•
                                                                       pm
                                                                                                                       (F.21)
where the last inequality holds by Eq. (F.16). To complete the analysis, we need an upper bound for
вҲҘr
 gm вҲҘ2 . Note that by the triangle inequality and Eq. (F.19), we have that
                  вҲҘr
                   gm вҲҘ вүӨ вҲҘPП•pm gqm вҲҘ + вҲҘPП•pm gsm вҲ’ PП•pm gqm вҲҘ + вҲҘPП•pm gsm вҲ’ PП•pm gm вҲҘ
                                             вӢҶ
                          вүӨ вҲҘОІm (Оі|ПҒ|)s вҲ’1 В· PП•pm ОёвӢҶ вҲҘ + вҲҘPП•pm rm
                                                                a            b
                                                                  вҲҘ + вҲҘPП•pm rm вҲҘ
                                              вӢҶ
                                 + O(k вҲ’(s вҲ’1) В· logвҲ’3/2 k),
        a                     a
where rm   = (rm,1 , . . . , rm,d ) вҲҲ Rd and rm b                     b
                                                   = (rm,1 , . . . , rm,d ) вҲҲ Rd . To proceed, note that by
Eq. (F.20) and Eq. (F.6), we have that
                                                 вӢҶ                    p
                                   a
                             вҲҘPП•p rm вҲҘ вүӨ Ca k вҲ’(s +1)/2 В· (вҲҘОёвҲҘ2 + 1 + k 2 /d)
                                                             вӢҶ
                                      вүӨ 3Ca k вҲ’(s +1)/2 ;
                                                    вӢҶ
                                                        X          1/2
                                  b
                            вҲҘPП•p rm вҲҘ вүӨ Cb В· (Оі|ПҒ|)s В·    |ОёjвӢҶ |2      .
                                                                         jвҲҲП•
                                                                           pm

Putting these upper bounds together, we have that
                                                         вӢҶ                         вӢҶ       X вӢҶ 2  1/2
                    вҲҘPП•p gm вҲҘ2 вүӨ ОІm В· (Оі|ПҒ|)s вҲ’1 + Cb (Оі|ПҒ|)s                           В·   |Оёj |
                                                                                            jвҲҲП•
                                                                                              pm
                                                    вҲ’(sвӢҶ +1)/2                   вҲ’(sвӢҶ вҲ’1)
                                       + 3Ca k                           + O(k              В· logвҲ’3/2 k).              (F.22)


                                                                 53
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Note that for any a1 вҲ§ a2 > b > 0, it holds that
                   a1 вҲ’ b (a1 вҲ’ b) В· (a2 вҲ’ b)
                          =                   вүҘ (a1 /a2 вҲ’ b/a2 ) В· (1 вҲ’ b/a2 ).
                   a2 + b      a22 вҲ’ b2
                               вӢҶ
Setting вҲҶ = В·k вҲ’1 + k вҲ’(s вҲ’1)/2 В· logвҲ’3/2 k вҲЁ k вҲ’1 = o(1), we get by combining Eq. (F.21) and
Eq. (F.22) that
                                     P                                    вӢҶ

    gm , ОёвӢҶ вҹ©
   вҹЁr            (ОІm вҲ’ Cb В· Оі|ПҒ|) В·       pm Оёj
                                        jвҲҲП•
                                               вӢҶ2
                                                    вҲ’ 3Ca В· k вҲ’1 вҲ’ O(k вҲ’(s вҲ’1)/2 В· logвҲ’3/2 k)
              вүҘ                                   1/2
     вҲҘr
      gm вҲҘ                        P
                ОІm + Cb В· Оі|ПҒ| В·      jвҲҲП•pm Оёj
                                              вӢҶ2      + 3Ca В· k вҲ’1 + O(k вҲ’(sвӢҶ вҲ’1)/2 В· logвҲ’3/2 k)
                          вҲ’1   1 вҲ’ Cb ОІm  вҲ’1
                                             Оі|ПҒ|     X 2
                                                           вӢҶ 1/2

              вүҘ 1 вҲ’ O(вҲҶ)      В·           вҲ’1      В· (    Оё j )    вҲ’ O(вҲҶ)
                                 1 + C b ОІm  Оі|ПҒ|      p           jвҲҲП•m
                          вҲ’1
             вүҘ1вҲ’C В·k               вҲ’ O(вҲҶ)

where the last line holds because (1 вҲ’ Ck вҲ’1 )r вүҘ 1 вҲ’ rC В· k вҲ’1 for any C, r > 0 and sufficiently
large k. Note that k вҲ’1 = O(вҲҶ), we see that
                                                 gm , ОёвӢҶ вҹ©
                                                вҹЁr
                                                           вүҘ 1 вҲ’ O(вҲҶ).
                                                 вҲҘrgm вҲҘ
This concludes the proof of Theorem 5.1.



F. 4   P R O O F O F T H E K E Y R E S U LT S

Proof of Proposition F.5. First, by Lemma H.2, we have for each j вҲҲ [d] that
                                                                   вҲҡ               L
                               X                                         s+1X
        вҹЁEPОёвӢҶ [s
               gm ], ej вҹ© =            EQ [О¶s (y) В· ПҲps+1 (y)] В·             вҹЁwm,l , ОёвӢҶ вҹ©s В· вҹЁwm,l , ej вҹ©
                                                                         L
                              sвүҘsвӢҶ                                                l=1
                                                                           вҲҡ           L
                                       X                                       s X
                                   +          EQ [О¶s (y) В· ПҲpsвҲ’1 (y)] В·         В· вҹЁwm,l , ОёвӢҶ вҹ©sвҲ’1 В· вҹЁОёвӢҶ , ej вҹ©.
                                                                              L
                                       sвүҘsвӢҶ                                         l=1
                                                               вҲҡ      L
                                                                   sвӢҶ X                     вӢҶ
                        = EQ [О¶sвӢҶ (y) В· ПҲpsвӢҶ вҲ’1 (y)] В·                         вҹЁwm,l , ОёвӢҶ вҹ©s вҲ’1 В· вҹЁОёвӢҶ , ej вҹ©
                                                                 L
                                                                         l=1
                                   + R1 + R2 ,                                                                    (F.23)
where the remainders R1 , R2 are defined as
                                                           вҲҡ              L
                      X                                        s+1X
              R1 =            EQ [О¶s+1 (y) В· ПҲps (y)] В·            вҹЁwm,l , ОёвӢҶ вҹ©s В· вҹЁОёвӢҶ , ej вҹ©;
                                                               L
                     sвүҘsвӢҶ                                                l=1
                                                           вҲҡ                  L
                      X                                        s+1 X
              R2 =            EQ [О¶s (y) В· ПҲps+1 (y)] В·           В· вҹЁwm,l , ОёвӢҶ вҹ©s В· вҹЁwm,l , ej вҹ©.
                                                               L
                     sвүҘsвӢҶ                                                  l=1

We also denote the leading signal term as
                                                           вҲҡ         L
                                                             sвӢҶ X             вӢҶ
                  S = EQ [О¶sвӢҶ (y) В· ПҲpsвӢҶ вҲ’1 (y)] В·               вҹЁwm,l , ОёвӢҶ вҹ©s вҲ’1 В· вҹЁОёвӢҶ , ej вҹ©.
                                                             L
                                                                   l=1

By definition R1 collects the higher order term that aligns with the signal and the R2 collects all the
terms in the expected gradient that are parallel to wm,l . In comparison to the non-sparse case, here we
are analyzing the gradient coordinate-wisely. Therefore, R1 and R2 need to be controlled separately.


                                                            54
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Analysis for the dominant term S in Eq. (F.23). We first define
                                  rm,l = wm,l В· 1{| supвҹЁОҫm,l , ej вҹ©| вүӨ Пө}.
                                  w
                                                          j

By definition of w
                 rm,l , we have that w  rm,l , l вҲҲ [L] are independent to each other and w
                                                                                         rm,l = wm,l on
event Em (Пө). We can approximate the expectation of the вҹЁwm,l , ОёвӢҶ вҹ© as
                                 вӢҶ                            вӢҶ
                     rm,l , ОёвӢҶ вҹ©s вҲ’1 ] = Ewm,l вҹЁwm,l , ОёвӢҶ вҹ©s вҲ’1 В· 1 sup |вҹЁОҫm,l , ej вҹ©| вүӨ Пө

            Ewrm,l [вҹЁw
                                                                                     j
                                                              вӢҶ sвӢҶ вҲ’1

                                       вүғ Ewm,l [вҹЁwm,l , Оё вҹ©               ] Вұ Pr sup |вҹЁОҫm,l , ej вҹ©| > Пө
                                                                                         j
                                                              вӢҶ sвӢҶ вҲ’1                         c
                                       вүғ Ewm,l [вҹЁwm,l , Оё вҹ©               ] Вұ Pr(Em (Пө) ).
                                           c
Here the last line holds because Em (Пө) = вҲӘl {supj |вҹЁОҫm,l , ej вҹ©| > Пө}. For the first term, it holds by
Proposition F.4, we have that on E0,sвӢҶ вҲ’1вҲ’1{sвӢҶ even}
                                (                                         sвӢҶ вҲ’2
                     вӢҶ sвӢҶ вҲ’1      ОіПҒ В· Оі|ПҒ| + k вҲ’1/2 |Оёm
                                                       вӢҶ
                                                         | + k вҲ’1 ОҙsвӢҶ вҲ’2        if sвӢҶ even;
    Ewm,l [вҹЁwm,l , Оё вҹ©       ]вүғ             вҲ’1/2 вӢҶ        вҲ’1 вӢҶ       вӢҶ
                                                                    s вҲ’1
                                  (Оі|ПҒ| + k     |Оёm | + k Оҙs вҲ’1 )               if sвӢҶ odd.
For the second moment that is involved in the BernsteinвҖҷs inequality, we have that on E0,2sвӢҶ вҲ’2
                                   вӢҶ                              вӢҶ
                    rm,l , ОёвӢҶ вҹ©2s вҲ’2 ] = E[вҹЁwm,l , ОёвӢҶ вҹ©2s вҲ’2 1{sup |вҹЁwm,l , ej вҹ©| вүӨ Пө}]
                 E[вҹЁw
                                                                             j
                                                          вӢҶ 2sвӢҶ вҲ’2
                                        вүӨ E[вҹЁwm,l , Оё вҹ©               ]
                                                                                          вӢҶ
                                                      вҲ’1/2
                                        вүғ (Оі|ПҒ| + k                 вӢҶ
                                                                  |Оёm | + k вҲ’1 Оҙ2sвӢҶ вҲ’2 )2s вҲ’2
To proceed, we have by BernsteinвҖҷs inequality (Lemma J.1) that there exists an event Em,11 with
Pr(Em,11 ) вүҘ 1 вҲ’ O(dвҲ’cb,11 ). And it holds on Em,11 вҲ© Em (Пө) that
                     1X                   вӢҶ     1X                вӢҶ
                             вҹЁwm,l , ОёвӢҶ вҹ©s вҲ’1 =       rm,l , ОёвӢҶ вҹ©s вҲ’1
                                                     вҹЁw
                     L                          L
                              l                               l
                                                                                     вӢҶ
                                                  вүғ Ewm,l [вҹЁwm,l , ОёвӢҶ вҹ©s вҲ’1 ] + E,
where the error term E can be bounded by
                                                                                 вӢҶ
                                                          r
                   вҲ’1/2
                                                sвӢҶ вҲ’1             log(d) Пөs вҲ’1 log(d)
                            вӢҶ
                              | + k вҲ’1 Оҙ2sвӢҶ вҲ’2                                              c

  |E| вүӨ Оі|ПҒ| + k          |Оёm                         В·                 +             + Pr Em (Пө) .
                                                                    L         L
Moreover, the assumption that
                                      вӢҶ         вӢҶ
                                                                                                   вӢҶ
                                                                                         c
                   L вүі log d В· k 2 вҲЁ Пөs вҲ’1 В· k s     ;                    Pr(Em (Пө) ) вүӨ k вҲ’s ;

allows us to simplify the upper bound for E, since
                                                                                  sвӢҶ вҲ’1            вӢҶ
                    |E| вүІ k вҲ’1 В· Оі|ПҒ| + k вҲ’1/2 |Оёm
                                                 вӢҶ
                                                   | + k вҲ’1 Оҙ2sвӢҶ вҲ’2                          + k вҲ’s .      (F.24)

In conclusion, we have on Em,11 вҲ© Em (Пө) that
                                                              вӢҶ
                              S вүғ (Ewm,l [вҹЁwm,l , ОёвӢҶ вҹ©s вҲ’1 ] + E) В· вҹЁОёвӢҶ , ej вҹ©.
We remain this form for further simplification.

Analysis for the first remainder R1 in Eq. (F.23). For any s, sвҖІ , it holds by the property of
likelihood ratio decomposition that

                       EQ [|О¶s (y) В· ПҲpsвҖІ (y)|] вүӨ EQ [О¶s (y)2 ]1/2 В· EQ [ПҲpsвҖІ (y)2 ]1/2
                                                  sX
                                                вүӨ         EQ [ПҲpsвҖІ (y)2 ],
                                                     sвҖІ вүҘ0



                                                      55
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


and the last quantity is a constant that is independent to s, sвҖІ . To bound the summation for s вүҘ sвӢҶ , we
have on by Lemma F.3 that |вҹЁwm,l , ОёвӢҶ вҹ©| вүӨ Оі|ПҒ| + Пө < 1/2 on
                вҲҡ          L                                                   L
           X s+1X                               XвҲҡ               1  sвҲ’sвӢҶ 1 X                     вӢҶ
                              |вҹЁwm,l , ОёвӢҶ вҹ©|s вүІ       s+1В·                В·       |вҹЁwm,l , ОёвӢҶ вҹ©|s
              вӢҶ
                   L                               вӢҶ
                                                                  2         L
            sвүҘs             l=1                      sвүҘs                                   l=1
                                                          L
                                                     1    X                        вӢҶ
                                                вүІ               |вҹЁwm,l , ОёвӢҶ вҹ©|s .                           (F.25)
                                                     L
                                                          l=1

Now it reduces to bound the right-hand side of Eq. (F.25). Note that on Em (Пө), w
                                                                                rm,l = wm,l . We can
first track the first and second moment of вҹЁwm,l , ОёвӢҶ вҹ© as
                                                      вӢҶ                                вӢҶ
                                        rm,l , ОёвӢҶ вҹ©|s ] вүӨ Ewm,l [|вҹЁwm,l , ОёвӢҶ вҹ©|s ]
                              Ewrm,l [|вҹЁw
                                                                                       вӢҶ
                                                           вүӨ Ewm,l [вҹЁwm,l , ОёвӢҶ вҹ©2s ]1/2 .
To bound the last quantity, we see that given E0,2sвӢҶ , Proposition F.4 reads
                                               вӢҶ                                                 вӢҶ
                       Ewm,l [вҹЁwm,l , ОёвӢҶ вҹ©2s ] вүӨ (Оі|ПҒ| + k вҲ’1/2 |Оёm
                                                                  вӢҶ
                                                                    | + k вҲ’1 Оҙ+ )2s .
By BernsteinвҖҷs inequality, there exists a event Em,12 with Pr(Em,12 ) вүҘ 1 вҲ’ O(dвҲ’cb,12 ) such that on
Em,12 вҲ© Em (Пө), it holds that
      L                           r                                                  вӢҶ
   1X               вӢҶ sвӢҶ
                                     log d                                      вӢҶ  Пөs log(d)
         |вҹЁwm,l , Оё вҹ©| вүІ 1 +                 В· (Оі|ПҒ| + k вҲ’1/2 |Оёm
                                                                вӢҶ
                                                                  | + k вҲ’1 Оҙ+ )s +           ,
   L                                   L                                               L
      l=1
                               вӢҶ     вӢҶ
Given that L вүі log(d) В· k вҲЁ (Пөs В· k s ) , it further holds that
                       L
                   1X                вӢҶ                                   вӢҶ      вӢҶ
                      |вҹЁwm,l , ОёвӢҶ вҹ©|s вүІ (Оі|ПҒ| + k вҲ’1/2 |Оёm
                                                         вӢҶ
                                                           | + k вҲ’1 Оҙ+ )s + k вҲ’s .
                   L
                      l=1

In conclusion, it holds on Em,12 вҲ© Em (Пө) that
                                                           вӢҶ         вӢҶ

                   R1 вүІ (Оі|ПҒ| + k вҲ’1/2 |Оёm вӢҶ
                                             | + k вҲ’1 Оҙ+ )s вҲ’1 + k вҲ’s В· |вҹЁОёвӢҶ , ej вҹ©|.

Analysis for the second remainder R2 in Eq. (F.23). Similar to Eq. (F.25), we can first upper
bound R2 as
                                                L
                                            1X                вӢҶ
                                  |R2 | вүІ      |вҹЁwm,l , ОёвӢҶ вҹ©|s В· |вҹЁwm,l , ej вҹ©|
                                            L
                                              l=1
                                                L
                                            1X                вӢҶ
                                        =        rm,l , ОёвӢҶ вҹ©|s В· |вҹЁw
                                               |вҹЁw                 rm,l , ej вҹ©|,
                                            L
                                              l=1

where the last line holds by the definition of Em (Пө). We decouple the product with the Cauchy-Schwarz
inequality as follows:
                        вӢҶ                                                  вӢҶ
            rm,l , ОёвӢҶ вҹ©|s В· |вҹЁw
  Ewrm,l [|вҹЁw                 rm,l , ej вҹ©|] вүӨ Ewm,l [|вҹЁwm,l , ОёвӢҶ вҹ©|s В· |вҹЁwm,l , ej вҹ©|]
                                                                               вӢҶ
                                             вүӨ Ewm,l [|вҹЁwm,l , ОёвӢҶ вҹ©|2s ]1/2 В· Ewm,l [|вҹЁwm,l , ej вҹ©|2 ]1/2
The first term in the upper bound can be tackled with Proposition F.4. For the second term, we have
that
                            Ewm,l [вҹЁwm,l , ej вҹ©2 ] вүІ E[(вҹЁОҫm,l , ej вҹ© + Оі В· вҹЁОё, ej вҹ©)2 ]
                                                    вүІ E[вҹЁОҫm,l , ej вҹ©2 ] + Оі 2 Оёj2
                                                    = Оі 2 Оёj2 + E[1{j вҲҲ П•m,l } В· Оҫm,l,j
                                                                                  2
                                                                                        ]
                                                    вүІ Оі 2 Оёj2 + k вҲ’1 В· (k/d)1{jМё=m} .


                                                            56
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Here, the first line holds because вҲҘОіОё + ОҫвҲҘ2 вүҘ 1/2. The last line holds by applying Lemma I.5 and
that P(j вҲҲ П•m,l ) вүӨ k/d for j Мё= m. Note that each term in the summation of is bounded by Пө log(k)
up to a constant on Em (Пө). We have by BernsteinвҖҷs inequality (Lemma J.1) that, there exists an event
Em,13 with Pr(Em,13 ) вүҘ 1 вҲ’ O(dвҲ’cb,13 ). And it holds on Em,13 вҲ© Em (Пө) that
                  r         !
                     log(d)                                    sвӢҶ
                              В· Оі|ПҒ| + k вҲ’1/2 |Оёm
                                                вӢҶ
                                                  | + k вҲ’1 Оҙ+     В· Оі|Оёj | + k вҲ’1/2 (k/d)1{jМё=m}/2

    |R2 |вүІ 1 +
                       L
                 вӢҶ
               Пөs +1 log(d)
           +                .
                    L
Given that
                                                      вӢҶ        вӢҶ

                                  L вүі log(d) В· k вҲЁ (Пөs +1 В· k s +1 ) ,

we conclude that it holds on Em,13 вҲ© Em (Пө) that
                                          sвӢҶ                                         вӢҶ
    |R2 |вүІ Оі|ПҒ| + k вҲ’1/2 |Оёm
                           вӢҶ
                             | + k вҲ’1 Оҙ+     В· Оі|Оёj | + k вҲ’1/2 (k/d)1{jМё=m}/2 + k вҲ’(s +1) .



Summary of first-order moment. We now merge previous results to summarize the results for the
first-order moment. Note that it is sufficient to set
                                                      вӢҶ         вӢҶ
                           L = в„Ұ log(d) В· k вҲЁ Пөs вҲ’1 (k В· log k)s +1

Define the final event as Em,1 = Em,11 вҲ© Em,12 вҲ© Em,13 , which is {wm,l }lвҲҲ[L] measurable. By
previous analysis, it holds on this event that
                    вӢҶ                                                           sвӢҶ вҲ’1вҲ’1{sвӢҶ even}
   S вүғ ОёjвӢҶ В· (ОіПҒ)1{s even} В· Оі|ПҒ| + k вҲ’1/2 |Оёm    вӢҶ
                                                    | + k вҲ’1 ОҙsвӢҶ вҲ’1вҲ’1{sвӢҶ even}                   + ОёjвӢҶ В· E;
                                             вӢҶ
                                            s           вӢҶ
  R1 вүІ Оі|ПҒ| + k вҲ’1/2 |Оёm   вӢҶ
                              | + k вҲ’1 Оҙ+       + k вҲ’s В· |ОёjвӢҶ |;


                                         sвӢҶ                                                  вӢҶ
  R2 вүІ Оі|ПҒ| + k вҲ’1/2 |Оёm вӢҶ
                            | + k вҲ’1 Оҙ+        В· (Оі|Оёj | + k вҲ’1/2 В· (k/d)1{jМё=m}/2 ) + k вҲ’(s +1) .

Following the error term E in Eq. (F.24), we define R = R1 + R2 + E, which be bounded by d
                                                                            вӢҶ         вӢҶ

   |R| вүІ k вҲ’1 вҲЁ (Оі|ПҒ| + k вҲ’1/2 |Оёm вӢҶ
                                     |) В· (Оі|ПҒ| + k вҲ’1/2 |ОёmвӢҶ
                                                              | + k вҲ’1 Оҙ+ )s вҲ’1 + k вҲ’s В· |ОёjвӢҶ |
                                               sвӢҶ                                               вӢҶ
            + Оі|ПҒ| + k вҲ’1/2 |ОёmвӢҶ
                                 | + k вҲ’1 Оҙ+      В· (Оі|Оёj | + k вҲ’1/2 В· (k/d)1{jМё=m}/2 ) + k вҲ’(s +1) .
                                                                                                        (F.26)

And we summarize the first moment on Em,1 вҲ© Em (Пө) as
                                                                                          sвӢҶ вҲ’1вҲ’1{s even}
       gm , ej вҹ©] вүғ ОёjвӢҶ В· (ОіПҒ)1{s even} В· Оі|ПҒ| + k вҲ’1/2 |Оёm
EPОёвӢҶ [вҹЁs                                                  вӢҶ
                                                            | + k вҲ’1 ОҙsвӢҶ вҲ’1вҲ’1{sвӢҶ even}                      + R,

where R is upper bounded in Eq. (F.26).


Proof of Proposition F.6. Similar to the proof of Proposition E.4, the proof of this proposition com-
prises two parts. To begin with, we calculate the variance of each coordinate of gsm .

Second moment calculation.          It suffices to consider the variance of the first sample. To this end,
we define
                                   L
                                 1X
                       gsm,1 =       ПҲ(y1 , вҹЁwm,l , z1 вҹ©) В· z1 вҲ’ ПҲp1 (y1 ) В· wm,l .
                                 L
                                   l=1



                                                     57
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


For any v вҲҲ {e1 , e2 , . . . , ed }, it holds by the definition of gsm,1 that
                              L                                                          L
                         1 X                                                        1 X             h                           i
       gm,1 , vвҹ©2 ] вүІ                                                         2                       p1 (y)2 вҹЁwl , vвҹ©вҹЁwlвҖІ , vвҹ©

EPОёвӢҶ [вҹЁs                          EP   вӢҶ  ПҲ(y, вҹЁwl , zвҹ©)ПҲ(y, вҹЁwl вҖІ , zвҹ©)вҹЁz, vвҹ©    +          EP   вӢҶ   ПҲ
                        L2 вҖІ         Оё
                                                                                    L2 вҖІ        Оё
                           l,l =1                                                     l,l =1

                         1 X                                                        X
                       = 2       EQ ПҲ(y, вҹЁwl , zвҹ©)ПҲ(y, вҹЁwlвҖІ , zвҹ©)вҹЁz, vвҹ©2 В· 1 +          О¶s (y)hs (вҹЁОёвӢҶ , zвҹ©)
                        L      вҖІ                                                      вӢҶ
                                  lМё=l                                                            sвүҘs
                                          L
                                     1    X                                              1 X
                                                EQ ПҲ(y, вҹЁwl , zвҹ©)ПҲ(y, вҹЁwl , zвҹ©)вҹЁz, vвҹ©2 + 2    EQ [ПҲp1 (y)2 ]вҹЁwl , vвҹ©вҹЁwlвҖІ , vвҹ©

                                 +
                                     L2                                                 L   вҖІ
                                          l=1                                                           lМё=l
                                          L
                                     1    X
                                 +              EQ [ПҲp1 (y)2 ]вҹЁwl , vвҹ©2 .                                      (F.27)
                                     L2
                                          l=1

In the same manner as the non-sparse case, we can derive a O(1/L) upper bound for the second and
the last summation, which traverse through all l = lвҖІ . Recalling Eq. Lemma F.3, we already have that
                                                  sup |вҹЁwm,l , ej вҹ©| вүІ Оі + Пө;
                                                    l,j

                                                 sup |вҹЁwm,l , ОёвӢҶ вҹ©| вүІ Оі|ПҒ| + Пө.
                                                    l
                                            sup |вҹЁwm,l , wm,lвҖІ вҹ©| вүІ Оі 2 + Пө2 log(k).
                                            lМё=lвҖІ

To incorporate with the notations in Lemma H.3, we denote the upper bounds of the вҹЁwm,l , ej вҹ©,
вҹЁwm,l , ОёвӢҶ вҹ© and вҹЁwm,l , wm,lвҖІ вҹ© (l Мё= lвҖІ ) as

                              Пө0 = Оі + Пө;                 Пө1 = Оі|ПҒ| + Пө;        Пө2 = Оі 2 + Пө2 log(k),
respectively. By the virtue of Lemma H.3, the desired expectation is behaving nicely if the ratio
(Пө20 вҲЁ Пө21 )/Пө2 is a constant term. To validate this fact, we note that
                                      Пө20     Оі 2 + Пө2                    Пө21    Оі 2 ПҒ 2 + Пө2
                                          вүғ 2            ,                    вүғ 2             .
                                      Пө2   Оі + Пө2 log(k)                  Пө2   Оі + Пө2 log(k)

Since Пө вүӘ 1 вүӘ log(k)1/2 , we conclude that Пө20 вҲЁ Пө21 /Пө2 вүІ 1 for sufficiently large k. Therefore, we
have by Lemma H.3 that
                                                                           вҲһ
1 X h                                                                     X                           i      вӢҶ

  2
      EQ ПҲ(y1 , вҹЁwm,l , z1 вҹ©) В· ПҲ(y1 , вҹЁwm,l
                                                                 2
                                             вҖІ , z1 вҹ©) В· вҹЁz1 , vвҹ© В·   1 +      О¶ s (y)hs (вҹЁОё вӢҶ
                                                                                               , zвҹ©)    вүІ Пөs2 вҲ’1 .
L   вҖІ                                                                     s=sвӢҶ
    lМё=l

On the other hand, we have for the third term in Eq. (F.27) that
                  1 X
                       EQ [ПҲp1 (y)2 ]вҹЁwm,l , vвҹ© В· вҹЁwm,lвҖІ , vвҹ© вүІ sup |вҹЁwm,lвҖІ , vвҹ©|2 В· 1{sвӢҶ вүӨ 2}
                  L2 вҖІ                                           l
                       lМё=l

                                                                            вүІ Пө20 В· 1{sвӢҶ вүӨ 2}
                                                                            вүІ Пө2 В· 1{sвӢҶ вүӨ 2},
where the first line holds by Lemma F.3.
In summary, we have on the event Em (Пө) вҲ© Erm that
                                                                 вӢҶ         1                    sвӢҶ вҲ’1 1
                 sup             n VarPОёвӢҶ [вҹЁgm , vвҹ©] вүІ Пөs2 вҲ’1 +              = Оі 2 + Пө2 log(k)       + .
           vвҲҲ{e1 ,e2 ,...,ed }                                             L                          L

Concentration . We now turn to validate the condition of Lemma J.3. For any v вҲҲ {e1 , e2 , . . . , ed },
we set G(z, y, w) = |ПҲ(y, вҹЁw, zвҹ©) В· вҹЁz, vвҹ©| +P
                                             |ПҲp1 (y) В· вҹЁw, vвҹ©| with the domain measure defined as
dPОёвӢҶ (z1 , y1 ) Г— dВө(w), where dВө(w) = LвҲ’1 l Оҙwm,l , the integral MinkowskiвҖҷs inequality implies


                                                                     58
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


that
                                    Z                  Z             r  1/r
                       r 1/r
  EPОёвӢҶ [|вҹЁgm,1 , vвҹ©| ]         =  dP (y, z)  ОёвӢҶ dВө(w)|G(z, y, w)|
                                Z      Z                            1/r
                               вүӨ dВө(w)    dPОёвӢҶ (y, z)|G(z, y, w)|r
                                        L
                                   1X                                                 1X
                               =      EPОёвӢҶ [|ПҲ(yi , вҹЁwm,l , zi вҹ©) В· вҹЁzi , vвҹ©|r ]1/r +    |вҹЁwm,l , vвҹ©|. (F.28)
                                   L                                                  L
                                     l=1                                                   l

To proceed, we leverage Cauchy-Schwarz inequality to decouple the average of the product in the
first term, which reads
       L                                                       L
1X                                                 1X
   EPОёвӢҶ [|ПҲ(yi , вҹЁwm,l , zi вҹ©) В· вҹЁzi , vвҹ©|r ]1/r вүӨ    EPОёвӢҶ [|ПҲ(yi , вҹЁwm,l , zi вҹ©)|2r ]1/2r В· EPОёвӢҶ [|вҹЁzi , vвҹ©|2r ]1/2r .
L                                                  L
   l=1                                                        l=1

Similar to the proof of Proposition E.4, we have that
                                                   P(x, y)  2
   EPОёвӢҶ [ПҲ(y, вҹЁwm,l z, )вҹ©2r ] вүӨ EQ [UвҹЁОёвӢҶ ,wm,l вҹ©              ]1/2 В· EQ [ПҲ(y, x)4r ]1/2 вүІ rCp 4r ,
                                                   Q(x, y)
where the first inequality exactly repeats Eq. (E.12) and the second inequality holds by Assump-
tion 4.1(c). On the other hand, we have that EPОёвӢҶ [вҹЁzi , vвҹ©2r ]1/2r вүӨ r1/2 . Since the second term in
Eq. (F.28) is bounded by O(1), we conclude that
                                            EPОёвӢҶ [|вҹЁgm,1 , vвҹ©|r ]1/r вүІ rCp +1/2 .
Thus, Lemma J.3 implies that there exists a {(zi , yi )}iвҲҲ[n] -measurable event Em,2 with probability at
least 1 вҲ’ O(dвҲ’cвҲ’1 /T ), on which for any v вҲҲ {e1 , e2 , . . . , ed }, it holds that
                                r
                                  EPОёвӢҶ [вҹЁgm,1 , vвҹ©2 ] В· log(dc+1 T ) log(dc+1 T ) В· log(dc+1 T n)Cp +1/2
   вҹЁgm , vвҹ© вҲ’ EPОёвӢҶ [вҹЁgm , vвҹ©] вүІ                                       +
                                                  n                                    n
                                 s
                                                         sвӢҶ вҲ’1
                                     Оі 2 + Пө2 log(k)           + LвҲ’1 В· log(d) log(d)Cp +3/2
                              вүІ                                                   +            ,
                                                          n                            n
given that T, n are at most of polynomial rate in d. Since we assume that
                                                  вӢҶ              вҲ’1
                      n = в„Ұ (Оі 2 + Пө2 log(k))s вҲ’1 + LвҲ’1              В· log(d)2Cp +2 ,
the above inequality can be further simplified as
                                            s
                                                                 sвӢҶ вҲ’1
                                                Оі 2 + Пө2 log(k)        + LвҲ’1 В· log(d)
               вҹЁgm , vвҹ© вҲ’ EPОёвӢҶ [вҹЁgm , vвҹ©] вүІ                                           .
                                                                  n
Additionally, Em,2 is the desired event. This concludes the proof of Proposition F.6.

F. 5       P R O O F S F O R T E C H N I C A L R E S U LT S I N T H E S PA R S E C A S E

Proof of Lemma F.1. With slighly abuse of notation, we assume that ОёвӢҶ вҲј Unif(SkвҲ’1 ). We first
consider the event E0,вҲһ = {вҲҘОёвӢҶ вҲҘвҲһ вүӨ C В· k вҲ’1/2 log(k)1/2 }. From the proof of Lemma J.6, we see
that
                  P(вҲҘОёвӢҶ вҲҘвҲһ вүҘ t) вүӨ 2k В· P(Оё1вӢҶ вүҘ t) вүӨ 2k exp(вҲ’k/16) + 2k exp(вҲ’t2 k/4).
Take t = C В· k вҲ’1/2 log(k)1/2 , we have that the failure probability is upper bounded by
                      2
2k exp(вҲ’k/16) + 2k 1вҲ’C /4 .
                                                                    d.
For the r-norm,    we leverage the property that ОёвӢҶ = Z/вҲҘZвҲҘ2 where Z вҲј N (0, Ik ). Now,
вҲҘZвҲҘ22 =             2           2        2
           P
             iвүӨk i , where Zi вҲ’ E[Zi ] вүҘ вҲ’1. Applying one-sided BernsteinвҖҷs inequality with
                  Z
failure probability k вҲ’c0 , we have that
                                           p
                               вҲҘZвҲҘ22 вүӨ k + 2c0 k log(k) + c0 log(k)/3.


                                                             59
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


On the other hand, note that we have for c1 > 2 that
                  p                            p
   P(max |Zi | > 2c1 log k) вүӨ k В· P(|Z1 | > 2c1 log k) вүӨ k exp{вҲ’c log k} = k 1вҲ’c1 ,
       iвүӨk

To apply BernsteinвҖҷs inequality, we note that
                                              p
                          E[|Zi |r В· 1{|Z1 | вүӨ 2c1 log k}] вүӨ E[|Zi |2r ]1/2 ;
                                              p
                         E[|Zi |2r В· 1{|Z1 | вүӨ 2c1 log k}] вүӨ E[|Zi |2r ],
where E[Zi2r ] = (2r вҲ’ 1)!!. Therefore, it holds by truncated BernsteinвҖҷs inequality that
                  p                                  p            r
P вҲҘZвҲҘrr > (k + 2c2 k log(k)) В· E[|Z1 |2r ]1/2 +         2C log(k) В· c2 log(k)/3 вүӨ k 1вҲ’c1 + k вҲ’c2

Combining the two bounds, we conclude that with probability 1 вҲ’ O(k 1вҲ’c0 вҲЁc1 вҲЁc2 ), it holds that
                                 r
                                         вҲҡ
                          d. вҲҘZвҲҘr    k + k log k + (log k)1+r/2
                  вҲҘОёвӢҶ вҲҘrr =        вүІ       вҲҡ                     вүІ k 1вҲ’r/2 ,
                             вҲҘZвҲҘr2    (k + k log k + log k)r/2
with probability at least 1 вҲ’ O(k вҲ’c ) for some constant c > 0.
                                                 P          вӢҶ
                                                                    вҲҡ
We now move on to consider the event E0,вҷҜ =         iвүӨk 1{|Оёi | вүҘ 1/ 2k} вүҘ k/4 . First, it holds by
the HoeffdingвҖҷs inequality that
                        X                             kp
                     P       1{Zi2 вүҘ 1/2} вҲ’ kp вүӨ           вүҘ 1 вҲ’ 2 exp(вҲ’2p2 k),
                                                       2
                         iвүӨk

where p = P(Z12 вүҘ 3/4) > 0.5. Denote above event as A1 . On the other hand, we have by the
BernsteinвҖҷs inequality that
                               X
                        P k вҲ’1   Zi2 вҲ’ 1 вүӨ 1/2 вүҘ 1 вҲ’ 2 exp{вҲ’k/32}.
                                       iвүӨk

Denote above event as A2 . Then on the event A1 вҲ© A2 , we have that
                      X n Z1            1 o X n 2              1 X 2o
                           1        >вҲҡ        =     1 Zi >           Zi
                              вҲҘZвҲҘ        2k                   2k
                      iвүӨk                       iвүӨk              iвүӨk
                                              A2 X           3
                                              вүҘ     1{Zi2 > }
                                                             4
                                                             iвүӨk
                                                         A1 kp
                                                вүҘ    > k/4.
                                                  2
                                              вҲҡ
In conclusion we have that P(|{i : |ОёiвӢҶ | > 1/ 2k}| > k/4) вүҘ P(A1 вҲ© A2 ) вүҘ 1 вҲ’ exp{вҲ’c3 k} for
some constant c3 > 0.



Proof of Lemma F.3. Clearly, it holds that
                           вҲҘОіОё + Оҫm,l вҲҘ2 вүҘ вҲҘОҫm,l вҲҘ2 вҲ’ Оі В· вҲҘОҫm,l вҲҘ2 вүҘ 1/2.
Bu substituting this lower bound for the denominator, we have for any j, l that
                                       |вҹЁwm,l , ej вҹ©| вүӨ 2(Оі|Оёj | + |вҹЁОҫm,l , ej вҹ©|)
                                                      вүӨ 2(Оі|Оёj | + Пө).
The last line holds by the definition of Em (Пө). On the other hand, we have for any l that
                            X
 |вҹЁwm,l , ОёвӢҶ вҹ©| вүӨ 2(Оі|ПҒ| +       Оҫm,l,j В· ОёjвӢҶ В· 1{j вҲҲ П•вӢҶ вҲ© П•m,l })
                           jвҲҲ[d]
                               X                                       1/2       X                             1/2
              вүӨ 2Оі|ПҒ| + 2                2
                                        Оҫm,l,j В· 1{j вҲҲ П•вӢҶ вҲ© П•m,l }           В·       ОёjвӢҶ 2 В· 1{j вҲҲ П•вӢҶ вҲ© П•m,l }
                                   j                                             j

              вүӨ 2Оі|ПҒ| + 2 sup |Оҫm,l,j | В· вҲҘОёвӢҶ вҲҘвҲһ В· |П•вӢҶ вҲ© П•m,l |
                               j



                                                           60
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


To proceed, note that on the event Erm вҲ©Em (Пө), it holds that |П•вӢҶ вҲ©П•m,l | вүӨ log k and that supj |Оҫm,l,j | вүӨ
Пө. Since we assume that вҲҘОёвӢҶ вҲҘвҲһ вүӨ 1/ log k, it holds that
                                         |вҹЁwm,l , ОёвӢҶ вҹ©| вүӨ 2(Оі|ПҒ| + Пө).

Now we turn to consider the correlation between wm,l and wm,lвҖІ .
                                         X
             |вҹЁwm,l , wm,lвҖІ вҹ©| вүӨ 2 Оі 2 +    |Оҫm,l,j | В· |Оҫm,lвҖІ ,j | В· 1{j вҲҲ П•m,l вҲ© П•m,lвҖІ }
                                                     j
                                               X
                                         +Оі              |Оёj | В· |Оҫm,l,j | В· 1{j вҲҲ П•m,l вҲ© supp(Оё)}
                                                 j
                                               X
                                         +Оі              |Оёj | В· |Оҫm,lвҖІ ,j | В· 1{j вҲҲ П•m,lвҖІ вҲ© supp(Оё)} .
                                                 j

For the second term, we have with the definition of Em (Пө) that
            X
                |Оҫm,l,j | В· |Оҫm,lвҖІ ,j | В· 1{j вҲҲ П•m,l вҲ© П•m,lвҖІ } вүӨ max |Оҫm,l,j |2 В· |П•m,l вҲ© П•m,lвҖІ |
                                                                           j,l
              j

                                                                      вүӨ Пө2 log k.
For the third term, applying the Cauchy-Schwarz inequality, we have that
         X                                                         p
      Оі      |Оёj | В· |Оҫm,lвҖІ ,j | В· 1{j вҲҲ П•m,l вҲ© П•m,lвҖІ } вүӨ ОівҲҘОёвҲҘ2 В· Пө log k =вүӨ Оі 2 + Пө2 log k.
          j

Putting them together, we have that
                                     |вҹЁwm,l , wm,lвҖІ вҹ©| вүӨ 4(Оі 2 + Пө2 log k).
This concludes the proof of Lemma F.3.

Proof of Proposition F.4. For conciseness, we momentarily drop the subscript m, l in the following
analysis. Conditioning on fixed П•, we have that
                                                                    вӢҶ s
                  Ew [вҹЁw, ОёвӢҶ вҹ©s ] = Ew вҲҘОіОё + ОҫвҲҘвҲ’s         вӢҶ

                                                2 В· ОівҹЁОё, Оё вҹ© + вҹЁОҫ, Оё вҹ©
                                                                     вӢҶ s
                                  = EП• Ew вҲҘОіОё + ОҫвҲҘвҲ’s

                                                   2 В· ОіПҒ + вҹЁОҫ, PП• Оё вҹ©     П• .               (F.29)
                                                              s+1
Given
      the polarization
                    вӢҶ s
                         level  Оі = o(1), we see that вҲҘОіОё + ОҫвҲҘ2 вүғ 1 Вұ o(1), and it suffices to evaluate
Ew ОіПҒ + вҹЁОҫ, PП• Оё вҹ©          П• . Without loss of generality, we assume that 1 вҲҲ П• and we can translate
PП• Оё into the first coordinate by the isotropy of Оҫ over SkвҲ’1 (П•). To this end, we can characterize the
     вӢҶ

first term as follows:
                      s                                      s
E ОіПҒ + вҹЁОҫ, PП• ОёвӢҶ вҹ©        П• = E ОіПҒ + вҹЁОҫ, вҲҘPП• ОёвӢҶ вҲҘ2 В· e1 вҹ©

                                                               П•
                                  s
                                 X 2вҢҠs/2вҢӢ
                                                (ОіПҒ)sвҲ’r В· вҲҘPП• ОёвӢҶ вҲҘr2 В· E Оҫ1r П• В· 1{r even}

                              =
                                 r=0
                                          r
                                   вҢҠs/2вҢӢ
                             (i)   X         2вҢҠs/2вҢӢ                                вҲ’r
                             вүғ                        (ОіПҒ)2вҢҠs/2вҢӢвҲ’2r В· вҲҘPП• ОёвӢҶ вҲҘ2r
                                                                              2 В·k    В· (ОіПҒ)1{s odd}
                                   r=0
                                               2r
                             = (ОіПҒ)1{s odd} В· (ОіПҒ + k вҲ’1/2 вҲҘPП• ОёвӢҶ вҲҘ2 )2вҢҠs/2вҢӢ + (ОіПҒ вҲ’ k вҲ’1/2 вҲҘPП• ОёвӢҶ вҲҘ2 )2вҢҠs/2вҢӢ /2


                             вүғ (ОіПҒ)1{s odd} В· (Оі|ПҒ| + k вҲ’1/2 вҲҘPП• ОёвӢҶ вҲҘ2 )2вҢҠs/2вҢӢ .                          (F.30)
Here, (i) holds by applying Lemma I.5 and вүғ denotes the equality that is up to a s-dependent
multiplicative constant.
Putting together Eq. (F.29) and (F.30), we conclude that
                  Ew [вҹЁw, ОёвӢҶ вҹ©s | П•] вүғ (ОіПҒ)1{s odd} (Оі|ПҒ| + k вҲ’1/2 вҲҘPП• ОёвӢҶ вҲҘ2 )sвҲ’1{s odd} .                (F.31)


                                                              61
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


In the sequel, we consider averaging over П•. From Eq. (F.31), we see that it suffices to consider
EП• [(Оі|ПҒ| + k вҲ’1/2 вҲҘPП• ОёвӢҶ вҲҘ2 )r ] for some r вүҘ 2. We alter the notation to facilitate some deferred
calculation. Consider m вҠӮ [d] with constant size |m| = O(1) that does not scale with k or d. Now
define П•m вҲј Unif{Sk,m }, where Sk,m = {S вҠӮ [d] : |S| = k, m вҠӮ S}. It is easily seen that this
definition covers previous definition of Sk,m by setting m = {m}. We characterize the magnitude of
EП•m [вҲҘPП•m ОёвӢҶ вҲҘr2 ] from both sides as follows. For the lower bound, we have that
                                            h            X                      r/2 i
                   EП•m [вҲҘPП•m ОёвӢҶ вҲҘr2 ] = EП•m вҲҘОёm  вӢҶ 2
                                                   вҲҘ2 +      |ОёjвӢҶ |2 1{j вҲҲ П•m }
                                                                       j вҲҲm
                                                                         /
                                                h         X                    i
                                                   вӢҶ r
                                           вүҘ EП•m вҲҘОёm вҲҘr +   |ОёjвӢҶ |r 1{j вҲҲ П•m }
                                                                      j вҲҲm
                                                                        /
                                           (i)             вӢҶ r   k
                                           вүғ (1 вҲ’ k/d) В· вҲҘОёm вҲҘr + В· вҲҘОёвӢҶ вҲҘrr
                                                                              d
                                           (ii)      k 1вҲ’r/2
                                               вӢҶ r                    r/2
                                           вүі вҲҘОёm вҲҘr +  В·k      В· вҲҘОёвӢҶ вҲҘ2
                                                     d
                                         вӢҶ r       k 2 вҲ’r/2
                                     = вҲҘОёm вҲҘr +        В·k    .
                                                    d
Here (i) holds by the fact that E[1{j вҲҲ П•m }] вүғ k/d for j вҲҲ / m, and (ii) is a consequence of JensenвҖҷs
inequality. For the upper bound, we have that
                           h           X                         r/2 i
  EП•m [вҲҘPП• ОёвӢҶ вҲҘr2 ] = EП•m вҲҘОёm   вӢҶ 2
                                  вҲҘ2 +     |ОёjвӢҶ |2 В· 1{j вҲҲ П•m }
                                                 j вҲҲm
                                                   /
                       h                             X                                    r/2 i
                          вӢҶ r
                  вүІ EП•m вҲҘОёm вҲҘr +                           |ОёjвӢҶ |2 В· 1{j вҲҲ П•m }
                                                    j вҲҲm
                                                      /
                                                    |            {z               }
                                                  |(П•m вҲ©П•вӢҶ )\{m}| nonzero summands
                  Jensen          h                         X                      i
                        вӢҶ r
                    вүІ вҲҘОёm вҲҘr + EП•m |(П•m вҲ© П•вӢҶ ) \ m|r/2вҲ’1 В·    |ОёjвӢҶ |r В· 1{j вҲҲ П•m } . (F.32)
                                                                                      j вҲҲm
                                                                                        /
Next, we apply Cauchy-Schwarz inequality as follows:
                      hX                                                i
           вӢҶ r
(F.32) = вҲҘОёm вҲҘr + EП•m     |ОёjвӢҶ |r В· 1{j вҲҲ П•m }2 В· |(П•m вҲ© П•вӢҶ ) \ m|r/2вҲ’1
                             j вҲҲm
                               /
                           hX                                  i1/2           hX                                            i1/2
          вӢҶ r
      вүӨ вҲҘОёm вҲҘr + EП•m                 |ОёjвӢҶ |2r В· 1{j вҲҲ П•m }            В· EП•m              1{j вҲҲ П•m } В· |(П•m вҲ© П•вӢҶ ) \ m|rвҲ’2
                             j вҲҲm
                               /                                                  j вҲҲm
                                                                                    /
                  k X           1/2                            1/2
          вӢҶ r
                      |ОёjвӢҶ |2r      В· EП•m |(П•m вҲ© П•вӢҶ ) \ m|rвҲ’1

      = вҲҘОёm вҲҘr +    В·
                  d
                            j вҲҲm
                              /
      (i)            k                1/2   k 2  (rвҲ’1)/2
           вӢҶ r
       вүІ вҲҘОёm вҲҘr +          В· k 1вҲ’r       В·
                       d                    d
                       2
                     k
       = вҲҘОёm вӢҶ r
               вҲҘr +      В· k вҲ’r/2 ,
                      d
where (i) holds by E0,2r and  вҲҡ  Lemma J.7. In conclusion, we have that EП•m [вҲҘPП• ОёвӢҶ вҲҘr2 ] вүғ вҲҘОёm
                                                                                              вӢҶ r
                                                                                                вҲҘr +
k вҲ’r/2 В· Оҙ given that k = o( d). Combining this result with Eq. (F.31), we obtain that
       Ew [вҹЁw, ОёвӢҶ вҹ©s ] вүғ (ОіПҒ)1{s odd} (Оі|ПҒ| + k вҲ’1/2 |Оёm
                                                       вӢҶ
                                                         | + k вҲ’1 Оҙ1/(sвҲ’1{s odd}) )sвҲ’1{s odd}
where Оҙ = k 2 /d = o(1) and Оҙr = Оҙ 1/r .

G    S TAT I S T I C A L Q U E R Y L O W E R B O U N D F O R S PA R S E S I G N A L
     R E C OV E RY
                                       вӢҶ
In this section, we provide a k s sample complexity lower bound for the single index model with
k-sparse signal when querying a VSTAT oracle. The statistical query (SQ) framework was developed
in Feldman et al. (2017) and for completeness, we present essential definition and results here.


                                                              62
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Definition G.1 (VSTAT Oracle). Let DвӢҶ be the input distribution over domain X . For a sample size
parameter n > 0, VSTAT(DвӢҶ , n) oracle is the oracle that for any query function
                                                                             p h : X вҶ’ [0, 1],
returns a value v вҲҲ [p вҲ’ П„, p + П„ ], where p = ExвҲјDвӢҶ [h(x)] and П„ = max{tвҲ’1 , p(1 вҲ’ p)/n}.

To define a key concept statistical query dimension, we first introduce the following notation.
Definition G.2 (Relative Pairwise Correlation). Given two distributions D1 , D2 вҲҲ вҲҶ(X ) and a
reference distribution D вҲҲ вҲҶ(X ),

                                                   D1 (x) D2 (x)
                          ПҮD (D1 , D2 ) = ExвҲјD             В·          вҲ’ 1.
                                                   D(x) D(x)
Definition G.3 (Statistical Dimension). For Оі s > 0, О· вҲҲ (0, 1), domain X , a set of distributions D
over X , the statistical dimension SDA(D, Оі s, О·) of D with average correlation Оі   s and solution set
bound О· is defined as the largest value mвҖІ such that there exists a reference distribution D вҲҲ вҲҶ(X )
and a finite set of distributions DD вҠҶ D which can depend on the reference D with the following
property: for any solution DвӢҶ вҲҲ D,

     (i) |DD \ {DвӢҶ }| вүҘ (1 вҲ’ О·)|DD |;
                          вҖІ                          вҖІ
     (ii) for any subset DD вҠҶ DD \ {DвӢҶ } such that |DD | вүҘ |DD \ {DвӢҶ }|/mвҖІ ,
                                     1      X
                                     вҖІ |2           ПҮD (Di , Dj ) вүӨ Оі
                                                                    s.
                                   |DD            вҖІ
                                               Di ,Dj вҲҲDD


The above definition of the statistical dimension is a speical case of the original Definition 3.1 in
Feldman et al. (2017) where we consider a search problem of exact recovery of the ground truth DвӢҶ .
Definition G.4 ((Оі, ОІ)-correlated Distributions). We say that a set of m distributions D =
{D1 , . . . , Dm } over X is (Оі, ОІ)-correlated relative to a reference distribution D вҲҲ вҲҶ(X ) if:

                                                    ОІ for i = j вҲҲ [m]
                                  ПҮD (Di , Dj ) вүӨ
                                                    Оі for i Мё= j вҲҲ [m].

The following lemma borrowed from Lemma 3.10 of Feldman et al. (2017) provides a lower bound on
the statistical dimension in terms of the (Оі, ОІ)-correlation property of the set of candidate distributions.
Lemma G.5. Given a set of candidate distributions D that are (Оі, ОІ)-correlated with respect to a
reference distribution D, then for any Оі вҖІ > 0 and О· > |D|вҲ’1 ,
                                                            (|D| вҲ’ 1)Оі вҖІ
                                  SDA(D, Оі + Оі вҖІ , О·) вүҘ                  .
                                                               ОІвҲ’Оі

The main result in the SQ framework is the following statement that relates the number of queries
required to the statistical dimension, which is borrowed from Theorem 3.2 of Feldman et al. (2017).
Lemma G.6. Let X be a domain and D be a set of candidate distributions over X . For any Оі      s>0
and О· вҲҲ (0, 1), Any randomized SQ algorithm that solves the problem of finding the input distribution
DвӢҶ вҲҲ D with probability at least Оұ > О· requires at least (Оұ вҲ’ О·)/(1 вҲ’ О·) В· SDA(D, Оі    s, О·) calls to
the VSTAT(DвӢҶ , (3s   Оі )вҲ’1 ) oracle.

Our strategy for proving the lower bound is to first construct a set of candidate distributions D that
are (Пү(k вҲ’1 ), ОІ)-correlated with respect to reference distribution Q with ОІ = DПҮ2 (PОёвӢҶ вҲҘ Q) and
|D| exponentially large. Then by Lemma G.5 and Lemma G.6, we can derive the desired hardness
result. It remains to construct the set of candidate distributions D that are (Пү(k вҲ’1 ), ОІ)-correlated
with respect to Q. To this end, we introduce the following result on the packing number of k-sparse
vectors.
Lemma G.7 (Packing Number for k-Sparse Vectors). Define ПҒ(u, v) = |вҹЁu, vвҹ©|. Let packing number
MПҒ (d, k, t) be the maximal cardinality of the set of k-sparse vectors in SdвҲ’1 such that ПҒ(u, v) < t
for any u Мё= v in the set. We have for any t вҲҲ (1/k, 1) that
                                                                           !
                                         1        min (d вҲ’ k)t2 , 3kt
                         MПҒ (d, k, t) вүҘ В· exp                                .
                                         2                    8


                                                    63
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


With all these ingredients in place, we are ready to prove the main theorem.

Proof of Theorem 5.4. Let us pick parameter Оәd вҲҲ ((log d)2 , k/4) that scales with d and set
                                      r
                                           Оәd Оәd
                            t вүҘ max            ,      вҲҲ (1/k, 1/2).                          (G.1)
                                         d вҲ’ k 3k
Note that t вҲҲ (1/k, 1/2) is able to hold by our choice of Оәd and condition that Пү((log d)2 ) вүӨ k вүӨ d/2.
In this vein, we can pick D to be the maximal set of distributions PОё for some k-sparse vectors
Оё вҲҲ SdвҲ’1 satisfying ПҒ(Оё, ОёвҖІ ) < t for any Оё Мё= ОёвҖІ in the set. It follows from plugging (G.1) into
Lemma G.7 that |D| вүҘ exp(Оәd /8)/2, which is super polynomially large in d for our choice of Оәd .
Next, we configure the remaining parameters in Lemma G.5 and Lemma G.6. We choose the reference
distribution to be Q, in which the covariate z is independent of the output y. For ОІ, we note that
                                    ПҮQ (PОё , PОё ) = DПҮ2 (PОё вҲҘ Q) = O(1),
which is a constant independent of Оё due to the rotational invariance of the likelihood ratio with
respect to Оё. Thus, we define this quantity as B can just set ОІ = DПҮ2 (PОёвӢҶ вҲҘ Q) = B. For Оі, we note
that for any two PОё , PОёвҖІ in D for Оё Мё= ОёвҖІ ,

                             PОё (x) PОёвҖІ (x)
  |ПҮQ (PОё , PОёвҖІ )| = ExвҲјQ           В·           вҲ’1
                             Q(x) Q(x)
                           "                                                               #
                                   X                             X
                   = ExвҲјQ 1 +           О¶s (y)hs (вҹЁОё, zвҹ©) В· 1 +      О¶sвҖІ (y)hsвҖІ (вҹЁОёвҖІ , zвҹ©)   вҲ’1
                                      sвүҘsвӢҶ                               sвҖІ вүҘsвӢҶ
                                                                                                              вӢҶ
                     X
                                     2         вҖІ   s
                                                         X
                                                                         2    s              2       sвӢҶ     ts +1
                 =          EQ [О¶s (y) ] В· |вҹЁОё, Оё вҹ©| вүӨ          EQ [О¶s (y) ] В· t вүӨ EQ [О¶ (y) ] В· t
                                                                                       sвӢҶ                 +       .
                                                                                                            1вҲ’t
                     sвүҘsвӢҶ                                sвүҘsвӢҶ

Here, the third equality follows from the fact that only when s = sвҖІ , the cross term
EQ [hs (вҹЁОё, zвҹ©)hs (вҹЁОёвҖІ , zвҹ©)] is non-zero. In particular, by the property of the Gaussian noise opera-
tor introduced in (B.3), we have that EQ [hs (вҹЁОё, zвҹ©)hs (вҹЁОёвҖІ , zвҹ©)] = вҹЁОё, ОёвҖІ вҹ©s < ts . For the last inequality
above, we simply use the fact that EQ [О¶s (y)2 ] вүӨ 1 for any s (Damian et al., 2024) and t < 1. Now,
we conclude that

                                                     t          вӢҶ                         вӢҶ
              |ПҮQ (PОё , PОёвҖІ )| вүӨ EQ [О¶sвӢҶ (y)2 ] +           В· ts вүӨ EQ [О¶sвӢҶ (y)2 ] + 1 В· ts .
                                                   1вҲ’t
                                                вӢҶ         вӢҶ
We thus set Оі вҖІ = Оі = EQ [О¶sвӢҶ (y)2 ] + 1 В· ts = Оҳ(ts ). Finally, we set О· = 1/3 and Оұ = 2/3. Then

all the conditions in both Lemma G.5 and Lemma G.6 are satisfied and we have
                                               (|D| вҲ’ 1)Оі   |D|Оі   Оі exp(Оәd /8)
                      SDA(D, 2Оі, 1/3) вүҘ                   вүҘ      вүҘ              .
                                                 ОІвҲ’Оі         2ОІ        4ОІ
Lastly, recall that we have |вҹЁОё, ОёвҖІ вҹ©| вүӨ t for any Оё Мё= ОёвҖІ in D, which means that in order to achieve
alignment at least 2t with the true signal ОёвӢҶ , we need to exactly identify the distribution PОёвӢҶ . Con-
sequently, by Lemma G.6, we have that any randomized SQ algorithm that solves the problem of
achieving alignment 2t with probability at least 2/3 requires at least Оі exp(Оәd /8)/(8B) calls to the
VSTAT(PОёвӢҶ , (6Оі)вҲ’1 ) oracle.

Simplification of the lower bound. To simplify the lower bound, let us take Оәd = (log d)c /2 for
some constant c > 2. Thus, the alignment 2t is upper bounded by
                                                            вҲҡ
                                        r (k вҲ’1 )

                                        Пү            if k < вҲҡd
                                 2t вүӨ                          ,
                                        r (dвҲ’1/2 ) if k вүҘ d
                                        Пү
where Пүr (В·) hides some poly-logarithmic factors. The number of queries is still super polynomially
large in d. Following from (G.1), we can safely set
                                                              p
                             (log d)c /k              2
                                                                         c
                                             if (log
                                                p d) < k < d(log d) ,
                        t= p           c                 c
                                (log d) /d if d(log d) вүӨ k вүӨ d/2


                                                         64
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Hence, the number of sample
                                 пЈұ       вӢҶ
                                 пЈІ ks вӢҶ
                                                                          p
                           вҲ’sвӢҶ                           if (log d)2 < k < d(log d)c
                       вҲ’1 t        (log d)cs
                   (6Оі) =      вүғ          вӢҶ                                          .
                                 пЈі ds /2
                                                            p
                            6               csвӢҶ /2       if d(log d)c вүӨ k вүӨ d/2
                                        6(log d)


Hence, we have established the desired lower bound on the sample complexity.
Remark G.8 (Difference between CSQ and SQ lower bound). The following is a comparison between
our SQ lower bound and the CSQ lower bound in Vural & Erdogdu (2024):

       вҖў Difference: CSQ is constrained to operate on a specific set of functions, whereas SQ is not.
         In this sense, CSQ creates a large family of functions with small average correlation, while
         SQ constructs a large covering net over the support of Оё as a hard instance, allowing for
         arbitrary query forms.
       вҖў Similarity: Both methods rely on Bernstein concentration inequalities on the correla-
         tion levelвҲҡfor two random sparse vectors. This leads to the critical correlation threshold
         max{1/ d, 1/k}, where d is the dimensionality and k is the sparsity level.

G.1     PROOF OF TECHNICAL LEMMAS FOR SQ LOWER BOUND

Proof of Lemma G.7. We use the probability method to prove the existence of a set of k-sparse vectors
in SdвҲ’1 with the desired property. We i.i.d. sample m vectors Пү (1) , . . . , Пү (m) from the following
distribution:
                                             пЈұ
                                                1
                                             пЈІ вҲҡk ,
                                             пЈҙ         w.p. 21 if j вҲҲ П•
               Пү : П• вҲј Unif(Sk ), Пүj = вҲ’ вҲҡk , w.p. 21 if j вҲҲ П• , j вҲҲ [d].
                                                  1
                                             пЈҙ
                                               0,      jвҲҲ
                                                        / П•.
                                             пЈі

where we recall that Sk is the set of all size-k subsets in [d]. Since each Пү (i) is i.i.d. sampled, we can
equivalently view вҹЁПү (i) , Пү (j) вҹ© for i Мё= j as a random variable sampled from the following distribution:
                    d   RX
    вҹЁПү (i) , Пү (j) вҹ© =       , where RX = r1 + . . . , rX , X вҲј Hypergeometric(d, k, k), (G.2)
                         k
where r1 , r2 , . . . are i.i.d. Rademacher random variables. Let us consider random variable W dis-
tributed as
                    d RY                                                           k

             W =            , where RY = r1 + . . . + rY , Y вҲј Binomial k,             .       (G.3)
                        k                                                        dвҲ’k
We will invoke the following fact on the tail probability regarding the above two random variables.
Proposition G.9. For RX and RY defined in (G.2) and (G.3), respectively, we have that P(RX вүҘ
t) вүӨ 2P(RY вүҘ t) for any t > 1.

The proof of the proposition is deferred to the end of the proof. Thus, it suffices to study the tail
                               d Pk
probability of W . Note that W = j=1 wj where wj are i.i.d. sampled from
                                   пЈұ
                                     1               k
                                   пЈІk,
                                   пЈҙ         w.p. 2(dвҲ’k)
                             wj = вҲ’ k1 , w.p. 2(dвҲ’k) k
                                                           , j вҲҲ [k].
                                                       k
                                   пЈҙ
                                   пЈі0,       w.p. 1 вҲ’ dвҲ’k
where E[wj ] = 0 and E[wj2 ] = (k(d вҲ’ k))вҲ’1 . Hence, we can apply the Bernstein inequality to obtain
that for any t > 1/k,
                                                      k(t/k)2 /2

       (i)  (j)
 P(вҹЁПү , Пү вҹ© вүҘ t) вүӨ 2P(W вүҘ t) вүӨ 2 exp вҲ’
                                                (k(d вҲ’ k))вҲ’1 + t/(3k 2 )
                                          2 2
                                                                             (d вҲ’ k)t2 3kt

                                         k t
                     = 2 exp вҲ’ 2                         вүӨ 2 exp вҲ’ min                  ,          .
                                 2k /(d вҲ’ k) + 2kt/3                             4         4


                                                    65
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Suppose we randomly sample m i.i.d. Пү (i) from the same distribution. Then the probability that all
such pair |вҹЁПү (i) , Пү (j) вҹ©| < t for t > 1/k is lower bounded by

       P |вҹЁПү (i) , Пү (j) вҹ©| < t, вҲҖi Мё= j вүҘ 1 вҲ’ m2 В· 2P(вҹЁПү (i) , Пү (j) вҹ© вүҘ t)


                                                                        (d вҲ’ k)t2 3kt

                                           вүҘ 1 вҲ’ 4m2 В· exp вҲ’ min                 ,       .
                                                                             4     4
Ensuring that the probability is nonzero will give us a valid construction of the set D. Therefore, there
must exist a D satisfying |вҹЁПү (i) , Пү (j) вҹ©| < t for any i Мё= j and with size
                                                                           !
                                       1           min (d вҲ’ k)t2 , 3kt
                             |D| вүҘ В· exp                                      .
                                       2                       8

Hence, we complete the proof.

Next, we aim to present the proof of Proposition G.9. To proceed, let us introduce the definition of
stochastic dominance.
Definition G.10 (Stochastic Dominance). For any real-valued random variable X and Y , we say
                                                            s.t.
that X is stochastically dominated by Y , denoted by X вүӨ Y , if P(X вүҘ t) вүӨ P(Y вүҘ t) for every t.

The following result is from Theorem A, Chapter 2 of Szekli (2012).
                                  s.t.
Proposition G.11. We have X вүӨ Y if and only if there exists a coupling (X,
                                                                        p Yp ) with law(X)
                                                                                        p =
law(X) and law(Y ) = law(Y ) such that X вүӨ Y almost surely.
                p                      p   p
                                                                                                        s.t.
Proposition G.12 (Theorem 1.1, Klenke & Mattner (2010)). Hypergeometric(d, k, k)                        вүӨ
Binomial(k, k/(d вҲ’ k)).

Another way to think of the problem is that Hypergeometric(d, k, k) corresponds to the number of
times a black ball is drawn when sampling for k times from an urn with d вҲ’ k white ball and k black
ball without replacement, while Binomial(k, k/(d вҲ’ k)) corresponds to sampling in the same urn but
with replacement. We claim the following fact on the tail probability of sum of Rademacher random
variables.
Proposition G.13 (Sum of Rademacher Random Variables). Let r1 , r2 , . . . be i.i.d. Rademacher
random variables. Let Rl = r1 + . . . + rl for l = 1, 2, . . .. Let pl (В·) be the probability mass function
of Bl . Then the following holds for any l = 1, 2, . . .:

      1. pl is symmetric and supported on the set of odd integers if l is odd, and supported on the set
         of even integers if l is even.
      2. For i вҲҲ supp(pl ) and i вүҘ 0, pl (i) is a non-increasing function of i.
      3. P(Rl вүҘ t) вүӨ P(Rl+2 вүҘ t) for any t > 1.
      4. P(Rl вүҘ t) вүӨ 2P(Rl+1 вүҘ t) for any t > 1.
      5. P(Rl вүҘ t) вүӨ 2P(Rl+lвҖІ вүҘ t) for any l вүҘ 1 and lвҖІ вүҘ 1.

Proof of Proposition G.13. The first claim is immediate from the symmetry of the Rademacher
random variables and the fact that the sum of an odd number of Rademacher random variables is odd,
while the sum of an even number of Rademacher random variables is even. For the second claim, we
note that

                                       вҲ’l       l
                            pl (i) = 2 В·               , i вҲҲ supp(pl ),
                                            (i + l)/2
which is a non-increasing function for i вүҘ 0. For the third claim, we let tвӢҶ = 2вҢҲt/2вҢү if l is even and
tвӢҶ = 2вҢҲ(t вҲ’ 1)/2вҢү + 1 if l is odd. In other words, tвӢҶ = min{П„ вҲҲ supp(pl ) : П„ вүҘ t}. Then we have


                                                    66
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


that
        P(Rl+2 вүҘ t) = P(Rl вүҘ tвӢҶ + 2) + P(Rl = tвӢҶ ) В· P(rl+1 + rl+2 вүҘ 0)
                          + P(Rl = tвӢҶ вҲ’ 2) В· P(rl+1 + rl+2 = 2)
                    = P(Rl вүҘ tвӢҶ ) + (P(Rl = tвӢҶ вҲ’ 2) вҲ’ P(Rl = tвӢҶ )) В· P(rl+1 + rl+2 = 2)
                    вүҘ P(Rl вүҘ tвӢҶ ) = P(Rl вүҘ t).
where in the first equality we use the fact that rl+1 + rl+2 is supported on {вҲ’2, 0, 2} and in the
second equality we use the symmetric property of the distribution of rl+1 + rl+2 . The last inequality
follows from the monotonicity of the probability mass function of Rl for tвӢҶ вҲ’ 2 вүҘ 0 when t > 1. For
the forth claim, we similarly have that
                                                                1              1
 P(Rl+1 вүҘ t) вүҘ P(Rl вүҘ tвӢҶ ) вҲ’ P(Rl = tвӢҶ ) В· P(rl+1 = вҲ’1) вүҘ         P(Rl вүҘ tвӢҶ ) = P(Rl вүҘ t).
                                                                2              2
The last claim follows from a combination of the third and forth claims where
                      1                     1                                1
    P(Rl+lвҖІ вүҘ t) вүҘ P(Rl+2вҢҠlвҖІ /2вҢӢ вүҘ t) вүҘ P(Rl+2вҢҠlвҖІ /2вҢӢвҲ’2 вүҘ t) вүҘ . . . вүҘ P(Rl вүҘ t).
                      2                     2                                2
Hence, the proof is complete.

Next, we proceed to the proof of Proposition G.9.

Proof of Proposition G.9. By Proposition G.12 and Proposition G.11, there exists a coupling X,
                                                                                            p Yp
with law(X) = law(X) and law(Y ) = law(Y ) such that X вүӨ Y almost surely where X вҲј
          p                       p                         p     p
Hypergeometric(d, k, k) and Y вҲј Binomial(k, k/(d вҲ’ k)).
Consider i.i.d. Rademacher random variables r1 , r2 , . . . , rk . Let Rl = r1 + . . . + rl for l = 1, 2, . . ..
Since RX x = r1 + . . . + rX
                                  p d
                              x | X = 2Binomial(X, 1/2) вҲ’ L and RYp = r1 + . . . + rYp | Y =
                                                     p                                                 p d
2Binomial(Yp , 1/2) вҲ’ L for the coupling (X, p Yp ) with X  p вүӨ Yp , we consider the conditional random
variable

                                                  1,       w.p. 1/2
           rX+i  | (R X+iвҲ’1
                            , X,
                              p  Yp ) = rX+i
                                             =                         , i = 1, 2, . . . , Yp вҲ’ X
                                                                                                p
            x         x                   x
                                                  вҲ’1, w.p. 1/2
The equality holds by the i.i.d. property of these Rademacher random variables. From the distributional
perspective, the distribution of RYp is obtained by conducting convolution with the Rademacher
distribution for Yp вҲ’ Xp times on the distribution of R x. Invoking Proposition G.13, we directly
                                                            X
conclude that P(RYp вүҘ t | X,  p Yp ) вүҘ P(R x вүҘ t | X,
                                              X
                                                      p Yp )/2 for any t > 1 and Yp вүҘ X.
                                                                                       p As Yp вүҘ X   p
holds almost surely, by the law of total probability, we arrive at the conclusion that P(RYp вүҘ t) вүҘ
P(RX x вүҘ t)/2 for any t > 1.


H      S U P P O R T I N G L E M M A S O N M O M E N T C A L C U L AT I O N S
Lemma H.1 (First moment). Under Assumption 4.1, for any s вүҘ 0, it holds for any y вҲҲ R and
w, Оё вҲҲ SdвҲ’1 that
                                    вҲҡ                               вҲҡ
 EzвҲјNd ПҲ(y, вҹЁw, zвҹ©)z В· hs (вҹЁОё, zвҹ©) = s + 1 В· ПҲps+1 (y) В· вҹЁw, Оёвҹ©s w + s В· ПҲpsвҲ’1 (y) В· вҹЁw, Оёвҹ©sвҲ’1 Оё,


in the L2 sense over the marginal distribution of y under Q.

Proof of Lemma H.1. For convenience, we denote ПҒ := вҹЁw, ОёвӢҶ вҹ©. We claim the following identities:
EzвҲјNd [ПҲ(y, wвҠӨ z)z В· hs (ОёвӢҶ вҠӨ z)]
            h                              i              h                               i
  = EzвҲјNd ПҲ(y, wвҠӨ z) В· ОёвӢҶ вҠӨ z В· hs (ОёвӢҶ вҠӨ z) В· ОёвӢҶ + EzвҲјNd ПҲ(y, wвҠӨ z) В· hs (ОёвӢҶ вҠӨ z) В· PОёвҠҘвӢҶ z (H.1)
            h                              i ОёвӢҶ вҲ’ ПҒw          h                              i w вҲ’ ПҒОёвӢҶ
  = EzвҲјNd ПҲ(y, wвҠӨ z) В· ОёвӢҶ вҠӨ z В· hs (ОёвӢҶ вҠӨ z) В·      2
                                                      + EzвҲјNd ПҲ(y, wвҠӨ z) В· wвҠӨ z В· hs (ОёвӢҶ вҠӨ z) В·     2
                                                                                                       .
    |                   {z                 } 1вҲ’ПҒ        |                 {z                 } 1вҲ’ПҒ
                       (I)                                              (II)


                                                      67
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Here, in the first identity, we project z in the direction of ОёвӢҶ and the orthogonal complement of ОёвӢҶ ,
where PОёвҠҘвӢҶ = I вҲ’ ОёвӢҶ ОёвӢҶ вҠӨ is the projection operator onto the orthogonal                 вӢҶ
                                                                       h complement of Оё . To see how
                                                                                                    i
the second identity holds, we first look at the second term EzвҲјNd ПҲ(y, wвҠӨ z) В· hs (ОёвӢҶ вҠӨ z) В· PОёвҠҘвӢҶ z .
For each direction v orthogonal to both ОёвӢҶ and w, we have
          h                                    i              h                          i
   EzвҲјNd ПҲ(y, wвҠӨ z) В· hs (ОёвӢҶ вҠӨ z) В· вҹЁPОёвҠҘвӢҶ z, vвҹ© = EzвҲјNd ,xвҲјN ПҲ(y, wвҠӨ z) В· hs (ОёвӢҶ вҠӨ z) В· x = 0.

                     вҠҘ                            вӢҶ
                 p PОёвӢҶ z is always orthogonal to Оё . Thus, the only direction left for consideration is
Also, by projection
             вӢҶ           2
v = (w вҲ’ ПҒОё )/ 1 вҲ’ ПҒ , for which we have
                       h                                    i
                EzвҲјNd ПҲ(y, wвҠӨ z) В· hs (ОёвӢҶ вҠӨ z) В· вҹЁPОёвҠҘвӢҶ z, vвҹ© В· v
                              "                                          #
                                                           вҠӨ        вӢҶвҠӨ
                                                 вҠӨ       w   z вҲ’ ПҒОё    z    w вҲ’ ПҒОёвӢҶ
                   = EzвҲјNd ПҲ(y, wвҠӨ z) В· hs (ОёвӢҶ z) В· p                      В·p
                                                               1 вҲ’ ПҒ2         1 вҲ’ ПҒ2
                              h                                           i w вҲ’ ПҒОёвӢҶ
                   = EzвҲјNd ПҲ(y, wвҠӨ z) В· hs (ОёвӢҶ вҠӨ z) В· (wвҠӨ z вҲ’ ПҒОёвӢҶ вҠӨ z) В·              .          (H.2)
                                                                             1 вҲ’ ПҒ2
Plugging Eq. (H.2) into the second term of line 2 in Eq. (H.1), we thus have the last identity in
Eq. (H.1). Next, we analyze terms (I) and (II) in Eq. (H.1). For our convenience, we define UПҒ as the
Gaussian noise operator such that
                                                 h           p           i
                         UПҒ ПҲ(y, x) = ExвҖІ вҲјN ПҲ(y, ПҒx + 1 вҲ’ ПҒ2 xвҖІ ) .

For term (I), we have by the definition of UПҒ that
              (I) = ExвҲјN [UПҒ ПҲ(y, x) В· x В· hs (x)]
                             вҲҡ                                  вҲҡ
                  = EzвҲјNd       s + 1 В· UПҒ ПҲ(y, x) В· hs+1 (x) + s В· UПҒ ПҲ(y, x) В· hsвҲ’1 (x)В·
                L2 (Q) вҲҡ                           вҲҡ
                  =      s + 1 В· ПҲps+1 (y) В· ПҒs+1 + s В· ПҲpsвҲ’1 (y) В· ПҒsвҲ’1 .                                    (H.3)
where the second line follows from the recurrence relation of the Hermite polynomials in Eq. (B.1),
and the last line follows from the property of the Gaussian noise operator in Eq. (B.3). Similarly for
term (II), we have
                           (II) = ExвҲјN [UПҒ (ПҲ(y, x)x) В· hs (x)]
                              L2 (Q)
                               = ПҒs В· ExвҲјN [ПҲ(y, x) В· x В· hs (x)]
                              L2 (Q) s
                                        вҲҡ                    вҲҡ
                               = ПҒ В·      s + 1 В· ПҲps+1 (y) + s В· ПҲpsвҲ’1 (y) ,                                 (H.4)

where in the last line we borrow the calculation in Eq. (H.3) by letting ПҒ = 1. Plugging Eq. (H.3)
and (H.4) into Eq. (H.1), we hence have
                    L2 (Q) вҲҡ
                                                        вҲҡ                     ОёвӢҶ вҲ’ ПҒw
             (H.1) =         s + 1 В· ПҲps+1 (y) В· ПҒs+1 + s В· ПҲpsвҲ’1 (y) В· ПҒsвҲ’1 В·
                                                                                1 вҲ’ ПҒ2
                                 вҲҡ                     вҲҡ              w вҲ’ ПҒОёвӢҶ
                         + ПҒs В·    s + 1 В· ПҲps+1 (y) + s В· ПҲpsвҲ’1 (y) В·
                                                                         1 вҲ’ ПҒ2
                         вҲҡ                           вҲҡ
                     = s + 1 В· ПҲps+1 (y) В· ПҒs w + s В· ПҲpsвҲ’1 (y) В· ПҒsвҲ’1 ОёвӢҶ ,
which completes the proof.

An implication of the previous lemma is that
                                                     вӢҶ            вӢҶ          p                        вӢҶ               вӢҶ
EQ [hsвӢҶ (вҹЁОёвӢҶ , zвҹ©) В· Пғ вҖІ (вҹЁz, Оёвҹ©) В· вҹЁz, ОёвӢҶ вҹ©] = s В· Пғ
                                                    p(s ) В· вҹЁОёвӢҶ , Оёвҹ©s вҲ’1 +                        p(s +2) В· вҹЁОёвӢҶ , Оёвҹ©s +1 ,
                                                                                 (s + 1)(s + 2) В· Пғ

where we take Пғp(s) as the s-th normalized Hermite coefficient of Пғ. Here, we take ПҲ(y, x) as Пғ вҖІ (x)
                  вҲҡ
and thus ПҲs (y) = s + 1 В· Пғ
         p                  p(s+1) .


                                                         68
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Lemma H.2 (Decomposition of first order moment). Suppose that ПҲ follows Assumption 4.1 and
                                          n  L
                                       1 XX
                               g=              ПҲ(yi , вҹЁwl , zi вҹ©) В· zi вҲ’ ПҲp1 (yi ) В· wl ,
                                      nL i=1
                                                l=1

                i.i.d.
where (zi , yi ) вҲј PОёвӢҶ and {wl }lвүӨL is fixed. Then it holds that
                                                                    вҲҡ XL
                                  X                                  s
                  EPОёвӢҶ [g] =            EQ [О¶s (y) В· ПҲpsвҲ’1 (y)] В·        вҹЁwl , ОёвӢҶ вҹ©sвҲ’1 В· ОёвӢҶ
                                                                    L
                                 sвүҘsвӢҶ                                       l=1
                                                                            вҲҡ           L
                                          X                                     s+1X
                                    +           EQ [О¶s (y) В· ПҲps+1 (y)] В·            вҹЁwl , ОёвӢҶ вҹ©s В· wl .
                                                                                L
                                        sвүҘsвӢҶ                                            l=1


Proof of Lemma H.2. Applying a change of measure from PОёвӢҶ to Q and invoking Eq. (2.2), we get
                         L
                    1X        h                                  i
       EPОёвӢҶ [g] =         EPОёвӢҶ ПҲ(y, вҹЁwl , zвҹ©) В· z вҲ’ ПҲp1 (y) В· wl
                    L
                      l=1
                       L
                    1 X                               X
                  =       EQ ПҲ(y, вҹЁwl , zвҹ©)z В· 1 +          О¶s (y)hs (вҹЁОёвӢҶ , zвҹ©) вҲ’ ПҲp1 (y)wl ,                       (H.5)
                    L                                     вӢҶ
                         l=1                                     sвүҘs

Note that for s = 0, we have for the first term in the summation of Eq. (H.5) that
                                    L                                                       L
                                    X                                           1           X
                             LвҲ’1          EQ [ПҲ(y, вҹЁwl , zвҹ©)z] = EQ [ПҲp1 (y)] В·                   wl ,
                                                                                L
                                    l=1                                                     l=1

which is cancelled out by the debiasing term in the algorithm. Applying the result of Lemma H.1 to
the remaining terms in Eq. (H.5) yields
                                                          вҲҡ     L
                            X                               s+1X
                EPОёвӢҶ [g] =       EQ [О¶s (y) В· ПҲs+1 (y)] В·
                                              p                   вҹЁwl , ОёвӢҶ вҹ©s В· wl
                               вӢҶ
                                                            L
                                  sвүҘs                                             l=1
                                                                     вҲҡ XL
                                        X                             s
                                      +    EQ [О¶s (y) В· ПҲpsвҲ’1 (y)] В·      вҹЁwl , ОёвӢҶ вҹ©sвҲ’1 В· ОёвӢҶ ,                      (H.6)
                                         вӢҶ
                                                                     L
                                          sвүҘs                                     l=1
                                 PL
where the EQ [ПҲp1 (y)] В· L1       l=1 wl term from Lemma H.1 with s = 0 is cancelled out by the debiasing
term in the algorithm.
Lemma H.3 (Second moment on nice event). Suppose ПҲ : R Г— R вҶ’ R satisfies the quadruple-
integrable and high-pass assumptions in Assumption 4.1. Let sвӢҶ be the generative exponent defined
in Definition 2.1. Suppose EQ [О¶s (y)2 ] вүӨ C for some universal C = O(1) and for all s вүҘ sвӢҶ . For any
w, wвҖІ , ОёвӢҶ , v вҲҲ SdвҲ’1 where either v = ОёвӢҶ or вҹЁv, ОёвӢҶ вҹ© = 0 in the non-sparse case, and either v = ej for
j вҲҲ supp(ОёвӢҶ ) or v = ej for j вҲҲ / supp(ОёвӢҶ ) in the sparse case, suppose that
       max{|вҹЁv, wвҹ©|, |вҹЁv, wвҖІ вҹ©|} вүӨ Пө0 ,             max{|вҹЁОёвӢҶ , wвҹ©|, |вҹЁОёвӢҶ , wвҖІ вҹ©|} вүӨ Пө,            |вҹЁw, wвҖІ вҹ©| вүӨ Пө1
for some Пө, Пө0 , Пө1 such that 4esвӢҶ Пө < 1/2. Then, we have for sвӢҶ вүҘ 2 that
                                                  вҲһ
      "                                                                  !#
                                                  X
                              вҖІ         2                         вӢҶ
  EQ ПҲ(y, вҹЁw, zвҹ©)ПҲ(y, вҹЁw , zвҹ©)вҹЁv, zвҹ© В· 1 +            О¶s (y)hs (вҹЁОё , zвҹ©)
                                                             s=sвӢҶ
                              2  sвӢҶ вҲ’1
                             2
                                                           2  sвӢҶ вҲ’2 2                       !
           вӢҶ           Пө     Пө                            Пө          Пө0
     вүІ Пөs1 вҲ’1 В·     1+    +                         вӢҶ
                                       В· Пө + 1(v вҠҘ Оё ) В·           В·        2         вӢҶ
                                                                        В· (Пө + Пө В· 1(s вүҘ 4)) ,
                       Пө1    Пө1                           Пө1         Пө1

and for sвӢҶ = 1, the bound is O(1). Here, вүІ hides constants that only depend on sвӢҶ , EQ [ПҲ(x, y)4 ]
and C.


                                                              69
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Proof. Using the results from Proposition I.1, we have that
                      p
hs (вҹЁОёвӢҶ , zвҹ©)вҹЁv, zвҹ©2 = (s + 2)(s + 1) В· hs+2 (z)[(ОёвӢҶ )вҠ—s вҠ— v вҠ—2 ] + hs (z)[(ОёвӢҶ )вҠ—s ]      (H.7)
                                       вӢҶ вҠ—sвҲ’1      вҠӨ     вӢҶ
                                                                  p                   вӢҶ вҠ—sвҲ’2
                       + 2s В· hs (z)[(Оё )      вҠ— v] В· вҹЁОё , vвҹ© + s(s вҲ’ 1) В· hsвҲ’2 (z)[(Оё )     ] В· вҹЁОёвӢҶ , vвҹ©2 .
Thus, we only need to focus on these degree terms in ПҲ(y, вҹЁw, zвҹ©)ПҲ(y, вҹЁwвҖІ , zвҹ©). Our goal is to
compute the following quantity, which we denoted by F :
                                                           вҲһ
                    "                                                             !#
                                                          X
           F = EQ ПҲ(y, вҹЁw, zвҹ©)ПҲ(y, вҹЁwвҖІ , zвҹ©)вҹЁv, zвҹ©2 В· 1 +     О¶s (y)hs (вҹЁОёвӢҶ , zвҹ©)
                                                                              s=sвӢҶ
                                               вҖІ             2

               = EQ ПҲ(y, вҹЁw, zвҹ©)ПҲ(y, вҹЁw , zвҹ©)вҹЁv, zвҹ©
                      XвҲһ
                            EQ О¶s (y)ПҲ(y, вҹЁw, zвҹ©)ПҲ(y, вҹЁwвҖІ , zвҹ©)вҹЁv, zвҹ©2 hs (вҹЁОёвӢҶ , zвҹ©) .

                    +                                                                                         (H.8)
                            s=sвӢҶ

Here, for the term corresponding to s = 0 in Eq. (H.8), we plug in Eq. (H.7) and have by Lemma I.3
that
 EQ ПҲ(y, вҹЁw, zвҹ©)ПҲ(y, вҹЁwвҖІ , zвҹ©)вҹЁv, zвҹ©2

           h                          вҲҡ                     i
   = EQ ПҲ(y, вҹЁw, zвҹ©)ПҲ(y, вҹЁwвҖІ , zвҹ©)( 2 В· h2 (z)[v вҠ—2 ] + 1)
       (sвӢҶ вҲ’2)вҲЁ0                           вӢҶ       (sвӢҶ вҲ’2)вҲЁ0                      вӢҶ                   вӢҶ           вӢҶ
   вүІ Пө1            В· Пө2вҲ§c
                      0
                         0
                           В· Пө(2вҲ’c0 )вҲЁ0 + Пөs1 вҲ’1 вүІ Пө1                В· Пө20 + Пөs1 вҲ’1 вүІ 1(sвӢҶ = 1) + Пөs1 вҲ’2 Пө20 + Пөs1 вҲ’1 .
Here, to use Lemma I.3, for h2 (z)[v вҠ—2 ] we take test tensor T2 = v вҠ—2 and set c0 = 2. The last line
also holds by using the Cauchy-Schwarz inequality for EQ [|О¶s (y)| В· ПҲ(y, x)2 ] вүӨ EQ [|О¶s (y)|2 ]1/2 В·
EQ [ПҲ(y, x)4 ]1/2 вүӨ EQ [ПҲ(y, x)4 ]1/2 = O(1). As for the case sвӢҶ = 1, we already have a constant
outside, and noting that the second moment is at most O(1) due to the quadruple-integrable as-
sumption, it suffices to consider in the following sвӢҶ вүҘ 2. For the second part of Eq. (H.8), we
canpsplit the expectation according to Eq. (H.7). For the first term in Eq. (H.7) which corresponds
to (s + 2)(s + 1) В· hs+2 (z)[(ОёвӢҶ )вҠ—s вҠ— v вҠ—2 ], we take test tensor Ts = v вҠ—2 вҠ— (ОёвӢҶ )вҠ—(sвҲ’2) with
c0 = 2, s0 = sвӢҶ + 2 and have by Proposition I.4 that
          вҲһ p
          X
                (s + 2)(s + 1) В· EQ О¶s (y)ПҲ(y, вҹЁw, zвҹ©)ПҲ(y, вҹЁwвҖІ , zвҹ©)hs+2 (z)[(ОёвӢҶ )вҠ—s вҠ— v вҠ—2 ]

       s=sвӢҶ
                            вӢҶ
                                                   sвӢҶ вҲ’1вҲ’вҢҠc0 /2вҢӢ
                                                                                        вӢҶ
                            s вҲ’1вҲ’вҢҠs0 /2вҢӢ
          вүІ 1(s0 вүӨ c0 ) В· Пө1             В· Пөs00 + Пө1                В· Пөc00 + Пөc00 В· Пө(2s )вҲЁs0 вҲ’c0
                                        вӢҶ                                            вӢҶ

                                         s вҲ’1вҲ’вҢҠ(c0 +1)/2вҢӢ
               + 1(s0 вүӨ 2(sвӢҶ вҲ’ 1)) В· Пө1                      В· Пөc00 В· Пө + Пөc00 В· Пө2(s вҲ’1)+1вҲ’c0
                     вӢҶ
                                        вӢҶ                            вӢҶ

          вүІ Пө20 В· Пө2s вҲ’2 + 1(sвӢҶ вүҘ 4) В· Пөs1 вҲ’2 В· Пө20 В· Пө + Пө20 В· Пө2s вҲ’3 .

For the second term hs (z)[(ОёвӢҶ )вҠ—s ], we take test tensor Ts = (ОёвӢҶ )вҠ—s with c0 = 0, s0 = sвӢҶ and have
by Proposition I.4 that
              вҲһ
              X
                     EQ О¶s (y)ПҲ(y, вҹЁw, zвҹ©)ПҲ(y, вҹЁwвҖІ , zвҹ©)hs (z)[(ОёвӢҶ )вҠ—s ]

              s=sвӢҶ
                            вӢҶ
                                         вӢҶ                                        вӢҶ

                                         s вҲ’1вҲ’вҢҠ(c0 +1)/2вҢӢ
               вүІ Пөc00 В· Пө(2s )вҲЁs0 вҲ’c0 + Пө1                В· Пөc00 В· Пө + Пөc00 В· Пө2(s вҲ’1)+1вҲ’c0
                       вӢҶ        вӢҶ          вӢҶ            вӢҶ                 вӢҶ
               вүІ Пө2s + Пөs1 вҲ’1 В· Пө + Пө2s вҲ’1 вүІ Пөs1 вҲ’1 В· Пө + Пө2s вҲ’1 .
For the third term 2s В· hs (z)[(ОёвӢҶ )вҠ—sвҲ’1 вҠ— v]вҠӨ В· вҹЁОёвӢҶ , vвҹ©, we take test tensor Ts = v вҠ— (ОёвӢҶ )вҠ—sвҲ’1 with
c0 = 1, s0 = sвӢҶ and have by Proposition I.4 that
              вҲһ
              X
                     2s В· EQ О¶s (y)ПҲ(y, вҹЁw, zвҹ©)ПҲ(y, вҹЁwвҖІ , zвҹ©)hs (z)[(ОёвӢҶ )вҠ—sвҲ’1 вҠ— v]вҠӨ

              s=sвӢҶ
                            вӢҶ
                                         вӢҶ                                        вӢҶ

                                         s вҲ’1вҲ’вҢҠ(c0 +1)/2вҢӢ
               вүІ Пөc00 В· Пө(2s )вҲЁs0 вҲ’c0 + Пө1                В· Пөc00 В· Пө + Пөc00 В· Пө2(s вҲ’1)+1вҲ’c0
                            вӢҶ        вӢҶ                       вӢҶ                вӢҶ                   вӢҶ
               вүІ Пө0 В· Пө2s вҲ’1 + Пө1s вҲ’2 В· Пө0 В· Пө + Пө0 В· Пө2s вҲ’2 вүІ Пөs1 вҲ’2 В· Пө0 В· Пө + Пө0 В· Пө2s вҲ’2 .


                                                        70
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025



                 p
For the last term s(s вҲ’ 1) В· hsвҲ’2 (z)[(ОёвӢҶ )вҠ—sвҲ’2 ] В· вҹЁОёвӢҶ , vвҹ©2 , we take test tensor Ts = (ОёвӢҶ )вҠ—s with
c0 = 0, s0 = sвӢҶ вҲ’ 2 and have by Proposition I.4 that
       вҲһ p
       X
          s(s вҲ’ 1) В· EQ О¶s (y)ПҲ(y, вҹЁw, zвҹ©)ПҲ(y, вҹЁwвҖІ , zвҹ©)hsвҲ’2 (z)[(ОёвӢҶ )вҠ—sвҲ’2 ] В· вҹЁОёвӢҶ , vвҹ©2

      s=sвӢҶ
                       вӢҶ
                                                 sвӢҶ вҲ’1вҲ’вҢҠc0 /2вҢӢ
                                                                                   вӢҶ
                       s вҲ’1вҲ’вҢҠs0 /2вҢӢ
        вүІ 1(sвӢҶ = 2) В· Пө1              В· Пөs00 + Пө1              В· Пөc00 + Пөc00 В· Пө(2s )вҲЁs0 вҲ’c0
                вӢҶ                                        вӢҶ

                s вҲ’1вҲ’вҢҠ(c0 +1)/2вҢӢ
            + Пө1                 В· Пөc00 В· Пө + Пөc00 В· Пө2(s вҲ’1)+1вҲ’c0
                                  вӢҶ        вӢҶ              вӢҶ                           вӢҶ        вӢҶ
        вүІ 1(sвӢҶ = 2)Пө1 + Пө2s + Пөs1 вҲ’1 В· Пө + Пө2s вҲ’1 вүІ 1(sвӢҶ = 2)Пө1 + Пөs1 вҲ’1 В· Пө + Пө2s вҲ’1 .
Summing up the above terms, we have that for sвӢҶ вүҘ 2,
     вӢҶ              вӢҶ
                                   вӢҶ
                                                       вӢҶ                         вӢҶ

F вүІ Пөs1 вҲ’2 Пө20 + Пөs1 вҲ’1 + Пө20 В· Пө2s вҲ’2 + 1(sвӢҶ вүҘ 4) В· Пөs1 вҲ’2 В· Пө20 В· Пө + Пө20 В· Пө2s вҲ’3
       вӢҶ               вӢҶ
                             вӢҶ                       вӢҶ                            вӢҶ      вӢҶ

   + Пө1s вҲ’1 В· Пө + Пө2s вҲ’1 + Пө1s вҲ’2 В· Пө0 В· Пө + Пө0 В· Пө2s вҲ’2 + 1(sвӢҶ = 2)Пө1 + Пөs1 вҲ’1 В· Пө + Пө2s вҲ’1 1(v = ОёвӢҶ )
        вӢҶ           вӢҶ                 вӢҶ                           вӢҶ           вӢҶ
  вүІ Пөs1 вҲ’2 Пө20 + Пөs1 вҲ’1 + Пө20 В· Пө2s вҲ’2 + 1(sвӢҶ вүҘ 4) В· Пө20 В· Пө2s вҲ’3 + Пө2s вҲ’1
         вӢҶ                         вӢҶ

    + Пөs1 вҲ’2 В· Пө0 В· Пө + Пө0 В· Пө2s вҲ’2 1(v = ОёвӢҶ ).

If v = ОёвӢҶ , then we additionally have Пө0 = Пө, which simplifies the above bound to
                                                                           2  sвӢҶ вҲ’1 !
                        sвӢҶ вҲ’2 2    sвӢҶ вҲ’1    2sвӢҶ вҲ’1    sвӢҶ вҲ’1         Пө2    Пө
      F | sвӢҶ вүҘ2,v=ОёвӢҶ вүІ Пө1 Пө + Пө1         +Пө        = Пө1     В· 1+       +           В·Пө .
                                                                    Пө1    Пө1
For v вҠҘ ОёвӢҶ , we have that
                        вӢҶ             вӢҶ               вӢҶ                           вӢҶ       вӢҶ
  F | sвӢҶ вүҘ2,vвҠҘОёвӢҶ вүІ Пө1s вҲ’2 Пө20 + Пө1s вҲ’1 + Пө20 В· Пө2s вҲ’2 + 1(sвӢҶ вүҘ 4) В· Пө20 В· Пө2s вҲ’3 + Пө2s вҲ’1
                                      2
                                            2  sвӢҶ вҲ’1         2  sвӢҶ вҲ’2 2                           !
                      вӢҶ             Пө       Пө                Пө            Пө
                 вүІ Пөs1 вҲ’1 В· 1 +         +             В·Пө+               В· 0 В· (Пө2 + Пө В· 1(sвӢҶ вүҘ 4)) .
                                    Пө1      Пө1               Пө1           Пө1

Where for sвӢҶ = 1, we have F |sвӢҶ =1 вүІ 1. Hence, we complete the proof.
Lemma H.4. For polarization level Оі = o(1), take the polarized random vector
                                       Оіe1 + Оҫ
                             w=                  ,        where Оҫ вҲј Unif(SdвҲ’1 ),
                                      вҲҘОіe1 + ОҫвҲҘ2
                                                                                      p
where e1 = (1, 0, . . . , 0)вҠӨ is the first standard basis vector in Rd . Let ОёвӢҶ = (ПҒ, 1 вҲ’ ПҒ2 , 0, . . . , 0) вҲҲ
SdвҲ’1 be a fixed direction. Then, we have that
                               пЈұ                       p                  s
                               пЈІ |ПҒ|(Оі + dвҲ’1/2 ) + 1 вҲ’ ПҒ2 dвҲ’1/2                    if s is even
             E[вҹЁОёвӢҶ , wвҹ©s ] вүғ                               p                 sвҲ’1
                               пЈіПҒОі |ПҒ|(Оі + dвҲ’1/2 ) + 1 вҲ’ ПҒ2 dвҲ’1/2                  if s is odd.

Proof of Lemma H.4. For w, we have by Lemma I.9 that the first moment is given by
                                          E[w] = C(e1 , Оі) В· Оі В· e1 вүғ Оіe1 ,
and the second moment is controlled by
               C(2e1 , Оі) В· (Оі + dвҲ’1/2 )2 0     В·В·В·   0    (Оі + dвҲ’1/2 )2                  0        В·В·В·0
             пЈ®                                          пЈ№ пЈ®                                            пЈ№
                            0                                    0
  E[wwвҠӨ ] = пЈҜ
             пЈҜ                                          пЈә пЈҜ                                            пЈә
                             ..                 вҲ’1
                                                        пЈәвүҫпЈҜ      ..                             вҲ’1
                                                                                                       пЈә.
             пЈ°
                              .      C(2e2 , Оі)d В· IdвҲ’1 пЈ» пЈ°
                                                                  .                            d В· IdвҲ’1пЈ»
                              0                                                   0
For вҹЁОёвӢҶ , wвҹ©s В· w, we look at coordinate П„ of w, and the first moment is given by
                                                h         p                i
                         E [вҹЁОёвӢҶ , wвҹ©s В· wП„ ] = E (ПҒw1 + 1 вҲ’ ПҒ2 w2 )s wП„ .


                                                          71
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Note that if П„ Мё= 1, 2, then the expectation is zero. For more generality, let us take r1 , r2 вҲҲ N. We
study the following expectation:
  E [вҹЁОёвӢҶ , wвҹ©s В· w1r1 w2r2 ]
           s     p
        X       s j              sвҲ’j
                                         h                 i
     =             ПҒ 1 вҲ’ ПҒ2 E w1j+r1 w2sвҲ’j+r2 В· 1(s вҲ’ j + r2 even)
        j=0
                j
        пЈұ
            вҢҠs/2вҢӢ
        пЈҙ    X s              p          sвҲ’2j
                                                h
                                                    2j+r1 sвҲ’2j+r2
                                                                    i
                           2j          2
                                  вҲ’
        пЈҙ
        пЈҙ
        пЈҙ                ПҒ      1    ПҒ        E   w1      w2                          if s + r2 is even,
        пЈҙ
        пЈІ
             j=0
                   2j
     = вҢҠ(sвҲ’1)/2вҢӢ
        пЈҙ
        пЈҙ      X             s       2j+1
                                           p
                                                    2
                                                      sвҲ’2jвҲ’1
                                                               h
                                                                  2j+1+r1 sвҲ’2jвҲ’1+r2
                                                                                    i
        пЈҙ
        пЈҙ                          ПҒ         1 вҲ’  ПҒ          E  w 1      w 2          if s + r2 is odd.
                         2j + 1
        пЈҙ
        пЈі
               j=0
Here, the first equality holds by noting that each term in the sum is zero if the degree on w2 is odd
due to the symmetry in the distribution of w2 . Next, we invoke Lemma I.9 for the moment as
E [вҹЁОёвӢҶ , wвҹ©s В· w1r1 w2r2 ]
    пЈұ
    пЈҙif s + r2 is
    пЈҙ                even:
    пЈҙ вҢҠs/2вҢӢ                                                         2j+2вҢҠr1 /2вҢӢ            sвҲ’2j+r2
    пЈҙX s
    пЈҙ
                                    sвҲ’2j 1(r odd)
    пЈҙ                    p
    пЈҙ
    пЈҙ                ПҒ2j 1 вҲ’ ПҒ2         Оі 1          Оі + dвҲ’1/2                    dвҲ’1/2
    пЈҙ
    пЈІ          2j
 вүғ j=0
    пЈҙ
    пЈҙ if s + r2 is odd:
    пЈҙвҢҠ(sвҲ’1)/2вҢӢ
    пЈҙ
    пЈҙ
                        s

                                                sвҲ’2jвҲ’1 1(r even)
                                                                                    2j+2вҢҠ r12+1 вҢӢ           sвҲ’2jвҲ’1+r2
    пЈҙ X
    пЈҙ                            2j+1
                                      p
                                              2                              вҲ’1/2                     вҲ’1/2
    пЈҙ
    пЈҙ                          ПҒ        1 вҲ’ ПҒ            Оі    1
                                                                       Оі +  d                        d
    пЈі
          j=0
                     2j + 1
    пЈұ
    пЈҙ if s + r2 is even:
    пЈҙ
    пЈҙ                                              2вҢҠ r21 вҢӢ         r2 +1(s odd)                                          2вҢҠ 2s вҢӢ
    пЈҙp
    пЈҙ             1(s odd) 1(r odd)           1                 1                              вҲ’1/2
                                                                                                        p
                                                                                                                 2 dвҲ’1/2
    пЈҙ
    пЈҙ
    пЈІ    1 вҲ’  ПҒ 2          Оі    1
                                        Оі + вҲҡ                 вҲҡ                    |ПҒ|(Оі  +  d      ) +    1 вҲ’ ПҒ
 вүғ                                              d                d
    пЈҙ
    пЈҙ if s +  r2  is odd:
    пЈҙ                                                2вҢҠ r12+1 вҢӢ          r2 +1(s even)                                           2вҢҠ sвҲ’1
                                                                                                                                     2 вҢӢ
    пЈҙ
    пЈҙПҒp1 вҲ’ ПҒ2 1(s even) Оі 1(r1 even) Оі + вҲҡ1                          1
    пЈҙ                                                                                                        p
                                                                                         |ПҒ|(Оі + dвҲ’1/2 ) + 1 вҲ’ ПҒ2 dвҲ’1/2
    пЈҙ
    пЈі                                                               вҲҡ
                                                  d                   d
Here, the symbol вүғ conceals some constant factors that are governed by upper and lower bounds
dependent on s only. Using the above calculation, we have We can specialize the above results to the
case r1 = r2 = 0 and obtain
                                  пЈұ                         p                 s
                                  пЈІ |ПҒ|(Оі + dвҲ’1/2 ) + 1 вҲ’ ПҒ2 dвҲ’1/2                        if s is even
               E[вҹЁОёвӢҶ , wвҹ©s ] вүғ                                 p                 sвҲ’1
                                  пЈіПҒОі |ПҒ|(Оі + dвҲ’1/2 ) + 1 вҲ’ ПҒ2 dвҲ’1/2                      if s is odd,
which completes the proof.

I     T E C H N I C A L R E S U LT S
I.1    T E C H N I C A L R E S U LT S F O R H E R M I T E T E N S O R

Proposition I.1. Let s вҲҲ N0 . For any z вҲҲ Rd , we have
                      p
   zi zj hs (z) = Sym (s + 2)(s + 1) В· hs+2 (z)[ei вҠ— ej ] + Оҙij hs (z) + s В· hs (z)[ej ] вҠ— ei
                                                           p
                                   + s В· hs (z)[ei ] вҠ— ej + s(s вҲ’ 1) В· hsвҲ’2 (z) вҠ— ei вҠ— ej ,
where we define hвҲ’1 (z) and hвҲ’2 (z) to be all zero tensors of any conformable shape.

Proof of Proposition I.1. Note that each element of hs (ОёвӢҶ вҠӨ z)zz вҠӨ must lie in the polynomial space
with degree at most s + 2, i.e., Rs+2 [z]. We take a test function F : Rd вҶ’ R such that R вҲҲ Rs+2 [z].
Thus, we can write down the inner product of F and hs (ОёвӢҶ вҠӨ z)zi zj for i, j вҲҲ [d] as
                   EzвҲјNd [F (z)hs (ОёвӢҶ вҠӨ z)zi zj ] = EzвҲјNd [F (z)zi zj В· hs (z)[(ОёвӢҶ )вҠ—s ]],


                                                        72
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


where in the equation, we use (B.4) to rewrite the Hermite polynomial in terms of the Hermite tensor.
It suffices to understand the tensor F (z)zi zj hs (z). Note that F is differentiable to any order, and the
tensor obtained by differentiating F to any order is square-integrable with respect to the standard
normal distribution. By the SteinвҖҷs lemma for Hermite tensor (B.5), we have
вҲҡ
   s! В· EzвҲјNd [F (z)zi zj hs (z)] = EzвҲјNd [вҲҮs (F (z)zi zj )]

                                                                           s(s вҲ’ 1)
    = Sym EzвҲјNd [вҲҮs F (z)zi zj ] + sEzвҲјNd [вҲҮsвҲ’1 F (z)вҲҮ(zi zj )] +                   EzвҲјNd [вҲҮsвҲ’2 F (z)вҲҮ2 (zi zj )]
                                                                               2
   = Sym EzвҲјNd [вҲҮs F (z)Оҙij ] + EzвҲјNd [вҲҮs+2 F (z)[ei вҠ— ej ]] + sEzвҲјNd [вҲҮs F (z)[ej ] вҠ— ei ]
                       + sEzвҲјNd [вҲҮs F (z)[ei ] вҠ— ej ] + s(s вҲ’ 1)EzвҲјNd [вҲҮsвҲ’2 F (z) вҠ— ei вҠ— ej ] .


                                                                                               (I.1)
Here, the вҖңSymвҖқ operation symmetrizes the tensor in the parentheses. The last equality holds by the
following calculations. For EzвҲјNd [вҲҮs F (z)zi zj ], we have
      EzвҲјNd [вҲҮs F (z)zi zj ] = Sym EzвҲјNd [вҲҮs F (z)Оҙij ] + EzвҲјNd [вҲҮs+1 F (z)[ej ]zi ]


                             = Sym EzвҲјNd [вҲҮs F (z)Оҙij ] + EzвҲјNd [вҲҮs+2 F (z)[ei вҠ— ej ]] ,


where we use the SteinвҖҷs lemma for both equalities. For EzвҲјNd [вҲҮsвҲ’2 F (z)вҲҮ2 (zi zj )], we have
Sym EzвҲјNd [вҲҮsвҲ’1 F (z)вҲҮ(zi zj )] = Sym EzвҲјNd [zj вҲҮsвҲ’1 F (z) вҠ— ei + zi вҲҮsвҲ’1 F (z) вҠ— ej ]


                                     = Sym (EzвҲјNd [вҲҮs F (z)[ej ] вҠ— ei ] + EzвҲјNd [вҲҮs F (z)[ei ] вҠ— ej ]) .
Now, for each derivative
                     вҲҡ      of F in (I.1), we have by the SteinвҖҷs lemma stated in (B.5) that
         s
EzвҲјNd [вҲҮ F (z)] = s! В· EzвҲјNd [F (z)hs (z)], which gives us
                                   h                            p
EzвҲјNd [F (z)zi zj hs (z)] = EzвҲјNd F (z) В· Sym Оҙij hs (z) + (s + 2)(s + 1) В· hs+2 (z)[ei вҠ— ej ]
                                                                             p                              i
                              + s В· hs (z)[ej ] вҠ— ei + s В· hs (z)[ei ] вҠ— ej + s(s вҲ’ 1) В· hsвҲ’2 (z) вҠ— ei вҠ— ej .
Since F вҲҲ Rs+2 [z] is arbitrary, we conclude that
                      p
   zi zj hs (z) = Sym (s + 2)(s + 1) В· hs+2 (z)[ei вҠ— ej ] + Оҙij hs (z) + s В· hs (z)[ej ] вҠ— ei
                                                            p
                                    + s В· hs (z)[ei ] вҠ— ej + s(s вҲ’ 1) В· hsвҲ’2 (z) вҠ— ei вҠ— ej .
The proof is completed by further taking the tensor inner product operation with respect to (ОёвӢҶ )вҠ—s on
both side.
Proposition I.2. Let w, wвҖІ вҲҲ SdвҲ’1 and s вҲҲ N0 . We have
 E [hi (вҹЁw, zвҹ©)hj (вҹЁwвҖІ , zвҹ©) В· hs (z)]
          s                                 s
        X                                 s        i!j!                                   вҠ—sвҲ’П„
    =        1(j = i + s вҲ’ 2П„, i вүҘ П„ ) В·                   2
                                                             В· вҹЁw, wвҖІ вҹ©iвҲ’П„ В· Sym wвҠ—П„ вҠ— wвҖІ        .
        П„ =0
                                          П„   s!((i вҲ’ П„ )!)
The above term is equal to
                        r
                            i!j! вҹЁw, wвҖІ вҹ©(i+jвҲ’s)/2

                s                                                         вҠ—(jвҲ’i+s)/2
                        В·       В·                  В· Sym wвҠ—(iвҲ’j+s)/2 вҠ— wвҖІ              .
         (i вҲ’ j + s)/2       s! ((i + j вҲ’ s)/2)!
if |i вҲ’ j| вүӨ s вүӨ i + j and s вүЎ i вҲ’ j mod 2. Otherwise the expectation gives the zero tensor.

Proof of Proposition I.2. By the SteinвҖҷs lemma for the Hermite tensor (B.5), we have
                                           1
E [hi (вҹЁw, zвҹ©)hj (вҹЁwвҖІ , zвҹ©) В· hs (z)] = вҲҡ В· E [вҲҮs (hi (вҹЁw, zвҹ©)hj (вҹЁwвҖІ , zвҹ©))]
                                            s!
                s
         1     X     s
                        E Sym вҲҮП„ hi (вҹЁw, zвҹ©) вҠ— вҲҮsвҲ’П„ hj (вҹЁwвҖІ , zвҹ©)

   =вҲҡ В·
           s! П„ =0   П„
                        s
                s
         1 X s                       i!j!             h
                                                                                                       вҠ—sвҲ’П„
                                                                                                              i
   =вҲҡ В·                                             E hiвҲ’П„ (вҹЁw, zвҹ©) вҠ— hjвҲ’s+П„ (вҹЁwвҖІ , zвҹ©) В· Sym wвҠ—П„ вҠ— wвҖІ
           s! П„ =0 П„       (i вҲ’ П„ )!(j вҲ’ s + П„ )!
         s                                     s
                                                   r
       X                                                i!j!                          вҠ—sвҲ’П„
   =         1(j = i + s вҲ’ 2П„, i вүҘ П„ ) В·       П„
                                                             вҹЁw, wвҖІ вҹ©iвҲ’П„ Sym wвҠ—П„ вҠ— wвҖІ        .
       П„ =0
                                          (i вҲ’   П„ )!    s!


                                                  73
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


the condition can be translated into |i вҲ’ j| вүӨ s вүӨ i + j and s вүЎ i вҲ’ j mod 2. Then, we can take
П„ = (i вҲ’ j + s)/2, s вҲ’ П„ = (j вҲ’ i + s)/2, i вҲ’ П„ = (i + j вҲ’ s)/2 to obtain the desired result.
Lemma I.3. Let ПҲ : R вҶ’ R such that ПҲ 2 вҲҲ L2 (N ). Suppose that ПҲ is high-pass in the sense
that ПҲpi = 0 for any i < sвӢҶ вҲ’ 1 for some sвӢҶ вҲҲ N0 . For w, wвҖІ вҲҲ SdвҲ’1 , take a series of test tensor
{Ts = v1 вҠ— v2 вҠ— . . . вҠ— vs вҲҲ (Rd )вҠ—s }вҲһ                                       вҖІ
                                       s=0 such that supi>c0 {|вҹЁw, vi вҹ©| вҲЁ |вҹЁw , vi вҹ©|} вүӨ Пө for some
Пө вҲҲ (0, 1/2) and integer c0 вҲҲ N0 . Let
                               Пө0 := max {|вҹЁw, vi вҹ©| вҲЁ |вҹЁwвҖІ , vi вҹ©|}.
                                         1вүӨiвүӨc0

Suppose that |вҹЁw, wвҖІ вҹ©| вүӨ Пө1 . Then we have for any s вҲҲ N0 that
                                                            s/2 вҲҡ           (sвӢҶ вҲ’1вҲ’вҢҠs/2вҢӢ)вҲЁ0
 EzвҲјNd ПҲ(вҹЁw, zвҹ©)ПҲ(вҹЁwвҖІ , zвҹ©) В· hs (z)[Ts ] вүӨ 4вҲҘПҲвҲҘ22 (4esвӢҶ )                                  В· ПөsвҲ§c  В· Пө(sвҲ’c0 )вҲЁ0 ,

                                                                  s + sвӢҶ В· Пө1                  0
                                                                                                  0


where вҲҘПҲвҲҘ22 = ExвҲјN [ПҲ 2 (x)].

Proof of Lemma I.3. As ПҲ(x)ПҲ(xвҖІ ) is also square-integrable, we are able to extract the s-th tensor
coefficient of the Hermite expansion of ПҲ(x)ПҲ(xвҖІ ) as
EzвҲјNd [ПҲ(вҹЁw, zвҹ©)ПҲ(вҹЁwвҖІ , zвҹ©) В· hs (z)]
              пЈ®                                                 пЈ№
                XвҲһ XвҲһ
   = EzвҲјNd пЈ°           ПҲpi ПҲpj hi (вҹЁw, zвҹ©)hj (вҹЁwвҖІ , zвҹ©) В· hs (z)пЈ»
                i=0 j=0
      вҲһ X
        вҲһ X
          s                                      s
      X                                         s        i!j!                                               вҠ—sвҲ’П„
   =              1(j = i + s вҲ’ 2П„, i вүҘ П„ ) В·                    2
                                                                   ПҲpi ПҲpj В· вҹЁw, wвҖІ вҹ©iвҲ’П„ В· Sym wвҠ—П„ вҠ— wвҖІ
     i=0 j=0 П„ =0
                                                П„   s!((i вҲ’ П„ )!)
                                 s
      вҲһ X  s              r
     X                  s     1 i!(i + s вҲ’ 2П„ )! p p                                            вҠ—(sвҲ’П„ )
   =          1(i вүҘ П„ )                          2
                                                   ПҲi ПҲi+sвҲ’2П„ В· вҹЁw, wвҖІ вҹ©iвҲ’П„ В· Sym wвҠ—П„ вҠ— wвҖІ                ,
     i=0 П„ =0
                        П„     s!     ((i вҲ’  П„ )!)
where the last second identity follows from Proposition I.2, and in the last line we restrict the condition
j = i + s вҲ’ 2П„ . Note that the double sums are interchangeable only if the series converges for each П„ .
However, by our condition that вҹЁw, wвҖІ вҹ© вүӨ 1 вҲ’ Пө for some Пө > 0, then for each П„ , we have for any test
tensor T = v1 вҠ— v2 вҠ— . . . вҠ— vs with вҲҘvi вҲҘ2 = 1 that
                 s
              вҲһ
             X      i!(i + s вҲ’ 2П„ )! p p                                          вҠ—(sвҲ’П„ )
                                 2
                                    ПҲi ПҲi+sвҲ’2П„ В· вҹЁw, wвҖІ вҹ©iвҲ’П„ В· Sym wвҠ—П„ вҠ— wвҖІ                 [T ]
             i=П„
                      ((i вҲ’ П„ )!)
                   вҲһ
                   X
               вүӨ         (i + s)s/2 В· ПҲpi ПҲpi+sвҲ’2П„ В· (1 вҲ’ Пө)iвҲ’П„ < вҲһ,
                   i=П„

where we note that 1 вҲ’ Пө will dominate the polynomial growth of (i + s)s/2 , and also using the fact
                                                   PвҲһ
that ПҲpi ПҲpi+sвҲ’2П„ is uniformly bounded by i=0 ПҲpi2 < вҲһ. Now, we interchange the double sum and
apply the high-pass assumption and have that
  EzвҲјNd [ПҲ(вҹЁw, zвҹ©)ПҲ(вҹЁwвҖІ , zвҹ©) В· hs (z)[T ]]
                                  s
            s    r           вҲһ
          X        s     1 X i!(i + s вҲ’ 2П„ )! p p                                           вҠ—(sвҲ’П„ )
      =                                           2
                                                     ПҲi ПҲi+sвҲ’2П„ В· вҹЁw, wвҖІ вҹ©iвҲ’П„ В·Sym wвҠ—П„ вҠ— wвҖІ           [T ].
          П„ =0
                  П„      s! i=i        ((i вҲ’ П„ )!)
                                0
                            |                        {z                     }
                                                    (I)
where we define
                                   i0 = max {(sвӢҶ вҲ’ 1), (sвӢҶ вҲ’ 1 + 2П„ вҲ’ s), П„ }
Note that the tensor product part is independent of i. Hence, we pull out term (I) and have
       s
            i0 !(i0 + s вҲ’ 2П„ )! p p
(I) =                             ПҲi0 ПҲi0 +sвҲ’2П„ вҹЁw, wвҖІ вҹ©i0 вҲ’П„
                ((i0 вҲ’ П„ )!)2
                                   пЈ«                                                                        пЈ¶
                                      XвҲһ
    Вұ вҲҘПҲвҲҘ22 В· вҹЁw, wвҖІ вҹ©i0 вҲ’П„ +1 пЈӯ (j + s + sвӢҶ )(j + s + sвӢҶ вҲ’ 1) В· В· В· (j + sвӢҶ + вҢҲ(s + 1)/2вҢү)|вҹЁw, wвҖІ вҹ©|j пЈё .
                                  j=0



                                                    74
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Here, the first term is given by splitting out the term with i = i0 from the summation, and the second
term is for i вүҘ i0 + 1. For the second term, we have the following argument:
max{i0 , i0 + s вҲ’ 2П„ } = (sвӢҶ вҲ’ 1) вҲЁ (sвӢҶ вҲ’ 1 + 2П„ вҲ’ s) вҲЁ П„ вҲЁ (sвӢҶ вҲ’ 1 + s вҲ’ 2П„ ) вҲЁ (sвӢҶ вҲ’ 1) вҲЁ (s вҲ’ П„ )
                         = (sвӢҶ вҲ’ 1 + 2П„ вҲ’ s) вҲЁ (sвӢҶ вҲ’ 1 + s вҲ’ 2П„ ) вҲЁ П„ вҲЁ (s вҲ’ П„ )
                         = (sвӢҶ вҲ’ 1 + |2П„ вҲ’ s|) вҲЁ (|П„ вҲ’ s/2| + s/2) вүӨ sвӢҶ + s вҲ’ 1.
Hence, we then have that for any i вүҘ i0 + 1 with j = i вҲ’ (i0 + 1) that
                                   max{i, i + s вҲ’ 2П„ } вүӨ sвӢҶ + s + j.
Therefore, for any i вүҘ i0 + 1, we have
  s
    i!(i + s вҲ’ 2П„ )! p                                 p
                  2
                      = i(i вҲ’ 1) В· В· В· (i вҲ’ П„ + 1) В· (i + s вҲ’ 2П„ )(i + s вҲ’ 2П„ вҲ’ 1) В· В· В· (i вҲ’ П„ + 1)
      ((i вҲ’ П„ )!)
                         p
                      вүӨ (j + sвӢҶ + s)(j + sвӢҶ + s вҲ’ 1) В· В· В· (j + sвӢҶ + 1)
                      вүӨ (j + sвӢҶ + s)(j + sвӢҶ + s вҲ’ 1) В· В· В· (j + sвӢҶ + вҢҲ(s + 1)/2вҢү).
To characterize the second term, we use Proposition J.5 where we have conditions |вҹЁw, wвҖІ вҹ©| < 1/2
and sвӢҶ + s вүҘ 2вҢҠ(s + 1)/2вҢӢ вҲ’ 1 satisfied, which gives us
                 XвҲһ
                    (j + s + sвӢҶ )(j + s + sвӢҶ вҲ’ 1) В· В· В· (j + sвӢҶ + вҢҲ(s + 1)/2вҢү)|вҹЁw, wвҖІ вҹ©|j
                j=0
                                                                   1
                   вүӨ 2(s + sвӢҶ ) В· В· В· (sвӢҶ + вҢҲ(s + 1)/2вҢү) В·
                                                             1 вҲ’ |вҹЁw, wвҖІ вҹ©|
                  вүӨ 4(s + sвӢҶ ) В· В· В· (sвӢҶ + вҢҲ(s + 1)/2вҢү).
Combining these results, we have for (I) that
      s
        i0 !(i0 + s вҲ’ 2П„ )! p p
(I) =                      ПҲi0 ПҲi0 +sвҲ’2П„ вҹЁw, wвҖІ вҹ©i0 вҲ’П„ Вұ вҲҘПҲвҲҘ22 В· 4(s + sвӢҶ ) В· В· В· (sвӢҶ + вҢҲ(s + 1)/2вҢү) В· вҹЁw, wвҖІ вҹ©i0 вҲ’П„ +1
            ((i0 вҲ’ П„ )!)2
   = C(sвӢҶ , s, П„, вҹЁw, wвҖІ вҹ©) В· вҹЁw, wвҖІ вҹ©i0 вҲ’П„ ,
where we define C(sвӢҶ , s, П„, вҹЁw, wвҖІ вҹ©) = (I)/вҹЁw, wвҖІ вҹ©i0 вҲ’П„ as the coefficient, which is given by
                       s
                 вҖІ        i0 !(i0 + s вҲ’ 2П„ )! p p
   вӢҶ
C(s , s, П„, вҹЁw, w вҹ©) =                       ПҲi0 ПҲi0 +sвҲ’2П„ Вұ вҲҘПҲвҲҘ22 В· 4(s + sвӢҶ ) В· В· В· (sвӢҶ + вҢҲ(s + 1)/2вҢү) В· |вҹЁw, wвҖІ вҹ©|,
                              ((i0 вҲ’ П„ )!)2
and also enjoys the following upper bound
             |C(sвӢҶ , s, П„, вҹЁw, wвҖІ вҹ©)| вүӨ вҲҘПҲвҲҘ22 В· 4(s + sвӢҶ вҲ’ 1) В· В· В· (sвӢҶ вҲ’ 1 + вҢҲ(s + 1)/2вҢү).   (I.2)
Here, the upper bound can be obtained by noting that the previous upper bound for terms i вүҘ i0 + 1
can be also applied to i вүҘ i0 .

Case s вүҘ 1. Let us plug in test tensor Ts into the expression, which gives us
|EzвҲјNd [ПҲ(вҹЁw, zвҹ©)ПҲ(вҹЁwвҖІ , zвҹ©) В· hs (z)[Ts ]]|
       s    r
     X     s    1                                                             вҠ—(sвҲ’П„ )
  вүӨ                |C(sвӢҶ , s, П„, вҹЁw, wвҖІ вҹ©)| В· |вҹЁw, wвҖІ вҹ©|i0 вҲ’П„ В· Sym wвҠ—П„ вҠ— wвҖІ            [Ts ]
     П„ =0
          П„     s!
                                                                пЈ«                                              пЈ¶
       s    r                                                           П„                   s
     X     s    1                                                 1  X Y                  Y
  вүӨ                |C(sвӢҶ , s, П„, вҹЁw, wвҖІ вҹ©)| В· |вҹЁw, wвҖІ вҹ©|i0 вҲ’П„ В· пЈӯ          |вҹЁw, vПҖ(i) вҹ©|        |вҹЁwвҖІ , vПҖ(j) вҹ©|пЈё ,
     П„ =0
          П„     s!                                                s!   i=1               j=П„ +1
                                                                     ПҖвҲҲО s

where О s denotes the set of all permutations of s elements. We further have this term bounded by
       |EzвҲјNd [ПҲ(вҹЁw, zвҹ©)ПҲ(вҹЁwвҖІ , zвҹ©) В· hs (z)[Ts ]]|                                               (I.3)
              s
            X s       r
                         1
          вүӨ                  max |C(sвӢҶ , s, П„, вҹЁw, wвҖІ вҹ©)| В· |вҹЁw, wвҖІ вҹ©|i0 вҲ’П„ В· Пө0sвҲ§c0 В· Пө(sвҲ’c0 )вҲЁ0
            П„ =0
                  П„      s! 0вүӨП„ вүӨs

              2s                                           вӢҶ
            вүӨ вҲҡ max |C(sвӢҶ , s, П„, вҹЁw, wвҖІ вҹ©)| В· |вҹЁw, wвҖІ вҹ©|(s вҲ’1вҲ’вҢҠs/2вҢӢ)вҲЁ0 В· ПөsвҲ§c
                                                                           0
                                                                              0
                                                                                В· Пө(sвҲ’c0 )вҲЁ0 .
               s! 0вүӨП„ вүӨs



                                                    75
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


where the last inequality follows from the following fact
          i0 вҲ’ П„ = (sвӢҶ вҲ’ 1 вҲ’ П„ ) вҲЁ (sвӢҶ вҲ’ 1 + П„ вҲ’ s) вҲЁ 0 = (sвӢҶ вҲ’ 1 вҲ’ s/2 + |П„ вҲ’ s/2|) вҲЁ 0
                 вүҘ (sвӢҶ вҲ’ 1 вҲ’ s/2 + 1(s odd)/2) вҲЁ 0 = (sвӢҶ вҲ’ 1 вҲ’ вҢҠs/2вҢӢ) вҲЁ 0.
Plugging (I.2) into (I.3), and by noting that |вҹЁw, vi вҹ©| вҲЁ |вҹЁwвҖІ , vi вҹ©| вүӨ Пө for any vi вҲҲ {ОёвӢҶ , v} and
|вҹЁw, wвҖІ вҹ©| вүӨ Пө, we have that
  |EzвҲјNd [ПҲ(вҹЁw, zвҹ©)ПҲ(вҹЁwвҖІ , zвҹ©) В· hs (z)[Ts ]]|
       2s                                                          (sвӢҶ вҲ’1вҲ’вҢҠs/2вҢӢ)вҲЁ0
    вүӨ вҲҡ вҲҘПҲвҲҘ22 В· 4(s + sвӢҶ вҲ’ 1) В· В· В· (sвӢҶ вҲ’ 1 + вҢҲ(s + 1)/2вҢү) В· Пө1                      В· ПөsвҲ§c
                                                                                        0
                                                                                           0
                                                                                             В· Пө(sвҲ’c0 )вҲЁ0
        s!
                        s/2
        4e(s + sвӢҶ вҲ’ 1)         вҲҡ

                                                         (sвӢҶ вҲ’1вҲ’вҢҠs/2вҢӢ)вҲЁ0
    вүӨ                        В· s + sвӢҶ вҲ’ 1 В· 4вҲҘПҲвҲҘ22 В· Пө1                    В· ПөsвҲ§c
                                                                               0
                                                                                  0
                                                                                    В· Пө(sвҲ’c0 )вҲЁ0
                s
             s/2 вҲҡ                     (sвӢҶ вҲ’1вҲ’вҢҠs/2вҢӢ)вҲЁ0
    вүӨ (4esвӢҶ ) В· s + sвӢҶ В· 4вҲҘПҲвҲҘ22 В· Пө1                   В· Пө0sвҲ§c0 В· Пө(sвҲ’c0 )вҲЁ0 .
Here, the second inequality follows from the StirlingвҖҷs approximation, and the last inequality holds
because s вүҘ 1.

Case s = 0.       For the case s = 0, we have that
                                                                            вӢҶ                вӢҶ
       |EzвҲјNd [ПҲ(вҹЁw, zвҹ©)ПҲ(вҹЁwвҖІ , zвҹ©)]| = C(sвӢҶ , 0, 0, вҹЁw, wвҖІ вҹ©) В· вҹЁw, wвҖІ вҹ©s вҲ’1 вүӨ 4вҲҘПҲвҲҘ22 Пөs1 вҲ’1 ,

which can also be upper bounded by the quantity derived for the case s вүҘ 1. Hence, the proof is
completed.
Proposition I.4. Let ПҲ(В·, В·)2 satisfies the quadratic integrability condition and high-pass condition
in Assumption 4.1 with sвӢҶ being the generative exponent. Suppose the remaining definitions (c0 ,
{Ts }вҲһ
     s=0 , Пө, Пө0 , Пө1 ) and conditions are the same as in Lemma I.3. Suppose c0 вҲҲ {0, 1, 2} and s0 вҲҲ N0 .
Take function series {О¶s (В·)}вҲһ                            2
                                s=0 satisfying EQ [О¶s (y) ] < C, вҲҖs вҲҲ N0 for some universal C = O(1).
              2               вӢҶ
Suppose 4eПө < 1/2. If s = 1, then we have that
      X
           (s + 2) В· |EQ [О¶s (y)ПҲ(y, вҹЁw, zвҹ©)ПҲ(y, вҹЁwвҖІ , zвҹ©)hs (z)[Ts ]]| вүІ Пөs00 + Пөc00 Пө(s0 вҲ’c0 )вҲЁ0 .
       sвүҘs0
   вӢҶ
If s вүҘ 2, then we have that
         X
             (s + 2) В· |EQ [О¶s (y)ПҲ(y, вҹЁw, zвҹ©)ПҲ(y, вҹЁwвҖІ , zвҹ©)hs (z)[Ts ]]|
           sвүҘs0
                               вӢҶ
                                                      sвӢҶ вҲ’1вҲ’вҢҠc0 /2вҢӢ
                                                                                         вӢҶ
                               s вҲ’1вҲ’вҢҠs0 /2вҢӢ
              вүІ 1(s0 вүӨ c0 ) В· Пө1            В· Пөs00 + Пө1              В· Пөc00 + Пөc00 В· Пө(2s )вҲЁs0 вҲ’c0
                                           вӢҶ                                          вӢҶ

                                            s вҲ’1вҲ’вҢҠ(c0 +1)/2вҢӢ
                  + 1(s0 вүӨ 2(sвӢҶ вҲ’ 1)) В· Пө1                    В· Пөc00 В· Пө + Пөc00 В· Пө2(s вҲ’1)+1вҲ’c0 .

Here, вүІ hides constants that depend on s0 , c0 , C, EQ [ПҲ(y, x)4 ].

Proof of Proposition I.4. Let F denote the target quantity. Invoking Lemma I.3 for each degree s, we
have that
      Xp
F вүӨ         s(s + 1) В· EyвҲјQ |EzвҲјNd [О¶s (y)ПҲ(y, вҹЁw, zвҹ©)ПҲ(y, вҹЁwвҖІ , zвҹ©)hs (z)[Ts ]]|
       sвүҘs0
                                                                s/2 вҲҡ         (sвӢҶ вҲ’1вҲ’вҢҠs/2вҢӢ)вҲЁ0 sвҲ§c0 (sвҲ’c0 )вҲЁ0
       Xp
              s(s + 1) В· EyвҲјQ 4|О¶s (y)|ExвҲјN [ПҲ(y, x)2 ] (4esвӢҶ )

  вүӨ                                                                   s + sвӢҶ Пө1              Пө0 Пө
       sвүҘs0

                                                               s/2 вҲҡ
                          q
                                                                             (sвӢҶ вҲ’1вҲ’вҢҠs/2вҢӢ)вҲЁ0 sвҲ§c0 (sвҲ’c0 )вҲЁ0
       Xp
  вүӨ           s(s + 1) В· 4 EQ [О¶s (y)2 ]EQ [ПҲ(y, x)4 ] (4esвӢҶ )       s + sвӢҶ Пө1              Пө0 Пө            ,
       sвүҘs0

where the last inequality follows from the Cauchy-Schwarz inequality. Noting that by our assumptions,
EQ [О¶s (y)2 ]EQ [ПҲ(y, x)4 ] = O(1) uniformly over s, which gives us
                                                      s/2 (sвӢҶ вҲ’1вҲ’вҢҠs/2вҢӢ)вҲЁ0 sвҲ§c0 (sвҲ’c0 )вҲЁ0
                     Xp
               F вүІ           s(s + 1)(s + sвӢҶ ) (4esвӢҶ ) Пө1                Пө0 Пө            .
                      sвүҘs0



                                                     76
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


For the case sвӢҶ = 1, we have the above term controlled by
                    Xp                   s/2
        F | sвӢҶ =1 вүІ       s(s + 1)2 (4e) Пө0sвҲ§c0 Пө(sвҲ’c0 )вҲЁ0
                     sвүҘs0
                                                           X p                          s/2 c0 sвҲ’c0
                 вүІ 1(c0 > s0 ) В·         sup     Пөs0 +                s(s + 1)2 (4e)       Пө0 Пө
                                   s0 вүӨsвүӨc0 вҲ’1
                                                         sвүҘc0 вҲЁs0
                                                                 X p                         (sвҲ’c0 вҲЁs0 )/2
                 вүІ 1(c0 > s0 ) В· Пөs00 + Пөc00 Пө(s0 вҲ’c0 )вҲЁ0                  s(s + 1)2 4eПө2
                                                               sвүҘc0 вҲЁs0

                 вүІ 1(s0 < c0 ) В· Пөs00 + Пөc00 Пө(s0 вҲ’c0 )вҲЁ0 вүІ Пөc00 вҲ§s0 Пө(s0 вҲ’c0 )вҲЁ0 ,
where вүІ only hides constants that depend on s0 , c0 . The last second inequality holds by noting that
4eПө2 < 1/2.
For the case sвӢҶ вүҘ 2, we note that c0 вүӨ 2 вүӨ 2(sвӢҶ вҲ’ 1), and we have
                                              s/2 (sвӢҶ вҲ’1вҲ’вҢҠs/2вҢӢ)вҲЁ0 sвҲ§c0 (sвҲ’c0 )вҲЁ0
               Xp
  F | sвӢҶ вүҘ2 вүІ        s(s + 1)(s + sвӢҶ ) (4esвӢҶ ) Пө1                Пө0 Пө
              sвүҘs0
                                         sвӢҶ вҲ’1вҲ’вҢҠs/2вҢӢ
           вүІ 1(s0 вүӨ c0 ) В· max Пө1                      В· Пөs0
                             s0 вүӨsвүӨc0
                                                                          sвӢҶ вҲ’1вҲ’вҢҠs/2вҢӢ
                     + 1(s0 вүӨ 2(sвӢҶ вҲ’ 1)) В·        max         Пө1          В· Пөc00 В· ПөsвҲ’c0
                                           c0 +1вүӨsвүӨ2(sвӢҶ вҲ’1)+1
                             X        p                            s/2
                     +                    s(s + 1)(s + sвӢҶ ) (4esвӢҶ ) Пөc00 ПөsвҲ’c0
                       sвүҘ(2(sвӢҶ вҲ’1)+2)вҲЁs0
                            вӢҶ
                                                   sвӢҶ вҲ’1вҲ’вҢҠc0 /2вҢӢ
                                                                                         вӢҶ
                            s вҲ’1вҲ’вҢҠs0 /2вҢӢ
           вүІ 1(s0 вүӨ c0 ) В· Пө1            В· Пөs00 + Пө1              В· Пөc00 + Пөc00 В· Пө(2(s вҲ’1)+2)вҲЁs0 вҲ’c0
                                           вӢҶ                                           вӢҶ

                                             s вҲ’1вҲ’вҢҠ(c0 +1)/2вҢӢ
                 + 1(s0 вүӨ 2(sвӢҶ вҲ’ 1)) В· Пө1                      В· Пөc00 В· Пө + Пөc00 В· Пө2(s вҲ’1)+1вҲ’c0 .

Thus, we complete the proof.

I.2   T E C H N I C A L R E S U LT S F O R U N I F O R M D I S T R I B U T I O N O N T H E S P H E R E

Lemma I.5 (Moment of polynomial on a sphere, adapted from Folland (2001)). Let Оҫ =
                                                                             Pd
(Оҫ1 , Оҫ2 , . . . , Оҫd ) вҲј Unif(SdвҲ’1 ) and s1 , s2 , . . . , sd вҲҲ N0 . Let s = i=1 si . Then we have
                                     пЈұ
                        " d      # пЈҙ0                                           if some si is odd,
                                     пЈІ
                                        d
                         Y
                    EОҫ       Оҫisi = Y О“((si + 1)/2)                   О“(d/2)
                                     пЈҙ                          В·               if all si are even,
                         i=1         пЈі
                                       i=1
                                                О“(1/2)            О“((s + d)/2)

To evaluate this moment, we provide the following bound.
                                                              Pd
Fact I.6. Take even degrees s1 , s2 , . . . , sd вҲҲ N0 and s = i=1 si . Then we have
                       s/2 Y      d                                        s  s/2
                      1                О“((si + 1)/2)         О“(d/2)
                             вүӨ                          В·              вүӨ          ,
                      d          i=1
                                              О“(1/2)      О“((s + d)/2)     d

where we define (0)0 = 1.

Proof of Fact I.6. Note that we can rewrite the product as
               d                                               Qd
                 О“((si + 1)/2)              О“(d/2)               i=1 (si вҲ’ 1)!!
               Y
                                     В·                =                                   .
               i=1
                        О“(1/2)           О“((s + d)/2)   (s + d вҲ’ 2) В· (s + d вҲ’ 4) В· В· В· d

Using the fact that a/b вүҘ (a вҲ’ 1)/(b вҲ’ 1) for 2 вүӨ a вүӨ b, we can recursively apply this inequality to
the factorial until it gives us the desired lower bound of (1/d)s/2 . For the upper bound, we can lower
bound the denominator by ds/2 and upper bound the numerator by ss/2 . We thus have the desired
result.


                                                         77
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Note that the second moment E[Оҫi2 ] вүҚ dвҲ’1 , thus Fact I.6 can be viewed as some kind of reverse
HolderвҖҷs inequality where we use lower moment to control higher moment. Notably, the reverse
inequality gives a dimension-free bound for the moments of the polynomial on the sphere. The
following proposition formalizes this intuition.
Proposition I.7. Suppose Оҫ = (Оҫ1 , Оҫ2 , . . . , Оҫd ) вҲј Unif(SdвҲ’1 ). Let f : Rd вҶ’ R be a function such
that E[(f (Оҫ) вҲ’ 1)2 ] вүӨ Оө2 . Take nonnegative degree s = (s1 , s2 , . . . , sd ) with вҲҘsвҲҘ1 = s, and suppose
each si is even for i вҲҲ [d]. We then have
                                   s/2          "        d
                                                                #
                                   1                    Y                               s  s/2
                        s/2                                  si
              (1 вҲ’ (2s) Оө) В·             вүӨ E f (Оҫ) В·        Оҫi вүӨ (1 + 2s/2 Оө) В·                .
                                   d                    i=1
                                                                                        d

Proof of Proposition I.7. By the Cauchy-Schwarz inequality, we have for any j = 0, 1, . . . , s1 /2,
            "                     #                    v "            #
                           d                           u       d                s/2
                          Y
                               si
                                     p
                                                   2
                                                       u Y
                                                                  2si          2s
          E (f (Оҫ) вҲ’ 1) В·     Оҫi    вүӨ E[(f (Оҫ) вҲ’ 1) ] В· E
                                                       t         Оҫi     вүӨОөВ·               ,
                          i=1                                i=1
                                                                               d

where we use Lemma I.5 and the upper bound in Fact I.6 for the second inequality. Additionally, note
that each si is even, we use the same argument to have
                                    s/2      " d       #
                                   1           Y           s  s/2
                                                    si
                                         вүӨE        Оҫi вүӨ           .
                                   d           i=1
                                                            d
Combining these two inequalities, we conclude the proof.
Proposition I.8. Let Оҫ = (Оҫ1 , Оҫ2 , . . . , Оҫd ) вҲј Unif(SdвҲ’1 ), Оі > 0 be a fixed parameter, and s =
(s1 , s2 , . . . , sd ) be a nonnegative integer vector with вҲҘsвҲҘ1 = s. It then holds that
                                                пЈ®                                   пЈ№
                                                 вҢҠs1 /2вҢӢ
                 "               d
                                        #                                    d
                             s
                                Y                 X        s1 s1 вҲ’2j 2j    Y
G(s) := E (Оҫ1 + Оі) 1 В·              Оҫisi = E пЈ°                 Оі    В· Оҫ1 В·     Оҫisi пЈ»
                                i=2               j=0
                                                           2j              i=2
             пЈұ
             пЈІ0,                                                          if some si is odd for i = 2, 3, . . . , d,
        =
                                   1
                                       2вҢҠs1 /2вҢӢ
                                                  1(s   odd)
                                                                 sвҲ’s1
                                                                 1
             пЈіC(s, Оі) В· Оі + вҲҡ                   В·Оі 1         В· вҲҡd      , otherwise,
                                    d

where 1/5 вүӨ C(s, Оі) вүӨ ss/2 .

Proof of Proposition I.8. Note that
                          "                                #      пЈ®                            пЈ№
                                              d                      s1                d
                                          s
                                              Y                    X     s1 j s1 вҲ’j   Y
                  G(s) = E (Оҫ1 + Оі) 1 В·             Оҫisi       = EпЈ°         Оҫ1 Оі    В·     Оҫisi пЈ» .
                                              i=2                   j=0
                                                                         j            i=2

Note that if there exists any odd degree si for i вүҘ 2, then G(s) = 0. For s2 , s3 , . . . , sd being even,
we have
                 пЈ®                                      пЈ№
                  вҢҠs1 /2вҢӢ                       d
                    X s1                   2j
                                               Y
     G(s) = E пЈ°                Оі s1 вҲ’2j В· Оҫ1 В·      s
                                                   Оҫi i пЈ»
                    j=0
                           2j                  i=2
                 вҢҠs1 /2вҢӢ                            d
                  X          s1 s1 вҲ’2j О“(j + 1/2) Y О“((si + 1)/2)           О“(d/2)
             =                    Оі   В·          В·                В·
                  j=0
                             2j          О“(1/2)    i=2
                                                       О“(1/2)       О“((s вҲ’ s1 + 2j + d)/2)

                 вҢҠs1 /2вҢӢ                                         Qd
                  X          s1 s1 вҲ’2j               (2j вҲ’ 1)!! В· i=2 (si вҲ’ 1)!!
             =                    Оі    В·                                                       ,
                  j=0
                             2j          (s вҲ’ s1 + 2j + d вҲ’ 2) В· (s вҲ’ s1 + 2j + d вҲ’ 4) В· В· В· d
                                         |                        {z                         }
                                                                 (I)
where for the second identity, we use Lemma I.5 to compute the moments of the polynomial on the
sphere. Now, we compute the lower and upper bounds of G(s).


                                                               78
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Lower Bound. For the lower bound, we have
          вҢҠs1 /2вҢӢ
           X s1
   G(s) вүҘ             Оі s1 вҲ’2j В· dвҲ’jвҲ’(s2 +s3 +В·В·В·+sd )/2
           j=0
                   2j
                вҢҠs1 /2вҢӢ                            2j
            1    X 2вҢҠs1 /2вҢӢ
                                               1
           вүҘ В·5              В·Оі 2вҢҠs1 /2вҢӢвҲ’2j
                                              вҲҡ       В· dвҲ’(s2 +s3 +В·В·В·+sd )/2 В· Оі 1(s1 odd)
            5    j=0
                          2j                    d
                   2вҢҠs1 /2вҢӢ                                 j
               1 X           2вҢҠs1 /2вҢӢ                   1
           вүҘ     В·                      В· Оі 2вҢҠs1 /2вҢӢвҲ’j вҲҡ      В· dвҲ’(s2 +s3 +В·В·В·+sd )/2 В· Оі 1(s1 odd) .
               5     j=0
                                j                        d

Here in the first inequality, we use the fact that a/b вүҘ (a вҲ’ 1)/(b вҲ’ 1) for 2 вүӨ a вүӨ b and apply it
recursively to the factorial (I) until it gives us dвҲ’jвҲ’(s2 +s3 +В·В·В·+sd )/2 . For the second inequality, we
first rearrange the terms in the summation and lower bound the binomial coefficients by changing s1
to 2вҢҠs1 /2вҢӢ. For the last inequality, let us define
                                                                         j
                                         2вҢҠs1 /2вҢӢ      2вҢҠs1 /2вҢӢвҲ’j    1
                               Aj =                 В·Оі              вҲҡ        .
                                             j                        d
We invoke Lemma J.4 and have that for each odd j, we have that
                            Aj вүӨ 2(AjвҲ’1 + Aj+1 ),      j = 1, 3, . . . , 2вҢҠs1 /2вҢӢ вҲ’ 1.
Therefore, the summation of all the odd terms is upper bounded by 4 times the summation of all the
even terms, which gives us the last inequality. Therefore, the lower bound of G(s) is
                                            2вҢҠs1 /2вҢӢ                     (sвҲ’s1 )
                             1          1               1(s1 odd)    1
                   G(s) вүҘ В· Оі + вҲҡ                    В·Оі           В· вҲҡ            .
                             5           d                            d

Upper Bound. For the upper bound, we have
                вҢҠs1 /2вҢӢ
                 X          s1 s1 вҲ’2j вҲ’jвҲ’(s2 +s3 +В·В·В·+sd )/2 s/2
      G(s) вүӨ                     Оі   В·d                     В·s
                 j=0
                            2j
                2вҢҠs1 /2вҢӢ                               j
                 X   2вҢҠs1 /2вҢӢ                     1
            вүӨ                   В·Оі 2вҢҠs1 /2вҢӢвҲ’j
                                                 вҲҡ       В· dвҲ’(s2 +s3 +В·В·В·+sd )/2 В· Оі 1(s1 odd) В· ss/2
               j=0
                        j                           d
                              2вҢҠs1 /2вҢӢ                       вҲ’(sвҲ’s1 )
              s/2         1               1(s1 odd)      1
            =s В· Оі+вҲҡ                   В·Оі           В· вҲҡ                ,
                           d                              d
where in the first line, we lower bound the denominator in the factorial (I) by dj+(s2 +s3 +В·В·В·+sd )/2
and upper bound the numerator by ss/2 . For the second inequality, we use the nonnegativity of each
terms and append the terms with j being odd to the summation.
Combining the lower and upper bounds, we have that
       пЈұ
       пЈІ0,                                                         if some si is odd for i = 2, 3, . . . , d,
G(s) =                       2вҢҠs1 /2вҢӢ                   вҲ’(sвҲ’s1 )
       пЈіC(s, Оі) В· Оі + вҲҡ1              В· Оі 1(s1 odd) В· вҲҡ1d        , otherwise,
                          d

for 1/5 вүӨ C(s, Оі) вүӨ ss/2 . Hence, the proof is complete.

I.3   T E C H N I C A L R E S U LT S O N P O L A R I Z E D R A N D O M V E C T O R S

Lemma I.9 (Moments of weakly polarized random vector). Suppose Оҫ = (Оҫ1 , Оҫ2 , . . . , Оҫd ) вҲј
Unif(SdвҲ’1 ) and define the polarized vector w as
                                                     Оҫ + Оіe1
                                             w=                ,
                                                   вҲҘОҫ + Оіe1 вҲҘ2


                                                     79
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


where Оі = o(1) > 0 is a parameter that describes the polarization strength, and e1 = (1, 0, . . . , 0)
                 вҲҡ basis vector. Take nonnegative integer degree s = (s1 , s2 , . . . , sd ) with вҲҘsвҲҘ1 =
is the first standard
s = O(1) < (2 eОі)вҲ’1 вҲ’ 2. Then we have
                   пЈұ
     " d       # пЈҙ пЈҙ  0,                                       if some si is odd for i = 2, 3, . . . , d,
                   пЈҙ
                   пЈІ                   s1    sвҲ’s1
                                    1
           wisi = C(s, Оі) В· Оі + вҲҡd         В· вҲҡ1d
      Y
Ew                                                     ,       if s1 is even, s2 , . . . , sd are even,
      i=1
                   пЈҙ                        s1 вҲ’1       sвҲ’s1
                   пЈіC(s, Оі) В· Оі В· Оі + вҲҡ1         В· вҲҡ1d
                   пЈҙ
                                                             , if s1 is odd, s2 , . . . , sd are even,
                   пЈҙ
                                        d

where 1/5 вҲ’ O(Оі) вүӨ C(s, Оі) вүӨ s(s+1)/2 + O(Оі).

Proof of Lemma I.9. Let r = вҲҘОҫ + Оіe1 вҲҘ2 . We reformulate the moment as
                             " d      #      "               d
                                                                  #
                                                       s
                              Y
                                   si          (Оҫ1 + Оі) 1 Y si
                           E      wi = E                  В·     Оҫi .
                              i=1
                                                   rs       i=2

By symmetry, we have the moment equal zero if some si is odd for i = 2, 3, . . . , d. Hence, we only
need to consider s2 , s3 , . . . , sd being even. In the following, we study the case for s1 being even and
odd separately.

Case 1: s1 is even. We first look at the simpler case where s1 is even. We note by weak polarization
in the sense of вҲҘОҫвҲҘ2 вү« вҲҘОіe1 вҲҘ2 , we can approximate 1/rs as 1 with approximation error
       " d       #    "                     #                       v "                         #
         Y                          Yd                              u
                                                                    u                  Yd
                                si                                                 2s1
              si                         si
                                                 p                                          2si
     E      wi вҲ’ E (Оҫ1 + Оі) В·           Оҫi                  вҲ’s  2
                                              вүӨ E [(1 вҲ’ r ) ] В· E (Оҫ1 + Оі) В·
                                                                    t                     Оҫi
        i=1                           i=2                                                    i=2
                                                       v "                   #
                                                       u
                                                       u             d
                                                                     Y
                                                                 2s1     2si
                                                вүӨ esОі В· E (Оҫ + Оі) В·
                                                       t
                                                                   1   Оҫ       ,    i                 (I.4)
                                                                              i=2

where we use the Cauchy-Schwarz inequality in the first line and for the second line, we use the fact
                                                    s
                           1                   Оі                        sОі
          |1 вҲ’ rвҲ’s | вүӨ          вҲ’ 1 =    1 +            вҲ’  1 вүӨ exp            вҲ’ 1 вүӨ esОі         (I.5)
                       (1 вҲ’ Оі)s              1вҲ’Оі                      1вҲ’Оі
          вҲҡ
for s < (2 eОі)вҲ’1 . Define
                                           "               d
                                                                 #
                                                    si
                                                         Y
                                                              si
                                G(s) := E (Оҫ1 + Оі) В·         Оҫi .
                                                             i=2

By Proposition I.8, we have that for even s1 , s2 , . . . , sd ,
                                                               s1       sвҲ’s1
                                                           1        1
                         G(s) = C вҖІ (s, Оі) В· Оі + вҲҡ               В· вҲҡ         ,
                                                            d        d
with 1/5 вүӨ C вҖІ (s, Оі) вүӨ ss/2 . Plugging the form of G(s) into (I.4), we have that
              " d        #
                Y                           p
                      si
          Ew        wi = M (s) Вұ esОі В· M (2s)
                 i=1
                                                                    s1        sвҲ’s1

                                  вҖІ
                                             p
                                                 вҖІ
                                                                1         1
                           = C (s, Оі) Вұ esОі C (2s, Оі) В· Оі + вҲҡ         В· вҲҡ
                                                                 d         d
                                                                s1        sвҲ’s1
                                                            1         1
                           = C вҖІ (s, Оі) Вұ esОі(2s)s/2 В· Оі + вҲҡ      В· вҲҡ          .
                                                             d         d
Here, C вҖІ (s, Оі) вҲ’ esОі(2s)s/2 вүҘ 1/5 вҲ’ esОі(2s)s/2 and C вҖІ (s, Оі) + esОі(2s)s/2 вүӨ ss/2 + esОі(2s)s/2 .


                                                    80
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Case 2: s1 is odd. We now consider the more complicated case where s1 is odd. In the following
proof, we will frequently invoke the following proposition, whose proof is deferred to Proposition I.7
of Appendix H.
Proposition I.7 (Restated). Suppose Оҫ = (Оҫ1 , Оҫ2 , . . . , Оҫd ) вҲј Unif(SdвҲ’1 ). Let f : Rd вҶ’ R be a
function such that E[(f (Оҫ) вҲ’ 1)2 ] вүӨ Оө2 . Take nonnegative degree s = (s1 , s2 , . . . , sd ) with вҲҘsвҲҘ1 = s,
and suppose each si is even for i вҲҲ [d]. We then have
                                  s/2          "        d
                                                               #
                                  1                    Y                             s  s/2
                                                            s
             (1 вҲ’ (2s)s/2 Оө) В·             вүӨ E f (Оҫ) В·     Оҫi i вүӨ (1 + 2s/2 Оө) В·               .
                                  d                    i=1
                                                                                      d

We first rewrite the moment as
  " d        #     "              d
                                        #
                             s
   Y
          si         (Оҫ1 + Оі) 1 Y si
E      wi = E                  В·     Оҫi                                                                           (I.6)
   i=1
                         rs      i=2
                  (s1 вҲ’1)/2
                                              "       d
                                                          # (s1 вҲ’1)/2                          "          d
                                                                                                               #
                                                Оҫ12j Y si                                        Оҫ12j+1 Y si

                      X       s1 s1 вҲ’2j                        X          s1       s1 вҲ’2jвҲ’1
              =                    Оі       В·E       В·   Оҫ  +                     Оі          В·E         В·     Оҫi .
                      j=0
                              2j                rs i=2 i       j=0
                                                                        2j + 1                      rs   i=2
                  |                     {z                } |                          {z                       }
                                 (I) even terms                                (II) odd terms
Let us look at the odd terms of (I.6). Let r+ = вҲҘОҫ + Оіe1 вҲҘ2 and rвҲ’ = вҲҘвҲ’Оҫ + Оіe1 вҲҘ2 . By symmetry,
we have for the expectation within the odd terms that
            "           d
                             #          "                              d
                                                                               #
              Оҫ12j+1 Y si

                                  1          1      1         2j+1
                                                                      Y
                                                                            si
          E          В·     Оҫi = В· E           s вҲ’ rs       В· Оҫ1    В·       Оҫi
                 rs    i=2
                                  2         r+       вҲ’                i=2
                                        пЈ®               P                                               пЈ№
                                             2     2         sвҲ’1 l sвҲ’1вҲ’l
                                  1       (rвҲ’  вҲ’ r+  )       l=0 rвҲ’ r+                         Yd
                               = В· EпЈ°             s В· r s В· (r + r )              В· Оҫ12j+1 В·       Оҫisi пЈ»
                                  2             r+     вҲ’       +      вҲ’                        i=2
                                         " PsвҲ’1                                    d
                                                                                             #
                                                             sвҲ’1вҲ’l
                                            2В·          rl r
                               = вҲ’Оі В· E s sl=0 вҲ’ +
                                                                                 Y
                                                                     В· Оҫ12j+2 В·        Оҫisi .
                                            r+ В· rвҲ’ В· (r+ + rвҲ’ )                 i=2

                                              2    2
Here, the last identity holds by noting that rвҲ’ вҲ’ r+ = вҲ’4ОіОҫ1 . Note that
                            PsвҲ’1 l sвҲ’1вҲ’l                    s+2
                         2 В· l=0 rвҲ’ r+

                                                        1
                  sup     s    s              вҲ’ 1  вүӨ              вҲ’ 1 вүӨ eОі(s + 2).
                 ОҫвҲҲSdвҲ’1 r+ В· rвҲ’ В· (r+ + rвҲ’ )           1вҲ’Оі

Hence, we have for the odd terms (II) that
          пЈ®                                                                      пЈ№
               PsвҲ’1 l sвҲ’1вҲ’l (s1 вҲ’1)/2                                    d
            2 В· l=0 rвҲ’

                         r+         X        s1
                                                                        Y
вҲ’(II) = E пЈ° s s                  В·                  Оі s1 вҲ’2j В· Оҫ12j+2 В·     Оҫisi пЈ»
            r+ В· rвҲ’ В· (r+ + rвҲ’ )    j=0
                                           2j + 1                       i=2
          (s1 вҲ’1)/2                                                          (sвҲ’s1 +2j+2)/2
            X           s1       s1 вҲ’2j          (s+2)/2                s+2
      вүӨ                        Оі        В· (1 + 2         eОі(s + 2)) В·
            j=0
                      2j + 1                                             d
                                                                                                                            !j
                                                            (sвҲ’s1 +2)/2          1 вҲ’1
                                                                                sX
                                                                                                                  r
                                                     s+2                                  s1 вҲ’ 1                      s+2
      вүӨ s1 В· (1 + 2     (s+2)/2
                                  eОі(s + 2)) В·                            В·ОіВ·                     В· Оі s1 вҲ’1вҲ’j В·                  ,
                                                      d                         j=0
                                                                                             j                         d

                                                                                        s1
                                                                                             s1 вҲ’1
where the first inequality holds by Proposition I.7 and the second inequality holds by 2j+1 / 2j =
s1 /(2j + 1) вүӨ s1 and also appending the odd terms to the summation. Thus, we have
                                                         r       !s1 вҲ’1      r       !sвҲ’s1 +2
                          (s+2)/2                           s+2                s+2
     вҲ’(II) вүӨ s1 В· (1 + 2          eОі(s + 2)) В· Оі В· Оі +                   В·                    .
                                                              d                   d


                                                            81
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Next, we study the even terms (I) in (I.6). Using Proposition I.7 with the uniform bound in (I.5), we
have (I) upper bounded by
                (s1 вҲ’1)/2
                                          "       d
                                                       #
                   X       s1 s1 вҲ’2j        Оҫ12j Y si
          (I) =               Оі       В·E        В·    Оҫ
                   j=0
                           2j                rs i=2 i
                                        (s1 вҲ’1)/2
                                                         r  sвҲ’s1 +2j
                            s/2           s1 s1 вҲ’2j
                                            X                s
              вүӨ (1 + 2 esОі) В·                  Оі      В·
                                j=0
                                          2j                 d
                                    1 вҲ’1
                                   sX                             r  j  r  sвҲ’s1
                       s/2                s1 вҲ’ 1       s1 вҲ’1вҲ’j     s     s
              вүӨ (1 + 2 esОі) В· s1 В·                  В·Оі         В·       В·        В·Оі
                                    j=0
                                             j                     d     d
                                              r  s1 вҲ’1  r  sвҲ’s1
                           s/2                   s               s
              = s1 В· (1 + 2 esОі) В· Оі В· Оі +                В·          .
                                                 d               d
Similarly, we have the lower bound for (I) as
                (s1 вҲ’1)/2
                                         "       d
                                                     #
                   X       s1 s1 вҲ’2j       Оҫ12j Y si
          (I) =               Оі      В·E        В·   Оҫ
                   j=0
                           2j               rs i=2 i
                                             (s1 вҲ’1)/2   r !sвҲ’s1 +2j

                                  s/2
                                                  X        1s1 s1 вҲ’2j
              вүҘ (1 вҲ’ (2s) esОі) В·                                 Оі    В·
                                  j=0
                                                           d2j
                                 sX1 вҲ’1                     r !j     r !sвҲ’s1
                1         s/2             s1 вҲ’ 1 s1 вҲ’1вҲ’j      1       1
              вүҘ (1 вҲ’ (2s) esОі) В·                  Оі      В·        В·          В·Оі
                5                 j=0
                                             j                d       d
                                             r !s1 вҲ’1    r !sвҲ’s1
                1         s/2                  1            1
              = (1 вҲ’ (2s) esОі) В· Оі В· Оі +              В·           .
                5                              d            d
Combining these upper and lower bounds for (I) together with the upper bound for (II), we have
      " d       #
                                           s1 В· (1 + 2(s+2)/2 eОі(s + 2)) В· (s + 2)(s+2)/2

        Y
             si       1          s/2
    E       wi вүҘ        (1 вҲ’ (2s) esОі) вҲ’
        i=1
                      5                                           d
                                 r !s1 вҲ’1       r !sвҲ’s1
                                    1             1
                      В·ОіВ· Оі+                В·              ,
                                    d             d
and
              " d           #                                               r !s1 вҲ’1     r !sвҲ’s1
               Y                                                             1            1
          E          wisi       вүӨ (1 + 2   s/2          (s+1)/2
                                                 esОі) В· s          В·ОіВ·   Оі+          В·           .
               i=1
                                                                             d            d

Hence, we complete our proof.

J     AU X I L I A RY L E M M A S
Lemma J.1 (BernsteinвҖҷs inequality). Let X1 , . . . , Xn be independent random variables with |Xi вҲ’
E[Xi ]| вүӨ C for all i вҲҲ [n]. Then for any t > 0, it holds that
                 n             n
                                                                       nt2 /2
             X
             1             1X
         P           Xi вҲ’        EXi вүҘ t вүӨ 2 exp вҲ’ вҲ’1 Pn                                 ,
             n i=1         n i=1                             n В· i=1 Var[Xi ] + Ct/3

or equivalently, for any Оҙ вҲҲ (0, 1),
             n
                               r          Pn
                                   2 В· nвҲ’1 i=1 Var[Xi ] В· log Оҙ вҲ’1   C log Оҙ вҲ’1
        X
         1
     P          Xi вҲ’ EXi вүӨ                                         +              вүҘ 1 вҲ’ Оҙ.
         n i=1                                  n                       3n


                                                              82
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


For the vector case, by a union bound over all the coordinates, we have the following corollary.
Corollary J.2 (Vector version of BernsteinвҖҷs inequality). Let X1 , . . . , Xn be independent random
vectors in Rd with вҲҘXi вҲ’ E[Xi ]вҲҘвҲһ вүӨ C for all i вҲҲ [n]. Then for any Оҙ вҲҲ (0, 1), it holds with
probability at least 1 вҲ’ Оҙ that
      n                    n
                                       r     Pn                                     вҲҡ
                                         nвҲ’1 i=1 Tr(Cov[Xi ]) В· log(dОҙ вҲ’1 )           dC log(dОҙ вҲ’1 )
                        X
   1X                   1
         Xi вүІ E               Xi     +                                           +                   .
  n i=1       2         n i=1      2                      n                                n

Lemma J.3 (Lemma I.3. in Damian et al. (2024)). Let X1 , . . . , Xn вҲҲ Rd be independent mean-zero
random vectors such that for all pPвүҘ 2, E[вҲҘXi вҲҘp ]1/p вүӨ Cpk/2 forP    some constants k, C вүҘ 0 and
                         2     вҲ’1    n          2                вҲ’1    n
vector norm вҲҘВ·вҲҘ. Define Пғ := n       i=1 E[вҲҘXi вҲҘ ] and Y := n       В· i=1 Xi . Then with probability
at least 1 вҲ’ 2Оҙ,
                                   r
                                     log(1/Оҙ) C log(1/Оҙ) log(n/Оҙ)k/2
                        вҲҘY вҲҘ вүІ Пғ В·            +                            .
                                         n                    n
where вүІ only hides constant that depends on k.
Lemma J.4 (Ratio bound of binomial expansion). For real numbers a, b > 0 and integer s вүҘ 2,
define

                               s
                       Aj :=       В· asвҲ’j В· bj , for j = 0, 1, . . . , s.
                               j
Then for all j = 1, 2, . . . , s вҲ’ 1, it holds that Aj вүӨ 2(AjвҲ’1 + Aj+1 ).

Proof of Lemma J.4. By the definition of Aj ,
                                                               s
                Aj   Aj                    b sвҲ’j+1 a j+1         b sвҲ’j+1 a j+1
     min           ,                = min    В·      , В·        вүӨ   В·    В· В·
               AjвҲ’1 Aj+1                   a     j   b sвҲ’j       a   j   b sвҲ’j
                                      s
                                               1      1
                                    вүӨ     1+       1+     вүӨ 2.
                                             sвҲ’j      j

Hence, the proof is complete by the nonnegativity of Aj .

Proposition J.5. For Пө вҲҲ [0, 1/2) and s, r вҲҲ N0 with s вүҘ 2r вҲ’ 1, it holds that
     вҲһ
     X                                                                                              1
           (j + s)(j + s вҲ’ 1) В· В· В· (j + s вҲ’ r + 1) В· Пөj вүӨ 2s В· (s вҲ’ 1) В· В· В· (s вҲ’ r + 1) В·            .
     j=0
                                                                                                   1вҲ’Пө

                                        PвҲһ
Proof of Proposition J.5. Denote F (x) = j=0 (j +s)(j +sвҲ’1) В· В· В· (j +sвҲ’r +1)xj for x вҲҲ (0, 1).
                               PвҲһ side of the inequality is simply F (Пө). It can be verified using
The desired quantity on the left-hand
the expansion of 1/(1 вҲ’ x) = j=0 xj for x вҲҲ (0, 1) that
                                                    dr   xs   вҲ’(sвҲ’r)
                                         F (x) =             В·x      .
                                                   dxr 1 вҲ’ x
Expanding this expression, we have
            r     П„
                                   drвҲ’П„

          X     r d                          1
  F (x) =              П„
                         (x s
                              ) В·    rвҲ’П„
                                                   В· xвҲ’(sвҲ’r)
          П„ =0
                П„   dx            dx       1 вҲ’ x
            r
          X     r                                      (вҲ’1)rвҲ’П„ (r вҲ’ П„ )! вҲ’(sвҲ’r)
        =          s(s вҲ’ 1) В· В· В· (s вҲ’ П„ + 1) В· xsвҲ’П„ В·                  В·x
          П„ =0
                П„                                       (1 вҲ’ x)rвҲ’П„ +1
               r
               X                                                                                      xrвҲ’П„
           =          (r В· (r вҲ’ 1) В· В· В· (П„ + 1)) В· (s В· (s вҲ’ 1) В· В· В· (s вҲ’ П„ + 1)) В· (вҲ’1)rвҲ’П„ В·                 .
               П„ =0
                                                                                                  (1 вҲ’ x)rвҲ’П„ +1


                                                          83
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025



                                         Pr
Write the above summation as F (x) = П„ =0 FП„ (x), where FП„ (x) is the П„ -th term in the summation.
Then for each П„ = 0, . . . , r вҲ’ 1, when x вҲҲ (0, 1), we have
                                    FП„ (x)      sвҲ’П„ 1вҲ’x
                                             =вҲ’      В·   < вҲ’1.
                                   FП„ +1 (x)    П„ +1   x
Note that Fr (x) is positive, and for each k = 1, . . . , вҢҠr/2вҢӢ, FrвҲ’2k+1 (x) < вҲ’FrвҲ’2k (x) < 0. Since
F (x) is positive, it is then upper bounded by FП„ (x) + |F0 (x)|, i.e.,
                                         1                 xr                                         1
F (x) вүӨ s В· (s вҲ’ 1) В· В· В· (s вҲ’ r + 1) В·      + r! В·               вүӨ 2s В· (s вҲ’ 1) В· В· В· (s вҲ’ r + 1) В·     .
                                        1вҲ’x         (1 вҲ’ x)r+1                                       1вҲ’x
The proof is complete by setting x = Пө.
Lemma J.6 (Gaussian-like tail bound for spherical coordinate). Suppose Оҫ вҲј Unif(SdвҲ’1 ). Then the
first coordinate of Оҫ, denoted by Оҫ1 , satisfies that for any t вүҘ 0,
                                   p
                          Pr(Оҫ1 вүҘ CdвҲ’1 log d) вүӨ exp(вҲ’d/16) + dвҲ’C/4 ,
where C > 0 is a constant.

                                                                          d
Proof of Lemma J.6. Consider z вҲј N (0, Id ), and it holds that Оҫ1 = z1 /вҲҘzвҲҘ2 , where z1 is the first
coordinate of z. Note that вҲҘzвҲҘ22 вҲј ПҮ2d , and by a standard tail bound for the ПҮ2d distribution, we have
                                           вҲҡ
                       Pr(вҲҘzвҲҘ22 вүӨ d вҲ’ 2 dx) вүӨ exp(вҲ’x), for any x вүҘ 0.
By taking x = d/16, we get Pr(вҲҘzвҲҘ22 вүӨ d/2) вүӨ exp(вҲ’d/16). Thus, applying a union bound,
                               z
                                 1
                                                                        p
                                     вүҘ t вүӨ Pr вҲҘzвҲҘ22 вүӨ d/2 + Pr(z1 вүҘ t d/2)

             Pr(Оҫ1 вүҘ t) = Pr
                               вҲҘzвҲҘ2
                         вүӨ exp(вҲ’d/16) + exp(вҲ’t2 d/4).
                                   p
The proof is complete by taking t = CdвҲ’1 log d.
Lemma J.7 (Hypergeometric behavior). Consider random variable X вҲј Hypergeometric(d, k, k)
with probability mass
                                      k dвҲ’k

                                            x   kвҲ’x
                           Pr(X = x) =          d
                                                        ,   for x = 1, 2, . . . k.
                                                k
                 вҲҡ
Suppose k = o( d), then for any constant s > 0, it holds that E[X s ] вүғ k 2 /d. In addition, the
following tail bound holds:
                                    Pr(X вүҘ log k) вүІ (k 2 /d)log k .
                                                                      вҲҡ
Proof of Lemma J.7. We first notice that for x вүҘ k 2 /d, since k = o( d),
     Pr(X = x + 1)                (k вҲ’ x)2                    k  2 .  d           d    k 2
                    =                               = 1вҲ’                   +  o       вүІ    .        (J.1)
       Pr(X = x)        (x + 1)(d вҲ’ 2k вҲ’ x + 1)               d        k2         k2    d
This immediately implies the tail bound:
                                            X k                      k 2  log k
                      Pr(X вүҘ log k) вүӨ             Pr(X = j) вүІ                   .
                                                                     d
                                            j=вҢҲlog kвҢү
                               s
Next, for the moment E[X ], we first study the magnitude of P(X = 0), which, by StirlingвҖҷs
approximation, is given by
                                ((d вҲ’ k)!)2         (d вҲ’ k)2(dвҲ’k)+1 В· eвҲ’2(dвҲ’k)
              Pr(X = 0) =                     вүғ d+1/2
                               d! В· (d вҲ’ 2k)!  d      В· (d вҲ’ 2k)(dвҲ’2k)+1/2 В· eвҲ’2(dвҲ’k)
                            (1 вҲ’ 2k/d + k 2 /d2 )dвҲ’k+1/2
                           =
                                (1 вҲ’ 2k/d)dвҲ’2k+1/2
                                                        dвҲ’k+1/2          k
                                          1                          2k
                           = 1+                                   1вҲ’       .
                                  (1 вҲ’ 2k/d) В· d2 /k 2                d


                                                   84
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025



            вҲҡ
Since k = o( d), we have (1 вҲ’ 2k/d)k вүғ 1. Further applying the fact that (1 + 1/m)m = Оҳ(1),
                                                      (1вҲ’2k/d)В·d2 /k2 В·k2 /d
                                        1
             Pr(X = 0) вүғ 1 +                                                 = Оҳ(1).
                                (1 вҲ’ 2k/d) В· d2 /k 2
As a consequence, using the first equality in (J.1), we can lower bound the expectation of X s by
                                                                 k2       k2
                      E[X s ] вүҘ Pr(X = 1) = Pr(X = 0) В·                 вүі    .
                                                             d вҲ’ 2k + 1   d
For the upper bound, we again use the first equality in (J.1) to get
                                            k2                          Pr(X = x) k 2
          Pr(X = x + 1) вүӨ                                 В· Pr(X = x) вүІ          В· .
                                  (x + 1)(d вҲ’ 2k вҲ’ x + 1)                 x+1     d
Recursive application of this inequality yields that P(X = x) вүІ P(X = 0) В· (k 2 /d)x /x!, and thus
                            k                                    k
                            X                                    X xs   k 2  x       k2
                E[X s ] =         xs В· Pr(X = x) вүӨ Pr(X = 0) В·                   вүІ      .
                            x=1                                  x=1
                                                                       x!   d        d

Therefore, we conclude that E[X s ] вүғ k 2 /d. This completes the proof.


                                                  85
