Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


I MPROVING R EASONING P ERFORMANCE IN L ARGE
L ANGUAGE M ODELS VIA R EPRESENTATION E NGI -
NEERING

 Bertram Højer∗, Oliver Jarvis∗, Stefan Heinrich
 Department of Computer Science, IT University of Copenhagen, Denmark
 {berh, ojar, stehe}@itu.dk



                                             A BSTRACT
           Recent advancements in large language models (LLMs) have resulted in in-
           creasingly anthropomorphic language concerning the ability of LLMs to reason.
           Whether reasoning in LLMs should be understood to be inherently different is,
           however, widely debated. We propose utilizing a representation engineering ap-
           proach wherein model activations are read from the residual stream of an LLM
           when processing a reasoning task. The activations are used to derive a control
           vector that is applied to the model as an inference-time intervention, modulating
           the representational space of the model, to improve performance on the speci-
           fied task. We publish the code for deriving control vectors and analyzing model
           representations.1 The method allows us to improve performance on reasoning
           benchmarks and assess how control vectors influence the final logit distribution of
           a model via metrics such as KL divergence and entropy. We apply control vectors
           to Mistral-7B-Instruct and a range of Pythia models on an inductive, a deductive
           and mathematical reasoning task. We show that an LLM can, to a certain degree,
           be controlled to improve its perceived reasoning ability by modulating activations.
           The intervention is dependent upon the ability to reliably extract the model’s typ-
           ical state when correctly solving a task. Our results suggest that reasoning per-
           formance can be modulated in the same manner as other information-processing
           tasks performed by LLMs and demonstrate that we are capable of improving per-
           formance on specific tasks via a simple intervention on the residual stream with
           no additional training.


1       I NTRODUCTION
Many recent developments in the study of artificial intelligence and more specifically large language
models (LLMs) have focused on improving their ability to solve reasoning tasks. The notion of
reasoning is, however, notoriously hard to ground and define (Chollet, 2019; Pavlick, 2023). While
various forms of reasoning such as inductive, deductive and abductive reasoning are well-defined,
they typically refer to high-level processes – often associated with System 2 thinking – as opposed
to fundamental computational mechanisms (Johnson-Laird, 2008). The increasing scale of LLMs
and better data-curation have yielded better results on standard benchmark datasets leading to
research into the reasoning strategies employed by LLMs; this research generally focuses on model
outputs as opposed to internal states (e.g. Mondorf & Plank, 2024). We thus cannot conclude
anything with regards to the processes or representational learning dynamics related to the ability
of an LLM to solve reasoning tasks. We propose modeling the typical representations of a simple
“reasoning process” and using those representations to improve reasoning performance on three
tasks.

Recent work has shown that it is possible to induce specific types of behavior by manually
modulating the internal state of a model. Researchers have assessed editing LLM knowledge in
MLP layers of transformers (Meng et al., 2023a;b) and have mapped entire computational circuits
    ∗
        Equal contributions.
    1
        code: https://github.com/bertramhojer/improve-reasoning-iclr-2025


                                                   1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


within models (Wang et al., 2022). More interestingly, it has been shown that we do not need to
investigate specific MLP or attention layers, but can instead look at the residual stream of an LLM.
By modulating the residual stream in a meaningful way it is possible to induce different types of
“behavioral” traits such as honesty, truthfulness and emotional valence. These types of behavior
can be conceived as directions in the representational space of an LLM (Liu et al., 2023; Hendel
et al., 2023; Todd et al., 2024). Additionally, modulating the residual stream has also been used
to improve the ability of transformer models trained to play the board games chess and othello
(Karvonen, 2024; Nanda et al., 2023). A similar approach was utilized by Anthropic for their
Golden Gate Claude model in which they steered an LLM towards “acting” as the Golden Gate
bridge (Templeton et al., 2024). The above research highlights the efficacy of the approach as well
as the broad potential applications.

As a novel contribution, we directly analyze the ability to improve “reasoning” using a rep-
resentation engineering approach. We specifically assess whether the residual stream of LLMs
contains valuable (and actionable) information as to a model’s reasoning ability and whether it can
be used to improve it, as has been done for other types of model “behavior”. Concretely, we extract
activations from the hidden dimension of LLMs. We then create a control vector on the basis of
these activations and assess whether our inference-time intervention can improve reasoning ability
on and across the specific set of tasks we analyze.
The main contribution of this paper is thus an analysis of the effectiveness of perturbing the residual
stream in order to improve a model’s performance on a set of reasoning-related tasks. We particularly
address whether the method allows us to find a direction in the representational space of LLMs
related to reasoning, and how the intervention affects the representational space of a model.

2    A PPROACH
We employ a representation engineering approach, deriving control vectors based on typical model
representations when performing the specified reasoning task. This allows us to assess whether one
can induce better reasoning performance similarly to how one can adjust e.g. the emotional valence
of model outputs (Zou et al., 2023).


                       ( ... )


                  Add & Norm                                                    Add & Norm

                                                                               Feed-forward
                  Feed-forward
                                                                                   layer
                      layer
         1x                                                                                            1x
                                                         Resisdual Stream
      Block       Add & Norm                                                                           Block

                                                                                Add & Norm
                  Multi-headed
                  self-attention                                               Multi-headed
                                                                               self-attention


                       ( ... )

(a) Traditional representation of transformer ar-           (b) Conceptual reframing of the transformer archi-
chitecture as introduced by Vaswani et al. (2017).          tecture as discussed by Elhage et al. (2021).

Figure 1: A conceptual reframing of transformer information processing emphasizing the impor-
tance of the residual stream. As opposed to focusing on the operations done by each computational
block, this framing emphasizes each computational block as reading from and writing to a residual
stream that is represented in the hidden dimension of a transformer model.


In most LLMs, the transformer architecture comprises an embedding layer followed by n computa-
tional blocks finally followed by an output layer of token logits from which a new token is generated


                                                     2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


via a softmax function over the logits (Vaswani et al., 2017). Following arguments by Elhage et al.
(2021) as well as recent related research (Templeton et al., 2024), we highlight the residual stream
as a key component of the transformer, and emphasize that the fundamental operation of the trans-
former is representation transformation. This conceptual reframing is illustrated in Figure 1. The
operations done by a single layer in any given transformer can be described as in Equation 1 without
the term cℓ + α.

                            yℓ = LayerNorm (xℓ + Att(xℓ ))
                                                                                                     (1)
                          xℓ+1 = LayerNorm (yℓ + MLP(yℓ )) + cℓ · α
xℓ is the hidden dimension activation vector at the ℓ’th layer, yℓ the activations after the scaled
dot-product attention-mechanism and xℓ+1 the activations after the MLP transformation.
Recent work has illustrated the efficacy of analyzing and manipulating the residual stream by e.g.
using sparse autoencoders to extract features from residual stream activations (Huben et al., 2023).
This work suggests that the residual stream is a better level of analysis than single neurons (or cohorts
of neurons) due partly to the issue of polysemanticity. Targeting the residual stream has also been
proposed as a solution to cross-layer superposition: the notion that features are smeared across many
hidden layers of a deep neural network (Bricken et al., 2023; Templeton et al., 2024). We extract the
representation after each layer at the final token of a task example. From these extracted activations
we derive layer-specific control vectors. Applying the control vector is the simple addition of adding
the cℓ · α term to the standard transformer operation as illustrated in Equation 1.

2.1   C ONTROL V ECTORS

A control vector can be trained in multiple ways based on the extracted model activations. The sim-
plest way is by creating a reading vector, which is merely the average over the extracted activations.
Given a set of prompts P , a model with L layers, and Hℓ (Pi ) as the hidden state of the residual
stream for the ℓ’th layer and the i’th prompt, the reading vector is described as follows:
                                                     |P |
                                                 1 X
                                         cℓ =             Hℓ (Pi )                                   (2)
                                                |P | i=1

Related work indicates that for extracting a desired behavior from an LLM it is best to use contrastive
pairs. The use of contrastive pairs entails looking at the representations for positive and negative
prompts. For the case of say, emotional valence, it could entail examples of ‘happy’ prompts and
examples of ‘sad’ prompts. For the case of reasoning we look at examples of successful reasoning
and unsuccessful reasoning – see subsection 3.1. This ensures that the control vectors are based on
a difference in representations (Zou et al., 2023). The control vector can thus be scaled to induce the
desired behavior or its opposite. Given a set of contrastive pairs of positive and negative prompts
P ± = (P + , P − ), we define the control vector as:
                                        |P ± |
                                     1 X
                                               Hℓ Pi+ − Hℓ Pi−

                               cℓ = ±                                                                (3)
                                   |P | i=1

Another method for training control vectors involves applying Principal Component Analysis (PCA)
to the contrastive activations (Zou et al., 2023). PCA finds directions in the data that account for
the most variance, with the first component indicating the direction in the data explaining maxi-
mum variance. The intuition is that the difference between these contrasting representations will
contribute significantly to the variance in the activations, and the first principal component should
thus approximate the direction in the activation space that most effectively distinguishes between
the desired outcome and its contrast. This direction can then be used as the control vector. Similar
to reading vectors using contrastive pairs the PCA control vector is defined in the following manner.

                                   Hℓ Pi+ − Hℓ Pi−           ∀ i ∈ 1, . . . , P ±

                   cℓ = PCA                                                           (1)
                                                                                                     (4)

A key consideration is how much one wishes to modulate representations (controlled by α), as too
strong modulation could result in non-sensical outputs. When creating control vectors of the reading


                                                    3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


type, an α = 1 is equivalent to adding a ”full” activation vector to the signal as ||cℓ || ≃ ||Hℓ ||
which follows from Equation 2. However, when applying PCA we get ||cℓ || = 1. To account for
the difference we implement an up-scaling of PCA-based control vectors which is dependent on the
actual norm of the extracted residual stream activations (see subsection A.1).

The derivation of control vectors is thus a relatively simple process that does not induce a
large computational overhead. We simply need to extract activations while performing inference on
a given task to control and improve the outputs of LLMs without any further training.

3       E VALUATION & A NALYSIS
3.1       E XPERIMENT

For IOI we create 2, 000 examples for each condition of the following form:

             Mary[A] and John[B] went to the store. John[B] gave the groceries to Mary[A] .

This task is inductive as multiple answers could be correct, we are however interested in controlling
the model to generate a desired name and pose this as an inductive inference problem. We study
four different conditions: ABBA (A), BABA (B), ABBA-Long (AL) and BABA-Long (BL).
bAbI comprises various reasoning tasks, one related to deductive reasoning of which there are 2, 000
examples. The questions have the following format2 :

             Passage: Mice are afraid of wolves. Gertrude is a mouse. Cats are afraid of sheep.
             Question: What is Gertrude afraid of? Answer: Wolf

GSM8K consists of high quality grade school math problems on which relatively capable LLMs still
struggle. The questions are of the following format:

             Question: ”Natalia sold clips to 48 of her friends in April, and then she sold half
             as many clips in May. How many clips did Natalia sell altogether in April and
             May?” Answer: ”Natalia sold (48/2 = 48/2 = 24) 24 clips in May. Natalia sold
             (48 + 24 = 48 + 24 = 72) 72 clips altogether in April and May. #### 72”

We provide a fully detailed example of a question from the GSM8K dataset in subsection A.3.
For GSM8K we use a total sample of 400 prompts to derive the control vectors. For each dataset
we create train and test splits with stratified labels. We then derive the control vector based on
model representations when it generates outputs on examples from the train split and test model
performance with a control vector applied on the test set.
In order to produce the contrastive pairs we need positive and negative prompt examples. For the
positive examples, an obvious method might be to select all cases where the model successfully
solves a task, making sure that the class labels are balanced so as to ensure that the model is not
biased towards a specific answer. A prompt for unsuccessful reasoning is less clear however. We
propose multiple schemes to elicit representations typical of poor reasoning. 1) A naive approach
entails asking a model to produce an incorrect answer. This was found during testing to be a poor
scheme since producing the wrong answer when prompted to might be considered good reasoning.
2) Taking examples where the model answers a question incorrectly, this approach does however
have pitfalls. In some cases an answer is not actually wrong, but simply not the correct token we
were envisioning. As an example in the IOI task ”Mary[A] and John[B] went to the store. John[B]
gave the groceries to Carl[C] .” Carl is not necessarily wrong, it is just not the token we expected.
3) The third scheme consists of simply creating negative prompts that are 75 random character
strings sampled from A to z. While this scheme does not introduce a natural contrast it provides
”a point of reference” in terms of model representations and empirically works better than merely
using reading vectors. We test scheme 2) and 3) in the following experiments.
We carry out multiple experiments applying the intervention to the residual stream of various LLMs
at the middle layer at varying scales of α and assess how this influences performance on the three
    2
        Questions are generally more complicated than this example. See subsection A.2 for more details.


                                                        4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


datasets. When deriving control vectors we get a control vector for each layer, previous work how-
ever indicates that only applying the vectors to the middle layer is enough to induce strong changes
to model outputs (Templeton et al., 2024). We generally assess the impact of the intervention at
α ∈ [−1, 1] at increments of 0.1, but look at a range of [−3, 3] for Mistral-7B-Instruct.

3.2   E VALUATION M ETRICS

We benchmark performance by investigating the output logits of a constrained set of potential re-
sponses, where the potential responses are the collection of all answers in the dataset, similarly to
what is done in the lm-eval framework (Sutawika et al., 2024). We do not use an exact-match met-
ric as it is particularly error-prone in 0-shot prompt scenarios for smaller LLMs, where the desired
structure of the output is unknown to the model. This results in verbose and prosaic language gen-
erated by the model to potentially be labeled as inaccurate despite providing correct answers. This
issue is less pronounced in few-shot prompting.
We thus use few-shot examples of the task when extracting the activations, in part to alleviate the
above-stated issues, but more importantly because LLMs have been shown to be in-context learners
(Brown et al., 2020). We furthermore cannot expect to be able to improve a model on a task it
cannot adequately solve when the method of improving a model is derived directly from it’s own
hidden states. For the GSM8K task the model generates a full response with a reasoning trace and
we use a decoding scheme to extract the final answer.

Beyond benchmarking the model outputs, we aim to understand the distribution changes as
control vectors are applied. We analyze this by examining summary statistics of the resulting distri-
butions and comparing them to the original model. We specifically focus on Kullback-Leibler (KL)
divergence between the logit distribution of a model with and without the intervention applied at
various α levels, providing a metric for distribution change magnitude:

                                                X               P (x)
                              DKL (P ∥Pα ) =        P (x) log                                    (5)
                                                                Pα (x)
                                                x∈X

where P is the original logit distribution and Pα is the modified logit distribution. We addition-
ally look at model entropy as a function of α, revealing whether the model becomes more or less
confident with increasing α:
                                             X
                                 H(X) = −        Pα (x) log Pα (x)                             (6)
                                                x∈X

Finally, we assess the average probability for correct versus incorrect answers as a function of α.
This is done to assess how the intervention concretely influences the token probability distribution.
                                                          N
                                                    1 X
                                     P̄αcorrect =         Pα (yˆi |xi )                             (7)
                                                    N i=1

                                        P̄αincorrect = 1 − P̄αcorrect                           (8)
where N is the number of samples, ŷ is the predicted answer to the input xi , and where ŷ is con-
strained to the list of potential answers.
These metrics yield insights into how the control vector intervention affects model states. If a certain
level of control creates a disproportionate spike in the KL divergence it would suggest a certain
threshold in terms of bringing the model out of its usual state. We expect a linear increase in KL
divergence as α increases. Entropy indicates the uncertainty contained in a probability distribution;
we expect that if the control vector improves task accuracy the entropy should drop as the probability
mass concentrates on the correct answer token. Finally, assessing the probability mass concentrated
at the correct token tells us concretely whether we are generally (across many samples) improving
the ability to correctly solve the task.
If we observe decreasing entropy and increased probability on correct tokens as accuracy increases
this suggests that the control vector intervention is working as intended. However, if the metrics
do not align and we observe for instance decreased entropy but no increase in accuracy it might
indicate that we are affecting the model in unintended ways.


                                                      5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


We do not train any models, but extract control vectors based on hidden states of the mod-
els. We evaluate model performance with the intervention on the test set and derive the control
vectors from activations based on the training set. We do this to avoid data contamination although
we cannot be certain that the training data of the models we use have not been contaminated
indirectly.

3.3   M ODELS

We work with models from the Pythia suite developed by EleutherAI (Biderman et al., 2023). We
specifically look at two models, namely Pythia-1.4B and Pythia-2.8B. We analyze these models
based on initial benchmarking studies and because this range allows us to analyze the efficacy of
the representation engineering approach across different scales. We additionally test the approach
on Mistral-7B-Instruct to scale the approach to a larger more capable model and to assess how the
control vectors affect an instruction-fine-tuned model.

3.4   R ESULTS

In this section we report results for Pythia-1.4B, Pythia-2.8B and Mistral-7B-Instruct with the PCA
derived control vectors applied. We generally see improved performance across models and tasks,
although there are differences in the optimal value of α as well as whether to scale the control vector
negatively or positively.

P YTHIA
We train control vectors on the signal extracted from the A condition and apply them across ex-
perimental conditions. We observe slight generalization across task variations for both Pythia-1.4B
and Pythia-2.8B as seen in 2a and 9a in subsection A.4 for Pythia-1.4B. Pythia-2.8B improves
accuracy slightly when the control vector is applied across conditions, with some variation in α, and
KL divergence increases quadratically as α is increased in both directions, see 2b. The intervention
is mostly effective for B and BL suggesting that the control vectors are encoding position-sensitive
information of the indirect-object to be generated. These findings are corroborated by the entropy
analysis which indicates a slight decrease as accuracy increases, however, we observe that as entropy
decreases KL divergence increases. We furthermore see that the probability mass on average accu-
mulates slightly around the correct answer with an increase in α in 2d although the average change
in probability on the correct token is minute. We report only on the IOI task for Pythia models as
they were not capable of adequately solving neither the bAbI or GSM8K tasks.

M ISTRAL
We see similar results for Mistral as for Pythia-2.8B on bAbI, see Figure 3. We improve the logit-
based accuracy and KL divergence increases quadratically. We do, however, observe a slight upward
trend in entropy against our expectations of how the intervention should affect the final logit distribu-
tion when it successfully improves a model’s accuracy. We assess performance on the bAbI dataset
as IOI is too simple relative to the performance of the model.
We additionally find that the control vector intervention improves model performance on the
GSM8K task; the approach successfully improves the model’s ability to solve the task with a nega-
tive α as indicated by Figure 4. While model representations are not very robust to the intervention
(based on the jagged trend line), we do find that the intervention works. The KL divergence and
entropy measures look quite different for GSM8K, although there does seem to be a positive corre-
lation between the metrics.
Finally we assess how control vectors derived from the bAbI task influences performance on
GSM8K evaluation and vice-versa. In Figure 5 we report the results of of this experiment. We
find an almost identical increase in accuracy on the GSM8K test set when a bAbI control vec-
tor is applied, and see similar trends in the KL divergence and entropy plots. We also find that a
GSM8K control vector improves performance on the bAbI task, see subsection A.5. This suggests
that the representation from which we derive the control vector captures aspects of the information-
processing a model performs when solving a reasoning benchmark task.


                                                   6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


      (a) Logit based accuracy on the IOI task                 (b) KL Divergence by α


                 (c) Entropy by α                             (d) Probability mass by α

Figure 2: Pythia-2.8B: results from PCA derived control vectors on the IOI task. We observe slight
improvement across most conditions and more stable model representations than for the smaller
model.


     (a) Logit based accuracy on the bAbI task                 (b) KL Divergence by α


                 (c) Entropy by α                             (d) Probability mass by α

Figure 3: Mistral-7B-Instruct: results from contrast-based control vectors on the deductive bAbI
dataset.


                                                 7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                (a) Accuracy by α on the GSM8K task


             (b) KL Divergence by α                                   (c) Entropy by α

Figure 4: Mistral-7B-Instruct: we report the changes in model performance on the GSM8K task
when we apply control vectors derived from the same task.


                                (a) Accuracy by α on the GSM8K task


             (b) KL Divergence by α                                   (c) Entropy by α

Figure 5: Mistral-7B-Instruct: we report changes in model performance on the GSM8K task when
we apply control vectors derived from the bAbI task at varying degrees of α. Control vectors derived
from bAbI can improve the model’s accuracy on the GSM8K task.


                                                 8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 6: Full responses created by Mistral-7B-Instruct at α = 0 and α = −2.6. The model
seemingly changes its reasoning trace to reach the correct answer.


We additionally analyze how model responses change when the intervention is applied with the
optimal α for a specific model and task. We report two examples in Figure 6 that showcase how
Mistral-7B-Instruct generates a different reasoning trace that results in the correct answer being
generated as opposed to when no control is applied (see also Figure 8 in subsection A.3 for an
incorrect example). More generally, we observe that differently sized models are affected differently
by different levels of α. Whether this is because of larger models being more robust to changes in
their representations or merely the fact that only modifying the middle layer representations is a
smaller part of a larger model is an open question.
In summary we find that control vectors can successfully be used to modify the representation of
LLMs to improve performance on the specified tasks for all models, although to varying degrees.
The finding that the intervention works for a task as complicated as GSM8K is especially affirming,
and even more so that it works across tasks. The qualitative examples showcase that applying the
interventions retains a model’s ability to generate coherent text and that it is not merely inducing the
generation of a specific subset of tokens; an important result for the intervention to be applicable
outside of research, which is largely focused on improving performance on benchmark datasets.

4     D ISCUSSION
In this paper, we study the ability of LLMs to solve reasoning tasks by modeling ‘reasoning’ as a
direction in the residual stream. Fundamentally, training control vectors relies on the representations
learned by an LLM and the ability to modify these in a way that preserves a model’s ability to gener-
ate semantically meaningful text. Similar approaches have been applied to modify the “sentiment”
of model outputs while maintaining semantic coherency. This research has especially focused on
inducing feelings of positivity and negativity effectively creating control vectors equivalent to pre-
pending a prompt with “Pretend you are feeling [X]” (Liu et al., 2023; Hendel et al., 2023). We have
similarly shown that we are capable of modulating the representational space of LLMs to boost per-
formance on a simple task while maintaining the model’s fundamental ability to generate coherent
text. This finding hints that the “ability” of LLMs to perform well on reasoning tasks is encoded
similarly to other model states, such as generating semantically positive or negative outputs. Given
prior literature, our ability to modify the outputs of an LLM via the residual stream is in and of itself
not a surprising finding; the main contribution of the paper is that we can improve on reasoning tasks
of varying complexity by nudging a model towards a specific state.

4.1   I MPLICATIONS

While there are many questions to be answered regarding reasoning in LLMs and many open ques-
tions wrt. to our findings and experiments, they suggest that reasoning performance can be modu-
lated similarly to how we can modulate the emotional valence of generated text or a model’s ability
to play chess. The developments over the past couple of years have been impressive, and they have


                                                   9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


affected the beliefs within the field regarding the limitations of machine learning models trained
solely on text. Whether current model architectures are at all capable of anything like the System 2
thinking done by humans seems unlikely, although work is being done to make LLMs reason “prop-
erly”.3 Whether such approaches amounts to reasoning in the traditional sense is still up for debate,
especially as reasoning is a hard term to ground and define.

4.2      R EASONING

While we acknowledge the deep philosophical questions surrounding the nature of reasoning, our
work takes a deliberately narrow empirical approach. We investigate whether specific manipulations
of model representations can improve performance on tasks that require reasoning-like behaviors,
without making strong claims about the nature of reasoning itself. We do not attempt to define
reasoning. Instead, we are interested in using tasks that are recognized and categorized as being
related to reasoning, be it inductive, deductive, mathematical, or in theory anything else. These
tasks differ in their prompt lengths and in how surface-level the correct solutions are (i.e, whether
the solutions requires reasoning through intermediate steps or calculations). In the IOI task, the
answer is present in the text, but needs to be inductively recalled, in the bAbI tasks the answers are
also in the prompt, but requires computing through one or more intermediate steps to achieve the
answer. Finally, in GSM8K, the answers are not present in the text anymore, and they also require
parsing the results through multiple intermediate calculations. Through this exploration, we aim to
identify actionable strategies for enhancing model performance across a spectrum of reasoning tasks
of scaling complexity, irrespective of how reasoning is formally defined.

4.3      LIMITATIONS

While this paper showcases how representation engineering can successfully be used to induce better
reasoning performance on an inductive, deductive, and a mathematical task, we see certain limita-
tions. We assess a limited scope of models, models that are smaller than production-level state-of-
the-art models. Working with smaller models has however provided the opportunity to assess the
“emergence” of capabilities and symmetries as models are scaled. Working with models that were
developed specifically for interpretability research furthermore opens the door for future research
into the internal model dynamics related to LLM reasoning. And while the biggest model comprises
a mere 7 billion parameters, Mistral-7B-Instruct is relatively capable.
The IOI reasoning task is furthermore a relatively simple task, which has both advantages and dis-
advantages. The results indicate that a task such as IOI may even be too simple to elicit a general
representation. The task is mostly interesting to our research when models cannot correctly answer
every question, a hard balance to strike. Hence the switch to the bAbI and GSM8K datasets, and the
Mistral-7B-Instruct model for additional experimentation. However, a simple task also limits the
scope of potential errors, which results in a cleaner picture of model behavior.
We furthermore suggest first steps towards creating contrastive pairs for reasoning to be used in
representation engineering research, we however call for future work to focus on understanding how
to optimally derive control vectors from model representations.

4.4      C ONCLUSION

We successfully used the technique of representation engineering by first training control vectors
on a training set of reasoning related tasks and secondly intervening on the middle layer of the
residual stream during inference. This allowed us to improve the performance of Pythia and Mistral
models on a simple inductive task (IOI), the deductive bAbI task, and finally the GSM8K dataset.
We illustrate how control vectors, trained using contrastive prompts, can be used to control and
direct the output of LLMs, as well as how these modifications affect the internal representations of
these models. Future research directions entail applying the intervention to much larger models, to
more general tasks, to test different contrastive schemes as well as exploring ways of embedding this
methodology into the models. In conclusion, our experiments indicate that reasoning can in part be
understood to be encoded in the residual stream, similarly to how emotional valence or the Golden
Gate feature is encoded in the models developed by Anthropic (Templeton et al., 2024).
   3
       see e.g. the most recent models from OpenAI that focus primarily on reasoning (OpenAI, 2024).


                                                      10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


S TATEMENT OF R EPRODUCIBILITY

We are committed to aiding reproducibility of our work and encourage further research in this direc-
tion. The source code for our implementation, developed as an internal framework, will be published
alongside this paper to facilitate this process. Our framework is built as a wrapper around PyTorch,
enabling easy extraction of hidden dimension representations and application of control vectors.
The models described in section 3.3 were loaded using the HuggingFace API and details on model
version are described there. The training process for control vectors is detailed in section 2.1. The
calculation of experimental results, including all metrics used, is thoroughly described in section
3.2. Information about datasets used, including any preprocessing steps, can be found in section 3.1
and A.2.
Our code is publicly available through Github, along with documentation to guide users through the
setup and execution of experiments.

R EFERENCES
Jimmy Lei Ba, Jamie Ryan Kiros, and Geoffrey E. Hinton. Layer Normalization, July 2016. URL
  http://arxiv.org/abs/1607.06450. arXiv:1607.06450 [cs, stat].

Stella Biderman, Hailey Schoelkopf, Quentin Anthony, Herbie Bradley, Kyle O’Brien, Eric Hal-
  lahan, Mohammad Aflah Khan, Shivanshu Purohit, USVSN Sai Prashanth, Edward Raff, Aviya
  Skowron, Lintang Sutawika, and Oskar van der Wal. Pythia: A Suite for Analyzing Large Lan-
  guage Models Across Training and Scaling, May 2023. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/
  2304.01373. arXiv:2304.01373 [cs].

Trenton Bricken, Adly Templteon, Joshua Batson, Brian Chen, and Adam Jermyn. Towards
  Monosemanticity: Decomposing Language Models With Dictionary Learning. Antropic
  AI - Technical Paper, 2023. URL https://transformer-circuits.pub/2023/
  monosemantic-features/index.html.

Tom B. Brown, Benjamin Mann, Nick Ryder, Melanie Subbiah, Jared Kaplan, Prafulla Dhari-
  wal, Arvind Neelakantan, Pranav Shyam, Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, Sandhini Agarwal,
  Ariel Herbert-Voss, Gretchen Krueger, Tom Henighan, Rewon Child, Aditya Ramesh, Daniel M.
  Ziegler, Jeffrey Wu, Clemens Winter, Christopher Hesse, Mark Chen, Eric Sigler, Mateusz Litwin,
  Scott Gray, Benjamin Chess, Jack Clark, Christopher Berner, Sam McCandlish, Alec Radford,
  Ilya Sutskever, and Dario Amodei. Language Models are Few-Shot Learners, July 2020. URL
  http://arxiv.org/abs/2005.14165. arXiv:2005.14165 [cs].

François Chollet. On the Measure of Intelligence, November 2019. URL http://arxiv.org/
  abs/1911.01547. arXiv:1911.01547 [cs].

Nelson Elhage, Neel Nanda, Catherine Olsson, Tom Henighan, and Nicholas Joseph.
  A Mathematical Framework for Transformer Circuits, December 2021.       URL
  https://transformer-circuits.pub/2021/framework/index.html#
  def-privileged-basis.

Roee Hendel, Mor Geva, and Amir Globerson. In-Context Learning Creates Task Vectors. In
  Houda Bouamor, Juan Pino, and Kalika Bali (eds.), Findings of the Association for Compu-
  tational Linguistics: EMNLP 2023, pp. 9318–9333, Singapore, December 2023. Association
  for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2023.findings-emnlp.624. URL https:
  //aclanthology.org/2023.findings-emnlp.624.

Robert Huben, Hoagy Cunningham, Logan Riggs Smith, Aidan Ewart, and Lee Sharkey. Sparse
  Autoencoders Find Highly Interpretable Features in Language Models. October 2023. URL
  https://openreview.net/forum?id=F76bwRSLeK.

Philip Johnson-Laird. How We Reason. Oxford University Press, October 2008. ISBN 978-0-19-
  955133-0. doi: 10.1093/acprof:oso/9780199551330.001.0001. URL https://academic.
  oup.com/book/11984.


                                                 11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Adam Karvonen.       Emergent World Models and Latent Variable Estimation in Chess-
  Playing Language Models, March 2024. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/2403.15498.
  arXiv:2403.15498 [cs].
Sheng Liu, Haotian Ye, Lei Xing, and James Zou. In-context Vectors: Making In Context Learn-
  ing More Effective and Controllable Through Latent Space Steering, 2023. URL https:
  //arxiv.org/abs/2311.06668. Version Number: 3.
Kevin Meng, David Bau, Alex Andonian, and Yonatan Belinkov. Locating and Editing Fac-
  tual Associations in GPT, January 2023a. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/2202.05262.
  arXiv:2202.05262 [cs].
Kevin Meng, Arnab Sen Sharma, Alex Andonian, Yonatan Belinkov, and David Bau. Mass-Editing
  Memory in a Transformer, August 2023b. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/2210.07229.
  arXiv:2210.07229 [cs].
Philipp Mondorf and Barbara Plank. Comparing Inferential Strategies of Humans and Large Lan-
  guage Models in Deductive Reasoning, June 2024. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/2402.
  14856. arXiv:2402.14856 [cs].
Neel Nanda, Andrew Lee, and Martin Wattenberg. Emergent Linear Representations in World Mod-
  els of Self-Supervised Sequence Models. In Yonatan Belinkov, Sophie Hao, Jaap Jumelet, Na-
  joung Kim, Arya McCarthy, and Hosein Mohebbi (eds.), Proceedings of the 6th BlackboxNLP
  Workshop: Analyzing and Interpreting Neural Networks for NLP, pp. 16–30, Singapore, Decem-
  ber 2023. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2023.blackboxnlp-1.2.
  URL https://aclanthology.org/2023.blackboxnlp-1.2.
OpenAI. Learning to Reason with LLMs, September 2024. URL https://openai.com/
  index/learning-to-reason-with-llms/.
Ellie Pavlick. Symbols and grounding in large language models. Philosophical Transactions. Series
  A, Mathematical, Physical, and Engineering Sciences, 381(2251):20220041, July 2023. ISSN
  1471-2962. doi: 10.1098/rsta.2022.0041.
Lintang Sutawika, Hailey Schoelkopf, Leo Gao, Baber Abbasi, Stella Biderman, Jonathan Tow,
  ben fattori, Charles Lovering, farzanehnakhaee70, Jason Phang, Anish Thite, Fazz, Aflah, Niklas
  Muennighoff, Thomas Wang, sdtblck, nopperl, gakada, tttyuntian, researcher2, Julen Etxaniz,
  Chris, Hanwool Albert Lee, Zdeněk Kasner, Khalid, LSinev, Jeffrey Hsu, Anjor Kanekar,
  KonradSzafer, and AndyZwei. EleutherAI/lm-evaluation-harness: v0.4.3, July 2024. URL
  https://zenodo.org/doi/10.5281/zenodo.12608602.
Adly Templeton, Tom Conerly, Jonathan Marcus, Jack Lindsey, and Trenton Bricken. Scaling
  Monosemanticity: Extracting Interpretable Features from Claude 3 Sonnet, May 2024. URL
  https://transformer-circuits.pub/2024/scaling-monosemanticity/
  index.html.
Eric Todd, Millicent L. Li, Arnab Sen Sharma, Aaron Mueller, Byron C. Wallace, and David Bau.
  Function Vectors in Large Language Models, February 2024. URL http://arxiv.org/
  abs/2310.15213. arXiv:2310.15213 [cs].
Ashish Vaswani, Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Jakob Uszkoreit, Llion Jones, Aidan N. Gomez,
  Lukasz Kaiser, and Illia Polosukhin. Attention Is All You Need, August 2017. URL http:
  //arxiv.org/abs/1706.03762. arXiv:1706.03762 [cs].
Kevin Wang, Alexandre Variengien, Arthur Conmy, Buck Shlegeris, and Jacob Steinhardt. Inter-
  pretability in the Wild: a Circuit for Indirect Object Identification in GPT-2 small, November
  2022. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/2211.00593. arXiv:2211.00593 [cs].
Andy Zou, Long Phan, Sarah Chen, James Campbell, Phillip Guo, Richard Ren, Alexander
  Pan, Xuwang Yin, Mantas Mazeika, Ann-Kathrin Dombrowski, Shashwat Goel, Nathaniel Li,
  Michael J. Byun, Zifan Wang, Alex Mallen, Steven Basart, Sanmi Koyejo, Dawn Song, Matt
  Fredrikson, J. Zico Kolter, and Dan Hendrycks. Representation Engineering: A Top-Down Ap-
  proach to AI Transparency, October 2023. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/2310.01405.
  arXiv:2310.01405 [cs].


                                               12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A     A PPENDIX
A.1   C ONTROL V ECTOR N ORMS

As can be gathered from equation 2 any control vector will have a norm that is equivalent to the
average of the hidden dimension activations at a given layer of the model. For the contrastive pairs
(equation 3) it will be equivalent to the norm one gets when subtracting the ”opposite” state from
the ”desired” state. This is however not the case for the control vector based on a PCA, because a
standard PCA implementation scales the output vector to have an L2 norm of 1. We cannot know the
exact size of ||Hℓ || as this is dependent on the learned parameters γ and β of the LayerNormfunction.
Assuming γ = 1 and β = 0, which are the usual initial  √ values (Ba et al., 2016), a rough estimate of
the norm of the hidden dimension, d, is ||Hℓ || = d, the value however varies a lot dependent on
the model and between layers. We therefore scale the PCA control vectors by ||Hℓ || of the training
data to allow for a more direct comparison between the control vector methods. As indicated by
figure 7 we get identical norms for the two methods, while the actual control vectors are different.


       (a) Reading Contrast CV - Pythia 1.4b               (b) Reading Contrast CV - Pythia 2.8b


        (c) PCA Contrast CV - Pythia 1.4b                   (d) PCA Contrast CV - Pythia 2.8b

                                   Figure 7: Control Vector Norms


A.2   DATA

I NDIRECT-O BJECT-I DENTIFICATION (IOI)
The IOI task examples were generated using the following schema:

         [A] and [B] went to the [location]. [B] gave the [object] to [A].

In the BABA (B) condition the schema was:

         [B] and [A] went to the [location]. [B] gave the [object] to [A].

We provide an example here, also shown in 3.1.

         Mary[A] and John[B] went to the store. John[B] gave the groceries to Mary[A] .

Examples are split into (X, y) pairs of the following form and fed to the model with X as the input
and y as the correct generation:


                                                 13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


         (”Mary and John went to the store. John gave the groceries to”, ” Mary”)

When extracting model representations (X, y) pairs are combined into a single string containing the
input prompt and the correct answer. When evaluating the performance of the derived control vector
the models only receives X, and we evaluate whether the token with the highest logit of the potential
answers is equivalent to the correct label, y. We used an 80/20 train-test split to train and evaluate
the performance on control vectors. We do not perform any additional pre-processing.

BA B I DATASET

We used the bAbI dataset, focusing on task 15, which involves simple deductive reasoning. Each
example in the dataset consists of: 1) A passage containing factual statements, 2) a question based
on the passage and 3) the correct answer. We provide an example here.

         Passage: Mice are afraid of wolves. Gertrude is a mouse. Cats are afraid of sheep.
         Winona is a mouse. Sheep are afraid of wolves. Wolves are afraid of cats. Emily
         is a mouse. Jessica is a wolf.
         Question: What is Gertrude afraid of?
         Answer: Wolf

Examples are split into (X, y) pairs of the following form and fed to the model with X as the input
and y as the correct generation:

         (”Passage:\nCats are afraid of wolves.\nGertrude is a mouse.\nJessica is a
         cat.\nQuestion: What is Jessica afraid of?\n”, ” wolf”)

When extracting model representations (X, y) pairs are combined into a single string containing the
input prompt and the correct answer. When evaluating the performance of the derived control vector
the models only receives X, and we evaluate whether the token with the highest logit of the potential
answers is equivalent to the correct label, y. We used an 80/20 train-test split to train and evaluate
the performance on control vectors.
We do not perform any additional pre-processing and have downloaded the data directly from
https://huggingface.co/datasets/Muennighoff/babi.

1- SHOT PROMPTING
When 1-shot prompting, we simply provide the input prompt with an example of how to solve the
task. The model is prompted with an out-of-distribution example in order not to nudge the model
towards a specific answer. This takes the following form:

         Example\nPassage: Giraffes are afraid of lions.\nElephants are afraid of
         snakes.\nJohn is a giraffe.\nQuestion: What is John afraid of?\nAnswer:
         Lion\n(Passage and question)

INSTRUCTION PROMPTING

Since instruction fine tuned models are able to follow instructions, we found that prompting the
model to output a one word answer made sense, and was also found to work better empirically.

         [INST]\n(potential one-shot example)\nPlease give a one word answer as in the
         example above. [/INST]\n(Passage and question)


                                                 14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A.3   GSM8K F LIPPED R ESPONSE

The following is a concrete example from the experiment with Mistral-7B-Instruct and the PCA-
contrast control vector with α = −2.6. This example showcases how the reasoning trace is still
interact when the intervention is applied, and that something in the intervention leads the model to
accurately end up at the correct answer of 3 as opposed to 2.5. The ”reasoning” in the two samples
is identical until the point where the model generates the text ”which is 1 bolt of white fiber”. This
additional information seemingly allows the model to generate the correct response when finally
answering the question.
Response before intervention:

         Question: ”A robe takes 2 bolts of blue fiber and half that much white fiber. How
         many bolts in total does it take?”

         Correct Answer: 3.0

         Predicted Answer: 2.5

         Full Response: ” solve this problem, we need to add the amount of blue
         and white fiber required for the robe. 1. We know that the robe takes 2 bolts of
         blue fiber. 2. We also know that it takes half that much white fiber. 3. So, to find
         the total number of bolts required, we can add the blue and white fiber together:
         Total bolts = Blue fiber + White fiber. Total bolts = 2 + (1/2) Total bolts = 2.5
         Therefore, the robe takes a total of 2.5 bolts.”

Response after intervention:

         Question: ”A robe takes 2 bolts of blue fiber and half that much white fiber. How
         many bolts in total does it take?”

         Correct Answer: 3.0

         Predicted Answer: 3.0

         Full Response: ” solve this problem, we need to add the amount of blue
         and white fiber required for the robe. 1. We know that the robe takes 2 bolts of
         blue fiber. 2. We also know that it takes half that much white fiber, which is 1
         bolt of white fiber. 3. To find the total number of bolts required, we simply add
         the amount of blue and white fiber: Total bolts = Blue fiber + White fiber. Total
         bolts = 2 + 1. Total bolts = 3. Therefore, it takes 3 bolts of fiber in total to make
         the robe.”


                                                  15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 8: Full responses created by Mistral-7B-Instruct at α = 0 and α = 3. The model seemingly
changes it’s reasoning trace to answer incorrectly.


A.4   A DDITIONAL R ESULTS

We train control vectors on the signal extracted from the A condition and apply across experimental
conditions. We observe slight generalization across tasks for both Pythia-1.4B and Pythia-2.8B as
seen in 2a and 9a. Pythia-1.4B improves accuracy when the control vector is applied with positive
α across conditions, and KL divergence is relatively stable in the positive direction and very unsta-
ble in the negative direction resulting in much higher and more varied KL divergence (figure 9b).
These findings are corroborated by the entropy analysis which indicates a slight decrease as accu-
racy increases, but an even stronger drop in entropy as α → −1, suggesting that the intervention
is pushing the probability mass towards a specific incorrect token (figure 9c). We furthermore see
how the probability mass on average accumulates around the correct answer in figure 9d although
the increase with positive α is small.


                                                 16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


     (a) Logit based accuracy on the IOI task                    (b) KL Divergence by α


                (c) Entropy by α                                (d) Probability mass by α

Figure 9: Pythia-1.4B results. Results from PCA derived control vectors. Slight improvements in
accuracy across all conditions, and malleable model representations.


                            (a) Accuracy on GSM8K for Mistral-7B-Instruct


            (b) KL Divergence by α.                                 (c) Entropy by α.

   Figure 10: Mistral-7B results. Results from PCA-based CVs on random contrastive pairs.


                                                 17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A.5   C ONTROL V ECTOR C ROSS - TASK R ESULTS


                            (a) Accuracy on bABI for Mistral-7B-Instruct


            (b) KL Divergence by α.                                 (c) Entropy by α.

Figure 11: Mistral-7B results. Results from PCA-based CVs trained on the GSM8K task evaluated
on bAbI.


                                                18
