Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


AUTONOMOUS E VALUATION OF LLM S FOR
T RUTH M AINTENANCE AND R EASONING TASKS
 Rushang Karia∗ , Daniel Bramblett∗, Daksh Dobhal, Siddharth Srivastava
 School of Computing and Augmented Intelligence
 Arizona State University
 {rushang.karia,drbrambl,ddobhal,siddharths}@asu.edu



                                              A BSTRACT
             This paper presents AutoEval, a novel benchmark for scaling Large Language
             Model (LLM) assessment in formal tasks with clear notions of correctness, such
             as truth maintenance in translation and logical reasoning. AutoEval is the first
             benchmarking paradigm that offers several key advantages necessary for scaling
             objective evaluation of LLMs without human labeling: (a) ability to evaluate
             LLMs of increasing sophistication by auto-generating tasks at different levels
             of difficulty; (b) auto-generation of ground truth that eliminates dependence on
             expensive and time-consuming human annotation; (c) the use of automatically
             generated, randomized datasets that mitigate the ability of successive LLMs to
             overfit to static datasets used in many contemporary benchmarks. Empirical
             analysis shows that an LLM’s performance on AutoEval is highly indicative of its
             performance on a diverse array of other benchmarks focusing on translation and
             reasoning tasks, making it a valuable autonomous evaluation paradigm in settings
             where hand-curated datasets can be hard to obtain and/or update.


1       I NTRODUCTION
Large Language Models (LLMs) have been demonstrated to perform well in many natural language
tasks involving formal languages such as autoformalization – converting natural language (NL)
to formal language (FL) such as source code, math etc., (Wu et al., 2022; Liang et al., 2023),
informalization – converting FL to NL (e.g. code summarization), and reasoning – using LLMs
to perform sound reasoning or derive proofs. Although these methods have been successful in
small-scale scenarios, LLM’s effectiveness in maintaining factual accuracy or preserving which
facts are true across translation remains unclear due to the difficulty in designing benchmarks that
capture truth maintenance in such tasks. Multiple authors have noted that existing benchmarks and
evaluation methodologies for such tasks are susceptible to the Benchmark Contamination Problem
due to their use of static datasets, e.g., HumanEval (Chen et al., 2021; Wu et al., 2022; Han et al.,
2024), and/or metrics that are insufficient/incomplete syntactic measures of evaluation (e.g, BLEU
scores (Callison-Burch et al., 2006). As a result, existing methods provide misleading signals on
the capabilities of LLM technology. One effective method to mitigate this problem in existing
benchmarks is creating new data (Xu et al., 2024a). This is a tedious and expensive process since data
generation requires expert annotators to hand-generate well-balanced datasets. While using LLMs as
judges and/or metrics is a promising research direction (Zheng et al., 2023; Shankar et al., 2024; Xu
et al., 2024b; Madaan et al., 2023), it is unknown whether LLMs can be used as accurate verifiers.
This paper addresses three key desiderata for benchmarking LLM capabilities in truth maintenance
across NL and FL: (D1) Can we dynamically generate out-of-distribution datasets without human
annotators? (D2) How do we accurately assess an LLM’s truth maintenance capabilities? (D3) Can
we develop a benchmark predictive of LLM performance on formal translation and reasoning tasks?
Main contributions Our key contributions are as follows:

          1. A new approach for automatic synthesis of well-balanced test datasets using context-free
             grammars that are unlikely to be memorized during the LLM’s training process (§D1).
    ∗
        These authors contributed equally.


                                                    1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


      2. The utilization of formal verifiers such as theorem provers to provably validate syntax-
         independent notions of correctness without having to exhaustively test over all possible truth
         valuations of formal syntax involving logic (§D2).
      3. ∀uto∃∨∧L: a scalable, plug-and-play assessment system for benchmarking new LLMs as
         and when they are developed. Our system can be extended to any class of formal syntax that
         uses a grammar and admits an equivalence checker.
      4. We show that LLM performance on our metric serves as an effective indicator of LLM
         performance on other metrics across a wide variety of tasks, such as first-order logic
         reasoning (§D3). Thus, our metric offers a scalable and efficient surrogate for evaluating
         new LLMs in tasks where other metrics may be limited due to the unavailability of new
         datasets. We also show that SOTA LLMs are unable to maintain truth effectively.


2    F ORMAL F RAMEWORK

Large Language Models (LLMs) are non-linear functions represented by (billons of) parameters θ
that, given a set of input tokens x1 , . . . , xn , typically from natural language NL, predict the output
token yi+1 using the distribution P (yi+1 |x1 , . . . , xn , y1 , . . . , yi ; θ). The input tokens contain context
κ (also known as a prompt) that provides the necessary information for the task (e.g., instructions,
etc). It is known that κ significantly impacts the response quality y1 , . . . , yn (Sahoo et al., 2024).
Propositional Logic is a branch of logic that utilizes propositions and logical operators (e.g., con-
junction: ∧, etc) to construct sentences that can be used to perform reasoning using the rules of
logic. For example, propositions, p1 = It is raining, p2 = It is sunny can be used to create a sentence
P = p1 ∨ p2 . If P is true and ¬p1 is observed, then one can use the rules of inference to deduce that
p2 is true (Huth & Ryan, 2004). Two sentences in propositional logic, P1 and P2 , are equivalent,
P1 ≡ P2 , iff their truth values agree for all possible assignments. E.g., ¬(p1 ∧ p2 ) ≡ ¬p1 ∨ ¬p2
since ∀p1 , p2 ∈ {True, False} × {True, False}, ¬(p1 ∧ p2 ) = ¬p1 ∨ ¬p2 .
First-order Logic (FOL) differs from propositional logic in that sentences are constructed using
predicates, quantifiers, constants, symbols, and variables. A popular example is the syllogism, where,
given two FOL sentences ∀x. Man(x) → Mortal(x) and Man(Socrates), one can conclude that
Mortal(Socrates). A FOL sentence F can be interpreted using a universe U, a substitution operator σ,
and an interpretation function I (Russell & Norvig, 2020). Two FOL sentences, F1 , F2 , are equivalent,
F1 ≡ F2 , iff they are equivalent under all possible models. E.g., ¬∀x. Man(x) ≡ ∃y. ¬Man(y).
A regular expression (regex) is a sequence of characters used to determine whether a particular string
matches the pattern or language induced by the regex. For example, the regex 200(00)∗ 1 using
Σ = {0, 1, 2} matches all strings possible using Σ that begin with a two, followed by one or more
pairs of zeroes, and end with a one (Hopcroft et al., 2001). Two regexes, R1 and R2 are equivalent,
R1 ≡ R2 , if they represent the same language. It is known that R1 ≡ R2 if their corresponding
minimal deterministic finite automata, D1 , D2 , are isomorphic, i.e., D1 ≃ D2 (Hopcroft et al., 2001).
We refer to sentences (strings) in first-order and propositional logic (regexes) as formal language FL
in this paper. We now provide a definition of (Auto/In)formalization in the context of LLMs.
Definition 2.1 (Autoformalization: A). Given an LLM L, a NL N , a FL F , a string ψ ∈ NL, and
context κ′ , autoformalization A, is defined as using L to translate ψ to φ = AL (ψ, κ′ ) s.t. φ ∈ FL.
Definition 2.2 (Informalization: I). Given an LLM L, a NL N , a FL F , a string φ ∈ FL, and context
κ, informalization I, is defined as using L to translate φ to ψ = IL (φ, κ) s.t. ψ ∈ NL.

Example One possible autoformalization of “Every human drinks coffee but some are not dependent on
it” in FOL is [∀x. Human(x) =⇒ Drinks(x, Coffee)] ∧ [∃y. Human(y) ∧ ¬Dependent(y, Coffee)].
Ideally, informalization will be an inverse of autoformalization. Therefore, the FOL formula
[∀x. Human(x) =⇒ Drinks(x, Coffee)] ∧ [∃y. Human(y) ∧ ¬Dependent(y, Coffee)] can be in-
formalized to the sentence “Every human drinks coffee but some are not dependent on it”.
We assume that the context κ, κ′ provided contains the prompt and any necessary vocabulary that is
needed for the task (e.g., Human(x) represents that x is a human, etc.). We omit κ, κ′ , and L in the
notation for A and I where they are clear from the context.


                                                        2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Informalization and autoformalization are non-deterministic functions. Therefore, it is possible that
a different LLM (or the same LLM with a different seed) autoformalizes the same input text to a
syntactically or even semantically different output. E.g., the example above could be autoformalized
to the semantically equivalent form: ∀x. Human(x) =⇒ Drinks(x, Coffee) ∧ ¬∀y. Human(y) =⇒
Dependent(y, Coffee). Similarly, an LLM can informalize differently. The example above could
be informalized by the same LLM to “All humans drink coffee but some are not dependent on it”.
Thus, the informalization (autoformalization) of an autoformalization (informalization) of a string
is possibly different from that string: AL (IL (φ, κ′ ), κ) ̸= φ and IL (AL (ψ, κ), κ′ ) ̸= ψ. Given
n ∈ N+ , let (A ◦ I)n (φ0 ) to refer to the sequence φ0 → ψ0 → . . . → φn that is obtained using an
LLM L when starting with FL φ0 , where ψi = I(φi ) and φi+1 = A(ψi ).
While syntactic differences across (A ◦ I)n (φ0 ) operations may be acceptable, the ability of an LLM
to maintain semantic content across (A ◦ I)n (φ0 ) for FL such as first-order logic, regular expressions,
etc., is foundational and underlies many aspects of the capabilities of LLMs surrounding reasoning,
semantically accurate translation, etc. For programming, it has been shown that autoformalization
accuracy is indicative of the reasoning abilities of LLMs since they frame reasoning as generation of
FL (Chen et al., 2021). Others (Wu et al., 2022) have made similar observations and have highlighted
the need for benchmarks and metrics for assessing the truth maintenance capabilities of LLMs. In
this paper, we further show through our empirical evaluation that an LLM’s ability to preserve factual
information or semantic truth across translations is indicative of its performance on related tasks.
Intuitively, truth maintenance captures an LLM’s ability to preserve truth across translation; opera-
tionally, it evaluates the ability of a system to be able to accurately invert its own translations. We say
that an LLM maintains truth in translation iff (A ◦ I)n (φ0 ) always leads to a φn that is semantically
equivalent to φ0 . Recall that ≡ denotes the semantic equivalence operator in FL. Formally,
Definition 2.3 (LLM Truth Maintenance). An LLM L maintains truth in translation iff ∀φ0 , n, and
for all sequences (A ◦ I)n (φ0 ) obtained using L, φn ≡ φ0 .

In practice, we estimate the ability for truth maintenance through a sampling-based process. Naturally,
LLMs may not autoformalize, reason, etc., correctly due to issues like hallucination (Ji et al., 2023),
etc. For the earlier example, the LLM could autoformalize by omitting the Human(y) statement to
yield [∀x. Human(x) =⇒ Drinks(x, Coffee)]∧[∃y. ¬Dependent(y, Coffee)]. This seems innocuous
but changes the meaning since y is no longer required to be human, and thus it interprets as “All
humans drink coffee, but some element of the universe is not dependent on coffee.” Such issues have
profound implications in synthesizing specifications and/or programs. Thus, an LLM must be able to
understand its own generated output across NL and FL, and it is imperative to create a benchmark
that can faithfully assess the truth maintenance of LLMs.


3     T HE ∀UTO∃∨∧L A PPROACH FOR A SSESSING T RUTH M AINTENANCE

We now describe our approach, ∀uto∃∨∧L, for autonomously assessing an LLM’s ability for truth
maintenance. ∀uto∃∨∧L provides dynamically generated datasets that can be scaled arbitrarily
by systematically generating out-of-distribution, well-balanced ground-truth data (§D1 – Sec. 1),
provides §D2 by using intrinsic LLM capabilities to automatically assess (A ◦ I)n (φ0 ) without
requiring any labeled annotations and using formal verifiers to rigorously check and guarantee the
correctness of (A ◦ I)n (φ0 ) without having to engage in an exhaustive search process.

3.1   AUTOMATIC EVALUATION OF TRUTH MAINTENANCE

We develop a novel technique that can soundly assess truth maintenance without any human an-
notations by evaluating φi → ψi → φi+1 . Our approach is based on the following intuition. Let
I : φ → ψ be a non-deterministic function that maps FL φ to NL ψ. Similarly, let A : ψ → φ be
a non-deterministic function that maps NL ψ to FL φ. In general, there are many possible correct
informalizations (autoformalizations) of φ ∈ FL (ψ ∈ NL). Because I and A are non-deterministic
functions, their inverses are thus not well-defined.
Our key observation is that if I and A come from the same system (e.g., an LLM), then we can
evaluate that system’s truth maintenance by composing I and A. Let φ be any FL expression and let
L be an LLM. If L preserves truth, then ψ = I(φ) will be an accurate NL representation of φ and


                                                    3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                                                  Clear   's Context
  Formal Syntax         Vocabulary
  Generator              Database
                                                                         LLM
  Input Grammar:                     Automatic          FL                                 NL
                                                                                                                                    Query
                                     Vocabulary                                                                        FL
                                                                                                                                            ?
      FL                             Generation        Vocab                               Vocab

  Ground-truth Data and Context Generation                     Informalization:                   Autoformalization:             Verification
 Case 1 (Vocabulary is abstract)


                                                                             's Context
                                                  A conjunction of the
                                                                                                                            ?
                                                  propositions p1, p2, p1;                                                       True
                               LLM                also expressed p1 and                                            Prover9


                                                                             Clear
                                                  p2 by idempotence

 Case 2 (Vocabulary is real-world)


                                                                             's Context
                                                  The sun was bright the
                                                  day before whilst it is                                                    ?
                                                                                                                                 True
    : It is raining          LLM                  raining heavily today                                            Prover9


                                                                             Clear
    : It was sunny yesterday
 Case 3 (Vocabulary is real-world)


                                                                             's Context
                                              An regular expression
                                              for email with a set of                                                                 ?
        [a-z]+@[a-z]+.com                                                                                 \W+@\W+.com                     False
                               LLM            characters separated                                                          Prover9


                                                                             Clear
                                              by @, ending in .com                                              (numbers are not allowed in       )


Figure 1: The ∀uto∃∨∧L process for autonomous evaluation of LLM truth maintenance w.r.t. (A ◦ I)n (φ0 ).



φ′ = A(ψ) will be a semantically equivalent FL representation of ψ. Since ψ is an NL description, it
is quite challenging to check whether I(φ) is indeed an accurate representation of φ without human
intervention. However, if L preserves truth, φ′ = A(I(φ)) will be semantically equivalent to φ
even if they are not syntactically identical. Thus, we only need to check if φ ≡ φ′ . For example, let
φ0 = p1 ∧ p1 , ψ0 = I(φ1 ) = “A conjunction of propositions p1 and p1 that can be simplified to p1
using Idempotence.”, and φ′1 = A(ψ0 ) = p1 for a sequence (A ◦ I)1 (φ0 ). It is challenging to check
if ψ0 accurately represents φ0 , but it is easy to check if φ0 ≡ φ1 using a formal verifier.
Since ∀uto∃∨∧L uses formal syntax φ as input and produces formal syntax φ′ as output, we can use
formal verifiers to check whether φ ≡ φ′ . As a result, ∀uto∃∨∧L avoids brittle syntactic equivalence
checks and exhaustive tests of semantic equivalence that require evaluations of all possible truth
valuations of formulas or executions of regexes.
We use the above insights to automatically assess LLM truth maintenance by using the same LLM
L to represent I and A respectively. Fig. 1 shows our overall assessment process. Briefly, we use a
context-free grammar G to automatically generate a ground-truth FL expression φ0 . Next, we use
a vocabulary generation process to generate a context for φ0 . This can either use abstract terms or
use NL elements for more human-like scenarios (§D1). We then evaluate (A ◦ I)1 (φ0 ) by using L
to first generate ψ0 = I(φ0 , κ) using context κ designed for informalization. The context of L is
cleared (note that we only use the output of I(φ0 )), and we use L to generate φ1 = A(ψ0 , κ′ ) using
context κ′ designed for autoformalization. We then use a verifier (e.g., Z3 (de Moura & Bjørner,
2008), Prover9 (McCune, 2010)) to assess if φ0 ≡ φ1 since both are elements of FL. If φ0 ≡ φ1 then
we can repeat the process by evaluating (A ◦ I)1 (φ1 ) similarly.
Example: Consider case 2 in Fig. 1. ∀uto∃∨∧L uses the grammar in Fig. 2b to automatically generate
a ground truth FL sentence as φ0 = p1 ∧ p2 ∧ p1 . We can use any vocabulary to generate meaning for
the propositions; p1 : It is raining today, p2 : It was sunny yesterday. Next, the LLM L is prompted
with Prompt 1 to perform informalization yielding NL ψ0 = A(φ0 ). L can perform any simplification
or other paraphrasing necessary. For example, L could informalize φ0 above to ψ0 =“The weather
status was sunny yesterday whilst it is raining today.” Notice that the LLM-generated NL statement
automatically reflects a simplification using the Commutative (a ∧ b ≡ b ∧ a) and Idempotent
(a ∧ a ≡ a) properties. Next, L is asked to autoformalize ψ0 without any context other than the
vocabulary to use and a prompt for autoformalization (App. F). In this case, the LLM could return
φ1 = A(ψ0 ) = p1 ∧ p2 . We use a theorem prover such as Prover9 (McCune, 2010) to show that
φ0 ≡ φ1 and thus assess L’s truth maintenance capabilities w.r.t. (A ◦ I)1 (φ0 ).


                                                                     4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


3.2   ∀UTO∃∨∧L M ETRICS

∀uto∃∨∧L score When evaluating an LLM’s truth-maintenance capabilities, it is crucial to consider
the intended application, because performance on FL strings of similar complexity typically indicates
how the model will fare in practice. As such, ∀uto∃∨∧L can be used in two distinct modes: parame-
terized and calibrated ∀uto∃∨∧L scores. The parameterized ∀uto∃∨∧L score computes performance
with the descriptional complexity of FL strings as a parameter (e.g., the number of operators). The
calibrated ∀uto∃∨∧L score Scal (D, d) is computed using all FL strings from dataset D with complex-
ity up to d, where there are equal number of examples for each complexity. In both modes, the score
is computed as the fraction of FL strings in the corresponding dataset for which (A ◦ I)1 (φ1 ) ≡ φ1 .
Bounding false positives in computation of ∀uto∃∨∧L scores A key advantage of the ∀uto∃∨∧L
score is its robustness to different informalizations of the same FL. Thus, when ∀uto∃∨∧L outputs
that an LLM maintains truth (A ◦ I)n (φ0 ) on FL φ0 , the intermediate NL = I(ψ0 ) is a semantically
equivalent translation of φ0 . We now bound the probability of false positives, i.e., cases where the
LLM fails both autoformalizing and informalizing but yields an FL string equivalent to the original.
                            IL (φ0 )     AL (ψ0 )
Given an LLM L, let φ0 −−−−→ ψ0 −−−−−→ φ1 be an execution of the ∀uto∃∨∧L process for
(A ◦ I)1 (φ0 ) s.t. φ0 ≡ φ1 but ψ0 is not an accurate representation of φ0 . We can derive the
probability of ∀uto∃∨∧L providing such false positives. Let pI be the probability with which L
informalizes an FL expression I(φ0 ) = ψ0 s.t. ψ0 is an accurate representation of φ0 . Similarly,
let pA be the probability of autoformalizing ψ0 , A(ψ0 ) = φ1 , s.t. φ1 is semantically equivalent to
ψ0 , i.e. φ0 ≡ φ1 . Let pH be the probability that L hallucinates FL φ1 by autoformalizing ψ0 s.t.
φ1 ≡ φ0 given that ψ0 is not an accurate representation of φ0 .
It can be seen that for a false positive to be outputted by ∀uto∃∨∧L, the sequence φ0 → ψ0 produces
an incorrect NL description and the sequence ψ0 → φ1 autoformalizes incorrectly but hallucinates
just right to yield φ1 ≡ φ0 . The probability of such a sequence corresponds to L making two
mistakes, with the second mistake being such that it generated an expression equivalent to φ0 . This
can be expressed as (1−pI )(1−pA )pH . For (A◦I)n (φ0 ), this probability is (1−pI )n (1−pA )n pnH
since ∀uto∃∨∧L computes (A ◦ I)1 (φi ) if φi−1 ≡ φi (Sec. 3). As LLM technology improves, we
expect pI , pA → 1 and pH → 0. As a result, the probability of false positives provided by ∀uto∃∨∧L
decreases as n increases. This low likelihood of false positives is further confirmed empirically by
our analysis of correlation and predictive power w.r.t. other benchmarks (Sec. 4).
LLMs as verifiers score The llm-verifier score evaluates a given llm’s ability to determine equivalence
between FL strings. It is measured by using FL strings produced by a LLM from the ∀uto∃∨∧L
process. For each dataset and descriptional complexity, we compute an F1 score by comparing the
evaluated LLM’s equivalence predictions with the formal verifier’s results. We use Chain-of-Thought
(CoT) to allow LLMs to utilize their generated outputs to improve their reasoning (Wei et al., 2022).
Predictive power In addition to using calibrated and parameterized ∀uto∃∨∧L scores for assessing the
ability for truth maintenance, we propose a new metric for evaluating the extent to which performance
on a benchmark is indicative of performance on other benchmarks:
Definition 3.1 (Predictive Power). Let L1 and L2 be language models evaluated on two benchmarks
A and B with ranks ≥A and ≥B . The predictive power of A over B is formally defined as P|A (B) =
P r(L1 ≥B L2 |L1 ≥A L2 ).

In practice, we compute predictive power as a sampling-based maximum-likelihood estimate over
multiple auto-generated datasets.

3.3   DYNAMIC DATASET G ENERATION

We use context-free grammars (CFGs) (Hopcroft et al., 2001) – a set of production rules over terminal
and non-terminal symbols – for dynamically generating datasets. An infix parse tree is obtained by
repeatedly applying the rules, where the depth of this tree is often used to measure the descriptional
complexity of a given string generated using the CFG (Csuhaj-Varjú & Kelemenová, 1993). CFGs
also can be used to generate arbitrarily large amounts of data dynamically.
Another advantage is that CFGs can be customized with minimal human effort to generate diverse
datasets whose ground-truth data possesses specific properties. For example, a dynamic dataset


                                                    5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


S →S∧S           S → (S ∧ S)|(S ∨ S)                S → F |(∀f. S)|(∃f. S)           S → (S)K|ΣK
S → (P ∨ P ∨ P ) S → (¬S)                           F → (F ∧ F )|(F ∨ F )            S → SΣK
P → ¬v|v         S → ¬v|v                           F → (¬F )|¬p|p                   K → ∗|ε
       (a) 3–CNF        (b) Propositional Logic       (c) First-order Logic      (d) Regular Expression

           Figure 2: CFGs (described in Sec. 3.3.1) used for synthesizing the datasets in ∀uto∃∨∧L.

that only consists of k–CNF sentences – propositional logic in the Canonical Normal Form (P10 ∨
. . . ∨ Pk0 ) ∧ (P11 ∨ . . . ∨ Pk1 ) ∧ . . . where Pij ∈ {px , ¬px } – can be easily generated. We enrich the
generated sentence with context via a customizable Vocabulary Generation step, which automatically
provides the necessary vocabulary for performing the task (e.g., providing English meanings to allow
for human-like NL) by using terms from a vocabulary database or by using an LLM.

3.3.1     AUTO -G ENERATED DATASETS

∀uto∃∨∧L is open-source1 , is written in Python 3, includes several pre-computed datasets, and is
easily customizable for adding new datasets, prompts, LLMs, etc. We now describe the datasets that
any newly developed LLM can be evaluated on by using ∀uto∃∨∧L out-of-the-box.
Our dataset generator (described in App. B) takes a user-provided CFG and vocabulary to dynamically
generate user-controlled, diverse datasets up to a user-specified metric such as the number of operators,
parse tree depth, etc. It is guaranteed to generate any representable string using the CFG (App. B).
As a result, users can easily generate out-of-distribution datasets in ∀uto∃∨∧L by simply providing
CFGs and/or vocabularies.
The ∀uto∃∨∧L core benchmark uses four CFGs (Fig. 2) for producing five datasets compromising FL
strings. The 3-CNF(n) (Fig. 2a) and propositional logic PL(n) (Fig. 2b) CFGs replace the terminal
by randomly selecting from a list of n propositions. First-order logic FOL(np , no ) (Fig. 2c) CFG
replaces the terminal with predicates of the form p(v1 , . . . , vn ) where p is a predicate name selected
from a list of np predicates, vi is either an object o from a list of no objects or is a free variable
f ∈ {x1 , x2 , . . .} that is appropriately annotated within the scoping rules. Finally, the regular
expression RE(n) (Fig. 2d) CFG uses the vocabulary set Σ = {0, . . . , n − 1}.
We provide 5 datasets with 2 generated from the FOL CFG and 1 each for the rest. We sampled 500
strings for each complexity level. The 3-CNF(12) dataset contains examples with up to 59 operators,
totaling ∼10k strings. PL(12) contains examples with up to 40 operators, for a total of ∼20k strings.
The RE(2) dataset contains examples with tree depth up to 40, also totaling ∼20k strings.
The FOL datasets, FOL(8, 12)–S and FOL(8, 12)–E, contain examples with up to 37 operators,
for a total of ∼19k strings each. FOL(8, 12)–S uses auto-generated synthetic object and predicate
names. Conversely, FOL(8, 12)–E uses verbs from VerbNet (Schuler, 2005) for predicate names
and names from Faker (Faraglia, 2024) for object names. Using more descriptive names allows for
informalization to produce more abstract sentences that closely resemble the NL statements in SOTA
autoformalization datasets. For example, a FL statement Boom(Richard) ∧ Exercise(Yolonda) yields
a more natural NL statement: “Richard experiences a boom, and Yolonda engages in exercise”.
While each dataset was generated in 10 separate pieces, each produced independently, our datasets
contain ∼85k unique examples. We also provide zero-shot and 2-shot prompts for each dataset, for a
total dataset size ∼170k for off-the-shelf evaluation and continual assessment of any new LLM. Of
these examples, ∼85% of them are composed of unique CFG parse trees (trees obtained by sampling
the CFG but not injecting the vocabularies). Expressions with the same parse tree but different
vocabularies (e.g., p1 ∧ p2 and p2 ∧ p1 ) account for ∼10% of our dataset, providing a robust check
against positional bias in the LLM. Additional information is presented in App. M.
We use open-source libraries to robustly parse the LLM-generated output. We use the Natural
Language Toolkit (NLTK) library (Bird et al., 2009) for parsing logic and use Reg2Dfa (Reg, 2017)
for regexes. LLM output that cannot be parsed is said to be syntactically non-compliant. Additionally,

   1
       The code for this project is available at: https://github.com/AAIR-lab/autoeval.


                                                      6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


      Prompt 1: Informalization (I) prompt for Fig. 1: Case 2 (other prompts available in App. F)

      Your task is to convert a ⟨Propositional Logic, First-order Logic⟩ formula, appearing after
      [FORMULA], to a natural description that represents the formula. Only natural language
      terms are allowed to be used and do not copy the formula in your description. Your
      description should allow one to reconstruct the formula without having access to it, so make
      sure to use the correct names in your description. Explicitly describe the predicates. You may
      use terms verbatim as specified in the vocabulary below.

      [VOCABULARY]
         Operators: List of operators followed by their NL interpretations
           Objects: The objects in the universe (if any)
       Propositions: The propositions in the universe and their NL interpretations (if any)
         Predicates: The predicates in the universe and their NL interpretations (if any)
         Examples: Few-shot examples of the task (if any)

      Example Prompt
      Your task . . .
         Operators: ∧ represents conjunction, ∨ represents disjunction, . . .
       Propositions: p1 : It is raining, p2 : It was sunny yesterday
           Formula: p1 ∧ p2 ∧ p1
      Example Response: The sun was bright the day before whilst it is
      raining today.



we also use scripts to ensure that the informalization step does not copy elements of FL into NL (e.g.,
complete or any parts of FL) that would otherwise make autoformalization trivial.


4     A SSESSMENT OF SOTA LLM S ON THE ∀UTO∃∨∧L B ENCHMARK

In this section we present an evaluation of several SOTA LLMs using ∀uto∃∨∧L, as well as an
evaluation of ∀uto∃∨∧L as a benchmark for evaluating LLMs’ reasoning and translation ability using
the predictive power score. In particular, we use the following assessment criteria for evaluating
LLMs using ∀uto∃∨∧L: (A1) Can LLMs produce FL translations that are syntactically compliant?
(A2) Can LLMs maintain truth while translating FL? (A3) Can LLMs accurately verify whether two
FL strings are logically equivalent? In addition, we use the following criterion to assess ∀uto∃∨∧L
itself: (A4) Is the performance on ∀uto∃∨∧L indicative of performance on other benchmarks?

4.1     E VALUATING LLM S U SING ∀UTO∃∨∧L

We assessed §A1 - §A3 using 17 SOTA closed and open-source LLMs (Fig. 3). For clarity, we plot
select models, grey out the data from the others, and refer the reader to App. N for a comprehensive
overview. We evaluated §A1 and §A2 using the parameterized ∀uto∃∨∧L score on our generated
datasets. For §A3, we calculated the LLMs as verifiers score for each descriptional complexity class
by having each LLM verify the results produced by GPT-4o.
As stated in Sec. 2, prompts are crucial for LLM performance. To ensure our results reflect LLM
capabilities rather than the effect of poorly designed prompts, we conducted extensive prompt
engineering and ensured that at least one LLM could achieve a parameterized ∀uto∃∨∧L score
≥ 95% on the 3-CNF(12) dataset, which has a constrained but representative grammar. Analysis on
each LLM’s performance on the 3-CNF(12) dataset is presented in App. C.
As shown in Fig. 3, SOTA LLMs are able to produce syntactically compliant formal syntax (§A1)
for formal syntax with low descriptional complexity (e.g., few operators in logic). However, as the
complexity increases, the ability of LLMs to autoformalize their own informalizations diminishes.
One surprising result here is that GPT-4o is less syntactically compliant for regexes than Phi and
LLama-3, which are much smaller models. This is due to GPT-4o often repeating a token sequence


                                                    7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                          ChatGPT           GPT-4o        GPT-4o-mini           Phi3      Mistral      LLama3            Other LLMs (n = 10)
                                       Propositional Logic(12)            FOL(8, 12)−S                    FOL(8, 12)−E                 Regular Expression(2)
                               1
Compliance
 Syntactic                   .75
                              .5
                             .25
                               0
                               1
LLMs as Verifiers ∀uto∃∨∧L


                             .75
                    Score


                              .5
                             .25
                               0
                               1
   F1 Score


                             .75
                              .5
                             .25
                               0
                                   0     10     20     30     40 0       10     20     30       40 0    10      20     30       40 0     10    20    30       40
                                        # of Operators: ∧, ∨, ¬ (¬ is counted as an operator iff not succeeded by a terminal)          CFG Parse Tree Depth

Figure 3: Zero-shot Pass@1 results from using ∀uto∃∨∧L to assess LLMs w.r.t. §A1, §A2, §A3 on the
packaged datasets (Sec. 3.3.1). The x-axis represents an increasing descriptional complexity. The y-axis is each
evaluated LLM’s syntactic compliance rate (1st row), parameterized ∀uto∃∨∧L score (2nd row), and F1 score as
a verifier (3rd row). Additional results (prompt calibration, few-shot, etc.) are included in the Appendix.
when translating regex, resulting in hitting the token limit. For logic, we observed that LLMs often
use the correct syntax but often misplace parentheses, creating malformed expressions.
Our analysis further shows, except on the 3-CNF(12) dataset used for prompt calibration, LLMs
cannot maintain truth in FL translation (§A2) as the descriptional complexity increases. For translating
logic expressions with more than 20 operators, none exceeded 50% accuracy in maintaining truth.
This is concerning since formal specifications often have hundreds of operators. A common issue
was misunderstanding the formal syntax’s precedence and associativity rules. Misplaced operators
led to quick verification failures. We provide an analysis of failing cases in App. G.
Moreover, even with CoT prompting, LLMs cannot serve as accurate verifiers of logical equivalence
(§A3) for anything but toy expressions (low descriptional complexity), after which F1 scores fall
sharply. For small FL strings, we found that LLMs have difficulties with negations in logic. Due to
space limitations, we present some examples and an analysis of the kinds of syntactic structures that
LLMs fail to verify correctly in the Appendix (App. L, Fig. 21).

4.2                            E VALUATING ∀UTO∃∨∧L AS A B ENCHMARK

For assessing §A4, we used the same 17 LLMs to evaluate the predictive power (Sec. 3.2) of ∀uto∃∨∧L
w.r.t 5 popular benchmarks: (a) FOLIO(R;{NL, FOL}) (Han et al., 2024), a popular logical reasoning
benchmark with ground truth in both NL and FL; (b) FOLIO({A/I}) evaluates if an LLM can
(auto/in)formalize NL (FL) accurately; (c) LogiEval(R;{PL, FOL}) (Patel et al., 2024) a reasoning
benchmark with ground truth in propositional and first-order logic; (d) HumanEval(A) (Chen et al.,
2021), a code autoformalization benchmark; (e) Big Bench Hard (BBH) (Suzgun et al., 2023). These
benchmarks are contrasted in Sec. 5, and example prompts of these benchmarks are included in
App. K. We ran 5 runs on each benchmark except BBH. For BBH, we use the reported numbers in
the literature as scores for the models (sources are included in App K). We measured the correlation
between each benchmark’s score and the calibrated ∀uto∃∨∧L score (Fig. 4), which was calibrated
based on the descriptional complexity of the examples found in the benchmark. We also measured
the calibrated ∀uto∃∨∧L score’s predictive power w.r.t these benchmarks (Fig. 5).
As shown in Fig. 4, there is a moderate-to-strong positive correlation between LLM performance
on ∀uto∃∨∧L and other logic-based benchmarks on a myriad of tasks such as autoformalization,
logical reasoning, code generation, etc. The calibrated ∀uto∃∨∧L score exhibits a strong, positive
correlation (ρ ≥ 0.7) with other static benchmarks on FL-based tasks, as well as reasoning tasks such
as FOLIO. Notably, calculating the parameterized ∀uto∃∨∧L score does not require hand-annotation
unlike these benchmarks. Similar results appear in LogiEval for propositional logic, though the FOL
version shows only a moderate correlation (0.5 ≤ ρ < 0.7). We traced this reduction to dataset
imbalance, where 80% of samples are from the positive class. Furthermore, the dataset is skewed


                                                                                            8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                                Trend Line      Other Models (n = 10)
                                          ChatGPT        GPT-4o        GPT-4o-mini        Phi      Mistral     LLama3
                            FOLIO (R; NL)    FOLIO (R; FOL)    LogiEval (R; PL)  LogiEval (R; FOL)     FOLIO (A)      HumanEval (A)
Benchmark Score    1    ρ = 0.81                  ρ = 0.83                  ρ = 0.79                                       ρ = 0.64                                                                       ρ = 0.84                                                                                                   ρ = 0.75
                        p = 0.00                  p = 0.00                  p = 0.00                                       p = 0.01                                                                       p = 0.00                                                                                                   p = 0.00
                  .75
                   .5
                  .25
                   0     Scal (FOL(8, 12)–E, 6)    Scal (FOL(8, 12)–E, 6)         Scal (PL(12), 30)                        Scal (FOL(8, 12)–E, 30)                                                                    Scal (FOL(8, 12)–E, 6)                                                                                                       Scal (RE(2), 7)
                        0    .25 .5 .75     1     0   .25 .5 .75      1     0   .25 .5 .75      1                          0          .25 .5 .75                                             1            0                     .25 .5 .75                                                             1             0              .25 .5 .75                                            1
                                                                                Calibrated ∀uto∃∨∧L Score

Figure 4: Correlation between scores on ∀uto∃∨∧L and static benchmarks from the literature. The Pearson
correlation coefficient (ρ) and the p-value (values ≤ 0.05 are statistically significant) are annotated in the top
left. The calibrated ∀uto∃∨∧L score Scal (D, d) use all strings in dataset D with descriptional complexity d
bounded above, as shown in the plots (App. K.4). Grey hexagons () represent data from 10 other models.


towards lower difficulty. This leads to lower overall performance (and consequently correlation) of
models like GPT-4o-mini that actually try to reason and provide no answers compared to models like
LLama-3.1-8b, which mostly answered yes.
Our results (Fig. 5) show that an LLM’s cal-
ibrated ∀uto∃∨∧L score is a strong predictor        1           FL-based metrics
                                                      0.89 0.87 0.86
of its performance on FL-based benchmarks.                            0.85
                                                                            0.81 0.78
                                                                                               Length Dependent
                                                                                                  NL Metrics
Our metric is also a more robust truth main-      .75                                 0.73 0.73 0.72 0.71
                                                                                                             0.68
                                                                                                 P∀uto∃∨∧L(X)


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           HumanEval(A) : Accuracy
tenance measure than length-dependent, NL-


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     LogiEval(FOL) : Accuracy
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 LogiEval(PL) : Accuracy
                                                                                                                                                                                                        FOLIO(FOL) : Accuracy
                                                                                                                                       FOLIO(NL) : Accuracy


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                FOLIO(I) : METEOR
                                                                                                                                                              FOLIO(A) : Accuracy
based metrics like BLEU scores (Papineni et al.,


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       FOLIO(I) : ROUGE
                                                   .5
                                                                                                                                                                                    BBH(R) : Accuracy


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            FOLIO(I) : BERT
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     FOLIO(I) : BLEU
2002). For example, changing the generated NL
ψ =“the weather status was sunny yesterday        .25
and is raining today” to ψ ′ =“the weather sta-
tus was sunny yesterday and is not raining today”   0
still achieves a high BLEU(ψ ′ , ψ) score of 0.74                 Benchmark X (Annotated bars)
(BLEU(ψ, ψ) = 1) but does not maintain truth. Figure 5: Predictive power of ∀uto∃∨∧L w.r.t other
Even as a predictor for such metrics, ∀uto∃∨∧L benchmarks. Benchmark metrics appear after the colon.
notably surpasses random-chance accuracy.

4.3                     E VALUATING L ARGE R EASONING M ODELS USING ∀UTO∃∨∧L

Large Reasoning Models (LRMs) are LLMs
                                                                                                 DeepSeek R1


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              DeepSeek R1
                                                                                                               Syntactic Compliance


that also perform some reasoning steps (e.g.,                  PL(12)           FOL(8, 12)−E
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          ∀uto∃∨∧L Score

                                                         1                                   1
search) as a part of their generation process.
                                                       .75                                   .75
We assessed two SOTA LRMs – OpenAI’s o1
                                                        .5                                   .5
(OpenAI, 2024) and DeepSeek’s R1 (DeepSeek,
                                                                                                 OpenAI o1


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              OpenAI o1


                                                       .25                                   .25
2024) – on §A1 and §A2 using ∀uto∃∨∧L.                   0                                   0
Due to cost limitations, we regenerated a small            0 10 20 30 40 0 10 20 30 40
dataset with 10 examples for each operator num-                 # of Operators: ∧, ∨, ¬
ber for approximately 400 total examples. Our
results (Fig. 6) show that even SOTA LRMs can- Figure 6: Applying ∀uto∃∨∧L with zero-shot prompts
                                                  to LRMs on a small dataset of 400 strings.
not maintain truth effectively in (A ◦ I)1 (φ0 ).


5                       R ELATED W ORK

Logical Reasoning RuleTaker (Clark et al., 2020) and ProntoQA (Saparov & He, 2023) generate
datasets by using simple “if-then" and syllogisms rules to create reasoning questions. Similar
grammars are used by LogicNLI (Tian et al., 2021) and CLUTRR (Sinha et al., 2019). LogiEval
(Patel et al., 2024) uses fixed inference rules and LLMs to generate reasoning problems. Although
these techniques are dynamic, they remain limited in generating interesting reasoning problems
across different domains. In contrast, ∀uto∃∨∧L is multi-dimensional, offering five distinct datasets,
multiple customization options, and the ability to produce an infinite number of unique syntax trees.


                                                                                               9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


FOLIO (Han et al., 2024) utilizes human experts to generate a set of reasoning questions based on
real-world text sources. They generate questions in both NL and FL for propositional and first-order
logic that require 7 levels of reasoning. A similar approach is employed by ReClor (Yu et al., 2020)
and (Srivastava et al., 2023). A key weakness of these approaches is their reliance on human experts.
Autoformalization HumanEval is a popular benchmark for evaluating LLM capabilities of autofor-
malizing source code. LLM autoformalizations are evaluated via hand-written test cases. It has been
shown by Liu et al. (2023) through the HumanEval+ dataset that the test cases in HumanEval are
incomplete and can provide misleading rankings. StructuredRegex (Ye et al., 2020) used crowdsourc-
ing for generating regex datasets. In contrast, ∀uto∃∨∧L requires no human annotations and utilizes
formal verifiers for checking the truth maintenance and thus does not share such drawbacks.
FOLIO({A, I}) (Han et al., 2024) tests the (auto/in)formalization abilities of LLMs by using hand-
coded annotations of ⟨NL, FL⟩ pairs. However, as noted by the authors, they cannot check truth
maintenance effectively and rely on an inference engine to compute truth values for each conclusion.
∀uto∃∨∧L uses theorem provers to check equivalence and thus is sound in its accuracy evaluation.
MALLS (Yang et al., 2024) is an autoformalization dataset for first-order logic that was generated
using GPT-4. Their use of LLMs for generating the data limits the diversity of the dataset since
and the authors suggest to only use this dataset for fine-tuning and not for evaluation. In contrast,
∀uto∃∨∧L generates correct FL and has a sound evaluation metric for truth maintenance.
Autoformalization approaches such LeanEuclid (Murphy et al., 2024), DTV (Zhou et al., 2024),
LINC (Olausson et al., 2023), SatLM (Ye et al., 2020), Logic-LM (Pan et al., 2023) and others
(Wu et al., 2022) utilize formal verifiers to provide sound evaluation metrics but utilize hand-coded
datasets that limit their use in evaluating newer LLMs unlike ∀uto∃∨∧L.
Informalization Wu et al. (2022) and ProofNet (Azerbayev et al., 2023) use static datasets to evaluate
LLM informalization capabilities. They use metrics such as BLEU scores that are known to not
be indicative of accuracy for FL-based tasks (Ren et al., 2020). Jiang et al. (2023) develop MMA,
a dataset of formal and informal pairs generated using GPT-4. They note that their dataset is an
approximate measure due to using LLMs without manual validation. In contrast, ∀uto∃∨∧L is
autonomous and provides sound measures of LLM capabilities w.r.t. truth maintenance.

6   C ONCLUSION

We introduced ∀uto∃∨∧L, a new benchmark for autonomously assessing LLM truth maintenance in
formal language translation. ∀uto∃∨∧L allows scalable data generation without human labeling and
autonomously evaluates truth maintenance using formal verifiers to guarantee correctness. It is easily
extensible and provides several prepackaged datasets and dataset generators to assess new LLMs
quickly. Furthermore, our evaluation indicates that SOTA LLMs and LRMs are not performant in this
task. Finally, we show that our metric is predictive of performance on other formal-language-based
tasks and thus can be used as a surrogate benchmark for evaluating future LLMs.
Broader Impact ∀uto∃∨∧L provides a robust framework for evaluating the suitability and safety
of LLMs in FL-based tasks such as autoformalization and code generation. It also serves as a
surrogate for estimating performance as LLMs emerge. Our work lays the foundation for developing
autonomous evaluation techniques for LLMs in more flexible syntaxes, such as conversational AI.
Limitations and Future Work A limitation of our work is the use of formal verifiers: the equivalence
problem for first-order logic is well known to be undecidable. We mitigate this by using an appropriate
timeout and logging (only 0.66% of our results experienced a timeout). This issue can be removed
by using CFGs that generate decidable strings. An interesting application of ∀uto∃∨∧L is using
generated evaluations as datasets for back-translation, thereby improving the autoformalization
capabilities of models (Jiang et al., 2023). One interesting extension of our would be assessing truth
maintenance in other applications (e.g., image generation). Finally, using formal verifiers as callable
tools for an LLM is an intriguing extension of our benchmark, enhancing the assessment of §A3.
Threats to Validity Our results for paid APIs rely on the model checkpoints to be available. Due
to cost limitations, our results report pass@1 scores. We do report the std. deviation across 10 runs
on 10% of each dataset in App. H with similar conclusions. We assume that the verifier and parsing
libraries are sound. We mitigate this risk by using popular open-source tools like Prover9 and NLTK.


                                                  10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

This work was supported in part by the ONR grant N00014-23-1-2416, NSF grant IIS 1942856,
the Open AI Researcher Access Grant, and Arizona State University’s GPSA Jumpstart Research
Grant. We acknowledge Research Computing at Arizona State University for providing computation
resources that contributed to this paper’s results.


E THICS S TATEMENT

Our work involves using LLMs for generating text. Naturally, it is imperative to ensure that appropri-
ate guardrails are in place to prevent offensive content from being generated and/or displayed. We do
not use any personally identifiable information in ∀uto∃∨∧L.


R EFERENCES
Reg2dfa. https://github.com/Jack-Q/reg2dfa, 2017. Accessed: 2024-06-01.

Zhangir Azerbayev, Bartosz Piotrowski, Hailey Schoelkopf, Edward W Ayers, Dragomir Radev, and
  Jeremy Avigad. Proofnet: Autoformalizing and formally proving undergraduate-level mathematics.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.12433, 2023.

Satanjeev Banerjee and Alon Lavie. METEOR: An automatic metric for MT evaluation with
  improved correlation with human judgments. In Proc. ACL Workshop on Intrinsic and Extrinsic
  Evaluation Measures for Machine Translation and/or Summarization, pp. 65–72. Association for
  Computational Linguistics, 2005.

Steven Bird, Ewan Klein, and Edward Loper. Natural Language Processing with Python. O’Reilly,
  2009.

Chris Callison-Burch, Miles Osborne, and Philipp Koehn. Re-evaluating the role of Bleu in Machine
  Translation Research. In Proc. EACL, 2006.

Mark Chen, Jerry Tworek, Heewoo Jun, Qiming Yuan, Henrique Ponde De Oliveira Pinto, Jared
 Kaplan, Harri Edwards, Yuri Burda, Nicholas Joseph, Greg Brockman, et al. Evaluating large
 language models trained on code. arXiv preprint arXiv:2107.03374, 2021.

Peter Clark, Oyvind Tafjord, and Kyle Richardson. Transformers as soft reasoners over language. In
  Proc. IJCAI, 2020.

Erzsébet Csuhaj-Varjú and Alica Kelemenová. Descriptional complexity of context-free grammar
  forms. Theoretical Computer Science, 112(2):277–289, 1993.

Leonardo Mendonça de Moura and Nikolaj S. Bjørner. Z3: An efficient SMT solver. In International
  Conference on Tools and Algorithms for the Construction and Analysis of Systems (TACAS), 2008.

DeepSeek. Deepseek-r1: Incentivizing reasoning capability in llms via reinforcement learning.
  https://arxiv.org/abs/2501.12948, 2024. Accessed: 2025-01-22.

TJ Dunham and Henry Syahputra. Reactor mk. 1 performances: Mmlu, humaneval and bbh test
  results. arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.10515, 2024.

Daniele Faraglia. Faker. https://github.com/joke2k/faker, 2024. Accessed: 2024-06-
  01.

Clémentine Fourrier, Nathan Habib, Alina Lozovskaya, Konrad Szafer, and Thomas Wolf. Open
  llm leaderboard v2. https://huggingface.co/spaces/open-llm-leaderboard/
  open_llm_leaderboard, 2024.

IBM Granite Team. Granite 3.0 language models, 2024.


                                                 11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Simeng Han, Hailey Schoelkopf, Yilun Zhao, Zhenting Qi, Martin Riddell, Wenfei Zhou, James
  Coady, David Peng, Yujie Qiao, Luke Benson, Lucy Sun, Alexander Wardle-Solano, Hannah
  Szabó, Ekaterina Zubova, Matthew Burtell, Jonathan Fan, Yixin Liu, Brian Wong, Malcolm Sailor,
  Ansong Ni, Linyong Nan, Jungo Kasai, Tao Yu, Rui Zhang, Alexander R. Fabbri, Wojciech
  Kryscinski, Semih Yavuz, Ye Liu, Xi Victoria Lin, Shafiq Joty, Yingbo Zhou, Caiming Xiong, Rex
  Ying, Arman Cohan, and Dragomir Radev. FOLIO: natural language reasoning with first-order
  logic. In Proc. EMNLP, pp. 22017–22031, 2024.
Pengcheng He, Xiaodong Liu, Jianfeng Gao, and Weizhu Chen. Deberta: Decoding-enhanced bert
  with disentangled attention. In Proc. ICLR, 2021.
J.E. Hopcroft, R. Motwani, and J.D. Ullman. Introduction to Automata Theory, Languages, and
   Computation. Addison-Wesley series in computer science. Addison-Wesley, 2001. ISBN
   9780201441246.
Michael Huth and Mark Dermot Ryan. Logic in Computer Science - Modelling and Reasoning about
 Systems. Cambridge University Press, 2nd edition, 2004.
Douglas M. Jennewein, Johnathan Lee, Chris Kurtz, Will Dizon, Ian Shaeffer, Alan Chapman,
 Alejandro Chiquete, Josh Burks, Amber Carlson, Natalie Mason, Arhat Kobwala, Thirugnanam
 Jagadeesan, Praful Barghav, Torey Battelle, Rebecca Belshe, Debra McCaffrey, Marisa Brazil,
  Chaitanya Inumella, Kirby Kuznia, Jade Buzinski, Sean Dudley, Dhruvil Shah, Gil Speyer, and
 Jason Yalim. The Sol Supercomputer at Arizona State University. In Practice and Experience
  in Advanced Research Computing, PEARC ’23, pp. 296–301, New York, NY, USA, Jul 2023.
 Association for Computing Machinery. ISBN 9781450399852. doi: 10.1145/3569951.3597573.
Ziwei Ji, Nayeon Lee, Rita Frieske, Tiezheng Yu, Dan Su, Yan Xu, Etsuko Ishii, Ye Jin Bang,
  Andrea Madotto, and Pascale Fung. Survey of hallucination in natural language generation. ACM
  Computing Surveys, 55(12):1–38, 2023.
Albert Q Jiang, Wenda Li, and Mateja Jamnik. Multilingual mathematical autoformalization. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2311.03755, 2023.
Jacky Liang, Wenlong Huang, Fei Xia, Peng Xu, Karol Hausman, Brian Ichter, Pete Florence, and
  Andy Zeng. Code as policies: Language model programs for embodied control. In Proc. ICRA, pp.
  9493–9500, 2023.
Chin-Yew Lin. ROUGE: A package for automatic evaluation of summaries. In Text Summarization
  Branches Out, pp. 74–81, Barcelona, Spain, July 2004. Association for Computational Linguistics.
Jiawei Liu, Chunqiu Steven Xia, Yuyao Wang, and Lingming Zhang. Is your code generated by
   chatgpt really correct? rigorous evaluation of large language models for code generation. In Proc.
   NeurIPS, 2023.
Aman Madaan, Niket Tandon, Prakhar Gupta, Skyler Hallinan, Luyu Gao, Sarah Wiegreffe, Uri Alon,
 Nouha Dziri, Shrimai Prabhumoye, Yiming Yang, Shashank Gupta, Bodhisattwa Prasad Majumder,
 Katherine Hermann, Sean Welleck, Amir Yazdanbakhsh, and Peter Clark. Self-refine: Iterative
 refinement with self-feedback. In Proc. NeurIPS, 2023.
William McCune. Prover9 and Mace4. http://www.cs.unm.edu/~mccune/prover9/,
 2010.
Microsoft. Phi-3 technical report: A highly capable language model locally on your phone. https:
 //arxiv.org/pdf/2404.14219, 2024. Accessed: 2024-06-01.
MistralAI. Introducing the world’s best edge models.            https://mistral.ai/news/
 ministraux/, 2024. Accessed: 2024-11-22.
Logan Murphy, Kaiyu Yang, Jialiang Sun, Zhaoyu Li, Anima Anandkumar, and Xujie Si. Autofor-
  malizing euclidean geometry. In Proc. ICML, 2024.
Theo Olausson, Alex Gu, Benjamin Lipkin, Cedegao E. Zhang, Armando Solar-Lezama, Joshua B.
  Tenenbaum, and Roger Levy. LINC: A neurosymbolic approach for logical reasoning by combining
  language models with first-order logic provers. In Proc. EMNLP, 2023.


                                                12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


OpenAI. Gpt-4o. https://arxiv.org/pdf/2303.08774.pdf, 2023. Accessed: 2023-06-
  01.
OpenAI.            Gpt-4o-mini.          https://openai.com/index/
  gpt-4o-mini-advancing-cost-efficient-intelligence/, 2024. Accessed:
  2024-09-29.
OpenAI. Introducing openai o1. https://openai.com/o1/, 2024. Accessed: 2024-11-22.
Liangming Pan, Alon Albalak, Xinyi Wang, and William Yang Wang. Logic-lm: Empowering large
  language models with symbolic solvers for faithful logical reasoning. In Proc. EMNLP, 2023.
Kishore Papineni, Salim Roukos, Todd Ward, and Wei-Jing Zhu. Bleu: a method for automatic
  evaluation of machine translation. In Proc. ACL, pp. 311–318, 2002.
Nisarg Patel, Mohith Kulkarni, Mihir Parmar, Aashna Budhiraja, Mutsumi Nakamura, Neeraj
  Varshney, and Chitta Baral. Multi-logieval: Towards evaluating multi-step logical reasoning
  ability of large language models. In Proc. EMNLP, pp. 20856–20879, 2024.
Qwen2. Qwen 2.5. https://qwen2.org/qwen2-5/, 2024. Accessed: 2024-11-22.
Shuo Ren, Daya Guo, Shuai Lu, Long Zhou, Shujie Liu, Duyu Tang, Neel Sundaresan, Ming Zhou,
  Ambrosio Blanco, and Shuai Ma. Codebleu: a method for automatic evaluation of code synthesis.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2009.10297, 2020.
Stuart Russell and Peter Norvig. Artificial Intelligence: A Modern Approach. Pearson, 4th edition,
  2020.
Pranab Sahoo, Ayush Kumar Singh, Sriparna Saha, Vinija Jain, Samrat Mondal, and Aman Chadha.
  A systematic survey of prompt engineering in large language models: Techniques and applications.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.07927, 2024.
Abulhair Saparov and He He. Language models are greedy reasoners: A systematic formal analysis
  of chain-of-thought. In Proc. ICLR, 2023.
Karin Kipper Schuler. VerbNet: A Broad-coverage, Comprehensive Verb Lexicon. PhD thesis,
  University of Pennsylvania, 2005. AAI3179808.
Shreya Shankar, JD Zamfirescu-Pereira, Björn Hartmann, Aditya Parameswaran, and Ian Arawjo.
  Who validates the validators? Aligning llm-assisted evaluation of llm outputs with human prefer-
  ences. In Proc. ACM Symposium on User Interface Software and Technology, pp. 1–14, 2024.
Koustuv Sinha, Shagun Sodhani, Jin Dong, Joelle Pineau, and William L. Hamilton. CLUTRR: A
  diagnostic benchmark for inductive reasoning from text. In Proc. Empirical Methods in Natural
  Language Processing and the 9th International Joint Conference on Natural Language Processing
 (EMNLP-IJCNLP), 2019.
Aarohi Srivastava, Abhinav Rastogi, Abhishek Rao, Abu Awal Md Shoeb, Abubakar Abid, Adam
  Fisch, Adam R. Brown, Adam Santoro, Aditya Gupta, Adrià Garriga-Alonso, Agnieszka Kluska,
  Aitor Lewkowycz, Akshat Agarwal, Alethea Power, et al. Beyond the imitation game: Quantifying
  and extrapolating the capabilities of language models. Transactions on Machine Learning Research,
  2023. ISSN 2835-8856.
Mirac Suzgun, Nathan Scales, Nathanael Schärli, Sebastian Gehrmann, Yi Tay, Hyung Won Chung,
 Aakanksha Chowdhery, Quoc Le, Ed Chi, Denny Zhou, and Jason Wei. Challenging BIG-bench
 tasks and whether chain-of-thought can solve them. In Proc. ACL, 2023.
Jidong Tian, Yitian Li, Wenqing Chen, Liqiang Xiao, Hao He, and Yaohui Jin. Diagnosing the
   first-order logical reasoning ability through LogicNLI. In Proc. EMNLP, 2021.
Jason Wei, Xuezhi Wang, Dale Schuurmans, Maarten Bosma, Brian Ichter, Fei Xia, Ed H. Chi,
  Quoc V Le, and Denny Zhou. Chain of thought prompting elicits reasoning in large language
  models. In Proc. NeurIPS, 2022.


                                                13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Yuhuai Wu, Albert Qiaochu Jiang, Wenda Li, Markus N. Rabe, Charles Staats, Mateja Jamnik, and
  Christian Szegedy. Autoformalization with large language models. In Proc. NeurIPS, 2022.
Cheng Xu, Shuhao Guan, Derek Greene, and M-Tahar Kechadi. Benchmark data contamination of
  large language models: A survey. arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.04244, 2024a.
Tengyu Xu, Eryk Helenowski, Karthik Abinav Sankararaman, Di Jin, Kaiyan Peng, Eric Han,
  Shaoliang Nie, Chen Zhu, Hejia Zhang, Wenxuan Zhou, et al. The perfect blend: Redefining rlhf
  with mixture of judges. arXiv preprint arXiv:2409.20370, 2024b.
Yuan Yang, Siheng Xiong, Ali Payani, Ehsan Shareghi, and Faramarz Fekri. Harnessing the power
  of large language models for natural language to first-order logic translation. In Proc. ACL, pp.
  6942–6959, 2024.
Xi Ye, Qiaochu Chen, Isil Dillig, and Greg Durrett. Benchmarking multimodal regex synthesis with
  complex structures. In Proc. ACL, pp. 6081–6094, 2020.
Yi. 01-ai. https://huggingface.co/01-ai/Yi-1.5-34B-Chat, 2024. Accessed: 2024-
  11-22.
Weihao Yu, Zihang Jiang, Yanfei Dong, and Jiashi Feng. ReClor: A reading comprehension dataset
 requiring logical reasoning. In Proc. ICLR, 2020.
Tianyi Zhang*, Varsha Kishore*, Felix Wu*, Kilian Q. Weinberger, and Yoav Artzi. Bertscore:
  Evaluating text generation with bert. In Proc. ICLR, 2020.
Lianmin Zheng, Wei-Lin Chiang, Ying Sheng, Siyuan Zhuang, Zhanghao Wu, Yonghao Zhuang,
  Zi Lin, Zhuohan Li, Dacheng Li, Eric P. Xing, Hao Zhang, Joseph E. Gonzalez, and Ion Stoica.
  Judging llm-as-a-judge with mt-bench and chatbot arena. In Proc. NeurIPS, 2023.
Jin Peng Zhou, Charles E Staats, Wenda Li, Christian Szegedy, Kilian Q Weinberger, and Yuhuai
   Wu. Don’t trust: Verify – grounding LLM quantitative reasoning with autoformalization. In Proc.
   ICLR, 2024.


                                               14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A    A PPENDIX O RGANIZATION
The code used for this project can be found at https://github.com/AAIR-lab/autoeval.
The Appendix is organized as follows. Appendix Appendix B provides the algorithm used for
dataset generation. Appendix C discusses prompt tuning and validating our prompts on 3–CNF.
Appendix D provides the parameters we used when generating the five datasets discussed in the paper.
Appendix E provides additional information on our experimental setup, including the computational
resources used. Appendix F discusses the prompts and provides examples. Appendix G is our detailed
analysis of the empirical results from the main paper. Appendix H discusses an experiment we ran
to evaluate the standard deviation error. Appendix I includes additional results from our zero-shot
prompting experiments using other metrics for categorization. Appendix J evaluates an experiment
we performed comparing few-shot prompting compared to zero-shot. Finally, Appendix K provides
the experimental setup of the benchmarks we evaluated, data values and sources of scores collected,
the calibrated ∀uto∃∨∧L scores used for comparison, and additional correlation results.

B    DATASET G ENERATION
In this section, we provide the algorithm for generating formal syntax (FS) expressions and show that
it can generate all possible expressions from the grammar and vocabulary.
Our approach, ∀uto∃∨∧L, generates datasets by constructing a context-free grammar (CFG) tree
using the grammars discussed in Section 3.3.1. Since it is intractable to generate the full tree, we
control the branching factor and randomly expand the branches of this tree to generate formulae.

Algorithm 1 Dataset Generation
 1: Inputs: CFG G, vocabulary V, branching factor n, tree depth depth, sample count sample_count,
    and categorization metric m.
 2: Outputs: set of FS expressions φ
 3: N ← {0 : [None]}, Nt ← ⟨⟩
 4: for d = 1, 2, . . . , depth do
 5:     N ′ ← sampleN(N [d − 1], n)
 6:     for ν ∈ N ′ do
 7:         Nν , Tν ← generateNChildren(ν, G, n)
 8:         N [d] += Nν
 9:         Nt ← Nt ∪ Tν
10:     end for
11: end for
12: M ← categorizeExpressionsIntoDict(Nt , m)
13: φ ← ⟨⟩
14: for k ∈ keys(M ) do
15:     Mk ← sampleCFGExpressions(M [k], sample_count)
16:     φk ← buildFSExpressions(Mk , V)
17:     φ ← φ ∪ φk
18: end for
19: Return: φ

The dataset generation algorithm is shown in Algorithm 1. This algorithm constructs a CFG tree
by maintaining non-terminal nodes at each tree level ( N ) and all the leaf nodes (Nt ), where each
terminal node represents a completed CFG expression (line 3). For generating nodes at a certain level
in the tree, n nodes from the previous level are sampled (line 5). Each node is branched n times
using the CFG to produce nodes at the current tree level, and all the leaf nodes are collected (lines 7
through 9). As a result, by iteratively performing this process for each tree level, we obtain a set of
leaf nodes (CFG expressions).
The leaf nodes are then categorized based on the specified metric (e.g., tree depth, number of operators,
etc.) (line 12). For each metric value, a fixed number of CFG expressions corresponding to that
value are sampled (line 15). Using the vocabulary, an FS expression is constructed from each CFG
expression (line 16). Consequently, the final dataset of FS expressions contains an equal number for


                                                  15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


each metric value (line 17). This set of FS expressions is the final result produced by the algorithm
(line 19).
The vocabulary is fixed in length, with a hyperparameter controlling the number of unique propositions
for propositional logic. Similarly, for first-order logic, the number of unique variables, constants, and
predicates are also hyperparameters. Also, regular expressions have a hyperparameter controlling
the alphabet size. When these expression components are needed for building the FS expression,
the exact one is selected using uniform random selection. In the special case of first-order logic
predicates, the grounded predicate is generated by randomly selecting a predicate and then selecting
constants depending on the predicate’s arity. In the case of the arbitrary vocabulary, the arity for a
predicate is randomly assigned. To add variables, each constant has a certain probability of being
replaced by a variable.
Guaranteed Expression Coverage The dataset generator (Algorithm 1) is guaranteed to generate all
possible formal syntax expressions that can be produced for a grammar and vocabulary. Let φ be
an FS expression that can be constructed using the rules from CFG G and the vocabulary V. Note
that φ corresponds to a CFG expression φCF G , derived by substituting the vocabulary with the CFG
symbols. Due to uniform selection, the probability of φ being generated from φCF G is greater than
zero. Furthermore, the CFG expression represents a leaf node in the CFG tree that can be reached by
applying the CFG rules in a specific sequence. Due to the random sampling of rules at each node,
there is a non-zero probability of generating this particular path in the tree. Thus, φ can be generated
using the dataset generator algorithm.


C                             3-CNF P ROMPT C ALIBRATION

In this section, we discuss the K-CNF results used to calibration the prompts.
We tested several prompts for 3-CNF to verify that our prompts are sufficient to prompt the LLM
to correctly perform informalization and autoformalization. Additionally, we verified that the
equivalence verification prompt prompted the LLMs to give an accurate yes-or-no answer. The
performance of all 14 LLMs on 3-CNF for §A1, §A2, and §A3 are shown in Figure 7.

                                    ChatGPT   GPT-4o         GPT-4o-mini           Phi3      Mistral              LLama3         Other LLMs (n = 10)
                                                                                   3–CNF(12)
                             1.00
Compliance
 Syntactic


                             0.75
                             0.50
                             0.25
                             0.00
                             1.00
LLMs as Verifiers ∀uto∃∨∧L


                             0.75
                    Score


                             0.50
                             0.25
                             0.00
                             1.00
   F1 Score


                             0.75
                             0.50
                             0.25
                             0.00
                                    0           10                  20                   30                  40                   50                   60
                                                # of Operators: ∧, ∨, ¬ (¬ is counted as an operator iff not succeeded by a terminal)


Figure 7: Zero-shot Pass@1 results (avg. over 10 batches, higher values better) for 3-CNF from using
∀uto∃∨∧L to assess LLMs w.r.t. §A1, §A2, §A3 (Sec. 3.3.1) on the packaged datasets. The x-axis is
the # of operators.

The best-performing models we tested (GPT-4o and GPT-4o-mini) achieved nearly perfect syntactic
compliance, accuracy, and equivalence verification even as the number of operators increased. This
proves that the prompts we used in our experiments are sufficient for prompting the model for
performing the tasks for §A1, §A2, and §A3.


                                                                                  16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


For the other LLMs tested, syntactic compliance and accuracy diminished as the number of operators
increased. However, when evaluating the equivalence of GPT-4o results, all LLMs achieved near-
perfect accuracy regardless of operator number. Due to most of GPT-4o results being positive cases,
the results support that LLMs can verify two equivalent 3-CNF formulae as equivalent.

D    DATASET G ENERATION H YPERPARAMETERS
In Table 1, we provide the hyperparameters used to generate the five datasets.


               Table 1: Hyperparameters used for producing the five datasets.
 Parameter Type       Hyperparameter             Value Description
                          depth                          40     Maximum depth of the CFG tree.
 General                  n                             200     Branching factor of produced CFG
                                                                tree.
                          sample_count                   50     Number of CFGS for each metric
                                                                value to select.
                          free_variable_prob 0.25               Probability of a constant being re-
                                                                placed by a variable.
                          max_free_variables             ∞      Maximum number of unique variables.
 First-Order Logic
                          max_predicate_arity            2      Maximum predicate arity.
                          min_predicate_arity            1      Minimum predicate arity.
                          num_objects                    12     Number of unique constants.
                          num_predicates                 8      Number of unique predicates.
 Propositional Logic      num_propositions               12     Number of unique propositions.
 Regular Expression       alphabet_size                  2      Alphabet size.


E    E XPERIMENTAL S ETUP
In this section, we will provide the details of our experimental setup for generating the datasets and
running ∀uto∃∨∧L for evaluating each LLM’s performance.
We ran our experiments using Python 3.10.13 with package versions shown in Table 2. We also
repackaged Prover9 (McCune, 2010) to improve performance where this repackaged version can be
found in our code base.
Dataset Generation: We generated five datasets using the
dataset generation algorithm with the hyperparameters shown in Table 2: Python package versions
Table 1 using the number of operators as the categorization metric used for empirical evaluation.
for all but regular expression, where we used CFG tree depth. We    Python Package        Version
generated 10 batches for each dataset, resulting in approximately
20k samples for each dataset with an equal distribution for each    openai                1.45.0
operator number.                                                    nltk                  3.8.1
                                                                    tqdm                  4.66.4
Evaluating and Verification: The closed-source models (GPT- anthropic                     0.26.1
3.5-turbo, GPT-4o, and GPT-4o-mini) were accessed using their       backoff               2.2.1
API using a temperature of 0.1. The open-source models LLama- tiktoken                    0.6.0
3-8B-Instruct and Mistral-v0.2-7B-Instruct were locally hosted      transformers 4.41.1
on a server with a 13th Gen Intel(R) Core(TM) i9-13900K and         Faker                 25.2.0
Nvidia RTX 4090 GPU using the model’s default parameters            networkx              3.3
with a temperature of 1. Similarly, Phi-3-medium-4k-instruct was
locally hosted on a server using a Nvidia A100-XM4-80GB GPU.
Verification was performed on an AMD EPYC machine with 128 cores. The larger open-source
models, Yi-1.5-34B-Instruct and Llama-3-70B-Instruct, were run on Arizona State University’s Sol
supercomputer (Jennewein et al., 2023).


                                                 17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


F     P ROMPTING
In this section, we provide the zero-shot and few-shot used in the main paper experiments.
The prompt for each dataset type provides the LLM with information on the problem type and the
vocabulary. For informalization, we prompt the model to produce just a natural language description.
We also provide the list of objects, predicates, propositions, and free variables in the formal syntax
expression. For autoformalization, the LLM is prompted to provide just the formal syntax expression
using the natural language description. Additionally, for first-order logic with a non-synthetic
grammar, we provide the predicate names and arity in the autoformalization prompt. Example
informalization and autoformalization few-shot prompts for the first-order logic dataset are shown
in Prompt 2 and Prompt 3. Example informalization and autoformalization few-shot prompts for
the regular expression dataset are shown in Prompt 4 and Prompt 5. Example informalization and
autoformalization zero-shot prompts for the propositional logic dataset are show in Prompt 6 and
Prompt 7.
For §A4, the prompt used for using an LLM to verify the equivalence of two formulae tells the
LLM about the type of datasets (e.g., propositional logic, first-order logic, and regular expression).
Using Chain-of-Thought prompting, the model is prompted to provide an explanation before giving
a yes-or-no answer in a parsable format. Prompt 8 gives an example of the prompt we used for
verifying two first-order logic formulae.

G     A NALYSIS OF M AIN PAPER R ESULTS
In this section, we analyze the main empirical results of the paper. Our results clearly show that
current SOTA LLMs are not performant in the truth maintenance task, which is why ∀uto∃∨∧L is
needed. As the expression complexity increases, the syntactic compliance, accuracy, and ability
to verify equivalence diminishes. We describe some of the errors that cause the low accuracy for
propositional logic, first-order logic, and regular expressions.

G.1    P ROPOSITIONAL L OGIC R ESULTS


Table 3: Examples of errors the evaluated LLMs made while evaluating ∀uto∃∨∧L for the proposi-
tional logic dataset.
   φ                      I(φ)                                         (A ◦ I)(φ)
                           The natural description of the formula is:
    (¬p11 ∧ ¬p8)           "It is not the case that both proposition p11      (¬(p11 ∧ p8))
                           and proposition p8 are true."
                           The natural description of the formula is:
                           "It is not the case that proposition p10 is true
    (¬p10 ∧ (¬p9 ∨ p7))                                                       ¬(p10 ∧ (¬p9 ∨ p7))
                           and either proposition p9 is false or
                           proposition p7 is true."
                           Here is the natural description of the given
    (¬p3 ∧ ¬p7)            formula: "The statement says that p3 is not        (¬p3 ∨ ¬p7)
                           true and p7 is also not true."
                           The formula states that either the proposition
                           p2 is true or the proposition p3 is true.
    (¬¬p2 ∨ p3)                                                               (p2 ∨ p3) ∧ ¬¬p2
                           Additionally, it specifies that the proposition
                           p2 is not false.
                           The formula describes a situation where the
                           first proposition is false, the second
    (¬p2 ∧ p5 ∧ ¬p6)                                                          (¬p ∧ q ∧ ¬r)
                           proposition is true, and the third proposition
                           is false.

Informalization Errors: A common error was the LLM failed to describe the proposition names.
Another was the LLM failing to provide a complete description of the formula. For example, GPT-
3.5-turbo often described portions of the expression based on what propositions and operators it


                                                 18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


    Prompt 2: Few-Shot First-Order Logic Informalization Prompt

   [TASK]
   Your task is to convert a first-order logic formula, appearing after [FORMULA], to a natural
   description that represents the formula. Only natural language terms are allowed to be used
   and do not copy the formula in your description. Your description should allow one to
   reconstruct the formula without having access to it, so make sure to use the correct names in
   your description. Explicitly describe the predicates. You may use terms verbatim as specified
   in the vocabulary below.

   [EXAMPLE 1]
   (¬p2 ∨ p1 ∨ ¬p2)
   Disjunctive predicate logic expression consisting of three components: the negation of a
   proposition labeled p2, the proposition p1, and again the negation of p2.

   [EXAMPLE 2]
   (¬¬p2 ∧ ¬(p3 ∨ p1))
   The expression asserts that p2 is not false while both p3 and p1 are not true.

    [VOCABULARY]
    ∨ represents disjunction
    ∧ represents conjunction
    ¬ represents negation
    ( and ) represent parentheses
    propositions can be used verbatim
    predicates can be used verbatim
    ∀ < x1 >< x2 > ... < xn > . represents universal quantification with x1... representing
    free variables
    ∃ < x1 >< x2 > ... < xn > . represents existential quantification with x1... representing
    free variables
    The objects are: p5, x1
    The parameterized predicates are: pred3(?p0, ?p1)
    The free variables are: x1

    [FORMULA]
    ∀x1 pred3(p5, x1)



contained. A common issue with GPT-4o, one of the best models, is that it often uses different
propositional symbols (see example 5 in Table 3). Finally, we also observed hallucinations were
the LLM attempted and failed to simplify the original formula (see example 4 in Table 3). These
interpretation errors resulted in the original meaning of the expression being lost.
Autoformalization Errors: We observed there were often syntactic issues where the description was
not fully translated into a formula or the parentheses did not match. An interesting result is that the
LLMs struggled to place the negation operator in the correct location. For example, GPT-4o often
describes ¬p ∧ ¬p as predicate p "negated twice and combined" but failed to regenerate the original
formula properly with this description.

G.2   F IRST-O RDER L OGIC R ESULTS

Informalization Errors: Similar to propositional logic, we observed the LLM often failed providing
enough details resulting in incorrect formulas being generated. A significant source of errors we
observed when not providing the predicate names and arity was the LLM rephrasing its explanation
causing confusion when regenerating.
Autoformalization Errors: Beyond the errors observed in propositional logic, the most common
mistake made during autoformalization was the LLM confusing constants with variables (see example
2 in Table 4). Additionally, the LLMs often messed up the predicate arity. Mistral often used = and


                                                  19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


   Prompt 3: Few-Shot First-Order Logic Autoformalization Prompt

   [VOCABULARY]
   Use ∨ to represent disjunction
   Use ∧ to represent conjunction
   Use ¬ to represent negation
   Use ( and ) to represent parentheses
   Use ∀ <free_variable_list> to represent universal quantification
   Use ∃ <free_variable_list> to represent existential quantification
   The <free_variable_list> consists of a sequence of space separate free variables with the last
   variable immediately followed by a period. Examples: (1) all x1 x2. (2) exists x4.
   Use <predicate>(<parameter_list>) to represent predicates (Names and parameters are
   provided in the description)

   [TASK]
   Your task is to interpret the natural language (NL) description of a first-order logic formula
   and represent it as formal syntax using the vocabulary specified in the [VOCABULARY]
   block above. Only output the formula and no other text. The NL description appears
   immediately following the [NL DESCRIPTION] tag.

   [EXAMPLE 1]
   Disjunctive predicate logic expression consisting of three components: the negation of a
   proposition labeled p2, the proposition p1, and again the negation of p2.
   (¬p2 ∨ p1 ∨ ¬p2)

   [EXAMPLE 2]
   The expression asserts that p2 is not false while both p3 and p1 are not true.
   (¬¬p2 ∧ ¬(p3 ∨ p1))

   [NL DESCRIPTION]
   For all objects labeled x1, the predicate pred3 holds true with parameters p5 and x1.


Table 4: Examples of errors the evaluated LLMs made while evaluating ∀uto∃∨∧L for the first-order
logic dataset.
  φ                              I(φ)                                    (A ◦ I)(φ)
                                The formula states that it is not the case
                                that the predicate pred8 holds for the
                                                                             ¬(pred8(p10)
 (¬pred8(p10) ∧ pred8(p5)       object p10, and the predicate pred8
                                                                             ∧pred8(p5)
 ∧pred6(p8))                    holds for the object p5, and the
                                                                             ∧pred6(p8))
                                predicate pred6 holds for the object p8,
                                all conjoined together.
                                Here is the natural description of the
 ∃x1.¬pred2(p4)                 given formula: "There exists an x1 such      ∃x1.¬pred2(x1)
                                that p4 is not an instance of pred2.
                                For all x1, it is not the case that          ∀x1.¬(pred3(p5)
 ∀x1.¬¬pred3(p5)
                                pred3(p5) is false.                          ∨¬pred3(p5))
                                There exists a relationship between the
 pred2(p3, p5)                  objects p3 and p5 such that the predicate    ∃p3 p5.pred2(p3, p5)
                                pred2 holds true for these objects.


̸= operators with the variables, which was not needed for any formluae in ∀uto∃∨∧L. Similarly, the
 LLMs would often use their own grammar instead of the one provided in the prompt.


                                                 20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


   Prompt 4: Few-Shot Regex Informalization Prompt

   [TASK]
   Your task is to convert the regular expression appear after [REGEX], to a natural description
   that represents the regular expression. Only natural language terms are allowed to be used
   and do not copy the regular expression in your description. Your description should allow
   one to reconstruct the regular expression without having access to it, so make sure to use the
   correctly account for scoping. You may use terms verbatim as specified in the vocabulary
   below.

   [VOCABULARY]
   you may use symbols from the vocabulary
   you can use *

   [EXAMPLE 1]
   (1*)0*
   The regex matches strings that starts with any number (including none) of the digit ’1’,
   followed by any number (including none) of the digit ’0’.

   [EXAMPLE 2]
   (01*)
   The regex matches strings that begin with a ’0’ followed directly by any number (including
   none) of ’1’s.

   [FORMULA]
   0


   Prompt 5: Few-Shot Regex Autoformalization Formal

   [VOCABULARY]
   Use * to represent zero or more duplications of the same expression
   Use ( and ) to represent parentheses

   [TASK]
   Your task is to interpret the natural language (NL) description of a regular expression and
   represent it as formal syntax using the vocabulary specified in the [VOCABULARY] block
   above. Only output the regular expression and no other text. The NL description appears
   immediately following the [NL DESCRIPTION] tag.

   [EXAMPLE 1]
   The regex matches strings that starts with any number (including none) of the digit ’1’,
   followed by any number (including none) of the digit ’0’.
   (1*)0*

   [EXAMPLE 2]
   The regex matches strings that begin with a ’0’ followed directly by any number (including
   none) of ’1’s.
   (01*)

   [NL DESCRIPTION]
   The regex matches strings that start with the digit ’0’.



G.3   R EGULAR E XPRESSION R ESULTS

Informalization Errors: Most of the errors observed were the LLMs giving the wrong explanation,
even for simple regular expressions. For example, GPT-4o often described c∗ as "one or more


                                                 21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


    Prompt 6: Zero-Shot Propositional Logic Informalization Prompt

    [TASK]
    Your task is to convert a propositional logic formula, appearing after [FORMULA], to a
    natural description that represents the formula. Only natural language terms are allowed to be
    used and do not copy the formula in your description. Your description should allow one to
    reconstruct the formula without having access to it, so make sure to use the correct names in
    your description. Explicitly describe the predicates. You may use terms verbatim as specified
    in the vocabulary below.

    [VOCABULARY]
    ∨ represents disjunction
    ∧ represents conjunction
    ¬ represents negation
    ( and ) represent parentheses
    propositions can be used verbatim
    The propositions are: p5, p12, p4

    [FORMULA]
    (p5 ∨ ¬p12 ∨ ¬p4)


    Prompt 7: Zero-Shot Propositional Logic Autoformalization Prompt

    [TASK]
    Your task is to interpret the natural language (NL) description of a propositional logic formula
    and represent it as formal syntax using the vocabulary specified in the [VOCABULARY]
    block above. Only output the formula and no other text. The NL description appears
    immediately following the [NL DESCRIPTION] tag.

    [VOCABULARY]
    Use ∨ to represent disjunction
    Use ∧ to represent conjunction
    Use ¬ to represent negation
    Use ( and ) to represent parentheses

    [NL DESCRIPTION]
    A disjunctive statement involving three propositions: p5, the negation of p12, and the
    negation of p4.



occurrences of ’c’", where c is a character from the alphabet (see example 1 in Table 5). For the
other LLMs, it was quite common for the explanation to not give the actual character (see example
4 in Table 5). Overall, we observed a higher likelihood of SOTA LLMs hallucinating on regular
expressions compared to the other datasets.
Autoformalization Errors: The most common mistake when constructing a regular expression from
natural language was misplacing ∗ or adding it when it was not needed (see example 3 in Table 5).
Finally, even though we explicitly prompted the LLMs to use just ∗, sometimes the LLM would use
+.


H    S TANDARD D EVIATION E VALUATION

In this section, we perform an empirical analysis of the standard deviation of the syntactic compliance
and accuracy of the ∀uto∃∨∧L results. Due to the 10 batches having different data, the standard
deviation cannot be computed reliably based on the performance of the individual batches. We
evaluated the standard deviation by running ∀uto∃∨∧L 10 times on the first batch of each dataset


                                                  22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


         Prompt 8: First-Order Logic Verification Prompt

        Your task is to say whether two First-Order Logic formulae are equivalent. The first formula
        will appear right after [FORMULA 1] and the second after [FORMULA 2].
        Give an explanation followed by a yes or no answer. The answer must show up at the end
        with the format "[Answer]" followed by either a yes or no.

         [Formula 1]
         ∃x1.¬pred5(p7)

         [Formula 2]
         ∃p7.¬pred5(p7)



Table 5: Examples of errors the evaluated LLMs made while evaluating with ∀uto∃∨∧L for the
regular expression dataset.
       φ         I(φ)                                                    (A ◦ I)(φ)
                                  The pattern consists of one or more occurrences of the digit
                    1∗ 0                                                                                                    (1∗ )10
                                  "1" followed by exactly one occurrence of the digit "0".
                                  The regular expression describes a sequence that consists of
                                  zero or more repetitions of the digit ’1’, followed by exactly
                    (1∗ )∗ 0                                                                                                ((1∗ )0)∗
                                  one ’0’. This entire pattern can repeat any number of times,
                                  including zero times.
                                  The pattern consists of zero or more occurrences of the
                    1∗ 11∗        digit ’1’, followed by exactly one occurrence of the digit ’1’,                           1∗ 1∗ 1∗
                                  followed by zero or more occurrences of the digit ’1’.
                                  Zero or more occurrences of the character or group of
                    (1)∗ 0                                                                                                  (.∗ )
                                  characters before the asterisk.


composed of 1974 propositional logic, 1900 first-order logic, and 1842 regular expressions examples.
Additionally, we evaluated GPT-3.5-turbo (ChatGPT) with a temperature of 1, LLama-3-8B-Instruct,
Mistral-v0.2-7B-Instruct, and Phi-3-medium-4k-instruct. We calculated the mean and standard
deviation of each independent run of ∀uto∃∨∧L and plotted the results in Figure 8.

                                               ChatGPT               Phi           Mistral             LLama3
                           3–CNF(12)           Propositional Logic(12)       FOL(8, 12)−S              FOL(8, 12)−E              Regular Expression(2)
             1.00
Compliance


             0.75
 Syntactic


             0.50
             0.25
             0.00

             1.00
∀uto∃∨∧L


             0.75
  Score


             0.50
             0.25
             0.00
                    0   10 20 30 40 50 60 0         10    20   30    40 0    10    20    30   40 0     10    20      30   40 0      10    20   30    40

                             # of Operators: ∧, ∨, ¬ (¬ is counted as an operator iff not succeeded by a terminal)               CFG Parse Tree Depth


Figure 8: Average and standard deviation error of Zero-shot Pass@1 results from using ∀uto∃∨∧L to
assess LLMs w.r.t. §A1 and §A2 (Sec. 3.3.1) on the first batch of the packaged datasets. The x-axis
represents an increasing order of descriptional complexity.

For propositional and first-order logic, the standard deviation of the evaluated LLMs is low. While
noisier, the standard deviation of the regular expression results were still less than 20% with the


                                                                              23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


better performing models having a lower standard deviation. Overall, this experiment shows that the
noise of non-deterministic text generation does not significantly impact ∀uto∃∨∧L or our results and
evaluations.


I                       A DDITIONAL Z ERO -S HOT P ROMPTING R ESULTS

In this section, we evaluate other categorization metrics from the zero-shot prompting experiments
from the main paper. For the propositional and first-order logic datasets, the other categorization
metrics are the CFG parse tree depth needed to produce each FS expression and the individual number
of each operator (∧, ∨, ¬). For regular expressions, we have discussed in the main paper that each
regular expression represents a minimal deterministic finite automata (DFA) that is unique up to
isomorphism. Therefore, the other categorization metrics for regular expressions are the number of
nodes V , the number of edges E, and the density of this minimal DFA. The density is calculated
using Equation 1 where we discretize the value by rounding to every tenth.

                                                                                |E|
                                                             Density =                                                                  (1)
                                                                          |V |(|V | − 1)

Imbalanced Dataset Labels Due to the datasets being created by sampling an equal number of
expressions for each number of operators, taking this dataset and evaluating it in terms of the other
metrics results in an imbalanced dataset. To examine this effect, we have created Figures 9 and 10 to
perform an analysis of dataset imbalance on these other metrics.
For propositional and first-order logic, the dataset is actually quite balanced due to CFG tree depth
and the number of each individual operator having a high correlation to the total number of operators.
As such, other than metric values close to the extrema, the noise from the imbalanced data will be
marginal.
The regular expression dataset is less balanced due to a weaker correlation with the CFG tree depth.
The middle of the density graphs will be the most noisy since there is significantly less data for
densities of 0.1 and 0.2. The number of examples drops as the number of edges and nodes increases
with less than 10% of the data having more than 7 edges and/or nodes.

                                           Density                       # of Edges                            # of Nodes
                                       0                                              1                                     1
Regular Expression(2)


                                                               2                                       2
                                                                                                  7+                                    7+
                                                                                                  6                                     6

                                                       0.5                                    5                                     5
                           0.1

                                 0.2                                                      4                3                    4
                                                 0.3                 3


Figure 9: Count of the number of examples for each metric value for the regular expression datasets.
The pie charts increase in values counter-clockwise while going from lighter to darker.

Categorization Metrics Performance In Figures 11, 12,13, 14, and 15 the performance of each
LLM over these other categorization metrics are shown. Across the board, we observe a diminishing
performance regardless of the source of increasing complexity. Ignoring the noise from the low
number of examples closer to the extrema, the depth of the tree showed a similar behavior as the
operator number. Propositional logic performance was concave w.r.t the number of ∧ and ∨ operators
since it becomes easier to describe expressions composed of exclusively ∧ and ∨ operators. A similar,
but weaker pattern is observed in the first-order logic results for the same reason. The negation
operator was not concave, showing how LLMs struggle to handle multiple negation operators.


                                                                         24
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                              CFG Parse Tree Depth                          # of ∧ Operators                                                # of ∨ Operators                                               # of ¬ Operators


 Propositional Logic(12)
                                   13-15     10-12                                        5       4       3                                              5         4       3
                                                  7-9                                                                                               6                                                                  1
                                                                                  6                               2                                                             2                                                      0
                               16-18                    4-6                                                                                   7
                                                                            7                                         1                                                             1
                             19-21                                                                                                          8
                                                            1-3                                                        0                                                             0
                                                                            8                                                               9
                             22-24                          40-42                                                 17+                                                                                      2                                   6+
                                                                                                                                           10                                           18+
                                                                            9                                    16
                                                        37-39                                                   15                           11                                  17                                                        5
                               25-27                                            10
                                                  34-36                                                       14                               12                              16
                                   28-30     31-33                                    11          12 13                                                 13 14          15                                                  3       4


                                    13-15        10-12                                5       4       3                                                 5 4            3
                                                                                                              2                                                                2                                                       0
 FOL(8, 12)−S


                                16-18                 7-9                       6                                                                  6
                                                                                                                      1                                                             1                          1
                                                                            7                                                               7
                             19-21                          4-6                                                           0                8                                            0
                                                            1-3             8
                           22-24                            40-42                                                  17+                                                             18+                                                          6+
                                                                            9                                                               9                                                                                                  5
                                                                                                                 16                                                               17
                              25-27                     37-39                10                                                             10                                   16                                                    4
                                                                                                                15                                                                                                 2
                                  28-30           34-36                              11                       14                                   11                          15
                                             31-33                                         12         13                                                 12        13 14                                                       3


                                    13-15        10-12                                5       4       3                                                 5 4            3
                                16-18                                                                         2                                     6                          2                                                       0
 FOL(8, 12)−E


                                                      7-9                        6
                                                                                                                      1                        7                                    1                          1
                             19-21                                          7
                                                            4-6                                                           0                8                                            0
                                                            1-3             8                                                                                                                                                                  6+
                           22-24                            40-42                                                  17+                     9                                       18+                                                         5
                                                                            9                                                                                                     17
                              25-27                     37-39                                                    16                         10                                                                                             4
                                                                                10                              15                                                               16
                                                                                                              14                                   11                          15                                  2
                                  28-30           34-36
                                             31-33                                    11 12           13                                                12         13 14                                                        3


Figure 10: Count of the number of examples for each metric value for each of the datasets. Each row
is a dataset and each column is a different metric that can be used to categorize the dataset. The pie
charts increase in value counter-clockwise while going from lighter to darker.

                                     ChatGPT           GPT-4o               GPT-4o-mini                                        Phi3         Mistral      LLama3                                        Other LLMs (n = 10)
                                        Propositional Logic(12)                 FOL(8, 12)−S                                                 FOL(8, 12)−E                                            Regular Expression(2)
                             1.00
Compliance
 Syntactic


                             0.75
                             0.50
                             0.25
                             0.00
                             1.00
LLMs as Verifiers ∀uto∃∨∧L


                             0.75
                    Score


                             0.50
                             0.25
                             0.00
                             1.00
   F1 Score


                             0.75
                             0.50
                             0.25
                             0.00
                                     0      10       20         30   40 0             10              20                  30        40 0       10             20               30             40 0    10               20      30              40
                                                                                                  CFG Parse Tree Depth



Figure 11: Zero-shot Pass@1 results (avg. over 10 batches, higher values better) from using ∀uto∃∨∧L
to assess LLMs w.r.t. §A1, §A2, §A3 (Sec. 3.3.1) on the packaged datasets. The x-axis is the depth of
the CFG tree to produce the formula.


For regular expressions, increasing the number of nodes and edges reduces accuracy and the ability
to evaluate equality. Density does not seem to be a factor, as the dip at 0.1 can be associated with
noise due to the lower number of examples. Overall, these three metrics are much weaker factors in
how well the LLM performs compared to the CFG tree depth.


J                            F EW-S HOT P ROMPTING R ESULTS

In this section, we discuss our few-shot prompting experiment and analyze the performance difference
between zero-shot and few-shot prompting on §A1 and §A2.


                                                                                                                               25
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                    ChatGPT         GPT-4o           GPT-4o-mini          Phi3        Mistral        LLama3     Other LLMs (n = 10)
                                           Propositional Logic(12)                        FOL(8, 12)−S                        FOL(8, 12)−E
                             1.00
Compliance
 Syntactic


                             0.75
                             0.50
                             0.25
                             0.00
                             1.00
LLMs as Verifiers ∀uto∃∨∧L


                             0.75
                    Score


                             0.50
                             0.25
                             0.00
                             1.00
   F1 Score


                             0.75
                             0.50
                             0.25
                             0.00
                                     0            10            20     25   0               10           20     25   0         10           20    25
                                                                                # of Operators: ∧



Figure 12: Zero-shot Pass@1 results (avg. over 10 batches, higher values better) from using ∀uto∃∨∧L
to assess LLMs w.r.t. §A1, §A2, §A3 (Sec. 3.3.1) on the packaged datasets. The x-axis is the number
of and operators (∧) in the expression.


                                    ChatGPT         GPT-4o           GPT-4o-mini          Phi3        Mistral        LLama3     Other LLMs (n = 10)
                                           Propositional Logic(12)                        FOL(8, 12)−S                        FOL(8, 12)−E
                             1.00
Compliance
 Syntactic


                             0.75
                             0.50
                             0.25
                             0.00
                             1.00
LLMs as Verifiers ∀uto∃∨∧L


                             0.75
                    Score


                             0.50
                             0.25
                             0.00
                             1.00
   F1 Score


                             0.75
                             0.50
                             0.25
                             0.00
                                     0            10            20     25   0               10           20     25   0         10           20    25
                                                                                # of Operators: ∨



Figure 13: Zero-shot Pass@1 results (avg. over 10 batches, higher values better) from using ∀uto∃∨∧L
to assess LLMs w.r.t. §A1, §A2, §A3 (Sec. 3.3.1) on the packaged datasets. The x-axis is the number
of or operators (∨) in the expression.


                                                                                          26
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                    ChatGPT         GPT-4o               GPT-4o-mini               Phi3        Mistral              LLama3               Other LLMs (n = 10)
                                           Propositional Logic(12)                                 FOL(8, 12)−S                                        FOL(8, 12)−E
                             1.00
Compliance
 Syntactic


                             0.75
                             0.50
                             0.25
                             0.00
                             1.00
LLMs as Verifiers ∀uto∃∨∧L


                             0.75
                    Score


                             0.50
                             0.25
                             0.00
                             1.00
   F1 Score


                             0.75
                             0.50
                             0.25
                             0.00
                                        0         3       6        9       12          0       3          6       9        12            0         3          6         9         12
                                                                   # of Operators: ¬ (counted as an operator iff not succeeded by a terminal)


Figure 14: Zero-shot Pass@1 results (avg. over 10 batches, higher values better) from using ∀uto∃∨∧L
to assess LLMs w.r.t. §A1, §A2, §A3 (Sec. 3.3.1) on the packaged datasets. The x-axis is the number
of negation operators (¬) in the expression.


                                    ChatGPT              GPT-4o          GPT-4o-mini               Phi3          Mistral           LLama3                 Other LLMs (n = 10)

                             1.00
Compliance
 Syntactic


                             0.75
                             0.50
                             0.25
                             0.00
                             1.00
LLMs as Verifiers ∀uto∃∨∧L


                             0.75
                    Score


                             0.50
                             0.25
                             0.00
                             1.00
   F1 Score


                             0.75
                             0.50
                             0.25
                             0.00
                                    0         4           8        12           16 0       4              8        12           16 0.0       0.1        0.2       0.3       0.4    0.5
                                                      # of Nodes                                    # of Edges                                           Density


Figure 15: Zero-shot Pass@1 results (avg. over 10 batches, higher values better) from using ∀uto∃∨∧L
to assess LLMs w.r.t. §A1, §A2, §A3 (Sec. 3.3.1) on the packaged datasets. The x-axis is the metric
on the CFG tree to produce the regular expression formula.


                                                                                                   27
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                  ChatGPT                 GPT-4o           GPT-4o-mini           Phi               Mistral           LLama3
                         Propositional Logic(12)               FOL(8, 12)−S                 FOL(8, 12)−E                 Regular Expression(2)
              1.00
Compliance    0.75
 Syntactic

              0.50
              0.25
              0.00
             −0.25
              1.00
              0.75
∀uto∃∨∧L
  Score


              0.50
              0.25
              0.00
             −0.25
                     0      10     20     30       40 0       10    20    30        40 0   10     20     30       40 0     10     20     30      40

                          # of Operators: ∧, ∨, ¬ (¬ is counted as an operator iff not succeeded by a terminal)          CFG Parse Tree Depth


Figure 16: Syntactic compliance and accuracy difference of few-shot Pass@1 compared to zero-shot
Pass@1 results (avg. over 10 batches, higher values better) from using ∀uto∃∨∧L to assess LLMs
w.r.t. §A1, §A2, §A3 (Sec. 3.3.1) on the packaged datasets. The x-axis represents the increasing order
of descriptional complexity.


We evaluated on the same five datasets from the main paper’s experiments but inserted two exam-
ples into the prompts. First-order and predicate logic used the same two examples, while regular
expressions used their own two examples. In Figure 16, the performance difference of each LLM
when using few-shot prompting instead of zero-shot is shown. Using few-shot prompting increases
syntactic compliance as the model has access to the desired format for encoding and decoding.
For expressions with lower complexity, this translates to a better performance on §A2. However,
as complexity increases, the performance difference between zero-shot and few-shot prompting is
negligible due to having the correct format for parsing but failing maintaining the same formula.


K             OTHER B ENCHMARK C ORRELATION AND ∀UTO∃∨∧L P REDICTIVE P OWER
              E VALUATION

For evaluating the correlation between a LLM’s performance on ∀uto∃∨∧L and existing benchmarks
and measuring the predictive power of ∀uto∃∨∧L, in Section 4.2, we evaluated on FOLIO (Han et al.,
2024), Multi-LogicEval (Patel et al., 2024), and HumanEval (Chen et al., 2021). In this section we
discuss these experiments and cite the sources of the HumanEval results along with evaluate the
predictive power of ∀uto∃∨∧L.
In this section, we discuss the experimental setup for the benchmark, the sources used for LLM
performance on other benchmarks, and the ∀uto∃∨∧L we used for evaluation. We also evaluate the
FOLIO premise benchmark further based on the operator numbers in each premise.

K.1            FOLIO E XPERIMENTAL S ETUPS

The FOLIO dataset is composed of premises and a conclusion for each sample where the task is
to conclude whether the conclusion is true, false, or unknown given the premises. Additionally,
the dataset provides an encoding into first-order logic for all the premises and conclusions. There-
fore, we evaluated each LLM on their abilities to (1) informalize a first-order logic premise, (2)
autoformalize a natural language premise, (3) correctly classifying the conclusion using the first-
order logic representations, and (4) correctly classifying the conclusion using the natural language
representations.
For the FOLIO premise informalization and autoformalization experiments, the LLM was prompted
using the same few-shot first-order logic prompt used by ∀uto∃∨∧L where the example from the
prompt is another premise from the same FOLIO example to make sure both the example and the
evaluated premises have the same context. Premises were screened to make sure that we were able to


                                                                               28
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


    Prompt 9: FOLIO Premise Informalization Prompt

   [TASK]
   Your task is to convert a first-order logic formula, appearing after [FORMULA], to a natural
   description that represents the formula. Only natural language terms are allowed to be used
   and do not copy the formula in your description. Your description should allow one to
   reconstruct the formula without having access to it, so make sure to use the correct names in
   your description. Explicitly describe the predicates. You may use terms verbatim as specified
   in the vocabulary below.

    [EXAMPLE 1]
    ∀x(DrinkRegularly(x, cof f ee) ∨ (¬W antT oBeAddictedT o(x, caf f eine)))
    People regularly drink coffee, or they don’t want to be addicted to caffeine, or both.
    [VOCABULARY]
    ∨ represents disjunction
    ∧ represents conjunction
    ¬ represents negation
    → represents implication
    ( and ) represent parentheses
    propositions can be used verbatim
    predicates can be used verbatim
    ∀ < x1 >< x2 > ... < xn > . represents universal quantification with x1... representing
    free variables
    ∃ < x1 >< x2 > ... < xn > . represents existential quantification with x1... representing
    free variables
    The objects are: caffeine
    The        parameterized        predicates      are:             awarethatdrug(?p0, ?p1),
    wanttobeaddictedto(?p0, ?p1)
    The free variables are: x

    [FORMULA]
    ∀x. (¬wanttobeaddictedto(x, caf f eine) → ¬awarethatdrug(x, caf f eine))



parse them into Prover9. Prompt 9 and 10 shows example prompts using example premises come
from the FOLIO dataset.
For evaluating the performance of each LLM on classifying whether the premises entailed the conclu-
sion, the same prompt was used for both the natural language and first-order logic representations of
the premises and conclusions. The prompts are inspired by the prompts used in Multi-LogiEval and
use Chain-of-Thought prompting and prompt the model to provide the answer in a parsable format.
Prompt 11 and Prompt 12 are examples of these prompts using an example from the FOLIO dataset.
We evaluated the informalization results against the ground truth natural language representation
using BLEU (Callison-Burch et al., 2006), ROUGE (Lin, 2004), METEOR (Banerjee & Lavie, 2005),
and BERT Score (Zhang* et al., 2020). The model deberta-xlarge-mnli (He et al., 2021) was used for
the BERT score calculation. For the autoformalization results, we used the same verification process
as the main paper. For the FOLIO conclusion classification, the LLM’s answered was parsed out of
its response with the examples that could not be parsed being classified as "Unknown" and marked as
wrong. These examples were checked to verify the parser.


K.2   M ULTI -L OGI E VAL E XPERIMENT S ETUP

The task in Multi-LogicEval (Patel et al., 2024) is to answer a yes-or-no question using the provided
context, where the question was created using a certain depth of rules of logical reasoning. We used a
prompt similar to the one they used where we use Chain-of-Thought prompting and prompt the LLM
to provide the answer in a specific location to parse. Prompt 13 shows an example of this prompt
using examples from the Multi-LogiEval dataset.


                                                 29
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


    Prompt 10: FOLIO Premise Autoformalization Prompt

   [VOCABULARY]
   Use ∨ to represent disjunction
   Use ∧ to represent conjunction
   Use ¬ to represent negation
   Use ( and ) to represent parentheses
   The objects are: caffeine
   The parameterized predicates are: awarethatdrug(?p0, ?p1),
   wanttobeaddictedto(?p0, ?p1)
   The free variables are: x

   [TASK]
   Your task is to interpret the natural language (NL) description of a first-order logic formula
   and represent it as formal syntax using the vocabulary specified in the [VOCABULARY]
   block above. Only output the formula and no other text. The NL description appears
   immediately following the [NL DESCRIPTION] tag.

    [EXAMPLE 1]
    People regularly drink coffee, or they don’t want to be addicted to caffeine, or both.
    ∀x(DrinkRegularly(x, cof f ee) ∨ (¬W antT oBeAddictedT o(x, caf f eine)))

    [NL DESCRIPTION]
    No one who doesn’t want to be addicted to caffeine is unaware that caffeine is a drug.


    Prompt 11: FOLIO Natural Language Representation Prompt

   For the following [PREMISES] containing rules of logical reasoning, perform step-by-step
   reasoning to answer whether the [CONCLUSION] is True/False/Uncertain based on the
   [PREMISES]. Use the following answer format:
   Reasoning Steps:
   Answer: True/False/Uncertain
   [PREMISES]:
   All people who regularly drink coffee are dependent on caffeine
   People regularly drink coffee, or they don’t want to be addicted to caffeine, or both.
   No one who doesn’t want to be addicted to caffeine is unaware that caffeine is a drug.
   Rina is either a student who is unaware that caffeine is a drug, or she is not a student and is
   she aware that caffeine is a drug.
   Rina is either a student who depend on caffeine, or she is not a student and not dependent on
   caffeine.
   [CONCLUSION]:
   Rina doesn’t want to be addicted to caffeine or is unaware that caffeine is a drug.



K.3   H UMAN E VAL AND B IG B ENCH H ARD S CORE S OURCES

To evaluate the correlation and predictive power of ∀uto∃∨∧L against commonly used LLM bench-
marks HumanEval (Chen et al., 2021) and Big Bench Hard (BBH) (Suzgun et al., 2023), we collected
the performance scores of the LLMs we evaulated on both benchmarks and report our findings and
sources in Table 6. We were unable to find any sources that evaluated GPT-4o-mini on BBH.

K.4   C OMPUTED C ALIBRATED ∀UTO∃∨∧L S CORE

To compare against the performance on different benchmarks in Section 4.2, we needed to calculate
the calibrated performance of each LLM on ∀uto∃∨∧L for the relevant portions of the datasets. For
example, there are few premises in the FOLIO dataset with more than 6 operators meaning that the
most accurate comparison would be to evaluate our first-order logic dataset up to the same number of


                                                 30
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


    Prompt 12: FOLIO First-Order Logic Representation Prompt

    For the following [PREMISES] containing rules of logical reasoning, perform step-by-step
    reasoning to answer whether the [CONCLUSION] is True/False/Uncertain based on the
    [PREMISES]. Use the following answer format:
    Reasoning Steps:
    Answer: True/False/Uncertain
    [PREMISES]:
    ∀x(DrinkRegularly(x, cof f ee) → IsDependentOn(x, caf f eine))
    ∀x(DrinkRegularly(x, cof f ee) ∨ (¬W antT oBeAddictedT o(x, caf f eine)))
    ∀x(¬W antT oBeAddictedT o(x, caf f eine) → ¬AwareT hatDrug(x, caf f eine))
    ¬(Student(rina) ⊕ ¬AwareT hatDrug(rina, caf f eine))
    ¬(IsDependentOn(rina, caf f eine) ⊕ Student(rina))
    [CONCLUSION]:
    ¬W antT oBeAddictedT o(rina, caf f eine) ∨ (¬AwareT hatDrug(rina, caf f eine))


    Prompt 13: Multi-LogicEval Prompt

    "Given the context that contains rules of logical reasoning in natural language and question,
    perform step-by-step reasoning to answer the question. Based on context and reasoning steps,
    answer the question ONLY in ’yes’ or ’no.’ Please use the below format:
    Context: At a university, students who study hard earn high grades. Those who participate in
    extracurriculars develop leadership skills. However, students have restricted time outside of
    classes. They can either study hard or they do not develop leadership skills from extracurricu-
    lars.
    Question: Can we conclude that Priya, a university student with limited free time, either earns
    high grades or does not participate in extracurricular activities?
    Reasoning steps: [generate step-by-step reasoning]
    Answer: Yes/No"



Table 6: Reported performance of SOTA LLMs on HumanEval and Big Bench Hard (BBH) benchmarks. The
values under the Computed column are averaged over 5 runs from our experiments. Other results are reported
from online sources. A – indicates that we were not able to find any online source. We used our local computed
results when they were available.
                      Model               HumanEval Score                              BBH Score
                                Computed               (Online)                          (Online)
                  ChatGPT       74.3          68 (OpenAI, 2024)             48.1 (OpenAI, 2023)
                    GPT-4o      91.8          90.2 (OpenAI, 2024)           83.1 (Dunham & Syahputra, 2024)
              GPT-4o-mini       88.3          87.2 (OpenAI, 2024)           –
     Llama-3.2-1B-Instruct      34.6          –                             8.7 (Fourrier et al., 2024)
   Qwen-2.5-1.5B-Instruct       56.7          61.6 (Qwen2, 2024)            19.8 (Fourrier et al., 2024)
      Phi-3.5-Mini-Instruct     71.3          64.6 (Liu et al., 2023)       36.7 (Fourrier et al., 2024)
  Mistral-7B-Instruct-v0.2      44.5          42.1 (Liu et al., 2023)       24.0 (Fourrier et al., 2024)
       Llama-3-8B-Instruct      62.8          61.6 (Liu et al., 2023)       24.5 (Fourrier et al., 2024)
    Granite-3.0-8B-Instruct     62.2          64.6 (Granite Team, 2024)     51.6 (Fourrier et al., 2024)
     Llama-3.1-8B-Instruct      63.4          66.5 (Microsoft, 2024)        63.4 (Microsoft, 2024)
 Ministral-8B-Instruct-2410     76.8          76.8 (MistralAI, 2024)        8.7 (Fourrier et al., 2024)
           Gemma-2-9B-IT        68.3          68.9 (Qwen2, 2024)            42.1 (Fourrier et al., 2024)
 Phi-3-Medium-4k-Instruct       75.0          62.2 (Microsoft, 2024)        49.4 (Fourrier et al., 2024)
    Qwen-2.5-14B-Instruct       80.5          83.5 (Qwen2, 2024)            48.4 (Fourrier et al., 2024)
        Yi-1.5-34B-Instruct     72.6          75.2 (Yi, 2024)               44.3 (Fourrier et al., 2024)
     Llama-3-70B-Instruct       79.9          77.4 (Liu et al., 2023)       50.2 (Fourrier et al., 2024)



operators. Therefore, we calculated the accuracy of the first-order logic formulae with less than seven
operators when calculating the correlation and predictive power. On MultiLogiEval, the number of


                                                     31
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                   ChatGPT                GPT-4              LLama3          Mistral          Phi                       GPT-4o-mini
                              FOLIO (A)               FOLIO (I; BLEU)        FOLIO (I; ROUGE)     FOLIO (I; METEOR)                   FOLIO (I; BERT)
                   1    ρ = 0.79                  ρ = 0.70                   ρ = 0.64                   ρ = 0.67                  ρ = 0.61


Benchmark Score
                        p = 0.00                  p = 0.00                   p = 0.00                   p = 0.00                  p = 0.00
                  .75
                   .5
                  .25
                   0
                        0    .25   .5   .75   1   0     .25   .5   .75   1   0    .25    .5   .75   1   0    .25   .5   .75   1   0     .25   .5   .75   1
                                                                                 ∀uto∃∨∧L Score
Figure 17: Correlation between the parameterized ∀uto∃∨∧L score and both autoformalization A and infor-
malization I for FOLIO premises. Each point represents a specific number of operators with arrows showing
increasing complexity (number of operators). The trendline across all the points is annotated with ×, the Pearson
correlation coefficient (ρ), and the p-value are annotated in the top left.



operators is dictated by the depth of the rules, so we took the average of all first-order logic examples
up to 30 in our dataset. On HumanEval, to the best of our knowledge using the average of regex with
CFG tree depth up to 7 is the best comparison.


K.5                      FOLIO A DDITIONAL C ORRELATION F IGURES

In Section 4.2, we evaluated the correlation of other benchmarks compared to ∀uto∃∨∧L. For the
FOLIO dataset, we were able to calculate the exact number of operators in each problem, allowing
us to plot points comparing the autoformalization and informalization accuracy for each operator
number class to directly compare to the accuracy of the same number of operators in the first-order
logic dataset we generated.
We plot these results in Figure 17 with the Pearson correlation coefficient. Each figure shows a
moderate to strong correlation with a statistically significant p-value of less than 0.05. As the compu-
tational complexity increases, performance on ∀uto∃∨∧L, autoformalization, and informalization
decreases. The autoformalization correlation is significantly stronger due to the informalization
evaluation metrics being much weaker at evaluating truth maintenance.



L                       LLM AS V ERIFIERS E VALUATION

In this section, we analyze the performance of LLMs on §A3, where we evaluate the performance of
using a LLM to verify whether the formal syntax expression φ is equivalent to the one produced by
GPT-4o after doing A ◦ I(φ). Figures 21 and 22 show the number of positive and negative examples.
Additionally, it breaks down the performance of each LLM on each dataset.
The LLMs are clearly biased towards giving positive answers with a high ratio of false positives
to negative labels compared to false negatives to positive labels. A common case was the LLM
not recognizing that GPT-4o renamed predicates or constants producing a different formal syntax
expression. A structure that ChatGPT tends to struggle with is double negations. Below we provide
two examples where, even at the time of writing this rebuttal, ChatGPT failed to correctly verify
whether the two formulae are equivalent. Note that [FORMULA 2] is ChatGPT’s own response after
conducting (A ◦ I)n (φ0 ) where φ0 = [FORMULA 1].
In the case of Output Example 1, it can be clearly seen that ChatGPT failed to understand that the two
formulae are different. In particular, it was not able to correctly evaluate or reason that the second
regular expression represents a string that begins with a 1 followed by zero or one 0’s. This is despite
the LLM using a “Chain-of-thought” to help it arrive at an answer.
A more glaring reasoning error is found in Output Example 2, where ChatGPT fails to apply the
principles of logic where ¬¬p ≡ p ̸≡ ¬p. Our results convincingly showcase that LLMs cannot be
used as verifiers even for straightforward statements such as the examples presented.


                                                                                    32
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


    Output Example 1: Regular Expression Verification Example

    Prompt:
    Your task is to say whether two Regular Expression formulae are equivalent. The first formula
    will appear right after [FORMULA 1] and the second after [FORMULA 2].
    Give an explanation followed by a yes or no answer. The answer must show up at the end
    with the format "[Answer]" followed by either a yes or no.
    [FORMULA 1]: 100*
    [FORMULA 2]: 1(0*)

    Response:
    To determine whether the two regular expressions 100∗ and 1(0∗) are equivalent, let’s analyze
     them:
     ### Explanation:
    1. Formula 1: 100*
    - This matches the character "1" followed by zero or more "0"s.
    - It will match: "1", "10", "100", "1000", etc.
     2.Formula 2: 1(0*)
    - This matches the character "1" followed by zero or more "0"s (the same as Formula 1).
    - It will also match: "1", "10", "100", "1000", etc.
     ### Key Observation:
    - Both formulas describe the same set of strings: a "1" followed by zero or more "0"s.
    - The use of parentheses in Formula 2 is purely for grouping and does not alter the matching
     behavior.
     ### Conclusion:
    The two regular expressions are equivalent.
     [Answer]: yes



    Output Example 2: First-Order Logic Verification Example

    Prompt:
    Your task is to say whether two First Order Logic formulae are equivalent. The first formula
    will appear right after [FORMULA 1] and the second after [FORMULA 2].
    Give an explanation followed by a yes or no answer. The answer must show up at the end
    with the format "[Answer]" followed by either a yes or no.
    [FORMULA 1]: ∀x1.(¬¬pred8(p8, p7) ∨ ¬pred4(x1))
    [FORMULA 2]: ∀x1.(¬pred8(p8, p7) ∨ ¬pred4(x1))

    Response:
    The two formulas are equivalent.
    Explanation: In both Formula 1 and Formula 2, the part ¬¬pred8(p8, p7) is equivalent to
    ¬pred8(p8, p7) due to the double negation elimination rule in logic. Therefore, both formulas
    convey the same meaning, as the presence or absence of a double negation does not affect the
    truth value in this context.
    [Answer]: Yes



M     DATASET D IVERSITY

Fig. 9 and Fig. 9 provide additional details on the types of data present in the datasets packaged with
∀uto∃∨∧L. Users can generate dynamic datasets along these dimensions using the hyperparameters
mentioned in Table 1.
To further provide additional statistics pertaining to the similarity of formulae in our dataset, especially
those where the formulae are otherwise equivalent but just use different vocabularies. For example,
the formula f = p1 can be represented via different propositions where p1 = It is raining in f1 and


                                                    33
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


something different in another formula f2 even though they canonically represent the same formula
f.
This allows to test robustness in LLM outputs. Nevertheless, the probability of such instances
decreases as the formula size increases. We have counted the total proporition of the dataset where
this occurs by replacing any variable from the vocabulary with an element of a vocabulary of size 1.
For example, all variables used in PL(12) dataset of our results are replaced by substituting those
variables with a vocabulary of only 1 proposition. Excess parentheses etc are preprocessed using
NLTK and removed before the substitution (e.g. ((p1 ) ∧ p2 ) is simplified to p1 ∧ p2 .
The k-CNF dataset contains 8550 unique samples and the propositional logic dataset contains 17.7k
samples constituting 85% and 90% of these datasets respectively.

N     E VALUATION OF LLM S
Table 7 lists the models, their parameters (– if closed-source), and the exact model version used for
our experiments. The open-source models were loaded using NVIDIA A100 80GB GPUs whereas
we used the OpenAI API for the GPT family of models. We cover a diverse range of models in our
evaluation ranging from extremely small LMs with a few billion parameters (∼1B) to LLMs with
several billions of parameters. This allows the analysis of ∀uto∃∨∧L from the lens of generalization.
Fig. 18 represents the syntactic compliance (§A1) data from Fig. 3 for all the models with a separate
axis for each LLM. Similarly, Fig. 19 plots the Accuracy (§A2). Additionally, Fig. 20 plots the F1
score of using LLMs as verifiers (§A3). Tables 9 – 14 provide the data that was used to plot the
results in Fig. 4 and to compute the predictive power in Fig. 5.
Tables 15 – 18 list the example counts for each combination of class label and prediction for FOLIO(R;
NL) and FOLIO(R; FOL) and each label’s precision and recall rate. Tables 19 and 20 list the examples
counts for each combination of class label and prediction for LogiEval(R; PL) and LogieEval(R;
FOL).

N.1   C LAUDE E VALUATION

We evaluated Claude 3.0 Sonnet on just the 3-CNF, propositional logic, and regular expression
datasets due to the cost. Our results are shown in Figure 23 and show that Claude 3.0 Sonnet performs
similarly to GPT-4o with both having nearly perfect syntactic compliance and accuracy on 3-CNF.
Sonnet achieved the highest syntactic compliance and accuracy on propositional logic compared to
the other models. However the accuracy was only around 50% for expressions with more than 20
operators. Additionally, while being often syntactic compliant, Sonnet performed with low accuracy
on the regular expression dataset.


                                                 34
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Table 7: The LLMs used in our evaluation. The label names represent the labels used in Fig. 18 and Fig. 19, |θ|
represents the total number of parameters, and the last column lists the exact version used (for reproducibility).
                              Label     |θ|     Version
                          ChatGPT       –       GPT-3.5-turbo-0125
                            GPT-4o      –       gpt-4o-2024-08-06
                      GPT-4o-mini       –       gpt-4o-mini-2024-07-18
                           GPT-4o1      –       o1-preview-2024-09-12
             Llama-3.2-1B-Instruct      1B      meta-llama/Llama-3.2-1B-Instruct
           Qwen-2.5-1.5B-Instruct       1.5B    Qwen/Qwen2.5-1.5B-Instruct
              Phi-3.5-Mini-Instruct     4B      microsoft/Phi-3.5-mini-instruct
          Mistral-7B-Instruct-v0.2      7B      mistralai/Mistral-7B-Instruct-v0.2
               Llama-3-8B-Instruct      8B      meta-llama/Llama-3-8B-Instruct
            Granite-3.0-8B-Instruct     8B      ibm-granite/granite-3.0-8b-instruct
            LLama-3.1-8B-Instruct       8B      meta-llama/Llama-3.1-8B-Instruct
         Ministral-8B-Instruct-2410     8B      mistralai/Ministral-8B-Instruct-2410
                   Gemma-2-9B-IT        9B      google/gemma-2-9b-it
         Phi-3-Medium-4k-Instruct       14B     microsoft/Phi-3-medium-4k-instruct
            Qwen-2.5-14B-Instruct       14B     Qwen/Qwen2.5-14B-Instruct
                Yi-1.5-34B-Instruct     34B     01-ai/Yi-34B-Instruct
             Llama-3-70B-Instruct       70B     meta-llama/Llama-3-70B-Instruct


Table 8: Correlation data for FOLIO(R; NL). The ∀uto∃∨∧L data was averaged from the PL dataset with data
points with description complexity d ≤ 6. These values were used to compute the predictive power of ∀uto∃∨∧L
reported in Fig. 5.
                                        Model     ∀uto∃∨∧L Score       FOLIO(R; NL) Score
                                      GPT-4o             0.79                   0.75
                                GPT-4o-mini              0.56                   0.69
                                    ChatGPT              0.36                   0.56
                     Mistral-7B-Instruct-v0.2            0.06                   0.54
                   Phi-3-medium-4k-instruct              0.35                   0.67
                        LLama-3-8B-Instruct              0.13                   0.58
                             Gemma-2-9B-IT               0.28                   0.64
                      Granite-3.0-8B-Instruct            0.18                   0.60
                       Llama-3.1-8B-Instruct             0.09                   0.59
                      LLama-3.2-1B-Instruct              0.03                   0.36
                       LLama-3-70B-Instruct              0.49                   0.70
                   Ministral-8B-Instruct-2410            0.10                   0.61
                        Phi-3.5-Mini-Instruct            0.19                   0.61
                     Qwen-2.5-1.5B-Instruct              0.07                   0.49
                      Qwen-2.5-14B-Instruct              0.67                   0.73
                                  Yi-1.5-34B             0.21                   0.63


                                                       35
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                    GPT-4o                         Phi-3-Medium-4k-Instruct   Llama-3.1-8B-Instruct           Phi-3.5-Mini-Instruct
                                                    GPT-4o-mini                    LLama-3-8B-Instruct        LLama-3.2-1B-Instruct           Qwen-2.5-1.5B-Instruct
                                                    ChatGPT                        Gemma-2-9B-IT              LLama-3-70B-Instruct            Qwen-2.5-14B-Instruct
                                                    Mistral-7B-Instruct-v0.2       Granite-3.0-8B-Instruct    Ministral-8B-Instruct-2410      Yi-1.5-34B

                               Propositional Logic(12)                         FOL(8, 12)−S                     FOL(8, 12)−E                       Regular Expression(2)
                       1

                                 GPT-4o
                       0
                       1

                                 GPT-4o-mini
                       0
                       1
                                                         ChatGPT



                       0
                       1
                                        Mistral-7B-Instruct-v0.2



                       0
                       1
                                      Phi-3-Medium-4k-Instruct



                       0
                       1
                                           LLama-3-8B-Instruct



                       0
                       1
                                                Gemma-2-9B-IT



                       0
                       1
Syntactic Compliance


                                 Granite-3.0-8B-Instruct
                       0
                       1

                                 Llama-3.1-8B-Instruct
                       0
                       1

                                 LLama-3.2-1B-Instruct
                       0
                       1

                                 LLama-3-70B-Instruct
                       0
                       1

                                 Ministral-8B-Instruct-2410
                       0
                       1

                                 Phi-3.5-Mini-Instruct
                       0
                       1

                                 Qwen-2.5-1.5B-Instruct
                       0
                       1

                                 Qwen-2.5-14B-Instruct
                       0
                       1

                                 Yi-1.5-34B
                       0
                           0               20                  40 0                 20                40 0             20                  40 0                20          40
                                # of Operators: ∧, ∨, ¬ (¬ is counted as an operator iff not succeeded by a terminal)                             CFG Parse Tree Depth



                                 Figure 18: Syntactic compliance (§A1) of all models on the ∀uto∃∨∧L datasets.



                                                                                                    36
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                         GPT-4o                         Phi-3-Medium-4k-Instruct   Llama-3.1-8B-Instruct           Phi-3.5-Mini-Instruct
                                         GPT-4o-mini                    LLama-3-8B-Instruct        LLama-3.2-1B-Instruct           Qwen-2.5-1.5B-Instruct
                                         ChatGPT                        Gemma-2-9B-IT              LLama-3-70B-Instruct            Qwen-2.5-14B-Instruct
                                         Mistral-7B-Instruct-v0.2       Granite-3.0-8B-Instruct    Ministral-8B-Instruct-2410      Yi-1.5-34B

                     Propositional Logic(12)                        FOL(8, 12)−S                     FOL(8, 12)−E                       Regular Expression(2)
            1
                                             GPT-4o



            0
            1
                                        GPT-4o-mini



            0
            1
                                           ChatGPT



            0
            1
                             Mistral-7B-Instruct-v0.2



            0
            1
                           Phi-3-Medium-4k-Instruct



            0
            1
                                LLama-3-8B-Instruct



            0
            1
                                     Gemma-2-9B-IT



            0
            1
                              Granite-3.0-8B-Instruct
∀uto∃∨∧L Score


            0
            1
                               Llama-3.1-8B-Instruct



            0
            1
                              LLama-3.2-1B-Instruct



            0
            1
                               LLama-3-70B-Instruct



            0
            1
                           Ministral-8B-Instruct-2410



            0
            1
                                Phi-3.5-Mini-Instruct



            0
            1
                             Qwen-2.5-1.5B-Instruct



            0
            1
                              Qwen-2.5-14B-Instruct



            0
            1
                                          Yi-1.5-34B



            0
                 0              20                 40 0                  20                40 0             20                  40 0                20          40
                      # of Operators: ∧, ∨, ¬ (¬ is counted as an operator iff not succeeded by a terminal)                            CFG Parse Tree Depth



                           Figure 19: ∀uto∃∨∧L Score (§A2) of all models on the ∀uto∃∨∧L datasets.



                                                                                         37
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                               Gemma-2-9B-IT                 Ministral-8B-Instruct-2410   ChatGPT                           LLama-3-70B-Instruct
                                                               Granite-3.0-8B-Instruct       Phi-3.5-Mini-Instruct        GPT-4o                            Yi-1.5-34B
                                                               Llama-3.1-8B-Instruct         Qwen-2.5-1.5B-Instruct       Phi-3-Medium-4k-Instruct          LLama-3-8B-Instruct
                                                               LLama-3.2-1B-Instruct         Qwen-2.5-14B-Instruct        Mistral-7B-Instruct-v0.2

                                     Propositional Logic(12)                             FOL(8, 12)−S                     FOL(8, 12)−E                         Regular Expression(2)
                             1


                                       Gemma-2-9B-IT
                             0
                             1


                                       Granite-3.0-8B-Instruct
                             0
                             1


                                       Llama-3.1-8B-Instruct
                             0
                             1


                                       LLama-3.2-1B-Instruct
                             0
                             1


                                       Ministral-8B-Instruct-2410
                             0
                             1


                                       Phi-3.5-Mini-Instruct
                             0
                             1
LLMs as Verifiers F1 Score


                                       Qwen-2.5-1.5B-Instruct
                             0
                             1


                                       Qwen-2.5-14B-Instruct
                             0
                             1


                                       ChatGPT
                             0
                             1


                                       GPT-4o
                             0
                             1


                                       Phi-3-Medium-4k-Instruct
                             0
                             1


                                       Mistral-7B-Instruct-v0.2
                             0
                             1


                                       LLama-3-70B-Instruct
                             0
                             1


                                       Yi-1.5-34B
                             0
                             1


                                       LLama-3-8B-Instruct
                             0
                                 0               20                    40 0                  20                 40 0             20                  40 0                  20          40
                                      # of Operators: ∧, ∨, ¬ (¬ is counted as an operator iff not succeeded by a terminal)                                    CFG Parse Tree Depth



Figure 20: LLMs as verifiers F1 score (§A3) for the GPT-4o results using the ∀uto∃∨∧L procedure of
all models on the ∀uto∃∨∧L datasets.



                                                                                                              38
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


      True Labels      True Positive       Non-compliant (True Label)         False Positive
      False Labels     False Negative      True Negative                      Non-compliant (False Label)
    GPT-4o
    ChatGPT
    Mistral
    Phi3
    Llama3
    Gemma2
    Granite
    Llama3.1
               ksat            plogic               fol                 fol_human             regex


Figure 21: The number of positive and negative examples of φ1 ≡ A ◦ I(φ0 ) when evaluating
GPT-4o on ∀uto∃∨∧L for each dataset (inner donuts). Additionally included is a breakdown of the
performance of each LLM when acting as the verifier (outer donuts). Included are all examples
containing 20 or fewer operators or, in the case of the regular expression dataset, CFG tree depth
of 20 or fewer. Non-compliant represents syntactically non-compliant responses when prompted to
verify the equivalence.



                                               39
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


        True Labels        True Positive    Non-compliant (True Label)         False Positive
        False Labels       False Negative   True Negative                      Non-compliant (False Label)
                    ksat           plogic            fol                 fol_human             regex
    Llama3.2
    Llama3(70B)
    Ministral
    Phi3.5-mini
    Qwen2.5(1.5B)
    Qwen2.5(14B)
    Yi-1.5


Figure 22: Additional LLMs evaluate on §A3, where the number of positive and negative examples of
φ1 ≡ A ◦ I(φ0 ) when evaluating GPT-4o on ∀uto∃∨∧L for each dataset (inner donuts). Additionally
included is a breakdown of the performance of each LLM when acting as the verifier (outer donuts).
Included are all examples containing 20 or fewer operators or, in the case of the regular expression
dataset, CFG tree depth of 20 or fewer. Non-compliant represents syntactically non-compliant
responses when prompted to verify the equivalence.


                                                40
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                  3–CNF(12)                                    PL(12)                                FOL(8, 12)−E
               1                                                                                                                              1

Compliance


                                                                                                                                                    ∀uto∃∨∧L
 Syntactic   .75                                                                                                                              .75


                                                                                                                                                      Score
              .5                                                                                                                              .5
             .25                                                                                                                              .25
               0                                                                                                                              0
                    0        10       20        30       40    0       10        20       30        40     0    10       20         30   40
                   # of Operators: ∧, ∨, ¬ (¬ is counted as an operator iff not succeeded by a terminal)        CFG Parse Tree Depth


Figure 23: ∀uto∃∨∧L results on Claude 3.0 Sonnet on the 3-CNF, propositional logic, and regular
expression datasets. Dashed line is the accuracy.


Table 9: Correlation data for FOLIO(R; FOL). The calibrated ∀uto∃∨∧L score was calculated from the FOL
dataset with data points with description complexity d ≤ 6. These values were used to compute the predictive
power of ∀uto∃∨∧L reported in Fig. 5.
                                                              Model         ∀uto∃∨∧L Score          FOLIO(R; FOL) Score
                                                     GPT-4o                       0.79                         0.71
                                               GPT-4o-mini                        0.56                         0.67
                                                   ChatGPT                        0.36                         0.51
                                   Mistral-7B-Instruct-v0.2                       0.06                         0.51
                                  Phi-3-medium-4k-instruct                        0.35                         0.62
                                       LLama-3-8B-Instruct                        0.13                         0.52
                                            Gemma-2-9B-IT                         0.28                         0.59
                                     Granite-3.0-8B-Instruct                      0.18                         0.56
                                      Llama-3.1-8B-Instruct                       0.09                         0.56
                                     LLama-3.2-1B-Instruct                        0.03                         0.36
                                      LLama-3-70B-Instruct                        0.49                         0.66
                                  Ministral-8B-Instruct-2410                      0.10                         0.56
                                       Phi-3.5-Mini-Instruct                      0.19                         0.53
                                    Qwen-2.5-1.5B-Instruct                        0.07                         0.45
                                     Qwen-2.5-14B-Instruct                        0.67                         0.71
                                                 Yi-1.5-34B                       0.21                         0.61


Table 10: Correlation data for LogiEval(R; PL). The calibrated ∀uto∃∨∧L score was calculated from the PL
dataset with data points with description complexity d ≤ 30. These values were used to compute the predictive
power of ∀uto∃∨∧L reported in Fig. 5.
                                                              Model         ∀uto∃∨∧L Score          LogiEval(R; PL) Score
                                                     GPT-4o                       0.67                         0.87
                                               GPT-4o-mini                        0.35                         0.67
                                                   ChatGPT                        0.17                         0.64
                                   Mistral-7B-Instruct-v0.2                       0.12                         0.60
                                  Phi-3-medium-4k-instruct                        0.23                         0.75
                                       LLama-3-8B-Instruct                        0.12                         0.61
                                            Gemma-2-9B-IT                         0.28                         0.71
                                     Granite-3.0-8B-Instruct                      0.21                         0.58
                                      Llama-3.1-8B-Instruct                       0.11                         0.71
                                     LLama-3.2-1B-Instruct                        0.04                         0.50
                                      LLama-3-70B-Instruct                        0.34                         0.85
                                  Ministral-8B-Instruct-2410                      0.17                         0.68
                                       Phi-3.5-Mini-Instruct                      0.10                         0.62
                                    Qwen-2.5-1.5B-Instruct                        0.11                         0.52
                                     Qwen-2.5-14B-Instruct                        0.46                         0.76
                                                 Yi-1.5-34B                       0.26                         0.78


                                                                                 41
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Table 11: Correlation data for LogiEval(R; FOL). The calibrated ∀uto∃∨∧L score was calculated from the FOL
dataset with data points with description complexity d ≤ 30. These values were used to compute the predictive
power of ∀uto∃∨∧L reported in Fig. 5.
                                     Model     ∀uto∃∨∧L Score     LogiEval(R; FOL) Score
                                   GPT-4o            0.32                    0.82
                             GPT-4o-mini             0.17                    0.56
                                 ChatGPT             0.09                    0.63
                 Mistral-7B-Instruct-v0.2            0.01                    0.56
                Phi-3-medium-4k-instruct             0.09                    0.70
                     LLama-3-8B-Instruct             0.02                    0.62
                          Gemma-2-9B-IT              0.07                    0.69
                   Granite-3.0-8B-Instruct           0.05                    0.55
                    Llama-3.1-8B-Instruct            0.02                    0.68
                   LLama-3.2-1B-Instruct             0.00                    0.47
                    LLama-3-70B-Instruct             0.15                    0.78
                Ministral-8B-Instruct-2410           0.02                    0.64
                     Phi-3.5-Mini-Instruct           0.04                    0.54
                  Qwen-2.5-1.5B-Instruct             0.02                    0.50
                   Qwen-2.5-14B-Instruct             0.19                    0.66
                               Yi-1.5-34B            0.05                    0.71


Table 12: Correlation data for FOLIO(A). The calibrated ∀uto∃∨∧L score was calculated from the FOL dataset
with data points with description complexity d ≤ 6. These values were used to compute the predictive power of
∀uto∃∨∧L reported in Fig. 5.
                                         Model    ∀uto∃∨∧L Score      FOLIO(A) Score
                                       GPT-4o             0.79               0.41
                                 GPT-4o-mini              0.56               0.40
                                     ChatGPT              0.36               0.33
                     Mistral-7B-Instruct-v0.2             0.06               0.19
                    Phi-3-medium-4k-instruct              0.35               0.32
                         LLama-3-8B-Instruct              0.13               0.16
                              Gemma-2-9B-IT               0.28               0.30
                       Granite-3.0-8B-Instruct            0.18               0.14
                        Llama-3.1-8B-Instruct             0.09               0.23
                       LLama-3.2-1B-Instruct              0.03               0.00
                       LLama-3-70B-Instruct               0.49               0.40
                    Ministral-8B-Instruct-2410            0.10               0.23
                         Phi-3.5-Mini-Instruct            0.19               0.18
                      Qwen-2.5-1.5B-Instruct              0.07               0.10
                       Qwen-2.5-14B-Instruct              0.67               0.36
                                   Yi-1.5-34B             0.21               0.31


                                                     42
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Table 13: Correlation data for FOLIO(I). The ∀uto∃∨∧L data was averaged from the FOL dataset with data
points with description complexity d ≤ 6. These values were used to compute the predictive power of ∀uto∃∨∧L
reported in Fig. 5.
                                                                      FOLIO(I) Score
                            Model     ∀uto∃∨∧L Score        BLEU   ROUGE       METEOR       BERT
                           GPT-4o             0.79          0.14     0.42          0.64      0.71
                     GPT-4o-mini              0.56          0.13     0.41          0.61      0.73
                         ChatGPT              0.36          0.19     0.47          0.62      0.76
         Mistral-7B-Instruct-v0.2             0.06          0.08     0.31          0.51      0.64
        Phi-3-Medium-4k-Instruct              0.35          0.12     0.39          0.58      0.70
             LLama-3-8B-Instruct              0.13          0.04     0.18          0.35      0.50
                  Gemma-2-9B-IT               0.28          0.10     0.34          0.53      0.63
           Granite-3.0-8B-Instruct            0.18          0.15     0.41          0.58      0.72
            Llama-3.1-8B-Instruct             0.09          0.09     0.31          0.51      0.64
           LLama-3.2-1B-Instruct              0.03          0.00     0.06          0.15      0.36
            LLama-3-70B-Instruct              0.49          0.12     0.40          0.60      0.70
        Ministral-8B-Instruct-2410            0.10          0.11     0.36          0.55      0.67
             Phi-3.5-Mini-Instruct            0.19          0.05     0.22          0.41      0.55
          Qwen-2.5-1.5B-Instruct              0.07          0.09     0.33          0.49      0.65
           Qwen-2.5-14B-Instruct              0.67          0.07     0.26          0.45      0.55
                       Yi-1.5-34B             0.21          0.12     0.39          0.58      0.72


Table 14: Correlation data for HumanEval (A). The ∀uto∃∨∧L data was averaged from the regex dataset with
data points with description complexity d ≤ 7. These values were used to compute the predictive power of
∀uto∃∨∧L reported in Fig. 5.
                                      Model     ∀uto∃∨∧L Score     HumanEval (A) Score
                                    GPT-4o           0.66                   0.92
                              GPT-4o-mini            0.44                   0.88
                                  ChatGPT            0.36                   0.74
                   Mistral-7B-Instruct-v0.2          0.20                   0.44
                 Phi-3-medium-4k-instruct            0.45                   0.75
                      LLama-3-8B-Instruct            0.07                   0.63
                           Gemma-2-9B-IT             0.28                   0.68
                    Granite-3.0-8B-Instruct          0.21                   0.62
                     Llama-3.1-8B-Instruct           0.19                   0.63
                    LLama-3.2-1B-Instruct            0.03                   0.35
                     LLama-3-70B-Instruct            0.33                   0.80
                 Ministral-8B-Instruct-2410          0.13                   0.77
                      Phi-3.5-Mini-Instruct          0.36                   0.71
                   Qwen-2.5-1.5B-Instruct            0.12                   0.57
                    Qwen-2.5-14B-Instruct            0.45                   0.80
                                Yi-1.5-34B           0.13                   0.73


                                                     43
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Table 15: Count of examples in FOLIO(R; NL) for each combination of (T)rue, (F)alse, and (U)ncertain label
and predictions in that order. For example, TU is the number of times a LLM predicted a True label as Uncertain.
                           Model      TT      TF      TU      FT       FF      FU       UT     UF    UU
                         GPT-4o      1667     125     147     178     1133     131   246       419   952
                   GPT-4o-mini       1500     187     253     162     1087     196   255       488   877
                       ChatGPT       1501     281     147     366      889     186   620       562   434
        Mistral-7B-Instruct-v0.2     1301     205     412     200     717      508    525      387    691
      Phi-3-medium-4k-instruct       1468     153     310     222      871     343    310      289   1009
           LLama-3-8B-Instruct       1400     244     288     272      807     347    477      413    717
                Gemma-2-9B-IT        1439      94     385     231      813     382   378       289   934
         Granite-3.0-8B-Instruct     1415     109     412     304      666     471    382      316    919
          Llama-3.1-8B-Instruct      1400     174     314     267      766     360    435      352    781
         LLama-3.2-1B-Instruct       1407     235     118     931      279      81   1109      235   111
          LLama-3-70B-Instruct       1677     101     161     263      966     214    419      319    881
      Ministral-8B-Instruct-2410     1577     242     116     358      954     130    583      532    503
           Phi-3.5-Mini-Instruct     1355     164     398     223      821     383    357      359    890
        Qwen-2.5-1.5B-Instruct       1470     345     117     615      684     138    824      477    309
         Qwen-2.5-14B-Instruct       1564     132     239     215     1020     207    266      276   1058
                     Yi-1.5-34B      1507     125     298     240      894     305   497       346   773


                 Table 16: Calculated precision and recall for each label in FOLIO (R;NL).
                                               True Label       False Label      Uncertain Label
                                    Model     Prec.    Rec.    Prec.    Rec.     Prec.       Rec.
                                  GPT-4o      0.80     0.86    0.68     0.79     0.77        0.59
                            GPT-4o-mini       0.78     0.77    0.62     0.75     0.66        0.54
                                ChatGPT       0.60     0.78    0.51     0.62     0.57        0.27
                 Mistral-7B-Instruct-v0.2     0.64     0.68    0.55     0.50     0.43        0.43
               Phi-3-medium-4k-instruct       0.73     0.76    0.66     0.61     0.61        0.63
                    LLama-3-8B-Instruct       0.65     0.72    0.55     0.57     0.53        0.45
                         Gemma-2-9B-IT        0.70     0.75    0.68     0.57     0.55        0.58
                  Granite-3.0-8B-Instruct     0.67     0.73    0.61     0.46     0.51        0.57
                   Llama-3.1-8B-Instruct      0.67     0.74    0.59     0.55     0.54        0.50
                  LLama-3.2-1B-Instruct       0.41     0.80    0.37     0.22     0.36        0.08
                   LLama-3-70B-Instruct       0.71     0.86    0.70     0.67     0.70        0.54
               Ministral-8B-Instruct-2410     0.63     0.81    0.55     0.66     0.67        0.31
                    Phi-3.5-Mini-Instruct     0.70     0.71    0.61     0.58     0.53        0.55
                 Qwen-2.5-1.5B-Instruct       0.51     0.76    0.45     0.48     0.55        0.19
                  Qwen-2.5-14B-Instruct       0.76     0.81    0.71     0.71     0.70        0.66
                              Yi-1.5-34B      0.67     0.78    0.65     0.62     0.56        0.48


                                                      44
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Table 17: Count of examples in FOLIO(R; FOL) for each combination of (T)rue, (F)alse, and (U)ncertain label
and predictions in that order. For example, TU is the number of times a LLM predicted a True label as Uncertain.
                           Model      TT      TF      TU      FT       FF      FU       UT     UF    UU
                         GPT-4o      1596     124     218     215     1004     224   329       359   932
                   GPT-4o-mini       1432     140     367     153      944     348   224       420   976
                       ChatGPT       1500     208     227     456      711     266   756       525   338
        Mistral-7B-Instruct-v0.2     1159     244     521     229     616      575    503      335    760
      Phi-3-medium-4k-instruct       1405     120     393     278      688     457    365      226   1014
           LLama-3-8B-Instruct       1471     193     249     462      621     332    674      396   532
                Gemma-2-9B-IT        1378     112     408     256      659     489   397       268   919
         Granite-3.0-8B-Instruct     1428     181     317     373      596     458    530      325   755
          Llama-3.1-8B-Instruct      1449     163     305     358      647     409    575      289   725
         LLama-3.2-1B-Instruct       1436     232     127     969      239      96   1142      237   117
          LLama-3-70B-Instruct       1661     122     149     390      829     224    576      248   791
      Ministral-8B-Instruct-2410     1525     226     180     452      805     185    692      464    461
           Phi-3.5-Mini-Instruct     1291     145     449     314      595     503    466      331   791
        Qwen-2.5-1.5B-Instruct       1305     358     255     611      560     256    829      392    386
         Qwen-2.5-14B-Instruct       1648      90     194     279      918     241    377      253   966
                     Yi-1.5-34B      1513     106     271     285      730     350   476       282   826


                Table 18: Calculated precision and recall for each label in FOLIO(R; FOL).
                                               True Label       False Label      Uncertain Label
                                    Model     Prec.    Rec.    Prec.    Rec.     Prec.       Rec.
                                  GPT-4o      0.75     0.82    0.68     0.70     0.68        0.58
                            GPT-4o-mini       0.79     0.74    0.63     0.65     0.58        0.60
                                ChatGPT       0.55     0.78    0.49     0.50     0.41        0.21
                 Mistral-7B-Instruct-v0.2     0.61     0.60    0.52     0.43     0.41        0.48
               Phi-3-medium-4k-instruct       0.69     0.73    0.67     0.48     0.54        0.63
                    LLama-3-8B-Instruct       0.56     0.77    0.51     0.44     0.48        0.33
                         Gemma-2-9B-IT        0.68     0.73    0.63     0.47     0.51        0.58
                  Granite-3.0-8B-Instruct     0.61     0.74    0.54     0.42     0.49        0.47
                   Llama-3.1-8B-Instruct      0.61     0.76    0.59     0.46     0.50        0.46
                  LLama-3.2-1B-Instruct       0.40     0.80    0.34     0.18     0.34        0.08
                   LLama-3-70B-Instruct       0.63     0.86    0.69     0.57     0.68        0.49
               Ministral-8B-Instruct-2410     0.57     0.79    0.54     0.56     0.56        0.29
                    Phi-3.5-Mini-Instruct     0.62     0.68    0.56     0.42     0.45        0.50
                 Qwen-2.5-1.5B-Instruct       0.48     0.68    0.43     0.39     0.43        0.24
                  Qwen-2.5-14B-Instruct       0.72     0.85    0.73     0.64     0.69        0.61
                              Yi-1.5-34B      0.67     0.80    0.65     0.53     0.57        0.52


                                                      45
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Table 19: Number of examples of true positives (TP), false positives (FP), true negatives (TN), and false
negatives (FN) for each LLM in LogiEval(R; PL). The counts for when the LLM was non-compliant with our
prompt for positive (NP) and negative (NN) labels are also provided. Additionally, the calculated true positive
rate (TPR), true negative rate (TNR), precision, and F1 score for each LLM is shown.
                        Model      TP     FP     TN         FN   NP    NN    TPR     TNR      Prec.    F1
                      GPT-4o      1724     56    594    251       0    0     0.87     0.91    0.97    0.92
                GPT-4o-mini       1310    116    534    665       0    0     0.66     0.82    0.92    0.77
                    ChatGPT       1348    260    390    625       2    0     0.68     0.60    0.84    0.75
    Mistral-7B-Instruct-v0.2      1240    187    379    640       95   84    0.66     0.67    0.87    0.75
   Phi-3-medium-4k-instruct       1558    197    452    411       6    1     0.79     0.70    0.89    0.84
        LLama-3-8B-Instruct       1246    209    434    715       14    7    0.64     0.67    0.86    0.73
             Gemma-2-9B-IT        1464    217    432    497       14    1    0.75     0.67    0.87    0.80
      Granite-3.0-8B-Instruct     1106    168    482    869        0    0    0.56     0.74    0.87    0.68
       Llama-3.1-8B-Instruct      1523    242    400    430       22    8    0.78     0.62    0.86    0.82
      LLama-3.2-1B-Instruct        985    250    342    820      170   58    0.55     0.58    0.80    0.65
      LLama-3-70B-Instruct        1741    142    507    223      11    1     0.89     0.78    0.92    0.91
   Ministral-8B-Instruct-2410     1350    161    489    621       4     0    0.68     0.75    0.89    0.78
        Phi-3.5-Mini-Instruct     1222    180    459    719       34   11    0.63     0.72    0.87    0.73
     Qwen-2.5-1.5B-Instruct       1085    281    298    582      308   71    0.65     0.51    0.79    0.72
      Qwen-2.5-14B-Instruct       1474     72    574    486       15    4    0.75     0.89    0.95    0.84
                  Yi-1.5-34B      1651    193    457    321       3    0     0.84     0.70    0.90    0.87


Table 20: Number of examples of true positives (TP), false positives (FP), true negatives (TN), and false
negatives (FN) for each LLM in LogiEval(R; FOL). The counts for when the LLM was non-compliant with our
prompt for positive (NP) and negative (NN) labels are also provided. Additionally, the calculated true positive
rate (TPR), true negative rate (TNR), precision, and F1 score for each LLM is shown.
                       Model      TP      FP     TN         FN   NP    NN     TPR     TNR     Prec.     F1
                     GPT-4o      1627    57     593     398       0     0     0.80    0.91     0.97    0.88
               GPT-4o-mini       1084     95    555     941       0     0     0.54    0.85     0.92    0.68
                   ChatGPT       1346    177    472     678       1     1     0.67    0.73     0.88    0.76
   Mistral-7B-Instruct-v0.2      1172    159    403     716      137    88    0.62    0.72     0.88    0.73
  Phi-3-medium-4k-instruct       1449    139    511      574       2     0    0.72    0.79     0.91    0.80
       LLama-3-8B-Instruct       1267    139    502     752        6     9    0.63    0.78     0.90    0.74
            Gemma-2-9B-IT        1355    118    532     665       5      0    0.67    0.82     0.92    0.78
     Granite-3.0-8B-Instruct     1023    102    548     1002       0     0    0.51    0.84     0.91    0.65
      Llama-3.1-8B-Instruct      1466    198    440     538       21    12    0.73    0.69     0.88    0.80
     LLama-3.2-1B-Instruct        968    255    335     853      204    60    0.53    0.57     0.79    0.64
      LLama-3-70B-Instruct       1630    116    533      392       3     1    0.81    0.82     0.93    0.87
  Ministral-8B-Instruct-2410     1304    161    486      708      13     3    0.65    0.75     0.89    0.75
       Phi-3.5-Mini-Instruct     1059    140    493     922       44    17    0.53    0.78     0.88    0.67
    Qwen-2.5-1.5B-Instruct       1013    220    374     775      237    56    0.57    0.63     0.82    0.67
     Qwen-2.5-14B-Instruct       1303     89    555     707       15     6    0.65    0.86     0.94    0.77
                 Yi-1.5-34B      1489    156    494     534       2     0     0.74    0.76     0.91    0.81


                                                       46
