Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


W HAT M AKES A M AZE L OOK L IKE A M AZE ?
 Joy Hsu                                 Jiayuan Mao                          Joshua B. Tenenbaum
 Stanford University                     MIT                                  MIT
 joycj@stanford.edu                      jiayuanm@mit.edu                     jbt@mit.edu

 Noah D. Goodman                                   Jiajun Wu
 Stanford University                               Stanford University
 ngoodman@stanford.edu                             jiajunwu@cs.stanford.edu



                                            A BSTRACT
         A unique aspect of human visual understanding is the ability to flexibly interpret
         abstract concepts: acquiring lifted rules explaining what they symbolize, grounding
         them across familiar and unfamiliar contexts, and making predictions or reasoning
         about them. While off-the-shelf vision-language models excel at making literal
         interpretations of images (e.g., recognizing object categories such as tree branches),
         they still struggle to make sense of such visual abstractions (e.g., how an arrange-
         ment of tree branches may form the walls of a maze). To address this challenge,
         we introduce Deep Schema Grounding (DSG), a framework that leverages explicit
         structured representations of visual abstractions for grounding and reasoning. At
         the core of DSG are schemas—dependency graph descriptions of abstract concepts
         that decompose them into more primitive-level symbols. DSG uses large language
         models to extract schemas, then hierarchically grounds concrete to abstract com-
         ponents of the schema onto images with vision-language models. The grounded
         schema is used to augment visual abstraction understanding. We systematically
         evaluate DSG and different methods in reasoning on our new Visual Abstractions
         Benchmark, which consists of diverse, real-world images of abstract concepts and
         corresponding question-answer pairs labeled by humans. We show that DSG sig-
         nificantly improves the abstract visual reasoning performance of vision-language
         models, and is a step toward human-aligned understanding of visual abstractions.


1   I NTRODUCTION
Humans possess the remarkable ability to flexibly acquire and apply abstract concepts when inter-
preting the concrete world around us. Consider the concept “maze”: our mental model can interpret
mazes constructed with conventional materials (e.g., drawn lines) or unconventional ones (e.g., icing),
and reason about mazes across a wide range of configurations and environments (e.g., in a cardboard
box or on a knitted square). Our goal is to build systems that can make such flexible and broad
generalizations as humans do. This necessitates a reconsideration of a fundamental question: what
makes a maze look like a maze? A maze is not defined by concrete visual features such as the
specific material of walls or particular perpendicular intersections, but by lifted rules over symbols—a
plausible model for a maze includes its layout, the walls, and the designated entry and exit. Crucially,
lifted model components can be realized by infinitely many real-world variations, as opposed to
grounded concepts which are tied to specific visual inputs. For instance, walls constructed from candy
canes, hay, or popsicle sticks, despite their diverse materials, are all identifiable as parts of a maze.
However, current vision-language models (VLMs) often struggle to reason about visual abstractions
at a human level, frequently defaulting to literal interpretations of images, such as a collection of
object categories. These interpretations may be technically correct descriptions of the scene, but may
not align with the abstract concept underlying the image. For example, when given the intended
concept of “maze” and an image that realizes the concept with unconventional objects, VLMs such as
GPT-4o (OpenAI, 2024) and LLaVA (Liu et al., 2024) fail to correctly recognize objects in the scene
as components of the visual abstraction. It is unclear whether these off-the-shelf models leverage
knowledge of abstract concepts to make sense of images as humans do.


                                                   1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


 Abstract Concept: Maze



                                                                                                          …


                                          Deep Schema Grounding
                                                   LLM

                           Schema:                         maze
                                              layout                  walls
                                     entry-
                                      exit



  V:                         Q: “Imagine that the                               Schema       V
                             image represents a maze.
                             Are there clear                                  {layout: grid-like,
                             entrances or exits in the                         walls: ice,
                             maze? Answer with one                V
                                                                               entry-exit: gates}     Q
                             of the following answer
                             choices: yes, no.”                                       VLM

  VLM answer: No ✘                                                        DSG answer: Yes ✓

  V:                         Q: “Imagine that the                               Schema       V
                             image represents a maze.
                             What is the player in this                       {layout: triangular,
                             maze? Return none if                              walls: branches,
                             there is no player. Answer           V            entry-exit: corners}   Q
                             with one of the following
                             answer choices: grass,                                   VLM
                             moss, stick, none.”
  VLM answer: Stick ✘                                                     DSG answer: None ✓

Figure 1: There exist abstract concepts, such as “maze”, which are defined by lifted symbols
and patterns, instead of concrete visual features. We propose Deep Schema Grounding (DSG), a
framework for visual reasoning over such abstract concepts, which uses schemas to structure models’
interpretation of images. DSG hierarchically grounds conceptual schemas on images and uses them
to provide holistic context to VLMs, improving performance across diverse downstream queries.
To address the challenge of understanding abstract visual concepts, we propose Deep Schema
Grounding (DSG), a framework for models to interpret visual abstractions. At the core of DSG are
schemas—a dependency graph description of abstract concepts (see Figure 1). Schemas characterize
common patterns that humans use to interpret the visual world, generalize efficiently from limited
data, and reason across multiple levels of abstraction for flexible adaptation (Schank & Abelson,
1975). A schema for “helping” allows us to understand relations between characters in a finger puppet
scene, while a schema for “tic-tac-toe” allows us to play the game even when the grid is composed of
hula hoops instead of drawn lines. A schema for “maze” makes a maze look like a maze.
DSG explicitly uses schemas generated by and grounded by large pretrained models to reason
about visual abstractions. Concretely, we model schemas as programs encoding directed acyclic
graphs (DAGs), which decompose an abstract concept into a set of more concrete visual concepts
as subcomponents, as illustrated in Figure 1. The full framework is composed of three steps. First,
we extract schema definitions of abstract concepts from a large language model (LLM). Next, DSG
hierarchically queries a vision-language model (VLM), first grounding concrete symbols in the DAG
(i.e. symbols that do not depend on the interpretation of other symbols), then using those symbols
as conditions to ground more abstract symbols. Finally, we use the resolved schema, including the
grounding of all its components, as an additional input into a vision-language model to provide
holistic context about the image, such that we can improve visual reasoning across diverse downstream


                                                       2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


queries about the abstract concept. Our method is a general framework for abstract concepts without
dependency on specific models; the LLMs and VLMs used are interchangeable.
To investigate the capabilities of models in understanding visual abstractions, we introduce the Visual
Abstractions Benchmark (VAB). VAB is a visual question-answering benchmark that consists of
diverse, real-world images representing abstract concepts. The abstract concepts span 4 different
categories: strategic concepts that are characterized by rules and patterns (e.g., “tic-tac-toe”), scientific
concepts of phenomena that cannot be visualized in their canonical forms (e.g., “cell”), social concepts
that are defined by theory-of-mind relations (e.g., “deceiving”), and domestic concepts of household
objectives that cannot be directly defined by specific arrangements of objects (e.g, “table setting for
two”). Each image is an instantiation of an abstract concept, and is paired with questions that probe
understanding of the visual abstraction; for example, “Imagine that the image represents a maze. Are
there clear entrances or exits in the maze?” The Visual Abstractions Benchmark comprises 540 of
such examples, with answers labeled by 5 human annotators from Prolific. We found that off-the-shelf
VLMs and integrated LLMs with APIs have much room for improvement on this benchmark.
We evaluate Deep Schema Grounding on the Visual Abstractions Benchmark, and show that DSG
consistently improves performance of vision-language models across question types, abstract concept
categories, and base models. Notably, DSG improves GPT-4o by 6.6 percent points overall (↑ 9.9%
relative improvement), and, in particular, demonstrates a 10 percent point improvement (↑ 16.6%
relative improvement) in questions that involve counting. While the challenge of visual abstraction
understanding is still far from being fully solved, our results show that DSG is a promising solution
that effectively uses schemas to structure the thinking process of visual reasoning systems.
In summary, our contributions are the following:
    • We propose Deep Schema Grounding (DSG), a hierarchical, decomposition-based framework
      that explicitly extracts and grounds schemas of concepts with large pretrained models.
    • We introduce the Visual Abstractions Benchmark (VAB), a diverse, real-world visual question-
      answering benchmark that evaluates VLMs’ understanding of visual abstractions.
    • We demonstrate DSG’s improvement over prior state-of-the-art works across a variety of
      abstract concept categories, question types, response types, and metrics.

2    R ELATED W ORKS
Vision-language grounding and reasoning benchmarks. Visual-language benchmarks have
traditionally tackled reasoning about content in images, such as objects, relations, and actions (Chen
et al., 2015; Yu et al., 2015; Antol et al., 2015; Wu et al., 2016; Zhu et al., 2016; Krishna et al.,
2017; Wang et al., 2017). Recently, an increasing number of works have focused on evaluating
visual-language tasks that require commonsense reasoning, usually by asking “what if” or “why”
questions (Pirsiavash et al., 2014; Wagner et al., 2018; Zellers et al., 2019; Lu et al., 2022), or by
generating holistic scene descriptions (Song et al., 2024). In contrast to these related works, our paper
emphasizes the visual grounding and reasoning problem of abstract concepts, such as uncommon
visualizations of scientific terms or unconventional constructions of strategic games. Such abstract
concepts should be grounded on the relationship between lower-level concepts such as entities and
patterns, therefore positing novel challenges to vision-language models.
Concept representations in minds and machines. Our schema-based concept representations
are inspired by the theory-theory of concepts in cognitive science and artificial intelligence (Schank
& Abelson, 1975; Morton, 1980; Carey, 1985; Gopnik, 1988; Gopnik & Meltzoff, 1997; Carey,
2000). In short, these works treat concepts as organized within and around theories. Therefore,
acquiring the concept involves learning its theory, and reasoning with a concept involves causal-
explanatory reasoning of the theories. Such views have been largely leveraged in generating symbolic
representations for concepts such as word meanings (Speer et al., 2017) and object shapes (Biederman,
1987). However, most works have focused on using only symbolic features to describe scenes and
have been primarily applied to simple object-level concrete concepts. In contrast, we propose using
our schema representation as a guide for grounding scene-level, abstract concepts in natural images.
Hierarchical grounding of visual concepts. Our approach is related to recent works on chain-
of-thought reasoning in vision-language models (Lu et al., 2022; Chen et al., 2024), hierarchical
image classification (Koh et al., 2020; Menon & Vondrick, 2023), hierarchical relation detection (Li
et al., 2024), and visual reasoning via programs (Hu et al., 2017; Mao et al., 2019; Hsu et al., 2024).
In contrast to these algorithms, which are primarily designed for object and relational reasoning,


                                                     3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


    Extracting Schemas of Abstract Concepts
                                                              Schema:
      “Maze”
                                                              gen(concept=maze) =
                                         LLM                      gen(layout | concept=maze)
       Prompt                                                     gen(walls | concept=maze)
                                                                  gen(entry-exit | concept=maze, layout)


    Hierarchically Grounding Schemas on Images


                                                                                    {layout: rectangular,
                                                                  VLM                walls: coffee beans,
                                                                                     entry-exit: coffee cups}



                                                              Q: “Imagine that the image represents a maze,
                                                              what is the layout?”
       Schema:                                                Q: “Imagine that the image represents a maze,
                         maze
                                                              what are the walls?”
                layout           walls
                                                              Q: ‘Imagine that the image represents a maze,
       entry-
        exit
                                                              and the layout is {VLM layout prediction},
                                                              what is the entry and exit?”

    Visual Question Answering Augmented with Resolved Schemas

     “Imagine that the image represents a maze, the
     layout is rectangular, the walls are coffee beans,
     and the entry and exit are coffee cups.”                                 VLM                 A: “None”
     Q: “What is the player in
     this maze?”

Figure 2: Deep Schema Grounding consists of three main stages: (1) extracting schemas of abstract
concepts with large language models, (2) hierarchically grounding schemas on images with vision-
language models, and (3) conducting visual question-answering augmented with resolved schemas.

we focus on the grounding of scene-level concepts. Our framework also shares a similar spirit to
prior approaches (Menon & Vondrick, 2023; Li et al., 2024) that leverage vision-language models
to generate text descriptions of class features for classification tasks. However, our paper proposes
the generation of hierarchical schemas with LLMs to ground visual abstractions for reasoning.
Additionally, our hierarchical schema representation is related to hierarchical program representations
used in text-only reasoning (Gao et al., 2023; Zelikman et al., 2023; Zhang et al., 2024); in contrast,
we leverage program representations for understanding concepts in natural images. Notably, DSG
performs schema inference with a VLM; compared to fully symbolic inference processes, our
framework is capable of leveraging all visual information in the image for interpreting abstractions.

3     D EEP S CHEMA G ROUNDING
We study the task of reasoning about visual abstractions by concretely focusing on its visual question-
answering (VQA) form, although our idea naturally generalizes to other visual interpretation and
reasoning tasks. A VQA instance is a tuple of ⟨v, q, a⟩, where v is an image, q is a natural language
question, and a is the answer to the question. Here, a can take the form of multiple choices or
free-form responses in natural language. We assume that each image v has an underlying abstract
concept associated with it (e.g., “maze”), which is not associated with concrete visual features, but
a set of lifted rules that define the concept. We also assume that q is a question about the abstract
concept, and the concept is revealed to all models in question q.
The visual abstraction understanding task posits a series of challenges to off-the-shelf VLMs. These
questions are centered around concepts with infinite possible instantiations in the real world. As a


                                                          4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                      Tic-tac-toe                                               Cell

                                              tic-tac-
                                                                                                       cell
                                                 toe



                                    symbols               board
                                                                                       membrane                  nucleus


                             strategy                                                             organelle



                      Deceiving                                         Table Setting for Two
                                                                                             table-
                                        deceiving                                           setting-
                                                                                            for-two

                            deceiver                     victim                     two-                 table
                                                                                   chairs

                                        deceptive                                                                table-
                                         -object                                                                 setting


Figure 3: Examples of schemas for concepts and the visual features that they may be grounded to.
result, current VLMs struggle with this problem due to the potential novelty of the scene and the visual
abstraction combinations encountered. However, a crucial insight regarding these abstract concepts is
the consistency in composition patterns of lower-level concepts, which aggregate to construct the
high-level concept; these underlying patterns remain the same across different variations.
Based on these insights, we propose Deep Schema Grounding (DSG), a framework that leverages
schemas to interpret and reason about visual abstractions. DSG can be built on top of most pretrained
vision-language models (VLMs) to perform the visual question-answering task. Illustrated in Figure 2,
the DSG framework consists of three main steps: (1) extracting a schema of the concept, (2)
hierarchically grounding the schema to the visual input, and (3) leveraging the resolved schema as
input to the base VLM. We describe the schema definition and each stage in detail below.

3.1   V ISUAL A BSTRACTION S CHEMA

A visual abstraction schema is a concise program that defines a directed acyclic graphical (DAG)
representation of a particular concept. As illustrated in Figure 2, each node in the schema corresponds
to a subcomponent concept of the higher-level abstract concept. For example, the formation of a
maze can be decomposed into three components: the layout, the construction of the walls, and the
positioning of the entry and exit of the maze. The dependencies among individual components yield a
DAG configuration—in this case, the placement of the entry and the exit of the maze depends on the
layout of the maze. From an inference perspective, the dependency graph describes the order in which
the model should interpret each component, and how the interpretation of a particular component
should be conditioned on the interpretation of one or more previously interpreted components.
The most important feature of a visual abstraction schema is that the definition of such concepts
is universal, in the sense that the program describes a universal characterization of mazes made of
various components, rather than being restricted to specific visual instantiations (e.g., mazes formed
by drawn lines). Hence, schemas enable machines to better generalize to novel scenes.

3.2   E XTRACTING S CHEMAS OF A BSTRACT C ONCEPTS

DSG utilizes large language models (LLMs) as a repository of knowledge from which schemas can be
acquired. Given that LLMs are trained on extensive corpora of human language data, we hypothesize
that they contain human-aligned schemas for a wide range of abstract concepts. Compared to prior
works that use LLMs to translate natural language utterances into programs, DSG uses LLMs to
extract explicitly structured knowledge of abstract concepts based on the concept’s name.
In particular, our goal is to extract a universal schema for abstract concepts that is not instance-specific,
but is applicable across diverse visual stimuli. Notably, our prompt to the LLMs is generic and
simple, with only one example of a schema for the abstract concept “academia” (which consists of
key components: faculty, students, etc.), and a short instruction of the schema generation task. We
find that LLMs demonstrate a remarkable ability to extrapolate across a wide array of concepts, and


                                                                  5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


produce faithful decompositions of the visual abstractions. We detail the prompt and LLM-generated
schemas for each concept in Appendix C.

3.3   H IERARCHICALLY G ROUNDING S CHEMAS ON I MAGES

Instead of directly answering questions given the image and the question inputs, we first hierarchically
ground individual components in the schema to visual entities in the image. In the maze example in
Figure 2, this corresponds to inferring the materials of the walls, the layout of the maze, etc.
Formally, given a schema definition of the con-           gen(layout | concept=maze)
cept, DSG hierarchically grounds each component           Q: “Imagine that the image represents a maze,
in the concept DAG. The outcome of this process           what is the layout?”
is represented as short text descriptions, such as        A: Rectangular.
“wall: coffee beans”. We implement this procedure
                                                          gen(walls | concept=maze)
by leveraging pretrained VLMs to predict the most
likely grounding of a component given the image           Q: “Imagine that the image represents a maze,
and a text query (see Figure 4). Since our grounding      what are the walls?”
procedure is hierarchical, for components that are        A: Coffee beans.
conditioned on other concepts (e.g., the interpreta-      gen(entry-exit | concept=maze, layout)
tion of entry-exit is conditioned on the layout), the     Q: “Imagine that the image represents a maze, and
VLM also takes into account the grounding results         the layout is rectangular, what is the entry and exit?”
of these prerequisite components. This ensures that       A: Coffee cups.
each step of the grounding process is informed by
the previously established context, facilitating more
coherent and accurate grounding.                          Figure 4: The schema grounding process.

Grounding components following the hierarchical schema structure is crucial for abstract concepts
with many possible instantiations. For example, for the “maze” concept, DSG first resolves compo-
nents that are more coarse and concrete (e.g., layout), then uses those components as conditions to
resolve more difficult grounding problems of fine-grained and abstract components (e.g., entry-exit).
Figure 3 shows examples of schemas and how they may be grounded onto images. More examples
and failure modes can be found in Appendix A.

3.4   V ISUAL Q UESTION -A NSWERING AUGMENTED WITH G ROUNDED S CHEMAS

Finally, DSG leverages the grounding of individual components in the image to answer questions. For
example, given the concept “maze” and the grounded mapping of individual components: {layout:
rectangular, walls: coffee beans, entry-exit: coffee cups}, we augment the final question-
answering step by providing the VLM with the component mapping, as well as the full conversation
history of the grounding process. In particular, the groundings of the components are included in a
text prompt such as: “Imagine that the image represents a maze, and the layout is rectangular, and
the walls are coffee beans, and the entry and exit are coffee cups.” Compared with baselines that
only have access to the abstract concept itself (e.g., “Imagine that the image represents a maze.”), our
concept grounding system shows significant performance improvement with the resolved schema as
holistic context for the image.
Notably, our DSG framework is inference-only: it leverages the strong generalization capabilities
of LLMs (for proposing schemas) and VLMs (for grounding schemas and reasoning), to better
understand visual abstractions. Programmatic schemas are used as the intermediate representation to
bridge the explicit commonsense knowledge in LLMs and the visual reasoning capability of VLMs.


4     V ISUAL A BSTRACTIONS B ENCHMARK

In order to evaluate models on visual abstraction reasoning, we propose a new benchmark, the Visual
Abstractions Benchmark (VAB), illustrated with examples in Figure 5. It consists of 180 images and
3 questions per image, with a total of 540 test examples. VAB is comprised of 12 different abstract
concepts spanning 4 categories, where each concept is associated with 15 examples of real-world
images. The questions bridge multiple question types: binary-choice, counting, and open-ended
questions. We detail the set of abstract concepts and the image and text components of VAB below.

                                                   6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                  Strategic Concepts                                         Scientific Concepts
    Tic-tac-toe         Maze           Treasure map         Solar system           Atom                 Cell


                   Social Concepts                                           Domestic Concepts
     Helping          Deceiving         Negotiating       Table setting for two Guest bedrooms     Door decoration


Figure 5: The Visual Abstractions Benchmark comprises diverse, real-world images that represent 12
different abstract concepts across 4 categories.

Abstract concepts. We choose 12 different visual abstractions as concepts. All of them can be
grounded on different objects and configurations of objects in images. We focus on concepts that
are not tied to distinct visual features (e.g., unlike canonical colors and shapes) but instead require
higher-level, relational, and lifted patterns. These visual abstractions cover a wide range of visual
scenarios and possible linguistic queries, and they can be grouped into four broader categories.
The first category consists of strategic concepts, which are games characterized by rules and patterns,
including “tic-tac-toe”, “maze”, and “treasure map”. The exact object instantiations and visual
features may vary, but humans can easily identify the state of the game when given the concept. The
second category consists of scientific concepts with no possible visualization in the physical world,
including “solar system”, “atom”, and “cell”. While we cannot directly view these concepts, we can
create analogies of them based on everyday objects. The third category consists of social concepts,
which are intentional actions that involve the deduction of roles and relations, including “helping”,
“deceiving”, and “negotiating”. Examples of these theory-of-mind concepts in the real world can
be seen in many videos and movies; for a single image frame, we must make deductions to assign
possible roles to entities in the scene. The fourth category consists of domestic concepts, inspired
by everyday household tasks (Li et al., 2023). These concepts are goals in household environments
that cannot be easily defined by specific arrangements of objects, including “table setting for two”,
“guest bedrooms”, and “door decoration”. While humans easily recognize when such objectives are
completed, we do not have a simple definition for what exact configuration should be generated.

Images and question-answers. We curate 15 images for each abstract concept from the Internet.
Our criteria for the images are to be real, natural, and captured in the physical world. Our final set of
images is diverse in terms of subjects, environments, and domains. See Figure 5 for examples.


                                                      7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Table 1: DSG outperforms prior works across all questions and different question types in the Visual
Abstractions Benchmark. Results are averaged over 5 runs.
                                                 All       Counting      Binary     Open
          ViperGPT (Surı́s et al., 2023)          0.260       0.191       0.426      0.141
          VisProg (Gupta & Kembhavi, 2023)        0.304       0.249       0.385      0.255
          LLaVA (Liu et al., 2024)                0.415       0.344       0.552      0.321
          InstructBLIP (Dai et al., 2024)         0.437       0.322       0.538      0.392
          GPT-4o (OpenAI, 2024)                   0.664       0.604       0.655      0.693
          DSG (ours)                              0.730       0.704       0.690      0.776
          Human                                   0.846       0.816        0.833     0.868


     Table 2: DSG improves the performance of GPT-4o across categories of abstract concepts.
                               Strategic       Scientific        Social           Domestic
    GPT-4o (OpenAI, 2024)    0.653 ±0.052       0.646 ±0.074      0.647 ±0.163      0.708 ±0.082
    DSG (ours)               0.751 ±0.088       0.693 ±0.126      0.723 ±0.027      0.754 ±0.104

We create 3 types of natural language questions for each abstract concept in VAB. These questions
ask about different aspects of the images and take various forms, including binary-choice questions,
counting questions, and general open-ended questions. In total, there are 6 types of counting
questions, 14 types of binary-choice questions, and 16 types of open-ended questions. An example of
a binary-choice question is “Imagine that the image represents a table setting for two. What is the
configuration of the seats? Describe the answer as across or adjacent.”; an example of a counting
question is “Imagine that the image represents a cell. Excluding the nucleus, how many types of
organelles are there?”; an example of an open-ended question is “Imagine that the image represents a
treasure map. Based on the image, find the starting location; what is the main color of the map region
that is physically closest to the starting location?” The full Visual Abstractions Benchmark comprises
540 of such questions.
Answers to all image-question pairs are labeled by 5 human annotators from Prolific; we take their
modal response as the answer, to be used for exact-match text accuracy. While the Visual Abstractions
Benchmark focuses on multiple-choice questions and answers, we also provide a free-response variant
of VAB. We present examples for each type of question along with corresponding images and answers
in Appendix B, and release our benchmark here.


5     R ESULTS

We validate Deep Schema Grounding in comparison to baseline VLMs and integrated LLMs with
APIs on the Visual Abstractions Benchmark. We first compare our work with ViperGPT (Surı́s et al.,
2023), VisProg (Gupta & Kembhavi, 2023), LLaVA (Liu et al., 2024), InstructBLIP (Dai et al., 2024),
and GPT-4o (OpenAI, 2024). Then, we ablate different components of the DSG framework. Finally,
we show that DSG is model-agnostic and can benefit both closed-source and open-source models.
Baseline models are given the abstract concept itself in the prompt along with the question (e.g.,
“Imagine that the image represents a maze.”), but without DSG’s resolved schema of the concept. All
results are averaged over 5 runs. Here, we systematically evaluate multiple-choice answers, where
accuracy is calculated as exact-match accuracy. In Appendix A, we provide additional comparisons
with a graded accuracy metric based on the degree of alignment to human judgments, and results on
free-form answers using BERTScores (Zhang et al., 2020) and LLMs (Kamalloo et al., 2023).
VLMs benefit from decomposing abstract concepts into primitive-level components. Table 1
summarizes the multiple-choice accuracy of DSG with GPT-4o as the base VLM, in comparison
to that of prior works across 5 runs. DSG significantly outperforms VLMs and integrated LLMs
with APIs across all questions and all types of questions. In particular, our method demonstrates a
boost in accuracy of 6.6 percent points overall (↑ 9.9% relative improvement) compared to GPT-4o.
Across different question types, DSG shows the largest performance improvement of 10 percent
points (↑ 16.6% relative improvement) for counting-based questions, such as “How many entities are


                                                  8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Table 3: Summarization of DSG ablations; the full DSG framework shows strongest performance.
             schema grounding hierarchy context            All    Counting Binary Open
+ schema          ✓            ✗            ✗           ✗        0.681     0.629      0.672     0.709
+ grounding       ✓            ✓            ✗           ✗        0.693     0.727      0.660     0.710
+ hierarchy       ✓            ✓            ✓           ✗        0.701     0.713      0.671     0.723
DSG (ours)        ✓            ✓            ✓           ✓        0.730     0.704      0.690     0.776


helping?” We hypothesize that the significant improvement in accuracy for these questions is due to
more accurate labels for objects with DSG, as the schema grounding step will concretely associate
concepts such as “the entity who is helping” with particular parties in the image (e.g., pandas). These
questions usually require a more sophisticated reasoning process to answer correctly. In comparison,
for binary-choice questions, there may exist more superficial correlations that off-the-shelf VLMs
can rely on. Importantly, we also report a random human annotator’s accuracy of adhering to the
modal human response to highlight the difficulty of problems in VAB.
In Table 2, we more closely analyze the performance improvement of DSG on GPT-4o across concept
categories. We report the average performance and the standard deviation for 5 runs. We see that
DSG outperforms GPT-4o across the four categories. In particular, our method demonstrates a strong
boost in accuracy of 9.8 percent points (↑ 15% relative improvement) for strategic concepts, and
7.6 percent points (↑ 11.7% relative improvement) for social concepts. In Appendix A, we include
qualitative examples of cases where DSG succeeds and fails in correctly grounding schemas. Overall,
DSG’s decomposition-based framework improves performance of VLMs across abstract concepts.
Notably, we also analyze the performance of GPT-4v OpenAI (2023) and DSG with GPT-4v as
the base model, compared to that of GPT-4o. We summarize results as follows: GPT-4v yields an
overall accuracy of 0.653, GPT-4o yields 0.664, DSG with GPT-4v yields 0.707, and DSG with
GPT-4o yields 0.730. We see that DSG significantly improves the performance of both base models.
Importantly, DSG with GPT-4v as the base model outperforms GPT-4o by 4.3 percent points, and
showcases the potential for DSG to improve the visual reasoning performance of weaker models.

Explicit hierarchical grounding of schemas is better than implicit and sequential grounding.
We present ablation studies of different modules in DSG in Table 3. In particular, we evaluate (1) a
variant of DSG that is given only the LLM-generated schema for chain-of-thought reasoning within a
single query, without using explicit grounding steps (+ schema), (2) a variant where DSG performs
decomposed grounding sequentially instead of hierarchically (+ grounding), and (3) a hierarchical
variant (+ hierarchical) where in the final question-answering step, we provide the model with only
the grounding result of each schema component, instead of a full history of its grounding process.
With the first variant, we test whether GPT-4o can use the schema appropriately without a structured
thinking process. We explore the second variant to test whether decomposing the visual abstraction
into a set of key elements is sufficient for improving the understanding of abstract concepts, and
evaluate the role of hierarchical dependencies in lower-level concepts for grounding. Finally, we
present results on the third variant to test whether the full grounding trace of DSG is helpful during
the final question-answering step. The results show that all these design choices help: a schema only
does not lend itself to much improved performance, and hierarchical grounding from concrete to
abstract symbols, as well as the inclusion of the full context, improves performance in many concepts.

DSG improves other (open-source) VLMs, too. Tables 4 and 5 summarize the results of DSG with
open-source LLaVA as the base VLM. DSG yields consistent improvement overall (↑ 7.0% relative
improvement). However, in contrast to GPT-4o, both LLaVA and DSG yield poor results on counting
questions, as the base VLM struggles at enumeration regardless of its abstraction understanding.

           Table 4: DSG improves the performance of the open-source LLaVA model.
                                          All     Counting     Binary   Open
              LLaVA (Liu et al., 2024)      0.415        0.344       0.552      0.321
              DSG (ours)                    0.444        0.344       0.590      0.354



                                                  9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


    Table 5: Comparison of LLaVA and DSG across categories; DSG outperforms the base VLM.
                               Strategic      Scientific        Social          Domestic
 LLaVA (Liu et al., 2024)      0.407 ±0.038      0.333 ±0.101       0.378 ±0.126      0.541 ±0.091
 DSG (ours)                    0.430 ±0.046      0.378 ±0.119       0.393 ±0.154      0.578 ±0.096


6     D ISCUSSION
Our framework demonstrates that by explicitly grounding conceptual schemas through large pretrained
vision and language models, we can achieve better visual abstraction understanding in diverse real-
world instantiations. We find that LLMs generally possess well-structured knowledge of concepts,
outputting comprehensive schemas that are accurately decomposed into more concrete symbols and
their dependencies. The extracted schemas effectively capture the concise essence of a concept, such
as the answer to our initial question of what makes a maze look like a maze. However, as DSG relies
on pre-trained LLMs to generate schemas and does not restrict the schemas to a set of specified
symbols, it is possible that the schemas may contain harmful biases based on the concept given, or
may include symbols that are difficult for VLMs to interpret.
In particular, we observe that current VLMs struggle to ground challenging schema components
involving spatial constraints. DSG does not explicitly improve this capability or specify how to
parameterize spatial configurations. While DSG can generate schema components that contain spatial
relationships, and try to ground them by describing them in language, it remains limited by the
VLMs’ abilities to conduct such spatial understanding. For example, let us consider a case where the
extracted schema for the concept maze includes a symbol representing “an unobstructed path from
entry to exit”. That such a path exists in the maze—typically only one and often one that is difficult to
find—is a defining feature of mazes, yet is challenging for VLMs to correctly identify. VLMs’ lack of
spatial understanding weakens DSG’s ability to interpret complex and spatially grounded components.
Scaling DSG to better understand concepts that require precise layouts of schema components is
difficult but crucial for future work.
A key aspect of DSG is that our framework does not limit the expressiveness of schemas to a specific
set of symbols or the grounding process to a specific set of answers. The only prior we inject into
DSG is the hierarchical process of resolving the schema—the interface between the LLM and VLMs
is unconstrained language. In theory, DSG can propose and ground any concept and any individual
component, allowing the LLM and VLM to determine what defines a visual abstraction without any
restrictions. But such flexibility may also render the schema ambiguous and not universal enough to
improve downstream tasks. However, we see that the empirical evidence in our paper supports DSG,
and we believe that DSG serves as a proof of concept for the kind of inductive biases that should
be incorporated into visual reasoning systems—a structured thinking process guided by flexible but
explicit knowledge can augment visual abstraction interpretation.
While we have made progress on understanding what makes a maze look like a maze, in proposing
DSG as a framework for leveraging explicit schemas backed by powerful LLMs and VLMs, we are
far from solving all reasoning across abstract concepts as humans do. There may be ways to improve
the grounding of individual components, as well as more efficient priors that can be incorporated into
the system. We leave such exploration to future work.

7     C ONCLUSION
We propose Deep Schema Grounding as a promising approach to understanding visual abstractions.
DSG leverages schemas of concepts to decompose abstract concepts into subcomponents and model
their dependencies. Our framework extracts explicitly structured schemas from large language models
and hierarchically grounds them to images with vision-language models. On the Visual Abstractions
Benchmark, a visual question-answering benchmark composed of real-world images with diverse
underlying abstract concepts, DSG demonstrates significant improvements compared to base VLMs.
DSG is a step toward interpreting visual abstractions as humans do; more remains to be done in the
challenge of visual abstraction reasoning.


                                                  10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We thank Michael Li and Weiyu Liu for providing valuable feedback. This work is in part supported
by the Stanford Institute for Human-Centered Artificial Intelligence (HAI), ONR N00014-23-1-2355,
ONR YIP N00014-24-1-2117, NSF RI #2211258, Air Force Office of Scientific Research (AFOSR)
YIP FA9550-23-1-0127, the Center for Brain, Minds, and Machines (CBMM), the MIT Quest for
Intelligence, MIT–IBM Watson AI Lab, and Analog Devices. JH is also supported by the Knight
Hennessy Scholarship and the NSF Graduate Research Fellowship.

R EFERENCES
Stanislaw Antol, Aishwarya Agrawal, Jiasen Lu, Margaret Mitchell, Dhruv Batra, C Lawrence
  Zitnick, and Devi Parikh. VQA: Visual Question Answering. In ICCV, 2015.
Irving Biederman. Recognition-by-Components: A Theory of Human Image Understanding. Psycho-
   logical Review, 1987.
Susan Carey. Conceptual Change in Childhood. MIT Press, 1985.
Susan Carey. The Origin of Concepts. Journal of Cognition and Development, 2000.
Xinlei Chen, Hao Fang, Tsung-Yi Lin, Ramakrishna Vedantam, Saurabh Gupta, Piotr Dollár,
  and C Lawrence Zitnick. Microsoft COCO Captions: Data Collection and Evaluation Server.
  arXiv:1504.00325, 2015.
Yangyi Chen, Karan Sikka, Michael Cogswell, Heng Ji, and Ajay Divakaran. Measuring and
  Improving Chain-of-thought Reasoning in Vision-Language Models. NAACL, 2024.
Wenliang Dai, Junnan Li, Dongxu Li, Anthony Meng Huat Tiong, Junqi Zhao, Weisheng Wang,
 Boyang Li, Pascale N Fung, and Steven Hoi. InstructBLIP: Towards General-purpose Vision-
 language Models with Instruction Tuning. NeurIPS, 2024.
Luyu Gao, Aman Madaan, Shuyan Zhou, Uri Alon, Pengfei Liu, Yiming Yang, Jamie Callan, and
  Graham Neubig. PAL: Program-aided Language Models. In ICML, 2023.
Alison Gopnik. Conceptual and Semantic Development as Theory Change: The Case of Object
  Permanence. Mind & Language, 1988.
Alison Gopnik and Andrew N Meltzoff. Words, Thoughts, and Theories. MIT Press, 1997.
Tanmay Gupta and Aniruddha Kembhavi. Visual Programming: Compositional Visual Reasoning
  without Training. In CVPR, 2023.
Joy Hsu, Jiayuan Mao, Josh Tenenbaum, and Jiajun Wu. What’s Left? Concept Grounding with
  Logic-Enhanced Foundation Models. NeurIPS, 2024.
Ronghang Hu, Jacob Andreas, Marcus Rohrbach, Trevor Darrell, and Kate Saenko. Learning to
  Reason: End-to-End Module Networks for Visual Question Answering. In ICCV, 2017.
Ehsan Kamalloo, Nouha Dziri, Charles LA Clarke, and Davood Rafiei. Evaluating Open-domain
  Question Answering in the Era of Large Language Models. ACL, 2023.
Pang Wei Koh, Thao Nguyen, Yew Siang Tang, Stephen Mussmann, Emma Pierson, Been Kim, and
  Percy Liang. Concept Bottleneck Models. In ICML, 2020.
Ranjay Krishna, Yuke Zhu, Oliver Groth, Justin Johnson, Kenji Hata, Joshua Kravitz, Stephanie
  Chen, Yannis Kalantidis, Li-Jia Li, David A Shamma, et al. Visual Genome: Connecting Language
  and Vision using Crowdsourced Dense Image Annotations. IJCV, 2017.
Chengshu Li, Ruohan Zhang, Josiah Wong, Cem Gokmen, Sanjana Srivastava, Roberto Martı́n-
  Martı́n, Chen Wang, Gabrael Levine, Michael Lingelbach, Jiankai Sun, et al. Behavior-1k: A
  Benchmark for Embodied AI with 1,000 Everyday Activities and Realistic Simulation. In CoRL,
  2023.


                                               11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Lin Li, Jun Xiao, Guikun Chen, Jian Shao, Yueting Zhuang, and Long Chen. Zero-shot Visual
  Relation Detection via Composite Visual Cues from Large Language Models. NeurIPS, 2024.
Haotian Liu, Chunyuan Li, Qingyang Wu, and Yong Jae Lee. Visual Instruction Tuning. NeurIPS,
  2024.
Pan Lu, Swaroop Mishra, Tanglin Xia, Liang Qiu, Kai-Wei Chang, Song-Chun Zhu, Oyvind Tafjord,
  Peter Clark, and Ashwin Kalyan. Learn to Explain: Multimodal Reasoning via Thought Chains
  for Science Question Answering. NeurIPS, 2022.
Jiayuan Mao, Chuang Gan, Pushmeet Kohli, Joshua B Tenenbaum, and Jiajun Wu. The Neuro-
   Symbolic Concept Learner: Interpreting Scenes, Words, and Sentences from Natural Supervision.
   In ICLR, 2019.
Sachit Menon and Carl Vondrick. Visual Classification via Description from Large Language Models.
  ICLR, 2023.
Adam Morton. Frames of Mind: Constraints on the Common-sense Conception of the Mental. Oxford
  University Press, 1980.
OpenAI.    ChatGPT Can Now See, Hear, and Speak.                     https://openai.com/blog/
  chatgpt-can-now-see-hear-and-speak, 2023.
OpenAI. Hello GPT-4o. https://openai.com/index/hello-gpt-4o/, 2024.
Hamed Pirsiavash, Carl Vondrick, and Antonio Torralba.            Inferring the Why in Images.
  arXiv:1406.5472, 2, 2014.
Roger C Schank and Robert P Abelson. Scripts, Plans, and Knowledge. In IJCAI, 1975.
Xiujie Song, Mengyue Wu, Kenny Q Zhu, Chunhao Zhang, and Yanyi Chen. A Cognitive Eval-
  uation Benchmark of Image Reasoning and Description for Large Vision Language Models.
  arXiv:2402.18409, 2024.
Robyn Speer, Joshua Chin, and Catherine Havasi. ConceptNet 5.5: An Open Multilingual Graph of
  General Knowledge. In AAAI, 2017.
Dı́dac Surı́s, Sachit Menon, and Carl Vondrick. ViperGPT: Visual Inference via Python Execution for
   Reasoning. In ICCV, 2023.
Misha Wagner, Hector Basevi, Rakshith Shetty, Wenbin Li, Mateusz Malinowski, Mario Fritz,
 and Ales Leonardis. Answering Visual What-if Questions: From Actions to Predicted Scene
 Descriptions. In ECCV Workshops, 2018.
Peng Wang, Qi Wu, Chunhua Shen, Anthony Dick, and Anton Van Den Hengel. FVQA: Fact-based
  Visual Question Answering. IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence,
  2017.
Jason Wei, Xuezhi Wang, Dale Schuurmans, Maarten Bosma, Fei Xia, Ed Chi, Quoc V Le, Denny
  Zhou, et al. Chain-of-thought Prompting Elicits Reasoning in Large Language Models. NeurIPS,
  2022.
Qi Wu, Peng Wang, Chunhua Shen, Anthony Dick, and Anton Van Den Hengel. Ask Me Anything:
  Free-form Visual Question Answering Based on Knowledge from External Sources. In CVPR,
  2016.
Licheng Yu, Eunbyung Park, Alexander C Berg, and Tamara L Berg. Visual Madlibs: Fill in the
  Blank Image Generation and Question Answering. In ICCV, 2015.
Eric Zelikman, Qian Huang, Gabriel Poesia, Noah D Goodman, and Nick Haber. Parsel: A Unified
  Natural Language Framework for Algorithmic Reasoning. NeurIPS, 2023.
Rowan Zellers, Yonatan Bisk, Ali Farhadi, and Yejin Choi. From Recognition to Cognition: Visual
  Commonsense Reasoning. In CVPR, 2019.


                                                12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Tianhua Zhang, Jiaxin Ge, Hongyin Luo, Yung-Sung Chuang, Mingye Gao, Yuan Gong, Xixin Wu,
  Yoon Kim, Helen Meng, and James Glass. Natural Language Embedded Programs for Hybrid
  Language Symbolic Reasoning. NAACL, 2024.
Tianyi Zhang, Varsha Kishore, Felix Wu, Kilian Q Weinberger, and Yoav Artzi. BERTScore:
  Evaluating Text Generation with BERT. ICLR, 2020.
Yuke Zhu, Oliver Groth, Michael Bernstein, and Li Fei-Fei. Visual7w: Grounded Question Answering
  in Images. In CVPR, 2016.


                                               13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


S UPPLEMENTARY FOR :
W HAT M AKES A M AZE L OOK L IKE A M AZE ?
The appendix is organized as the following. In Appendix A, we present comparisons of Deep Schema
Grounding to prior works with a graded accuracy metric, comparisons on free response generation,
results on single- v.s. multi-round reasoning, results with language-only baselines, ablations on schema
complexity, qualitative examples of DSG, and examples of hierarchical grounding. In Appendix B,
we show more examples of the Visual Abstractions Benchmark, explain our benchmark construction
procedure, describe our annotation collection process, and release our dataset. In Appendix C, we
provide our prompt to the LLM and all extracted schemas, as well as results from a human study
evaluating the quality of the generated schemas.

A     A DDITIONAL R ESULTS
A.1   G RADED ACCURACY C OMPARISON

Due to variation in human responses on the Visual Abstractions Benchmark—arising from natural
errors in annotation or potential ambiguity in questions—we compare Deep Schema Grounding to
prior works with a graded accuracy metric, based on degree of alignment to human judgements.
Predicted answers each receive K  5 points, where K is the number of human annotators out of 5 that
agree with the prediction. In Table 6, we report results with the graded accuracy metric over 5 runs.
DSG consistently outperforms previous works, showing an overall accuracy increase of 6.2 percent
points (↑ 10% relative improvement), and an accuracy boost in counting questions of 10.8 percent
points (↑ 20.8% relative improvement). We observe a similar trend in performance as with modal
response accuracy reported in the main text—more improvement is seen in counting questions.
Table 6: Comparison of DSG to prior works with a graded accuracy metric based on degree of
alignment to human judgements.
                                           All       Counting    Binary    Open
         ViperGPT (Surı́s et al., 2023)            0.254      0.200           0.413     0.136
         VisProg (Gupta & Kembhavi, 2023)          0.293      0.227           0.380     0.242
         LLaVA (Liu et al., 2024)                  0.400      0.327           0.548     0.298
         InstructBLIP (Dai et al., 2024)           0.420      0.307           0.528     0.368
         GPT-4o (OpenAI, 2024)                     0.622      0.519           0.655     0.632
         DSG (ours)                                0.684      0.627           0.681     0.708
         Human                                     0.789      0.728           0.784     0.816

A.2   C OMPARISON ON F REE R ESPONSE G ENERATION

We present comparisons between DSG and GPT-4o on free response generation in Table 7, with
accuracy first evaluated by BERTScores Zhang et al. (2020). We see that DSG outperforms GPT-4o
across all questions and question types.
       Table 7: Performance on free response generation; DSG outperforms the base VLM.
                                          All       Counting Binary Open
                 GPT-4o (OpenAI, 2024)        0.900    0.917          0.942     0.858
                 DSG (ours)                   0.908    0.949          0.946     0.859

Additionally, we report free-response results by incorporating an LLM-based strategy for evaluating
free-response answers (Kamalloo et al., 2023). In particular, we use zero-shot evaluation via LLM
prompting, which includes the ground truth and predicted answer in the prompt, to verify the
correctness of the prediction. We use GPT-4 as the base LLM, and compare GPT-4o with DSG. In
Table 8, we see that DSG outperforms GPT-4o overall, with particularly strong results on counting and
open-ended questions, and shows stronger signal than with BERTScores. However, performance on
binary questions is lower, which we hypothesize is due to some of the components being potentially
misleading or ambiguous in binary contexts.


                                                  14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Table 8: Performance on free response generation with Kamalloo et al. (2023)’s GPT-4-based metric
for evaluating open-domain QA models.
                                     All       Counting Binary Open
                       GPT-4o         36.67     45.56        55.24     14.58
                       DSG (ours)     37.78     53.33        49.52     21.25


A.3   R ESULTS ON S INGLE - ROUND VS . M ULTI - ROUND R EASONING

The key idea behind DSG lies in schema decomposition (e.g., in the form of extracting components:
layout, walls, and entry and exit) to guide the VLM to interpret the scene. DSG introduces an explicit
guidance to the VLM system, by first generating a decomposition of the target concept, parsing the
image, then answering the question. The specific method of processing these questions—whether in
a single query or across multiple queries—is not fundamentally important. While in theory, these
steps could be merged into a single CoT-style prompt (Wei et al., 2022), our following experiments
show that multi-round execution with explicit grounding steps significantly improves performance in
practice, at least for the current vision-language models.
Here, we compare results of (1) GPT-4o, (2) a single-round CoT baseline given schema components
(e.g. the VLM is given components for reasoning in a single query, without using the explicit
grounding steps), (3) a single-round CoT baseline given the full hierarchical schema (also in Table 3),
and (4) our full multi-round DSG framework. All results are averaged over 5 runs. In Table 9, we see
that DSG’s multi-round execution outperforms single-round, CoT-style baselines, likely due to its
explicit guidance and grounding.

Table 9: Comparison of DSG with single- and multi-round grounding of the schema, with results
averaged over 5 runs.
                                                   All     Counting Binary Open
      GPT-4o                                            0.664     0.604        0.655     0.693
      Single-round with schema components               0.667     0.607        0.661     0.696
      Single-round with hierarchical schema             0.681     0.629        0.672     0.709
      Multi-round with hierarchical schema (DSG)        0.730     0.704        0.690     0.776


A.4   L ANGUAGE - ONLY BASELINES

We additionally report results on language baselines. The first is a language-only baseline, where
GPT-4o only has access to the question itself without input image or schema. The second is a
language-with-schema baseline, where GPT-4o has access to the question and the DSG grounded
schema (the schema is extracted from the image and provides context), but the final query itself does
not have access to the image. We report results over 5 runs, and present results in Table 10.

Table 10: Comparison with language-only baseline and baseline with DSG’s grounded schema, with
results averaged over 5 runs.
                                           All      Counting Binary Open
                Language-only                  0.397    0.300        0.510     0.335
                Language w/ DSG schema         0.522    0.440        0.530     0.546

Notably, the language-only baseline performs worse than all open-source and closed-source VLMs,
showing that the visual input is essential for achieving higher accuracy on the benchmark. We note
that the language-only baseline outperforms integrated LLMs with API baselines, as these methods
tend to fail in execution. With DSG’s grounded schema, the language model performs significantly
better, highlighting the importance of the holistic context provided by the grounded schema. We
see that in open-ended questions, the grounded schema significantly improves performance of the
language-only baseline. We hypothesize that this is because the schema helps rule out implausible
answer choices by leveraging the grounded components.


                                                 15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A.5   S CHEMA C OMPLEXITY A BLATION

We highlight that there’s a tradeoff between encouraging more detailed components in a schema
and avoiding both components that are less broadly applicable across all image instantiations as
well as potential failures of current VLMs in handling such detailed concepts, especially more
spatially-focused ones. As capabilities of VLMs increase, we believe DSG’s performance will scale
accordingly, and we can increase the detail of the schema without making this tradeoff. In addition,
the complexity of the generated schema is currently influenced by the number of components in the
example prompt. As LLMs become less dependent on the form of the initial prompt, they can decide
the schema without being influenced by the bias in the example.
To explore the impact of schema complexity and better understand the capabilities of current VLMs,
we report ablations results varying the numbers of components in the example prompt: 3, 5, 7, and 9.
The example prompts are based on the same abstract concept academia expanded to different levels
of detail.
With 3 components:
gen(concept=academia) =
   gen(faculty | concept=academia)
   gen(students | concept=academia)
   gen(research−output | concept=academia, faculty, students)


With 5 components:
gen(concept=academia) =
   gen(faculty | concept=academia)
   gen(students | concept=academia)
   gen(courses | concept=academia, faculty, students)
   gen(research−output | concept=academia, faculty, students, courses)
   gen(funding | concept=academia, research−output)


With 7 components:
gen(concept=academia) =
   gen(faculty | concept=academia)
   gen(students | concept=academia)
   gen(departments | concept=academia, faculty, students)
   gen(courses | concept=academia, departments, faculty, students)
   gen(research−output | concept=academia, departments, faculty, students)
   gen(funding | concept=academia, research−output, departments)
   gen(infrastructure | concept=academia, funding, departments, courses)


With 9 components:
gen(concept=academia) =
   gen(faculty | concept=academia)
   gen(students | concept=academia)
   gen(departments | concept=academia, faculty, students)
   gen(courses | concept=academia, departments, faculty, students)
   gen(research−output | concept=academia, departments, faculty, students)
   gen(funding | concept=academia, research−output, departments)
   gen(infrastructure | concept=academia, funding, departments, courses)
   gen(administration | concept=academia, infrastructure, departments, faculty, students)
   gen(community−engagement | concept=academia, research−output, administration, students,
        faculty)



         Table 11: Ablation with varying number of components in the example prompt.
                                       All     Counting Binary Open
                    DSG w/ 3 comp.      0.730     0.689       0.700     0.771
                    DSG w/ 5 comp.      0.691     0.622       0.671     0.733
                    DSG w/ 7 comp.      0.685     0.667       0.662     0.713
                    DSG w/ 9 comp.      0.676     0.700       0.657     0.683

In Table 11, the results demonstrate that accuracy decreases as the number of components in the
example prompt increases, likely due to current VLMs struggling with grounding more specific
components. We note that all DSG variants still outperform the GPT-4o baseline. Interestingly, our
findings also highlight a tendency for LLMs to generate shorter schemas, even when exposed to more
detailed example prompts. In Table 12 we show the number components in the prompts and the mean
number of components in the resulting schemas, averaged over all abstract concepts.


                                                16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Table 12: Number of components in schema and the resulting average number of components in the
generated schemas.
                                         Generated comp. #
                                               3 comp.        3.00
                                               5 comp.        4.66
                                               7 comp.        5.75
                                               9 comp.        7.00


Notably, although the number of components in the example prompt does affect the average number of
components in resulting schemas, this effect is less prominent and the resulting average plateaus. This
phenomenon indicates that schemas may potentially converge to shorter lengths. And while current
VLMs’ limitations constrain schema complexity, as these capabilities improve with development, we
expect DSG’s performance to scale, enabling our framework to adopt more detailed schemas without
sacrificing effectiveness.

A.6   Q UALITATIVE E XAMPLES

We present examples of DSG’s resolved schemas in Figure 6; in particular, we highlight cases where
DSG’s schema grounding process errors in red.

                Imagine that the image                   Imagine that the image         Imagine that the image
                represents tic tac toe, and              represents maze, and the       represents treasure map, and
                the board is tape on floor,              layout is double-spiral, and   the map is a cookie, and the
                and the symbols are plates               the walls are sand ridges,     x marks the spot is a
                and cups, and the strategy               and the entry and exit is      chocolate x, and the path is
                is block opponent.                       outer ends of the spirals.     icing-dashed-lines.


                Imagine that the image                   Imagine that the image         Imagine that the image
                represents solar system, and             represents atom, and the       represents cell, and the
                the sun is an orange slice,              nucleus is a cluster of        membrane is an orange
                and the planets are fruits               candies, and the electrons     string, and the nucleus is a
                and snacks, and the orbits               are green candies, and the     blue knitted ball, and the
                are yogurt drizzles.                     energy levels are icing        organelles are craft
                                                         trails.                        materials arranged on a
                                                                                        board.

                Imagine that the image                   Imagine that the image         Imagine that the image
                represents helping, and the              represents deceiving, and      represents negotiating, and
                helper is a blue hand, and               the deceiver is an ambush,     the participants are dolls,
                the recipient is an octopus              and the victim is a lego       and the setting is home
                toy, and the task is                     figure with helmet, and the    office, and the objects are
                celebration setup.                       deceptive object is spear.     dolls.


                Imagine that the image                   Imagine that the image         Imagine that the image
                represents setting up table              represents tidying up guest    represents putting up
                for two, and the table is a              room, and the bed is a         decorations on door, and the
                picnic table, and the two                neatly-made bed, and the       door type is classroom
                chairs are cushions, and the             storage is a dresser and       door, and the decoration
                table setting is an outdoor              nightstand, and the            type is valentine's day
                picnic setup.                            cleanliness is immaculate.     decorations, and the tools
                                                                                        are adhesive tape or tacks.



Figure 6: Examples of DSG’s resolved schemas across different abstract concepts; in red we highlight
failure cases where inference of individual components errors.


A.7   H IERARCHICAL G ROUNDING E XAMPLE

In Figure 7, we highlight an example of how DSG’s hierarchical inference improves schema grounding
accuracy compared to a sequential version of DSG.

A.8   C OMPUTING R ESOURCES

We use OpenAI’s API for GPT-4o (OpenAI, 2024), ViperGPT (Surı́s et al., 2023), and VisProg (Gupta
& Kembhavi, 2023). Open-sourced models, LLaVA (Liu et al., 2024) and InstructBLIP (Dai et al.,


                                                         17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                 Hierarchical Grounding                                                  Sequential Grounding
                                                              Concept
 gen(nucleus | concept=atom)                                            gen(nucleus | concept=atom)
 Q: “Imagine that the image represents an atom, what is        Atom     Q: “Imagine that the image represents an atom, what is
 the nucleus?”                                                          the nucleus?”
 A: Grapes                                                              A: Grapes
 gen(electrons | concept=atom)                                          gen(electrons | concept=atom)
 Q: “Imagine that the image represents an atom, what are                Q: “Imagine that the image represents an atom, what
 the electrons?”                                                        are the electrons?”
 A: Blueberries                                                         A: Blueberries
 gen(energy-levels | concept=atom, nucleus, electrons)                  gen(energy-levels | concept=atom)
 Q: “Imagine that the image represents an atom, and the                 Q: “Imagine that the image represents an atom, what
 nucleus is grapes, and the electrons are blueberries, what             are the energy levels?”
 are the energy levels?”                                                A: Orbitals
 A: Plate edges
 gen(concept=atom)                                                      gen(concept=atom)
 Resolved schema: Imagine that the image represents an                  Resolved schema: Imagine that the image represents
 atom, and the nucleus is grapes, and the electrons are                 an atom, and the nucleus is grapes, and the electrons
 blueberries, and the energy levels are plate edges.                    are blueberries, and the energy levels are orbitals.



Figure 7: In comparison to DSG, which hierarchically grounds each component, a sequential variant
errors when grounding a more fine-grained symbol, energy-levels, without conditioning on prior
predictions of more concrete symbols, nucleus and electrons.

2024), and the API calls of the aforementioned integrated LLMs with APIs, were run inference-only
with 1 A40 on an internal cluster.


                                                                18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


B     V ISUAL A BSTRACTIONS B ENCHMARK
B.1   B ENCHMARK E XAMPLES

In Figure 9, we provide visual question-answering examples of VAB across concept types and
question types.

B.2   B ENCHMARK C ONSTRUCTION

We constructed the Visual Abstractions Benchmark inspired by areas where abstract concepts would
occur in the real-world, including strategic games which can be played across instantiations, scientific
concepts where many classroom science projects exist, social concepts with theory-of-mind examples,
and domestic concepts with tasks that do not have predefined and exact configurations of end states.
Images were manually curated from the Internet, primarily using Google Image Search. We searched
for diverse real-world representations of each concept (e.g., tic-tac-toe on the beach). Images were
chosen such that each image is (a) faithful to the given concept, (b) diverse compared to other chosen
images, (c) real-world, and (d) high-quality; this process is difficult to procedurally replicate. We
then wrote general questions for each concept, aiming for broad applicability and alignment with the
images. These questions focus on reasoning grounded in the abstract concept rather than specific
visual details of individual images. Once images and questions were curated, they were sent to human
annotators via Prolific for labeling.

B.3   A NNOTATION

We collect annotations for the Visual Abstractions Benchmark through Prolific; 5 human annotators
labeled each question-image pair. Figure 8 shows our annotation interface, built from jsPsych. Each
annotator was compensated at the rate of $12 USD per hour, and no potential risk was incurred by
the annotators.


            Figure 8: Example of our annotation interface shown to Prolific annotators.


B.4   R ELEASE

We release the Visual Abstractions Benchmark here. We group all images by their corresponding
abstract concepts. Each image is carefully curated and manually audited to be safe for release.


                                                  19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                Q: Imagine that the image               Q: Imagine that the image               Q: Imagine that the image
                represents tic-tac-toe. What are the    represents tic-tac-toe. What team       represents tic-tac-toe. What team
                symbols of the two teams? Answer        has more symbols played on the          is leading the game? Answer with
                with one of the following answer        board? Answer with one of the           one of the following answer
                choices: chocolate and cracker,         following answer choices:               choices: hula hoop, red frisbee,
                chocolate and marshmallow,              cucumber, lettuce, tomato, equal.       yellow frisbee, uncertain.
                cracker and marshmallow.

                A: Chocolate and marshmallow            A: Tomato                               A: Yellow frisbee

                Q: Imagine that the image               Q: Imagine that the image               Q: Imagine that the image
                represents a maze. What are the         represents a maze. What is the          represents a maze. Are there clear
                walls made of? Answer with one          player in this maze? Return none        entrances or exits in the maze?
                of the following answer choices:        if there is no player. Answer with      Answer with one of the following
                lights, mirror, stairs.                 one of the following answer             answer choices: yes, no.
                                                        choices: ball, heart, icing, none.



                A: Mirror                               A: Ball                                 A: Yes
                Q: Imagine that the image               Q: Imagine that the image               Q: Imagine that the image
                represents a treasure map. What is      represents a treasure map. Based        represents a treasure map. Is there
                the path made of? Answer with           on the image, find the starting         a treasure location marked with
                one of the following answer             location; what is the main color of     red? Answer with one of the
                choices: black line, red line,          the map region that is physically       following answer choices: yes, no.
                stickers, tortilla marking.             closest to the starting location?
                                                        Return none if there is no region.
                                                        Answer with one of the following
                                                        answer choices: red, yellow, green,
                A: Black line                           blue, black, white, silver, none.       A: No
                                                        A: Red
                Q: Imagine that the image               Q: Imagine that the image               Q: Imagine that the image
                represents a solar system. Find the     represents a solar system. Are the      represents a solar system. Is there
                item that represents Earth; what is     planets following the correct order     an item that represents the sun?
                the main color of the item that is      of the solar system? Answer with        Answer with one of the following
                physically closest to Earth and         one of the following answer             answer choices: yes, no.
                also represents a planet? Answer        choices: yes, no.
                with one of the following answer
                choices: red, orange, yellow,
                purple, brown, gray.                    A: No                                   A: Yes
                A: Brown
                Q: Imagine that the image               Q: Imagine that the image               Q: Imagine that the image
                represents an atom. What symbol         represents an atom. What are the        represents an atom. What symbol
                represents the electron? Answer         symbols of the proton and               represents the electron shells?
                with one of the following answer        neutron? Answer with one of the         Answer with one of the following
                choices: blue bead, craft, gold         following answer choices: green         answer choices: aluminum foil,
                bead, pipe cleaner, purple bead.        ball and orange ball, orange ball       orange cereal, red candy, rice
                                                        and pink ball, pink ball and green      crispy, yellow candy, none.
                                                        ball.
                A: Gold bead                            A: Orange ball and pink ball            A: Rice crispy
                Q: Imagine that the image               Q: Imagine that the image               Q: Imagine that the image
                represents a cell. What symbol          represents a cell. What is the main     represents a cell. Excluding the
                represents the nucleus? Answer          color of the cell membrane?             nucleus, how many types of
                with one of the following answer        Answer with one of the following        organelles are there? If seven or
                choices: avocado, gumball,              answer choices: pink, orange,           more, return numerous. Answer
                gummy worm, licorice twist,             yellow, green, blue, black, brown,      with one of the following answer
                watermelon.                             transparent.                            choices: three, four, five, six,
                                                                                                numerous.
                A: Avocado                              A: Pink                                 A: Five
                Q: Imagine that the image               Q: Imagine that the image               Q: Imagine that the image
                represents helping. Has the goal        represents helping. Is the goal to      represents helping. How many
                state been achieved, or is the          help with doing something, or help      entities are helping? If three or
                action still in progress? Answer        with stopping something from            more, return numerous. Answer
                with one of the following answer        happening? Answer with one of           with one of the following answer
                choices: achieved, in progress.         the following answer choices:           choices: one, two, numerous.
                                                        doing, stopping.

                A: In progress                          A: Doing                                A: Numerous
                Q: Imagine that the image               Q: Imagine that the image               Q: Imagine that the image
                represents deceiving. What is the       represents deceiving. Does the          represents deceiving. How many
                deceiver trying to hide? Answer         entity being deceived seem to           entities are being deceived? If
                with one of the following answer        have doubts about the deceiver?         three or more, return numerous.
                choices: beer, card, itself, poker      Answer with one of the following        Answer with one of the following
                chip, uncertain.                        answer choices: yes, no, uncertain.     answer choices: one, two,
                                                                                                numerous.

                A: Card                                 A: No                                   A: Numerous
                Q: Imagine that the image               Q: Imagine that the image               Q: Imagine that the image
                represents negotiating. What is         represents negotiating. Does an         represents negotiating. Is there a
                being negotiated? Return none if        entity seem to have the upper hand      side of negotiation with more
                there are no visible items being        in negotiation? Answer with one         entities? Answer with one of the
                negotiated. Answer with one of the      of the following answer choices:        following answer choices: yes, no,
                following answer choices: food,         yes, no.                                uncertain.
                house, sheep, none.

                A: Sheep                                A: No                                   A: Yes
                Q: Imagine that the image               Q: Imagine that the image               Q: Imagine that the image
                represents setting up table for two.    represents setting up table for two.    represents setting up table for two.
                Based on the image, can you             Based on the image, can you             What is the configuration of the
                predict how many forks are placed       predict how many plates are             seats? Answer with one of the
                for each person? Answer with one        placed for each person? Answer          following answer choices: across,
                of the following answer choices:        with one of the following answer        adjacent.
                one, two, three, four.                  choices: one, two, three, four, five,
                                                        six.
                A: Two                                  A: Two                                  A: Across
                Q: Imagine that the image               Q: Imagine that the image               Q: Imagine that the image
                represents tidying up guest room.       represents tidying up guest room.       represents tidying up guest room.
                Based on the image, can you             Are the linens tidied? Answer with      Are there still personal items in
                predict how many pillows are            one of the following answer             the room? Answer with one of the
                placed on the bed? Answer with          choices: yes, no.                       following answer choices: yes, no.
                one of the following answer
                choices: one, two, three, four, five,
                six, uncertain.
                A: Two                                  A: No                                   A: Yes
                Q: Imagine that the image               Q: Imagine that the image               Q: Imagine that the image
                represents putting up decor on          represents putting up decor on          represents putting up decor on
                door. What is the theme of the          door. Are there more decorations        door. Do the decorations integrate
                decoration? Answer with one of          at the center of the door, or           with a component specific to the
                the following answer choices:           directly surrounding the door?          door? Answer with one of the
                valentine, fall, halloween, winter,     Answer with one of the following        following answer choices: yes, no.
                christmas, new year, uncertain.         answer choices: center,
                                                        surrounding
                A: Fall                                 A: Surrounding                          A: Yes

  Figure 9: Examples of visual question-answering pairs in the Visual Abstractions Benchmark.


                                                        20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


C     LLM-G ENERATED S CHEMAS

C.1   P ROMPT

Below, we provide the prompt used as input to GPT-4 to extract schemas for visual abstractions; we
substitute [abstract-concept] for a given concept.
Can you give me a program representing the schema for a concept? For example,
gen(concept=academia) =
   gen(faculty | concept=academia)
   gen(students | concept=academia)
   gen(research−output | concept=academia, faculty, students)
Please do the same for gen(concept=[abstract−concept]) in the same format without explanation.
      Keep the program simple with four or less components. Use only the most necessary parts
     of the schema that can be mapped to objects in an image.


C.2   A LL S CHEMAS

Here, we present all LLM-generated schemas for the Visual Abstractions Benchmark.

Strategic concepts.
gen(concept=tic−tac−toe) =
   gen(board | concept=tic−tac−toe)
   gen(symbols | concept=tic−tac−toe)
   gen(strategy | concept=tic−tac−toe, symbols)

gen(concept=maze) =
   gen(layout | concept=maze)
   gen(walls | concept=maze)
   gen(entry−exit | concept=maze, layout)

gen(concept=treasure−map) =
   gen(map | concept=treasure−map)
   gen(x−marks−the−spot | concept=treasure−map)
   gen(path | concept=treasure−map, map)


Scientific concepts.
gen(concept=solar−system) =
   gen(sun | concept=solar−system)
   gen(planets | concept=solar−system)
   gen(orbits | concept=solar−system, sun, planets)

gen(concept=atom) =
   gen(nucleus | concept=atom)
   gen(electrons | concept=atom)
   gen(energy−levels | concept=atom, nucleus, electrons)

gen(concept=cell) =
   gen(membrane | concept=cell)
   gen(nucleus | concept=cell)
   gen(organelles | concept=cell)


Social concepts.
gen(concept=helping) =
   gen(helper | concept=helping)
   gen(recipient | concept=helping)
   gen(task | concept=helping, helper, recipient)

gen(concept=deceiving) =
   gen(deceiver | concept=deceiving)
   gen(victim | concept=deceiving)
   gen(deceptive−object | concept=deceiving, deceiver, victim)

gen(concept=negotiating) =
   gen(participants | concept=negotiating)
   gen(setting | concept=negotiating)
   gen(objects | concept=negotiating, participants)


                                               21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Domestic concepts.
gen(concept=setting−up−table−for−two) =
   gen(table | concept=setting−up−table−for−two)
   gen(two−chairs | concept=setting−up−table−for−two)
   gen(table−setting | concept=setting−up−table−for−two, table)

gen(concept=tidying−up−guest−room) =
   gen(bed | concept=tidying−up−guest−room)
   gen(storage | concept=tidying−up−guest−room)
   gen(cleanliness | concept=tidying−up−guest−room, bed, storage)

gen(concept=putting−up−decorations−on−door) =
   gen(decoration−type | concept=putting−up−decorations−on−door)
   gen(door−type | concept=putting−up−decorations−on−door)
   gen(tools | concept=putting−up−decorations−on−door, decoration−type)



C.3   H UMAN S TUDY OF S CHEMA Q UALITY

To evaluate the correctness and quality of the generated schemas, we conduct a human study using
Prolific, with 20 participants. Each participant was asked 3 questions about each schema. The
questions are as follow for an example concept maze:
Here you are given a concept, maze, and the core components underlying it: layout, walls,
     entry−exit. How well do these core components represent this concept on a scale of 1−7?
Here you are given a concept, maze, and the core components underlying it: layout, walls,
     entry−exit. How many components out of the ones listed accurately represent part of this
     concept?
Here you are given a concept, maze, and the core components underlying it: layout, walls,
     entry−exit. How many more components, if any, would you add to accurately represent this
     concept?


We collect 3 responses for each of 12 concepts with 20 responses each, and yield a total of 720 human
annotated answers. In Table 13, we see that (a) participants rated schemas as reasonably representative,
(b) 86.3% of the components were considered accurate by participants, and (c) participants suggested
adding 1.6 components on average per schema. The concept that ranks highest for the first question is
the concept cell with a rating of 6.15, and lowest as the concept negotiating with 4.50. The concept
solar-system had the highest number of components to keep at 95%, while the concept negotiating
is the lowest again at 61.7%. The concept tic-tac-toe was the most complete, with an average of 1
concept that participants might add, while the concept solar-system had an average of 2.65. Though
there is still room for improvement, the schemas generated by the LLM are largely accurate and
aligned with human expectations. Importantly, none of the schemas were judged as fully invalid,
showing the robustness of DSG’s approach.

Table 13: Prolific study on quality of generated schemas, with results averaged over 20 participants.
                               Representativeness (1-7) # comp. to keep # comp. to add
       Participant responses    5.74                         2.59                1.59


                                                  22
