Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


L EARNING TO S TEER M ARKOVIAN AGENTS
UNDER M ODEL U NCERTAINTY

 Jiawei Huang: , Vinzenz Thoma; , Zebang Shen: , Heinrich H. Nax§ , Niao He:
 : Department of Computer Science, ETH Zurich
   {jiawei.huang, zebang.shen, niao.he}@inf.ethz.ch
 ; ETH AI Center
   vinzenz.thoma@ai.ethz.ch
 § University of Zurich
   heinrich.nax@uzh.ch



                                                 A BSTRACT

             Designing incentives for an adapting population is a ubiquitous problem in a wide
             array of economic applications and beyond. In this work, we study how to design
             additional rewards to steer multi-agent systems towards desired policies without
             prior knowledge of the agents’ underlying learning dynamics. Motivated by the
             limitation of existing works, we consider a new and general category of learning
             dynamics called Markovian agents. We introduce a model-based non-episodic
             Reinforcement Learning (RL) formulation for our steering problem. Importantly,
             we focus on learning a history-dependent steering strategy to handle the inherent
             model uncertainty about the agents’ learning dynamics. We introduce a novel ob-
             jective function to encode the desiderata of achieving a good steering outcome with
             reasonable cost. Theoretically, we identify conditions for the existence of steering
             strategies to guide agents to the desired policies. Complementing our theoretical
             contributions, we provide empirical algorithms to approximately solve our objec-
             tive, which effectively tackles the challenge in learning history-dependent strategies.
             We demonstrate the efficacy of our algorithms through empirical evaluations.


1       I NTRODUCTION
Many real-world applications can be formulated as Markov Games (Littman, 1994) where the agents
repeatedly interact and update their policies based on the received feedback. In this context, different
learning dynamics and their convergence properties have been studied extensively (see, for example,
Fudenberg and Levine (1998)). Because of the mismatch between the individual short-run and
collective long-run incentives, or the lack of coordination in decentralized systems, agents following
standard learning dynamics may not converge to outcomes that are desirable from a system designer
perspective, such as the Nash Equilibria (NE) with the largest social welfare. An interesting class of
games that exemplify these issues are so-called “Stag Hunt” games (see Fig. 1-(a)), which are used
to study a broad array of real-world applications including collective action, public good provision,
social dilemma, team work and innovation adoption (Skyrms, 2004)1 . Stag Hunt games have two
pure-strategy NE, one of which is ‘payoff-dominant’, that is, both players obtain higher payoffs
in that equilibrium than in the other. Typical algorithms may fail to reach the payoff-dominant
equilibrium pH, Hq (LHS Fig. 1-(b)). Indeed, the other equilibrium pG, Gq is typically selected when it
is risk-dominant (Harsanyi and Selten, 1988; Newton, 2021).
This paper focuses on situations when an external “mediator” exists, who can influence and steer the
agents’ learning dynamics by modifying the original rewards via additional incentives. This kind
of mediator can be conceptualized in various ways. In particular, we can think of a social planner
who provides monetary incentives for joint ventures or for adoption of an innovative technology via
individual financial subsidies. As illustrated on the RHS of Fig. 1-(b), with suitable steering, agents’
dynamics can be directed to the best outcome. Our primary objective is to steer the agents to some
desired policies, that is, to minimize the steering gap vis-a-vis the target outcome. As a secondary
    1
        We defer a concrete and practical scenario which can be modeled by the Stag Hunt game to Appx. B.1


                                                       1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


objective, the payments to agents regarding the steering rewards should be reasonable, that is, the
steering cost should be low.
To our knowledge, Zhang et al. (2023) is the
first work studying a similar steering problem                              H         G
as ours. They assume the agents are no-regret                          H (5, 5) (0, 4)
learners and may act in arbitrarily adversarial                        G (4, 0) (2, 2)
ways. In some natural settings, such assumption
may not be practical, because no-regret criterion (a) Payoff Matrix of the Two-Player “Stag Hunt” Game.
typically requires careful processing of the en- H and G stand for two actions Hunt and Gather. Both
                                                     (H,H) and (G,G) are NE and (H,H) is payoff-dominant.
tire history of learning. In settings with limited              No Steering
cognitive resources and bounded rationality, it          1.0                     1.0 With Steering
is natural to favor models where the agents only
process a subset of the available information


                                                       2(H)


                                                                             2(H)
(Camerer, 2011). In particular, humans have              0.5                     0.5
been widely shown to rely overproportionally on
recent experiences in decision making, known
as ‘recency bias’ (Costabile and Klein, 2005;              0.0      0.5
                                                                    1(H)
                                                                            1.0    0.0     0.5
                                                                                            1(H)
                                                                                                     1.0
Page and Page, 2010; Durand et al., 2021). Be-
sides, there is evidence that behavioral dynamics (b) Dynamics of Agents Policies without/with Steering.
that only rely on the most recent experience are Agents follow natural policy gradient (replicator dynam-
able to fit behavioral data well in certain situa- ics) for policy update. x and y axes correspond to the
tions (Mäs and Nax, 2016). Motivated by these probability to take action H by the row and column play-
insights, we therefore study steering a different ers. Red curves represent the dynamics of agents’ poli-
category of learning dynamics called Markovian cies starting from different intializations (black dots).
agents, where the agents’ policy updates only
                                                        Figure 1: Example: The “Stag Hunt” Game
depend on their current policy and the (modi-
fied) reward function. Our model complements
the prior work on no-regret agents, and serves as the first abstraction of behavior based on limited
cognitive abilities with recency bias in steering setting. Theoretically, Markovian agents subsumes a
broader class of popular policy-based methods as concrete examples (Giannou et al., 2022; Ding et al.,
2022), which are not covered by no-regret assumptions. We note that a concurrent work (Canyakmaz
et al., 2024) considers a similar setting as ours, and we defer to Sec. 1.1 for further discussion.
In practice, learning the right steering strategies encounters two main challenges. First, the agents
may not disclose their learning dynamics model to the mediator. As a result, this creates fundamental
model uncertainty, which we will tackle with appropriate Reinforcement Learning (RL) techniques to
trading-off exploration and exploitation. Second, it may be unrealistic to assume that the mediator
is able to force the agents to “reset” their policies in order to generate multiple steering episodes
with the same initial state. This precludes the possibility of learning steering strategies through
episodic trial-and-error. Therefore, the most commonly-considered, fixed-horizon episodic RL (Dann
and Brunskill, 2015) framework is not applicable here. Instead, we will consider a finite-horizon
non-episodic setup, where the mediator can only generate one finite-horizon episode, in which we
have to conduct both the model learning and steering of the agents simultaneously. Motivated by
these considerations, we would like to address the following question in this paper:

                   How to learn desired steering strategies for Markovian agents
                       in the non-episodic setup under model uncertainty?

We consider a model-based setting where the mediator can get access to a model class F containing
the agents’ true learning dynamics f ˚ . We summarize and highlight our key contributions as follow:

• Conceptual Contributions: In Sec. 3, we formulate steering as a non-episodic RL problem, and
  propose a novel optimization objective in Obj. (1), where we explicitly tackle the inherent model
  uncertainty by learning history-dependent steering strategies. As we show in Prop. 3.3, under
  certain conditions, even without prior knowledge of f ˚ , the optimal solution to Obj. (1) achieves
  not only low steering gap, but also “Pareto Optimality” in terms of both steering costs and gaps.
• Theoretical Contributions: In Sec. 4, we provide sufficient conditions under which there exists
  steering strategies achieving low steering gap. These results in turn justify our chosen objective
  and problem formulation.


                                                   2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


• Algorithmic Contributions: Learning a history-dependent strategy presents challenges due to the
  exponential growth in the history space. We propose algorithms to overcome these issues.
      – When the model class |F| is small, in Sec. 5.1, we approach our objective from the perspective
        of learning in a Partially Observable MDP, and propose to to learn a policy over the model
        belief state space instead of over the history space.
      – For the case when |F| is large, exactly solving Obj. (1) can be challenging. Instead, we focus
        on approximate solutions to trade-off optimality and tractability. In Sec. 5.2, we propose a
        First-Explore-Then-Exploit (FETE) framework. Under some conditions, we can still ensure
        the directed agents converge to the desired outcome.
• Empirical Validation: In Sec. 6, we evaluate our algorithms in various representative environments,
  and demonstrate their effectiveness under model uncertainty.

1.1    C LOSELY R ELATED W ORKS

We discuss the works most closely related to ours in this section, and defer the others to Appx. B.2.
Steering Learning Dynamics As mentioned in the introduction, Zhang et al. (2023) are the first to
introduce the “steering problem”, but their setting differs quite fundamentally from ours in several key
aspects. Firstly, they assume that agents behave as no-regret and arbitrarily adversarial learners, which
may be unrealistic in settings with limited information and feedback, and owed to agents’ limited
cognitive resources (Camerer, 2011) including recency bias (Costabile and Klein, 2005). Motivated
by this, we instead focus on a broad class of Markovian dynamics. Secondly, the mediator’s objective
in Zhang et al. (2023) is to steer agents such that the average policy converges to the target NE
while maintaining a sublinear accumulative budget, motivated by their infinite-horizon setup. In
contrast, we consider the finite-horizon setting, and therefore, we are concerned with minimizing
the steering gap of the terminal policy and the cumulative steering cost. Thirdly, when the desired
NE is not pure, Zhang et al. (2023) require the mediator to be able to “give advice” to the players to
facilitate coordination, while we do not allow the mediator to do this. Because of these differences,
the methods and results obtained by Zhang et al. (2023) and us are not directly comparable, yet
complement one another depending on application considered.
Perhaps the closest to ours is a concurrent work by Canyakmaz et al. (2024). They consider a similar
finite-horizon non-episodic setup as ours, and experimentally investigate the use of control methods
to direct game dynamics towards desired outcomes, in particular allowing for model uncertainty.
Compared to their work, we handle the model uncertainty in a more principled way by employing
history-dependent steering strategies, since history can serve as sufficient information set for decision
making under uncertainty. This leads to several differences in the design principles between our
algorithms and Canyakmaz et al. (2024). Concretely, we propose a learning objective for history-
dependent strategies in Obj. (1), and two algorithms for low uncertainty (small F) and high uncertainty
(large F) settings, respectively. In the former case, we contribute a belief-state based algorithm that
can exactly solve Obj. (1), offering a stronger solution due to the theoretical guarantee in Prop. 3.3.
For the latter, although both our FETE and SIAR-MPC (Canyakmaz et al., 2024) share a two-phase
(exploration + exploitation) structure, ours represents a more general framework with a more advanced
exploration strategy (see more explanation in Sec. 5.2). Besides, we develop additional novel theory
regarding the existence of strategies with low steering gap.


2     P RELIMINARY

In the following, we formally define the finite-horizon Markov Game that we will focus on. We
summarize all the frequently used notations in this paper in Appx. A.
Finite Horizon Markov Game A finite-horizon N -player Markov Game is defined by a tuple
G :“ tN , s1 , H, S, A :“ tAn uN                     n N
                                     n“1 , P, r :“ tr un“1 u, where N :“ t1, 2, ..., N u is the indices of
agents, s1 is the fixed initial state, H is the horizon length, S is the finite shared state space, An is the
finite action space for agent n, and A denotes the joint action space. Besides, P :“ tPh uhPrHs with
Ph : S ˆ A Ñ ∆pSq denotes the transition function of the shared state, and rn :“ trhn uhPrHs with
rhn : S ˆ A Ñ r0, 1s denotes the reward function for agent n. For each agent n, we consider the non-
stationary Markovian policies Πn :“ tπ n “ tπ1n , ..., πH  n
                                                             u|@h P rHs, πhn : S Ñ ∆pAn qu. We denote


                                                     3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Π :“ Π1 ˆ ... ˆ ΠN to be the joint policy space of all agents. Given a policy π :“ tπ 1 , ..., π N u P Π,
a trajectory is generated by: @h P rHs, @n P rN s, anh „ π n p¨|sh q, rhn Ð rhn psh , ah q, sh`1 „
Ph p¨|sh , ah q, where ah :“ tanh unPrN s denotes the collection of all actions. Given a policy π, we
                                                        řH
define the value functions by: Qn,π                             n                                 n,π
                                      h|r p¨, ¨q :“ Eπ r h1 “h rh1 psh , ah q|sh “ ¨, ah “ ¨s, Vh|r p¨q :“
                                                                      1    1
     řH
Eπ r h1 “h rhn1 psh1 , ah1 q|sh “ ¨s, where we use |r to specify the reward function associated with the
value functions. In the rest of the paper, we denote An,π            n,π
                                                          |r “ Q|r ´ V|r
                                                                              n,π
                                                                                  to be the advantage value
                          n            n,π
function, and denote J|r pπq :“ V1|r ps1 q to be the total return of agent n w.r.t. policy π.


3    T HE P ROBLEM F ORMULATION OF THE S TEERING M ARKOVIAN AGENTS

We first introduce our definition of Markovian agents. Informally, the policy updates of Markovian
agents are independent of the interaction history conditioning on their current policy and observed
rewards. This encompass a broader class of popular policy-based methods as concrete examples
(Giannou et al., 2022; Ding et al., 2022; Xiao, 2022; Daskalakis et al., 2020).
Definition 3.1 (Markovian Agents). Given a game G, a finite and fixed T , the agents are Markovian
if their policy update rule f only depends on the current policy πt and the reward function r:
                                     @t P rT s,   πt`1 „ f p¨|πt , rq.

Here we only highlight the dependence on πt and r, and omit other dependence (e.g. the transition
function of G). It is worth to note that we do not restrict whether the updates of agents’ policies are
independent or correlated with each other, deterministic or stochastic. We assume T is known to us.
In the steering problem, the mediator has the ability to change the reward function r via the steering
reward u, so that the agents’ dynamics are modified to:
           @t P rT s, ut „ ψt p¨|π1 , u1 , ..., πt´1 , ut´1 , πt q,   πt`1 „ f p¨|πt , r ` ut q,
Here ψ :“ tψt utPrT s denotes the mediator’s “steering strategy” to generate ut . We consider history-
dependent strategies to handle the model uncertainty, which we will explain later. Besides, ut :“
tunt,h uhPrHs,nPrN s , where unt,h : S ˆ A Ñ r0, Umax s is the steering reward for agent n at game
horizon h and steering step t. Umax ă `8 denotes the upper bound for the steering reward. With a
bit of abuse of notation, here we treat both r and ut as vectors with length HN |S||A| and use r ` ut
to denote elementwise addition. For practical concerns, we follow the standard constraints that the
steering rewards are non-negative.
The mediator has a terminal reward function η goal and a cost function η cost . First, η goal : Π Ñ
r0, ηmax s assesses whether the final policy πT `1 aligns with desired behaviors—this encapsulates
our primary goal of a low steering gap. Note that we consider the general setting and do not restrict
the maximizer of η goal to be a Nash Equilibrium. For instance, to steer the agents to a desired
policy π ˚ , we could choose η goal pπq :“ ´}π ´ π ˚ }2 . Alternatively,        in scenarios focusing on
                                                                             n
                                                                    ř
maximizing utility, η goal pπq could be defined as the total utility nPrN s J|r pπq. For η cost : Π Ñ Rě0 ,
it is used to quantify the steering cost incurred while steering. In this paper, we fix η cost pπ, uq :“
           n      n
ř
   nPrN s J|u pπ q to be the total return related to π and the steering reward u. Note that we always
             cost
have 0 ď η pπ, uq ď Umax N H.
Steering Dynamics as a Markov Decision Process (MDP) Given a game G, the agents’ dy-
namics f and pη cost , η goal q, the steering dynamics can be modeled by a finite-horizon MDP.
M :“ tπ1 , T, Π, U, f, pη cost , η goal qu with initial state π1 , horizon length T , state space Π, action
space U :“ r0, Umax sHN |S||A| , stationary transition f , running reward η cost and terminal reward η goal .
For completeness, we defer to Appx. B.3 for an introduction of finite-horizon MDP
Steering under Model Uncertainty In practice, the mediator may not have precise knowledge of
agents learning dynamics model, and the uncertainty should be taken into account. We will only focus
on handling the uncertainty in agents’ dynamics f , and assume the mediator has the full knowledge of
G and the reward functions η goal and η cost . We consider the model-based setting where the mediator
only has access to a finite model class F (|F| ă `8) satisfying the following assumption:
Assumption A (Realizability). The true learning dynamics f ˚ is realizable, i.e. f ˚ P F.


                                                     4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A Finite-Hoziron Non-Episodic Setup and Motivation As motivated previously, we formu-
late steering as a finite-horizon non-episodic RL problem. To our knowledge, in contrast to our
finite-horizon setting, most of the non-episodic RL settings consider the infinite-horizon setup with
stationary or non-stationary transitions, and therefore, they are also not suitable here. We provide
more discussion in Appx. B.2.
Definition 3.2 (Finite Horizon Non-Episodic Steering Setting). The mediator can only interact with
the real agents for one episode tπ1 , u1 , ..., πT , uT , πT `1 u, where πt`1 „ f ˚ p¨|πt , r ` ut q for
all t P rT s. Nonetheless, the mediator can get access to the simulators for all models in F, and it
can sample arbitrary trajectories and do episodic learning with those simulators to decide the best
steering actions u1 , u2 , ..., uT to deploy.

The Learning Objective Motivated by the model-based non-episodic setup, we propose the
following objective function, where we search over the set of all history-dependent strategies, denoted
by Ψ, to optimize the average performance over all f P F.
                                                                     T
                                 1 ÿ          ”                      ÿ                   ı
                ψ ˚ Ð arg max            Eψ,f β ¨ η goal pπT `1 q ´     η cost pπt , ut q ,         (1)
                           ψPΨ |F|
                                    f PF                            t“1

Here we use Eψ,f r¨s :“ Er¨|@t P rT s, ut „ ψt p¨|tπt1 , ut1 ut´1
                                                                t1 “1 , πt q, πt`1 „ f p¨|πt , r ` ut qs to
denote the expectation over trajectories generated by ψ and f P F; β ą 0 is a regularization factor.
Next, we explain the rationale to consider history-dependent strategies. As introduced in Def. 3.2,
we only intereact with the real agents once. Therefore, the mediator needs to use the interaction
history with f ˚ to decide the appropriate steering rewards to deploy, since the history is the sufficient
information set including all the information regarding f ˚ availale to the mediator.
We want to clarify that in our steering framework, we will first solve Obj. (1), and then deploy ψ ˚
to steer real agents. The learning and optimization of ψ ˚ in Obj. (1) only utilizes simulators of F.
Besides, after deploying ψ ˚ to real agents, we will not update ψ ˚ with the data generated during the
interaction with real agents. This is seemingly different from common online learning algorithms
which conduct the learning and interaction repeatedly(Dann and Brunskill, 2015). But we want to
highlight that, given the fact that ψ ˚ is history-dependent, it is already encoded in ψ ˚ how to make
decisions (or say, learning) in the face of uncertainty after gathering data from real agents. In other
words, one can interpret that, in Obj. (1), the ψ ˚ to be optimized is an “online algorithm” which can
“smartly” decide the next steering reward to deploy given the past interaction history. As we will
justify in the following, our Obj. (1) can indeed successfully handle the model uncertainty.
                                                                   řT
Justification for Objective (1) We use Cψ,T pf q :“ Eψ,f r t“1 η cost pπt , ut qs and ∆ψ,T pf q :“
Eψ,f rmaxπ η goal pπq ´ η goal pπT `1 qs as short notes of the steering cost and the steering gap (of the
terminal policy πT `1 ), respectively. Besides, we denote Ψε :“ tψ P Ψ| maxf PF ∆ψ,T pFq ď εu2 to
be the collection of all steering strategies with ε-steering gap. Based on these notations, we introduce
two desiderata, and show how an optimal solution ψ ˚ of Obj. (1) can achieve them.
Desideratum 1 (ε-Steering Gap). We say ψ has ε-steering gap, if maxf PF ∆ψ,T pf q ď ε.
Desideratum 2 (Pareto Optimality). We say ψ is Pareto Optimal if there does not exist another
ψ 1 P Ψ, such that (1) @f P F, Cψ1 ,T pf q ď Cψ,T pf q and ∆ψ1 ,T pf q ď ∆ψ,T pf q; (2) Df 1 P F, s.t.
either Cψ1 ,T pf 1 q ă Cψ,T pf 1 q or ∆ψ1 ,T pf 1 q ă ∆ψ,T pf 1 q.
Proposition 3.3. [Justification for Obj. (1)] By solving Obj. (1): (1) ψ ˚ is Pareto Optimal; (2) Given
                                                                            1
any ε, ε1 ą 0, if Ψε{|F | ‰ H and β ě Umax Nε1HT |F | , we have ψ ˚ P Ψε`ε ;

Next, we give some interpretation. As our primary desideratum, we expect the agents converge to
some desired policy that maximizes the goal function η goal after being steered for T steps, regardless
of the true model f ˚ . Therefore, we restrict the worst case steering gap to be small. As stated in
Prop. 3.3, for any accuracy level ε ą 0, as long as ε{|F|-steering gap is achievable, by choosing β
large enough, we can approximately guarantee ψ ˚ has ε-steering gap. For the steering cost, although
it is not our primary objective, Prop. 3.3 states that at least we can guarantee the Pareto Optimality:
competing with ψ ˚ , there does not exist another ψ 1 , which can improve either the steering cost or gap
for some f 1 P F without deteriorating any others.
   2
     In fact, besides ε, Ψε also depends on other parameters like T , Umax , F and the initial policy π1 . For
simplicity, we omit those dependence unless necessary.


                                                      5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Given the above discussion, one natural question is that: when is Ψε non-empty, or equivalently,
when does a strategy ψ with ε-steering gap exist? In Sec. 4, we provide sufficient conditions and
concrete examples to address this question in theory. Notably, we suggest conditions where Ψε is
non-empty for any ε ą 0, so that the condition Ψε{|F | ‰ H in Prop. 3.3 is realizable, even for large
|F|. After that, in Sec. 5, we introduce algorithms to solve our Obj. (1).

4     E XISTENCE OF S TEERING S TRATEGY WITH ε-S TEERING G AP
In this section, we identify sufficient conditions such that Ψε is non-empty. In Sec. 4.1, we start with
the special case when f ˚ is known, i.e. F “ tf ˚ u. The results will serve as basis when we study the
general unknown model setting with |F| ą 1 in Sec. 4.2.

4.1   E XISTENCE WHEN f ˚ IS K NOWN : NATURAL P OLICY G RADIENT AS AN E XAMPLE

In this section, we focus on a popular choice of learning dynamics called Natural Policy Gradient
(NPG) dynamics (Kakade, 2001; Agarwal et al., 2021) (a.k.a. the replicator dynamics (Schuster and
Sigmund, 1983)) with direct policy parameterization. NPG is a special case of the Policy Mirror
Descent (PMD) (Xiao, 2022). For the readability, we stick to NPG in the main text, and in Appx. D.1,
we formalize PMD and extend the results to the general PMD, which subsumes other learning
dynamics, like the online gradient ascent (Zinkevich, 2003).
Definition 4.1 (Natural Policy Gradient). For any n P rN s, t P rT s, h P rHs, sh P S, the policy
                  n
is updated by: πt`1,h             n
                       p¨|sh q 9 πt,h              pn,πnt n psh , ¨qq. Here A
                                      p¨|sh q exppαA                         pn,πnt n is some random
                                                     h|r `ut                  h|r `ut
estimation for the advantage value An,πnt n with Eπn rA
                                         h|r `ut
                                                           pn,πnt n psh , ¨qs “ 0.
                                                            h|r `ut


We use A pπ           π
          |r`u (and A|r`u ) to denote the concatenation of the values of all agents, horizon, states
and actions. We only assume Apπt is controllable and has positive correlation with Aπt but could
                                  |r`u                                                   |r`u
be biased, which we call the “general incentive driven” agents.
Assumption B (General Incentive Driven Agents).
       @t P rT s, xErA pπt s, Aπt y ě λmin }Aπt }2 , }A         pπt        2    2     πt     2
                          |r`ut      |r`ut             |r`ut 2      |r`ut }2 ď λmax }A|r`ut }2 ,

Note that the exact NPG is captured by the special case with λmin “ λmax “ 1. For NPG, since the
policy is always bounded away from 0. We will use Π` :“ tπ|@n, h, ah , sh : πhn pah |sh q ą 0u to
denote such feasible policy set. We state our main result below.
Theorem 4.2 (Informal). Suppose η goal is Lipschitz in π, given any initial π1 P Π` , for any ε ą 0,
if the agents follow Def. 4.1 under Assump. B, and T and Umax are large enough, we have Ψε ‰ H.
Our result is strong in indicating the existence of a steering path for any feasible initialization. The
                                                                                           π˚
proof is based on construction. The basic idea is to design the ut so that Aπ |r`ut 9 log πt , for some
                                                                                t


target policy π ˚ P Π` (approximately) maximizing η goal , then we can guarantee the convergence of
πt towards π ˚ under Assump. B. The main challenge here would be the design of ut . We defer the
details and the formal statements to Appx. D.

4.2   E XISTENCE WHEN f ˚ IS U NKNOWN : THE I DENTIFIABLE M ODEL C LASS

Intuitively, when f ˚ is unknown, if we can first use a few steering steps Tr ă T to explore and identify
f ˚ , and then steer the agents from πTr to the desired policy within T ´ Tr steps given the identified
f ˚ , we can expect Ψε ‰ H. Motivated by this insight, we introduce the following notion.
Definition 4.3 (pδ, TFδ q-Identifiable). Given δ P p0, 1q, we say F is pδ, TFδ q-identifiable, if
maxψ minf PF Eψ,f rIrf “ fMLE ss ě 1 ´ δ, where IrEs “ 1 if E is true and otherwise 0;
                        řTFδ
fMLE :“ arg maxf PF t“1       log f pπt`1 |πt , ut q.

Intuitively, F is pδ, TFδ q-identifiable, if Dψ, s.t. after TFδ steering steps, the hidden model f can be
identified by the Maximal Likelihood Estimation (MLE) with high probability. Next, we provide a
general set of pδ, TFδ q-identifiable function classes with TFδ upper bounded for any δ P p0, 1q.


                                                   6
    Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


    Example 4.4. [One-Step Difference] If @π P Π, there exists a steering reward uπ P U, s.t.
    minf,f 1 PF H2 pf p¨|π, r ` uπ q, f 1 p¨|π, r ` uπ qq ě ζ, for some universal ζ ą 0, where H is the
    Hellinger distance, then for any δ P p0, 1q, F is pδ, TFδ q-identifiable with TFδ “ Opζ ´1 logp|F|{δqq.

    Based on Def. 4.3, we provide a sufficient condition when Ψε is non-empty.
    Theorem 4.5. [A Sufficient Condition for Existence] Given any ε ą 0, ΨεT pF; π1 q3 ‰ H, if D Tr ă T ,
                       ε                            ε{2
    s.t., (1) F is p 2ηmax , Trq-identifiable, (2) ΨT ´Tr pF; πTr q ‰ H for any possible πTr generated at step
    Tr during the steering.

    We conclude this section by noting that, by Thm. 4.2, the above condition (2) is realistic for NPG (or
    more general PMD) dynamics. The proofs for all results in this section are deferred to Appx. E.

    5       L EARNING (A PPROXIMATELY ) O PTIMAL S TEERING S TRATEGY

    In this section, we investigate how to solve Obj. (1). Comparing with the episodic RL setting, the
    main challenge is to learn a history-dependent policy. Since the history space grows exponentially in
    T , directly solving Obj. (1) can be computationally intractable for large T . Therefore, the main focus
    of this section is to design tractable algorithms to overcome this challenge.
    As a special case, when the model is known, i.e. F “ tf ˚ u, by the Markovian property, Obj. (1)
    reduces to a normal RL objective, and a state-dependent steering strategy ψ : Π Ñ U is already
    enough. For completeness, we include the algorithm but defer to Alg. 3 in Appx. B.4. In the rest of
    this section, we focus on the general case |F| ą 1. In Sec. 5.1, we investigate the solutions when |F|
    is small, and in Sec. 5.2, we study the more challenging case when |F| is large.

    5.1       S MALL M ODEL C LASS : DYNAMIC P ROGRAMMING WITH M ODEL B ELIEF S TATE

    A Partially Observable MDP Perspective In fact, we can interpret Obj. (1) as learning the optimal
    policy in a POMDP, in which the hidden state is pπt , f q, i.e. a tuple containing the policy and the
    hidden model f uniformly sampled from F, and the mediator can only partially observe the policy
    πt . It is well-known that any POMDP can be lifted to the belief MDP, where the state is the belief
    state of the original POMDP. Then, the optimal policy in the belief MDP is exactly the optimal
    history-dependent policy in the original POMDP (Ibe, 2013). In our case, for each step t P rT s, the
    belief state is pπt , bt q, where bt :“ rPrpf |tπt1 , ut1 utt1 “1 , πt qsf PF is the “model belief state” defined
    to be the posterior distribution of models given the history of observations and actions. When |F| is
    small, the model belief state bt P R|F | is low dimensional and computable. Learning ψ ˚ is tractable
    by running any RL algorithm on the lifted MDP. In Proc. 1, we show how to steer in this setting. We
    defer the detailed algorithm of learning such belief-state dependent strategy to Alg. 4 in Appx. B.5.

    Procedure 1: The Steering Procedure when |F| is Small
1 Input: Model Set F; Total step T ;
                                                                  ˚
2 Solving Obj. (1) by learning a belief state-dependent strategy ψBelief by Alg. 4 with F and T .
           ˚
3 Deploy ψBelief to steer the real agents for T steps.


    5.2       L ARGE M ODEL C LASS : A F IRST-E XPLORE -T HEN -E XPLOIT F RAMEWORK

    When |F| is large, the method in Sec. 5.1 is inefficient since the belief state bt is high-dimensional. In
    fact, the above POMDP interpretation implies the intractability of Obj. (1) for large |F|: the number
    of hidden states of the POMDP scales with |F|. Therefore, instead of exactly solving Obj. (1), we
    turn to the First-Explore-Then-Exploit (FETE) framework as stated in Procedure 2.
    The first Tr ă T steps are the exploration phase, where we learn and deploy an exploration policy
    ψ Explore maximizing the probability of identifying the hidden model with the MLE estimator. The
        3
            Here we highlight the dependence on initial policy, model, and time for clarity (see Footnote 2)


                                                              7
  Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


  remaining T ´ Tr steps belong to the exploitation stage. We first estimate the true model by the MLE
  with the interaction history with real agents. Next, we learn an exploitation strategy to steer real
  agents for the rest T ´ Tr steps by solving Obj. (1) with F “ tfMLE u, time T ´ Tr and the initial
  policy πTr `1 , as if fMLE is the true model.
  Justification for FETE We cannot guarantee that Desiderata 1& 2 are achievable, because we do
                                                            δ{|F |
  not exactly solve Obj. 1. However, if F is pδ{|F|, TF q-identifiable (Def. 4.3) and we choose
          δ{|F |
  Tr ě TF , we can verify PrpfMLE “ f ˚ q ě 1 ´ δ in FETE. Therefore, we can still expect the
  exploitation policy ψ Exploit steer the agents to approximately maximize η goal pπT `1 q with reasonable
  steering cost for the rest T ´ Tr steps.

  Procedure 2: The Steering Procedure when |F| is Large (The FETE Framework)
1 Input: Model Set F; Total step T ; Exploration horizon T       r;
2 /* —————————————- Exploration Phase —————————————- */

                                             Ð arg maxψ |F1 | f PF Eπ11 ,u11 ,...,π1Ă „ψ,f rIrf “
                                     Explore
                                                                ř
3 Learn an exploration strategy ψ
                                                                                     T `1
                  řTr         1   1      1   1
   arg maxf 1 PF t“1 log f pπt`1 |πt , ut qss.
           Explore
4 Deploy ψ         to steer the real agents and collect tπ1 , u1 , ..., πTr , uTr , πTr `1 u
5 /* —————————————- Exploitation Phase —————————————- */
                                    řTr
6 Estimate fMLE Ð arg maxf PF
                                       t“1 log f pπt`1 |πt , ut q
           Exploit
                                                                    řT ´Tr
7 Deploy ψ         Ð arg maxψ Eψ,fMLE rβ ¨ η goal pπT ´Tr `1 q ´ t“1 η cost pπt , ut q|π1 “ πTr `1 s.

 We conclude this section by highlighting the computational tractability of FETE. Note that when
 computing ψ Exploit , we treat fMLE as the true model, so an history-independent ψ Exploit is enough.
 Therefore, the only part where we need to learn a history-dependent strategy is in the exploration
 stage, and the maximal history length is at most Tr, which can be much smaller than T . Moreover, in
 some cases, it is already enough to just learn a history-independent ψ Explore to do the exploration (for
 example, the model class in Example 4.4).
  Comparison with Canyakmaz et al. (2024) Both SIAR-MPC in Canyakmaz et al. (2024) and our
  FETE (Procedure 2) adopt a first-explore-then-exploit structure. We examine the differences between
  two algorihms from two aspects: exploration strategy and model estimation strategy. Regarding
  exploration strategy, SIAR-MPC uses noise-based random exploration, whereas we adopt a more
  strategic approach, which uses the identification success rate as a signal to learn the exploration policy.
  Empirical results in Sec. 6.2 demonstrate the higher efficiency of our methods. In terms of model
  estimation strategy, SIAR-MPC estimates the hidden model by solving a constrained regression
  problem (Eq. (8) in Canyakmaz et al. (2024)), while we solve a MLE objective. In principle, our MLE
  objective is more general and can recover the regression problem in SIAR-MPC if choosing F to be
  the function class including Gaussian noise perturbed dynamics with side-information constraints
  introduced in Canyakmaz et al. (2024).

  6     E XPERIMENTS
  In this section, we discuss our experimental results. For more details of all experiments in this section
  (e.g. experiment setup and training details), we defer to Appx. G. The steering horizon is set to be
  T “ 500, and all the error bar shows 95% confidence level. We denote rxs` :“ maxt0, xu.

  6.1   L EARNING S TEERING S TRATEGIES WITH K NOWLEDGE OF f ˚

  Normal-Form Stag Hunt Game In Fig. 1-(b), we compare the agents’ dynamics with/without
  steering, where the agents learn to play the Stag Hunt Game in Fig. 1-(a). We report the experiment
  setup here. Both agents follow the exact NPG (Def. 4.1 with A       pπ “ Aπ ) with fixed learning rate
  α “ 0.01. For the steering setup, we choose the total utility as η goal , and use PPO to train the steering
  strategy (one can choose other RL or control algorithms besides PPO). We also conduct experiments
  in a representative zero-sum game ‘Matching Pennies’, which we defer the details to Appx. G.2.


                                                      8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Grid World Stag Hunt Game: Learning Steering Strategy with Observations on Agents’
Behaviors In the previous experiments, we consider the direct parameterization and the state
space X “ Π Ă R4 has low dimension. In real-world scenarios, the policy space Π can be
extremely rich and high-dimensional if the agents consider neural networks as policies. In ad-
dition, the mediator may not get access to the agents’ exact policy π because of privacy issues.
This motivates us to investigate the possibility
of steering agents with observations on agents’                              4.0
behavior only (e.g. trajectories of agents in a                              3.0


                                                                               Total Utility
game G), instead of the full observation of π. In                            2.0
Appx. F, we justify this setup and formalize it as                           1.0                with steering
a partially observable extension of our current                                                 no steering
framework. We consider the evaluation in a grid-                                 0      5       10         15
                                                                                      Steering Step t
world version of the Stag Hunt Game as shown
in Fig. 2-(a). In this setting, the state space in
                                                    Figure 2: Grid-World Version of Stag Hunt Game.
game G becomes pixel-based images, and both
                                                    Left: Illustration of game. Right: The perfor-
agents (blue and red) will adopt Convolutional
                                                    mance of agents with/without steering. Without
Neural Networks (CNN) based policies with
                                                    steering, the agents converge to go for hares, which
thousands of parameters and update with PPO.
                                                    has sub-optimal utility. Under our learned steering
We train a steering strategy, which only takes the
                                                    strategy, the agents converge to a better equilib-
agents’ recent trajectories as input to infer the
                                                    rium and chase the stag.
steering reward. As shown in Fig. 2-(b), without
direct usage of the agents’ policy, we can still
train a steering strategy towards desired solution.

6.2    L EARNING S TEERING S TRATEGIES WITHOUT K NOWLEDGE OF f ˚

Small Model Set |F|: Belief State Based Steering Strategy In this part, we evaluate Proc. 1
designed for small F. We consider the same normal-form Stag Hunt game and setup as Sec. 6.1,
while the agents update by the NPG with a random learning rate α “ rξs` , where ξ „ N pµ, 0.32 q.
Here the mean value µ is unknown to the mediator, and we consider a model class F :“ tf0.7 , f1.0 u
including two possible values of µ P t0.7, 1.0u. We report our experimental results in Table 1.

      Table 1: Evaluation for Proc. 1 (Averaged over 25 different initial π1 , see Appx. G.1).

                (a) Performance in f0.7                                   (b) Performance in f1.0
                 pp∆ψ,T ď εq          Cψ,T                                  pp∆ψ,T ď εq          Cψ,T
         ˚                                                         ˚
       ψ0.7       0.99 ˘ 0.01      10.6 ˘ 0.3                    ψ0.7        1.00 ˘ 0.00       8.2 ˘ 0.2
         ˚                                                         ˚
       ψ1.0       0.13 ˘ 0.02       7.6 ˘ 0.2                    ψ1.0        1.00 ˘ 0.00       5.6 ˘ 0.2
        ˚                                                         ˚
      ψBelief     0.87 ˘ 0.05      10.5 ˘ 0.4                   ψBelief      0.99 ˘ 0.01       6.1 ˘ 0.3

Firstly, we demonstrate the suboptimal behavior if the mediator ignores the model uncertainty and just
randomly deploys the optimal strategy of f0.7 or f1.0 . To do this, we train the (history-independent)
optimal steering strategy by Alg. 3, as if we know f ˚ “ f0.7 (or f ˚ “ f1.0 ), which we denote as
  ˚        ˚
ψ0.7  (or ψ1.0 ). To meet with our Desideratum 1, we first set the accuracy level ε “ 0.01, and search
the minimal β so that the learned steering strategy can achieve ε-steering gap (see Appx. G.3.1).
                                                                             ˚         ˚
Because of the difference in µ, we have β “ 70 and β “ 20 in training ψ0.7      and ψ1.0  , respectively,
                                    ˚                                                ˚
and empirically, we observe that ψ0.7 requires much larger steering reward than ψ1.0 . As we marked
                                                                                   ˚
in red in Table 1-(a) and (b), because of the difference in the steering signal, ψ0.7  consumes much
                                                                       ˚
higher steering cost to achieve the same accuracy level in f1.0 , and ψ1.0 may fail to steer agents with
                                                                   ˚
f0.7 to the desired accuracy. Next, we train another strategy ψBelief   via Alg. 4, which predicts the
steering reward based on both the agents’ policy π and the belief state of the model. As we can see,
  ˚
ψBelief can almost always achieve the desired ε-steering gap with reasonable steering cost.
Large Model Set |F|: The FETE Framework In this part, we evaluate the FETE framework
(Proc. 2 in Sec. 5.2). We consider an cooperative setting with N “ 10 players. Each agent has two
actions A and B, and the mediator only receives non-zero utility when all the agents cooperate together
                                    śN
to take action A, i.e. η goal pπq :“ n“1 π n pAq. The agents do not have intrinsic rewards (r “ 0), but
the mediator’s can steer them to maximize its own utility by providing additional steering rewards.

                                                     9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


We consider “avaricious                                         0.04                      50
                                     1.0                                 Oracle
                                                                         FETE
                                                                                                 Oracle
                                                                                                 FETE
agents” with varying de-                                                 FETE-RE                 FETE-RE


                                      n = n)
grees of greediness, who


                                                           , T/N
                                                                0.02                      25


                                                                                    C ,T
tend to decrease the learn-          0.5


                                  Pr( MLE
ing rates if the payments by
                                             Random Exploration
mediator are high. Conse-                    Ours
quently, they require more             0  30 100 200 300           0 f          f2     f3  0 f          f2   f3
                                                                       1                       1
steering steps to converge to               Steering Step   t            True   Models           True Models
the desired policies, poten-
tially earning more incen- Figure         3: Evaluation for Proc. 2. Left: Accuracy of MLE estimator
                                   n
tive payments from the me-       (λMLE  ) after doing exploration for t steps. Ours can achieve near 100%
diators. More concretely,        accuracy    after 30 steering steps, while the random exploration takes
the learning rate of agent more than 300 steps. Middle and Right: Average steering gap and
n is αn :“ rξn s` with steering cost of Oracle, FETE and FETE-RE. Our FETE achieves
ξn „ N p1.5´β n ¨rV|u   n,π
                            ´ competitive performance comparing with Oracle, and significantly
  n `      2           n
                                 outperforms FETE-RE (adaption of SIAR-MPC (Canyakmaz et al.,
λ s , 0.5 q, where β ą 0 2024) to our setting) in terms of steering gap.
is a scaling factor and λn ą
0 is the threshold to exhibit
avaricious behavior. In our experiments, the model uncertainty comes from multiple possible realiza-
tion of λn P t0.25, 0.75, `8u, which results in an extremely large model class F with |F| “ 310 .
Here λn “ `8 corresponds to normal agents whose learning rates are stable. The mediator does
not know the agents’ types tλn unPrN s in advance, and it can only observe one learning rate samples
tαn unPrN s of agents per iteration t P rT s and estimate the true types from those samples. We consider
the fixed initial policy with @n P rN s, π1n pAq “ 1 ´ π1n pBq “ 1{3, and set the maximal steering
reward Umax “ 1.0.
To understand the exploration challenge, note that, during the exploration phase, if the steering signal
                               n,π
u is not strong enough, i.e. V|u    ă λn , the mediator may fail to distinguish those avaricious agents
from the normal ones, because they behave exactly the same. Such failure can lead to undesired
outcomes in the exploitation phase: higher steering rewards can accelerate the convergence of normal
agents, but can lead to larger steering gaps for avaricious agents.
We provide the evaluation results in Fig. 3. First, we compare the exploration efficiency. We can see
the clear advantage of our strategic exploration in FETE (Procedure 2) compared with noise-based
random exploration (Canyakmaz et al., 2024). Next, we compare the steering gaps and costs of three
methods: (i) FETE; (ii) FETE-RE; (iii) Oracle – if the mediator knows f ˚ in advance and solving
Obj. (1) with F “ tf ˚ u. Here FETE-RE can be regarded as adaption of SIAR-MPC (Canyakmaz
et al., 2024) to our case by replacing strategic exploration in FETE with random exploration (see
Appx. G.4 for more explanation). We choose exploration horizon Tr “ 30 suggested by the previous
exploration experiment, and report results for three realizations of f ˚ P tf1 , f2 , f3 u. For f1 and
f2 , all the agents share λn “ 0.75 and `8, respectively. f3 is a mixed setup where λn “ 0.75 for
1 ď n ď 5 and λn “ `8 for 5 ă n ď 10. As we can see, comparing with Oracle, both the
steering gap and cost of our FETE are competitive. Moreover, thanks to our strategic exploration
method, FETE exhibits significiant advantage over Canyakmaz et al. (2024) in terms of steering gaps.


7    C ONCLUSION

In this paper, we introduce the problem of steering Markovian agents under model uncertainty.
We provide theoretical foundations for this problem by formulating a novel optimization objective
and providing existence results. Moreover, we design several algorithmic approaches suitable for
varying degrees of model uncertainty in this problem class. We test their performances in different
experimental settings and show their effectiveness. Our work opens up avenues for compelling
open problems that merit future investigation. Firstly, future work could aim to identify superior
optimization objectives that guarantee strictly better performances in terms of steering gap and
cost than ours. Secondly, when applying our strategies in real-world applications, constraints on
the steering reward budget could be added. Finally, the framework could be generalized to permit
non-Markovian agents.


                                                     10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
The work is supported by ETH research grant and Swiss National Science Foundation (SNSF) Project
Funding No. 200021-207343 and SNSF Starting Grant. VT is supported by an ETH AI Center
Doctoral Fellowship. HHN is supported by the Swiss National Science Foundation under Eccellenza
Grant ‘Markets and Norms,’ as well as under NCCR Automation Grant 51NF40-180545.

R EPRODUCIBILITY S TATEMENT
The code of all the experiments in this paper and the instructions for running can be found in
https://github.com/jiaweihhuang/Steering_Markovian_Agents.

R EFERENCES
Abel, D., Barreto, A., Van Roy, B., Precup, D., van Hasselt, H. P., and Singh, S. (2024). A definition
  of continual reinforcement learning. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 36.
Agarwal, A., Kakade, S. M., Lee, J. D., and Mahajan, G. (2021). On the theory of policy gradient
  methods: Optimality, approximation, and distribution shift. Journal of Machine Learning Research,
  22(98):1–76.
Akin, E. and Losert, V. (1984). Evolutionary dynamics of zero-sum games. Journal of mathematical
  biology, 20:231–258.
Auer, P., Jaksch, T., and Ortner, R. (2008). Near-optimal regret bounds for reinforcement learning.
 Advances in neural information processing systems, 21.
Azar, M. G., Osband, I., and Munos, R. (2017). Minimax regret bounds for reinforcement learning.
  In International conference on machine learning, pages 263–272. PMLR.
Bai, Y., Jin, C., and Yu, T. (2020). Near-optimal reinforcement learning with self-play. Advances in
  neural information processing systems, 33:2159–2170.
Balcan, M.-F., Blum, A., and Mansour, Y. (2013). Circumventing the price of anarchy: Leading
  dynamics to good behavior. SIAM Journal on Computing, 42(1):230–264.
Başar, T. and Bernhard, P. (2008). H-infinity optimal control and related minimax design problems: a
  dynamic game approach. Springer Science & Business Media.
Baumann, T., Graepel, T., and Shawe-Taylor, J. (2020). Adaptive mechanism design: Learning to
  promote cooperation. In 2020 International Joint Conference on Neural Networks (IJCNN), pages
  1–7. IEEE.
Burda, Y., Edwards, H., Storkey, A., and Klimov, O. (2018). Exploration by random network
  distillation. arXiv preprint arXiv:1810.12894.
Cai, Y., Luo, H., Wei, C.-Y., and Zheng, W. (2024). Near-optimal policy optimization for correlated
  equilibrium in general-sum markov games. arXiv preprint arXiv:2401.15240.
Camerer, C. F. (2011). Behavioral game theory: Experiments in strategic interaction. Princeton
  university press.
Canyakmaz, I., Sakos, I., Lin, W., Varvitsiotis, A., and Piliouras, G. (2024). Steering game dynamics
  towards desired outcomes. arXiv preprint arXiv:2404.01066.
Chakraborty, S., Bedi, A. S., Koppel, A., Manocha, D., Wang, H., Wang, M., and Huang, F.
  (2023). Parl: A unified framework for policy alignment in reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2308.02585.
Chen, S., Yang, D., Li, J., Wang, S., Yang, Z., and Wang, Z. (2022). Adaptive model design for
  markov decision process. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pages 3679–3700.
  PMLR.


                                                 11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Costabile, K. A. and Klein, S. B. (2005). Finishing strong: Recency effects in juror judgments. Basic
  and Applied Social Psychology, 27(1):47–58.
Curry, M., Thoma, V., Chakrabarti, D., McAleer, S., Kroer, C., Sandholm, T., He, N., and Seuken, S.
  (2024). Automated design of affine maximizer mechanisms in dynamic settings. Proceedings of
  the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, 38(9):9626–9635.
Dann, C. and Brunskill, E. (2015). Sample complexity of episodic fixed-horizon reinforcement
  learning. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 28.
Dann, C., Lattimore, T., and Brunskill, E. (2017). Unifying pac and regret: Uniform pac bounds for
  episodic reinforcement learning. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 30.
Daskalakis, C., Fishelson, M., and Golowich, N. (2021). Near-optimal no-regret learning in general
  games. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 34:27604–27616.
Daskalakis, C., Foster, D. J., and Golowich, N. (2020). Independent policy gradient methods for
  competitive reinforcement learning. Advances in neural information processing systems, 33:5527–
  5540.
Deng, Y., Schneider, J., and Sivan, B. (2019). Strategizing against no-regret learners. In Wallach, H.,
  Larochelle, H., Beygelzimer, A., d'Alché-Buc, F., Fox, E., and Garnett, R., editors, Advances in
  Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 32. Curran Associates, Inc.
Ding, D., Wei, C.-Y., Zhang, K., and Jovanovic, M. (2022). Independent policy gradient for large-scale
  markov potential games: Sharper rates, function approximation, and game-agnostic convergence.
  In International Conference on Machine Learning, pages 5166–5220. PMLR.
Dong, K., Wang, Y., Chen, X., and Wang, L. (2019). Q-learning with ucb exploration is sample
  efficient for infinite-horizon mdp. arXiv preprint arXiv:1901.09311.
Durand, R. B., Patterson, F. M., and Shank, C. A. (2021). Behavioral biases in the nfl gambling
  market: Overreaction to news and the recency bias. Journal of Behavioral and Experimental
 Finance, 31:100522.
Fiez, T., Chasnov, B., and Ratliff, L. (2020). Implicit learning dynamics in stackelberg games:
  Equilibria characterization, convergence analysis, and empirical study. In III, H. D. and Singh, A.,
  editors, Proceedings of the 37th International Conference on Machine Learning, volume 119 of
  Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pages 3133–3144. PMLR.
Foerster, J., Chen, R. Y., Al-Shedivat, M., Whiteson, S., Abbeel, P., and Mordatch, I. (2018).
  Learning with opponent-learning awareness. In Proceedings of the 17th International Conference
  on Autonomous Agents and MultiAgent Systems, pages 122–130.
Fudenberg, D. and Levine, D. K. (1998). The Theory of Learning in Games, volume 1 of MIT Press
  Books. The MIT Press.
Gerstgrasser, M. and Parkes, D. C. (2023). Oracles and followers: Stackelberg equilibria in deep
  multi-agent reinforcement learning. In Krause, A., Brunskill, E., Cho, K., Engelhardt, B., Sabato,
  S., and Scarlett, J., editors, Proceedings of the 40th International Conference on Machine Learning,
  volume 202 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pages 11213–11236. PMLR.
Giannou, A., Lotidis, K., Mertikopoulos, P., and Vlatakis-Gkaragkounis, E.-V. (2022). On the
  convergence of policy gradient methods to nash equilibria in general stochastic games. Advances
  in Neural Information Processing Systems, 35:7128–7141.
Gong, L., Yao, W., Gao, J., and Cao, M. (2022). Limit cycles analysis and control of evolutionary
  game dynamics with environmental feedback. Automatica, 145:110536.
Guo, X., Li, L., Nabi, S., Salhab, R., and Zhang, J. (2023). Mesob: Balancing equilibria & social
  optimality.
Harsanyi, J. C. and Selten, R. (1988). A general theory of equilibrium selection in games. MIT Press
  Books, 1.


                                                 12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Harsanyi, J. C. and Selten, R. (1992). A general theory of equilibrium selection in games. The MIT
  Press Classics. The MIT Press, Cambridge Mass, [2nd printing] edition.
Hernandez-Leal, P., Kaisers, M., Baarslag, T., and De Cote, E. M. (2017). A survey of learning in
  multiagent environments: Dealing with non-stationarity. arXiv preprint arXiv:1707.09183.
Huang, J., He, N., and Krause, A. (2024a). Model-based rl for mean-field games is not statistically
  harder than single-agent rl. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.05724.
Huang, J., Yardim, B., and He, N. (2024b). On the statistical efficiency of mean-field reinforcement
  learning with general function approximation. In International Conference on Artificial Intelligence
  and Statistics, pages 289–297. PMLR.
Ibe, O. (2013). Markov processes for stochastic modeling. Newnes.
Jacobson, D. (1973). Optimal stochastic linear systems with exponential performance criteria
  and their relation to deterministic differential games. IEEE Transactions on Automatic control,
  18(2):124–131.
Jin, C., Allen-Zhu, Z., Bubeck, S., and Jordan, M. I. (2018). Is q-learning provably efficient?
   Advances in neural information processing systems, 31.
Jin, C., Liu, Q., Wang, Y., and Yu, T. (2021). V-learning–a simple, efficient, decentralized algorithm
   for multiagent rl. arXiv preprint arXiv:2110.14555.
Kakade, S. M. (2001). A natural policy gradient. Advances in neural information processing systems,
 14.
Khetarpal, K., Riemer, M., Rish, I., and Precup, D. (2022). Towards continual reinforcement learning:
  A review and perspectives. Journal of Artificial Intelligence Research, 75:1401–1476.
Leonardos, S., Overman, W., Panageas, I., and Piliouras, G. (2021). Global convergence of multi-
  agent policy gradient in markov potential games. arXiv preprint arXiv:2106.01969.
Li, J., Yu, J., Nie, Y. M., and Wang, Z. (2020). End-to-end learning and intervention in games.
Littman, M. L. (1994). Markov games as a framework for multi-agent reinforcement learning. In
  Machine learning proceedings 1994, pages 157–163. Elsevier.
Liu, B., Li, J., Yang, Z., Wai, H.-T., Hong, M., Nie, Y., and Wang, Z. (2022). Inducing equilibria
  via incentives: Simultaneous design-and-play ensures global convergence. Advances in Neural
  Information Processing Systems, 35:29001–29013.
Lu, C., Willi, T., De Witt, C. A. S., and Foerster, J. (2022). Model-free opponent shaping. In
  International Conference on Machine Learning, pages 14398–14411. PMLR.
Luo, Z.-Q., Pang, J.-S., and Ralph, D. (1996). Mathematical Programs with Equilibrium Constraints.
  Cambridge University Press.
Mäs, M. and Nax, H. H. (2016). A behavioral study of “noise” in coordination games. Journal of
 Economic Theory, 162:195–208.
Mertikopoulos, P., Papadimitriou, C., and Piliouras, G. (2018). Cycles in adversarial regularized
 learning. In Proceedings of the twenty-ninth annual ACM-SIAM symposium on discrete algorithms,
 pages 2703–2717. SIAM.
Monderer, D. and Tennenholtz, M. (2004). K-implementation. J. Artif. Int. Res., 21(1):37–62.
Newton, J. (2021). Conventions under heterogeneous behavioural rules. The Review of Economic
  Studies, 88(4):2094–2118.
Osband, I., Blundell, C., Pritzel, A., and Van Roy, B. (2016). Deep exploration via bootstrapped dqn.
  Advances in neural information processing systems, 29.


                                                 13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Paarporn, K., Eksin, C., Weitz, J. S., and Wardi, Y. (2018). Optimal control policies for evolutionary
  dynamics with environmental feedback. In 2018 IEEE Conference on Decision and Control (CDC),
  pages 1905–1910.
Paccagnan, D. and Gairing, M. (2021). In congestion games, taxes achieve optimal approximation. In
  Proceedings of the 22nd ACM Conference on Economics and Computation, EC ’21, page 743–744,
  New York, NY, USA. Association for Computing Machinery.
Page, L. and Page, K. (2010). Last shall be first: A field study of biases in sequential performance
  evaluation on the idol series. Journal of Economic Behavior & Organization, 73(2):186–198.
Raffin, A., Hill, A., Gleave, A., Kanervisto, A., Ernestus, M., and Dormann, N. (2021). Stable-
  baselines3: Reliable reinforcement learning implementations. Journal of Machine Learning
  Research, 22(268):1–8.
Ratliff, L. J., Dong, R., Sekar, S., and Fiez, T. (2019). A perspective on incentive design: Challenges
  and opportunities. Annual Review of Control, Robotics, and Autonomous Systems, 2(1):305–338.
Riehl, J., Ramazi, P., and Cao, M. (2018). A survey on the analysis and control of evolutionary matrix
  games. Annual Reviews in Control, 45:87–106.
Roughgarden, T. and Tardos, É. (2004). Bounding the inefficiency of equilibria in nonatomic
  congestion games. Games and Economic Behavior, 47(2):389–403.
Schulman, J., Wolski, F., Dhariwal, P., Radford, A., and Klimov, O. (2017). Proximal policy
  optimization algorithms. arXiv preprint arXiv:1707.06347.
Schuster, P. and Sigmund, K. (1983). Replicator dynamics. Journal of theoretical biology, 100(3):533–
  538.
Shen, H., Yang, Z., and Chen, T. (2024). Principled penalty-based methods for bilevel reinforcement
  learning and rlhf. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.06886.
Skyrms, B. (2004). The stag hunt and the evolution of social structure. Cambridge University Press.
Thoma, V., Pasztor, B., Krause, A., Ramponi, G., and Hu, Y. (2024). Stochastic bilevel optimization
  with lower-level contextual markov decision processes. arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.01575.
Wang, J., Song, M., Gao, F., Liu, B., Wang, Z., and Wu, Y. (2023). Differentiable arbitrating in zero-
 sum markov games. In Proceedings of the 2023 International Conference on Autonomous Agents
 and Multiagent Systems, AAMAS ’23, page 1034–1043, Richland, SC. International Foundation
 for Autonomous Agents and Multiagent Systems.
Wang, K., Xu, L., Perrault, A., Reiter, M. K., and Tambe, M. (2022). Coordinating followers to reach
 better equilibria: End-to-end gradient descent for stackelberg games. Proceedings of the AAAI
 Conference on Artificial Intelligence, 36(5):5219–5227.
Wei, C.-Y., Jahromi, M. J., Luo, H., Sharma, H., and Jain, R. (2020). Model-free reinforcement
 learning in infinite-horizon average-reward markov decision processes. In International conference
 on machine learning, pages 10170–10180. PMLR.
Willi, T., Letcher, A. H., Treutlein, J., and Foerster, J. (2022). Cola: consistent learning with
 opponent-learning awareness. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pages 23804–
 23831. PMLR.
Willis, R., Du, Y., Leibo, J., and Luck, M. (2023). Resolving social dilemmas through reward transfer
 commitments. Adaptive and Learning Agents Workshop ; Conference date: 29-05-2023 Through
 30-05-2023.
Xiao, L. (2022). On the convergence rates of policy gradient methods. The Journal of Machine
  Learning Research, 23(1):12887–12922.
Yang, J., Li, A., Farajtabar, M., Sunehag, P., Hughes, E., and Zha, H. (2020). Learning to incentivize
  other learning agents. In Proceedings of the 34th International Conference on Neural Information
  Processing Systems, NIPS’20, Red Hook, NY, USA. Curran Associates Inc.


                                                  14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Yang, J., Wang, E., Trivedi, R., Zhao, T., and Zha, H. (2022). Adaptive incentive design with multi-
  agent meta-gradient reinforcement learning. In Proceedings of the 21st International Conference
  on Autonomous Agents and Multiagent Systems, AAMAS ’22, page 1436–1445, Richland, SC.
  International Foundation for Autonomous Agents and Multiagent Systems.
Yardim, B., Cayci, S., Geist, M., and He, N. (2023). Policy mirror ascent for efficient and independent
  learning in mean field games. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pages 39722–
  39754. PMLR.
Zhang, B. H., Farina, G., Anagnostides, I., Cacciamani, F., McAleer, S. M., Haupt, A. A., Celli, A.,
  Gatti, N., Conitzer, V., and Sandholm, T. (2023). Steering no-regret learners to optimal equilibria.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.05221.
Zhang, K., Yang, Z., and Basar, T. (2019). Policy optimization provably converges to nash equilibria
  in zero-sum linear quadratic games. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 32.
Zhang, K., Yang, Z., and Başar, T. (2021). Multi-agent reinforcement learning: A selective overview
  of theories and algorithms. Handbook of reinforcement learning and control, pages 321–384.
Zhao, S., Lu, C., Grosse, R. B., and Foerster, J. (2022). Proximal learning with opponent-learning
  awareness. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 35:26324–26336.
Zhong, H., Yang, Z., Wang, Z., and Jordan, M. I. (2024). Can reinforcement learning find stackelberg-
  nash equilibria in general-sum markov games with myopically rational followers? J. Mach. Learn.
  Res., 24(1).
Zinkevich, M. (2003). Online convex programming and generalized infinitesimal gradient ascent. In
  Proceedings of the 20th international conference on machine learning (icml-03), pages 928–936.


                                                 15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


C ONTENTS

1   Introduction                                                                                      1
    1.1   Closely Related Works . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       3

2   Preliminary                                                                                       3

3 The Problem Formulation of the Steering Markovian Agents                                           4

4   Existence of Steering Strategy with ε-Steering Gap                                               6
                            ˚
    4.1   Existence when f is Known: Natural Policy Gradient as an Example . . . . . . .             6
                            ˚
    4.2   Existence when f is Unknown: the Identifiable Model Class . . . . . . . . . . . .          6

5   Learning (Approximately) Optimal Steering Strategy                                               7
    5.1   Small Model Class: Dynamic Programming with Model Belief State . . . . . . . .              7
    5.2   Large Model Class: A First-Explore-Then-Exploit Framework . . . . . . . . . . .             7

6   Experiments                                                                                       8
                                                             ˚
    6.1   Learning Steering Strategies with Knowledge of f       . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   8
    6.2   Learning Steering Strategies without Knowledge of f ˚ . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .        9

7   Conclusion                                                                                       10

A Frequently Used Notations                                                                          18

B Missing Details in the Main Text                                                                   18
    B.1 A Real-World Scenario that Can be Modeled as a Stag Hunt Game . . . . . . . . .              18
    B.2 Additional Related Works . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       18
    B.3 A Brief Introduction to Markov Decision Process . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .          20
    B.4 Algorithm for Learning Optimal (History-Independent) Strategy when f ˚ is Known              20
    B.5 Algorithm for Learning Belief-State Dependent Steering Strategy . . . . . . . . . .          20

C Missing Proofs in Section 3                                                                        20

D Missing Proofs for Existence when the True Model f ˚ is Known                                      22
    D.1 More Details about Policy Mirror Descent . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .         22
    D.2 Proofs for the Existence of Desired Steering Strategy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .        23
          D.2.1 Special Case: PMD with Exact Advantage-Value . . . . . . . . . . . . . .             23
          D.2.2 The General Incentive Driven Agents under Assump. B . . . . . . . . . . .            25

E Missing Proofs for Existence when the True Model f ˚ is Unknown                                    26

F Generalization to Partial Observation MDP Setup                                                    28
    F.1   POMDP Basics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       28


                                                 16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


   F.2   Steering Process as a POMDP . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      29

G Missing Experiment Details                                                                      29
   G.1 About Initialization in Evaluation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   29
   G.2 Experiments for Known Model Setting . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .        30
         G.2.1 Experiment Details in Normal-Form Stag Hunt Game . . . . . . . . . . . .           30
         G.2.2 Experiment Details in Grid-World Version of Stag Hunt Game . . . . . . .           30
         G.2.3 Experiments in Matching Pennies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .        31
   G.3 Experiments for Unknown Model Setting . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .          32
         G.3.1 Details for Experiments with Small Model Set F . . . . . . . . . . . . . .         32
         G.3.2 Details for Experiments with Large Model Set F . . . . . . . . . . . . . .         33
   G.4 Explanation of the Consistency of the Adaption . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       33
   G.5 A Summary of the Compute Resources by Experiments in this Paper . . . . . . . .            33

H Additional Discussion about Generalizing our Results                                            34


                                                17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A     F REQUENTLY U SED N OTATIONS

 Notation                                  Description
 G                                         A finite-horizon general-sum Markov Game
 N                                         The number of agents
 S, A                                      State space and action space of the game G
 H                                         The horizon of the game G
 P                                         Transition function of the game G
 r                                         Reward function of the game G
 π                                         The agents’ policy (collection of policies of all agents)
 π1                                        The initial policy
 M                                         A finite-horizon Markov Decision Process (the steering MDP)
 X,U                                       State space and action space of M
 T                                         The horizon of M (i.e. the horizon of the steering dynamics)
 T                                         (Stationary) Transition function of M
 η cost                                    The steering cost function of M
 ψ                                         The history-dependent steering strategy by mediator
 u (or ut for a specific horizon t)        The steering reward function
 Umax                                      The upper bound for steering reward
 f                                         Agents learning dynamics (T “ f in the steering MDP)
 η goal                                    The goal function of M
 F                                         The model class of agents dynamics (with finite candidates)
 β                                         Regularization coefficient in Obj. (1)
                                                                                      řT
 Cψ,T pf q                                 The total expected steering cost Eψ,f r t“1 η cost pπt , ut qs
 ∆ψ,T pf q                                 The steering gap: Eψ,f rmaxπ η goal pπq ´ η goal pπT `1 qs
 Ψ                                         The collection of all history dependent policies
 Ψε as a short note of ΨεT,Umax pF; π1 q   tψ P Ψ|Eψ,f rmaxπ η goal pπq ´ η goal pπT `1 q|π1 s ď εu
 Qn,π          n,π      n,π
    h|r`u , Vh|r`u , Ah|r`u
                                           The Q-value, V-value and advantage value functions for agent n
 fMLE                                      The Maximal Likelihood Estimator (introduced in Def. 4.3)
 bt                                        Model belief state rPrpf |tπt1 , ut1 utt1 “1 , πt qsf PF P R|F |
 ψ Explore {ψ Exploit                      The exploration/exploitation policy in FETE framework.
 Op¨q, Ωp¨q, Θp¨q, Op¨q,
                      r     Ωp¨q,
                            r     Θp¨q
                                  r        Standard Big-O notations, p¨q
                                                                       Ă omits the log terms.


B     M ISSING D ETAILS IN THE M AIN T EXT
B.1   A R EAL -W ORLD S CENARIO THAT C AN BE M ODELED AS A S TAG H UNT G AME

As a real-world example, the innovation adaption can be modeled as a (multi-player) Stag Hunt
game. Consider a situation involving a coordination problem where people can choose between an
inferior/unsustainable communication or transportation technology that is cheap (the Gather action)
and a superior technology that is sustainable but more expensive (the Hunt action). If more and more
people buy products by the superior technology, the increasing profits can lead to the development
of that technology and the decrease of price. Eventually, everyone can afford the price and benefit
from the sustainable technology. In contrast, if people are trapped by the products of the inferior
technology due to its low price, the long-run social welfare can be sub-optimal. The mediator’s goal
is to steer the population to adopt the superior technology.

B.2   A DDITIONAL R ELATED W ORKS

We first complements the comparison with Zhang et al. (2023) in Sec. 1.1 by noting a minor but
worth to be mentioned difference between our setting and (Zhang et al., 2023) in terms of incentive


                                                18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


schemes. While they consider that the mediator influences the agents’ learning dynamics through a
scalar payment function, we operate with additional steering rewards in a multi-dimensional reward
vector space. As a result, there may not exist direct ways to translate the steering strategies between
both settings, especially in the bandit feedback setting where only the sampled actions of agents can
be observed (Zhang et al., 2023).
Opponent Shaping In the RL literature a line of work focus on the problem of opponent shaping,
where agents can influence each others learning by handing out rewards (Foerster et al., 2018; Yang
et al., 2020; Willi et al., 2022; Lu et al., 2022; Willis et al., 2023; Zhao et al., 2022). Although
the ways of influencing agents are similar to our setting, we study the problem of a mediator that
acts outside the Markov Game and steers all the agents towards desired policies, while in opponent
shaping the agents themselves learn to influence each other for their own interests.

Learning Dynamics in Multi-Agent Systems In multi-agent setting, it is an important question
to design learning dynamics and understand their convergence properties (Hernandez-Leal et al.,
2017). Previous works has established near-optimal convergence guarantees to equilibra (Daskalakis
et al., 2021; Cai et al., 2024). When the transition model of the multi-agent system is unknown,
many previous works have studied how to conduct efficient exploration and learn equilibria under
uncertainty (Jin et al., 2021; Bai et al., 2020; Zhang et al., 2021; Leonardos et al., 2021; Yardim et al.,
2023; Huang et al., 2024b;a). However, most of these results only have guarantees on solving an
arbitrary equilibrium when multiple equilibria exists, and it is unclear how to build algorithms based
on them to reach some desired policies to maximize some goal functions.

Mathematical Programming with Equilibrium Constraints (MPEC) MPEC generalises bilevel
optimization to problems where the lower level consists of solving an equilibrium problem (Luo
et al., 1996). (Li et al., 2020; Liu et al., 2022; Wang et al., 2022; 2023; Yang et al., 2022). These
works consider variants of an MPEC and present gradient based approaches, most of which rely on
computing hypergradients via the implicit function theorem and thus strong assumptions on the lower
level problem, such as uniqueness of the equilibrium. Most games fail to satisfy such constraints. In
contrast, our work makes no assumptions on the equilibrium structure and instead mild assumptions
on the learning dynamics.

Game Theory and Mechanism Design In Game Theory, a setup such as ours can be modelled
as a Stackelberg game. Several works have considered finding Stackelberg equilibria using RL
(Gerstgrasser and Parkes, 2023; Zhong et al., 2024) or gradient-based approaches (Fiez et al., 2020).
Deng et al. (2019) showed how agents can manipulate learning algorithms to achieve more reward, as
if they were playing a Stackelberg game. Related problems are implementation theory (Monderer
and Tennenholtz, 2004) and equilibrium selection (Harsanyi and Selten, 1992). Moreover, the field
of mechanism design has been concerned with creating economic games that implement certain
outcomes as their equilibria. Several recent works have considered mechanism design on Markov
Games (Curry et al., 2024; Baumann et al., 2020; Guo et al., 2023). In the case of congestion games,
mechanisms have been proposed to circumvent the price of anarchy (Balcan et al., 2013; Paccagnan
and Gairing, 2021; Roughgarden and Tardos, 2004), i.e. equililbria with low social welfare.
There is also a line of work has focused on control strategies for evolutionary games (Gong et al.,
2022; Paarporn et al., 2018). However, the game and learning dynamics differ significantly from our
setting. For a full survey of control-theoretic approaches, we refer the reader to Ratliff et al. (2019);
Riehl et al. (2018).

Bilevel Reinforcement Learning Bilevel RL considers the problem of designing an MDP—by
for example changing the rewards—with a desireable optimal policy. Recently, several works
have studied gradient-based approaches to find such good MDP configurations (Chen et al., 2022;
Chakraborty et al., 2023; Shen et al., 2024; Thoma et al., 2024). While similar in some regards, in
this setting we assume the lower level is a Markov Game instead of just an MDP. Moreover, our aim
is not to design a game with a desireable equilibrium from scratch, but to take a given game and
agent dynamics and steer them with minimal additional rewards to a desired outcome within a certain
amount of time. Therefore our upper-level problem is a strategic decision-making problem, solved by
RL instead of running gradient descent on some parameter space.


                                                   19
    Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


    Episodic RL and Non-Episodic RL Most of the existing RL literature focus on the episodic
    learning setup, where the entire interaction history can be divided into multiple episodes starting
    from the same initial state distribution(Dann and Brunskill, 2015; Dann et al., 2017). Comparing
    with this setting, our finite-horizon non-episodic setting is more challenging because the mediator
    cannot simply learn from repeated trial-and-error. Therefore, the learning criterions (e.g. no-regret
    (Azar et al., 2017; Jin et al., 2018) or sample complexity (Dann and Brunskill, 2015)) in episodic RL
    setting is not suitable in our case, which targets at finding a near-optimal policy in maximizing return.
    This motivates us to consider the new objective (Obj. (1)).
    To our knowledge, most of the previous works use “non-episodic RL” to refer to the learning in
    infinite-horizon MDP. One popular setting is the infinite-horizon MDPs with stationary transitions,
    where people consider the discounted (Schulman et al., 2017; Dong et al., 2019) or average return
    (Auer et al., 2008; Wei et al., 2020). The infinit-horizon setting with non-stationary dynamics is
    known as the continual RL (Khetarpal et al., 2022; Abel et al., 2024), where the learners “never stops
    learning” and continue to adapt to the dynamics. Since we focus on the steering problem with fixed
    and finite horizon, the methodology in those works cannot be directly applied here.
    Most importantly, we are also the first work to model the steering problem as a RL problem.

    B.3       A B RIEF I NTRODUCTION TO M ARKOV D ECISION P ROCESS

    A finite-horizon Markov Decision Process is specified by a tuple M :“ tx1 , T, X , U, T, pη, η term qu,
    where x1 is the fixed initial state, T is the horizon length, X is the state space, U is the action
    space. Besides, T :“ tTt utPrT s with Tt : X ˆ U Ñ ∆pX q denoting the transition function4 ,
    η :“ tηt utPrT s with ηt : X ˆ U Ñ r0, 1s is the normal reward function and η term : X ˆ U Ñ r0, 1s
    denotes the additional terminal reward function. In this paper, without further specification, we
    will consider history dependent non-stationary policies Ψ :“ tψ :“ tψ1 , ..., ψT u|@t P rT s, ψt :
    pX ˆ Uqt´1 ˆ X Ñ ∆pUqu. Given a ψ P Ψ, an episode of M is generated by: @t P rT s, ut „
    ψt p¨|txt1 , ut1 utt´1
                        1 “1 , xt q, ηt Ð ηt pxt , ut q, xt`1 „ Tt p¨|xt , ut q; η
                                                                                   term
                                                                                        Ð η term pxT `1 q;

    B.4       A LGORITHM FOR L EARNING O PTIMAL (H ISTORY-I NDEPENDENT ) S TRATEGY WHEN f ˚
              IS K NOWN



    Algorithm 3: Learning with Known Steering Dynamics
1 Input: Model Set F :“ tf ˚ u; Initial steering strategy ψ 1 :“ tψt1 utPrT s ; Regularization
   coefficient β; Iteration number K;
2 for k “ 1, 2, ..., K do
3     Agents initialize with policy π1k .
4     Sample trajectories with ψζk , @t P rT s:

                          ukt „ ψtk p¨|πtk q, πt`1
                                               k
                                                   „ f ˚ p¨|πtk , r ` ukt q, ηtk “ ´η cost pπtk , ukt q.
5    Update ψ k`1 Ð RLAlgorithmpψ k , tπtk , ukt , ηtk uTt“1 Y tβ ¨ η goal pπTk `1 quq.
6 end
         p˚ Ð ψζ .
7 Output ψ       K


    B.5       A LGORITHM FOR L EARNING B ELIEF -S TATE D EPENDENT S TEERING S TRATEGY

    C        M ISSING P ROOFS IN S ECTION 3

    Proposition 3.3. [Justification for Obj. (1)] By solving Obj. (1): (1) ψ ˚ is Pareto Optimal; (2) Given
                                                                                1
    any ε, ε1 ą 0, if Ψε{|F | ‰ H and β ě Umax Nε1HT |F | , we have ψ ˚ P Ψε`ε ;
        4
            In this paper, we focus on stationary transition function, i.e. T1 “ ... “ TT .


                                                               20
    Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


    Algorithm 4: Solving Obj. (1) by Learning Belief State-Dependent Strategy
1 Input: Model Set F; Regularization coefficient β; Initial steering strategy ψ 1 :“ tψt1 uTt“1 ;
   Iteration number K;
2 for k “ 1, 2, ..., K do
3     Sample f „ UniformpFq; Initialize π1k “ π1 .
4     Sample trajectories with ψ k from simulator of f :
5           @t P rT s bkt :“ Prp¨|π1k , uk1 , ..., πt´1
                                                    k
                                                        , ukt´1 , πtk q, ukt „ ψtk p¨|bkt , πtk q,
6                       πt`1 „ f p¨|πt , r ` ut q, ηtk Ð ´η cost pπtk , ukt q
                         k           k            k
                k`1
7     Update ψ        Ð RLAlgorithmpψ k , tpπtk , bkt q, ukt , ηtk uTt“1 Y tβ ¨ η goal pπTk `1 quq.
8 end

9 return ψ p˚ :“ ψ K “ tψ K uT
                           t t“1



    Proof. Suppose Ψε{|F | is non-empty, we denote ψ ε{|F | as one of the elements in Ψε{|F | . By definition,
    since maxπ η goal pπq is fixed, we have:
                                             1 ÿ
                            ψ ˚ Ð arg max           ´β∆pψ, f, T q ´ Cpψ, f, T q.
                                         ψ |F|
                                               f PF


    If β ě Umax Nε1HT |F | , by definition,
        ´ 1 ÿ                                         ¯ ´ 1 ÿ                                                  ¯
    0ď             ´β∆pψ ˚ , f, T q ´ Cpψ ˚ , f, T q ´              ´β∆pψ ε{|F | , f, T q ´ Cpψ ε{|F | , f, T q
          |F| f PF                                         |F| f PF
          1 ÿ      ´                                    ¯
      ď           β ∆pψ ε{|F | , f, T q ´ ∆pψ ˚ , f, T q ` Umax N HT
         |F| f PF
                                                                          (the steering reward u P r0, Umax s)
          1 ÿ ´ ε                         ¯
      ď           β       ´ ∆pψ ˚ , f, T q ` Umax N HT                                  (ψ ε{|F | P ΨεT,Umax pFq)
        |F| f PF      |F|
        Umax N HT ´ ε           1 ÿ           ˚
                                                         ¯
      ď                      ´          ∆pψ     , f, T q   ` Umax N HT
              ε1        |F| |F| f PF
                                                                                                  1
    As a direct observation, if Ef „UnifpF q r∆pψ ˚ , f, T qs “ |F1 | f PF ∆pψ ˚ , f, T q ą ε`ε
                                                                     ř
                                                                                              |F | , the RHS will
    be strictly less than 0, which results in contradiction. Therefore, we must have
                      @f P F, ∆pψ ˚ , f, T q ď |F| ¨ Ef „UnifpF q r∆pψ ˚ , f, T qs ď ε ` ε1 .
                                1
    which implies ψ ˚ P Ψε`ε .
    Next, we show the Pareto Optimality. If there exists ψ and f such that

           • For all f 1 P F with f ‰ f 1 , Cpψ ˚ , f, T q ě Cpψ, f, T q and ∆pψ ˚ , f, T q ě ∆pψ, f, T q;
           • For f , either Cpψ ˚ , f, T q ą Cpψ, f, T q and ∆pψ ˚ , f, T q ě ∆pψ, f, T q or Cpψ ˚ , f, T q ě
             Cpψ, f, T q and ∆pψ ˚ , f, T q ą ∆pψ, f, T q.

    Therefore, we must have:
                1 ÿ                                   1 ÿ
                        β∆pψ, f, T q ´ Cpψ, f, T q ă          β∆pψ ˚ , f, T q ´ Cpψ ˚ , f, T q,
               |F| f PF                              |F| f PF
    which conflicts with the optimality condition of Obj. (1).                                                ˝
                                                                                                      ˚
    Remark C.1. Intuitively, Pareto optimality ensures the steering rewards predicted by ψ are not
    necessarily large. For example, consider agents following NPG dynamics (Def. 4.1). Given any
    steering strategy ψ and a constant c ą 0, consider another steering strategy ψ 1 p¨q :“ ψp¨q ` c, i.e.,
    by increasing the steering reward predicted by ψ with c. Note that the learning dynamics under both
    ψ and ψ 1 are the same, and therefore the final steering gaps are the same. Pareto optimality implies
    that ψ 1 will never be more preferable than ψ.


                                                         21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


D     M ISSING P ROOFS FOR E XISTENCE WHEN THE T RUE M ODEL f ˚ IS K NOWN
In this section, we study the Policy Mirror Descent as a concrete example. In Appx. D.1, we provide
more details about PMD. Then, we study the PMD with exact updates and stochastic updates in
Appx. D.2.1 and D.2.2, respectively. The theorems in Sec. 4.1 will be subsumed as special cases.

D.1    M ORE D ETAILS ABOUT P OLICY M IRROR D ESCENT

Definition D.1 (Policy Mirror Descent). For each agent n P rN s, the updates at step t P rT s follows:

    @h P rHs, sh P S,    n
                        θt`1,h            n
                               p¨|sh q Ð θt,h            pn,πnt n ps, ¨q, (Update in the mirror space)
                                              p¨|sh q ` αA h|r `ut
                         n
                        zt`1,h p¨|sh q Ð p∇ϕn q´1 pθt`1,h
                                                    n
                                                          p¨|sh qq   (Map θ back to the primal space)
                         n                                n
                        πt`1,h p¨|sh q Ð arg min Dϕn pz, zt`1,h p¨|sh qq,                 (Projection)
                                         zP∆pAn q

Similar to Def. 4.1, here A pn,πnt n is some random estimation for the advantage value An,πnt n
                             h|r `ut                                                    h|r `ut
with Eπn rApn,πnt n psh , ¨qs “ 0. Besides, θn P R|S||A| denotes the variable in the dual space.
             h|r `ut                           t,h
ϕn : dompϕn q Ñ R is a function satisfying Assump. C below, which gives the mirror map ∇ϕn ;
p∇ϕn q´1 is the inverse mirror map; Dϕn pz, zrq :“ ϕn pzq ´ ϕn pr
                                                                z q ´ x∇ϕn pr
                                                                            z q, z ´ zry is the Bregman
                       n
divergence regarding ϕ .
Assumption C. We assume for all n P rN s, ϕn is µ-strongly convex and essentially smooth, i.e.
differentiable and }∇ϕn pz k q} Ñ `8 for any sequence z k P dompϕn q converging to a point on the
boundary of dompϕn q.

By Pythagorean Theorem and the strictly convexity of Dϕn , the projection π in Def. D.1 is unique.
Lemma D.2. Given a convex set C and a function ϕ which is µ-strongly convex on C, we have
                                                                              1
          } arg min Dϕ pz, p∇ϕq´1 pθ1 qq ´ arg min Dϕ pz, p∇ϕq´1 pθ2 qq} ď      }θ1 ´ θ2 }2 .
                zPC                              zPC                          µ

Proof. Given any dual variables θ1 and θ2 , and their projection z1                       :“
arg minzPC Dϕ pz, p∇ϕq´1 pθ1 qq and z2 :“ arg minzPC Dϕ pz, p∇ϕq´1 pθ2 qq, by the first order
optimality condition, we have:
                               @z P C, x∇ϕpz1 q ´ θ1 , z ´ z1 y ě 0,
                                       x∇ϕpz2 q ´ θ2 , z ´ z2 y ě 0
If we choose z “ z2 in the first equation and z “ z1 in the second equation, and sum together, we
have:
                            xθ1 ´ ∇ϕpz1 q ` ∇ϕpz2 q ´ θ2 , z1 ´ z2 y ě 0,
By strongly convexity of ϕ, the above implies:
                xθ1 ´ θ2 , z1 ´ z2 y ě x∇ϕpz1 q ´ ∇ϕpz2 q, z1 ´ z2 y ě µ ¨ }z1 ´ z2 }2
Therefore,
                                      µ}z1 ´ z2 } ď }θ1 ´ θ2 },
and we finish the proof.                                                                            ˝
Next, we discuss some concrete examples.

Example D.3 (Natural Policy Gradient). If we consider the mirror map and Bregman Divergence
generated by ϕn pzq :“ an PAn zpan q log zpan q, we have Dϕn pz1 , z2 q “ KLpz1 }z2 q, and recover
                      ř

the NPG in Def. 4.1. Note that ϕn is 1-strongly convex on the convex set ∆pAn q, Assump. C is
satisfied with µ “ 1.



                                                     22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Example D.4 (Online Gradient Ascent (Zinkevich, 2003)). If we consider the Euclidean distance
generated by l2 -norm ϕn pzq “ 21 }z}22 , we recover the projected gradient ascent
Definition D.5. For each agent n P rN s, the updates at step t P rT s follows:
            @h P rHs, sh P S,         n
                                     πt`1,h                        n
                                            p¨|sh q Ð Proj∆pAn q pπt,h            pn,πnt n ps, ¨qq,
                                                                       p¨|sh q ` αA h|r `u         t


Note that the projection with Euclidean distance is 1-Lipschitz, Assump. C is satisfied with µ “ 1.

Other Notations and Remarks In the following, we use Π` to be the “feasible policy set” (for
NPG in Def. 4.1, Π` refers to be set of policies bounded away from 0), such that for any π P Π` ,
there exists a dual variable θ corresponding to π, i.e.,
           @n P rN s, h P rHs, sh P S,          πhn p¨|sh q Ð arg min Dϕn pz, p∇ϕn q´1 pθhn p¨|sh qqq.
                                                                zP∆pAn q
                                                             n
In the following Lem. D.6, we show that constant shift in θt,h p¨|sh q does not change the projection
result. Therefore, when we say the dual variable θ associated with a given policy π, we only consider
those θ satisfying Eanh „πhn rθhn panh |sh qs “ 0.
Lemma D.6 (Constant Shift does not Change the Projection). For any n P rN s, regularizer ϕn
                                                      n
satisfying conditions in Assump. C, and any
                                          n
                                               θ P R|A | , consider the constant vector c1, where c P R
is a constant and 1 “ t1, 1, ..., 1u P R|A | , we have:
                  arg min Dϕn pz, p∇ϕn q´1 pθqq “ arg min Dϕn pz, p∇ϕn q´1 pθ ` c1qq
                  zP∆pAn q                                 zP∆pAn q


Proof.
                    arg minn Dϕn pz, p∇ϕn q´1 pθ ` c1qq
                        zP∆pA q

                 “ arg minn ϕn pzq ´ xθ ` c1, zy
                        zP∆pA q

                 “ arg minn ϕn pzq ´ xθ, zy ` c                            (we have constraints that z P ∆pAn q)
                        zP∆pA q

                 “ arg minn ϕn pzq ´ xθ, zy
                        zP∆pA q

                 “ arg min Dϕn pz, θq.
                    zP∆pAn q

                                                                                                                    ˝
D.2      P ROOFS FOR THE E XISTENCE OF D ESIRED S TEERING S TRATEGY

We first formally introduce the Lipschitz condition that Thm. 4.2 requires.
Assumption D (η goal is L-Lipschitz). For any π, π 1 P Π, |η goal pπq ´ η goal pπ 1 q| ď L}π ´ π 1 }2 .

                                                                                                 pπ
In the following, in Appx. D.2.1, as a warm-up, we start with the exact case when the estimation A
                                     π
is exactly the true advantage value A (which can be regarded as a special case of Assump. B). Then,
in Appx. D.2.2, we study the general setting and prove Thm. 4.2 as a special case of PMD.

D.2.1     S PECIAL C ASE : PMD WITH E XACT A DVANTAGE -VALUE
Lemma D.7 (Existence of Steering Path between Feasible Policies). Consider two feasible policies
                                                          n
π, πr which are induced by dual variables tθ1,h               uhPrHs,nPrN s and tθrhn uhPrHs,nPrN s , respectively.
If the agents follow Def. D.1 with exact Q value and start with π1 “ π, as long as Umax ě
        2
2H ` αT    pmaxn,h,sh ,anh |θrhn panh |sh q ´ θhn panh |sh q ´ Eānh „πt,h        rn pān |sh q ´ θn pr
                                                                       n p¨|sn q rθ
                                                                             h      h h
                                                                                                       n
                                                                                                   h ah |sh qs|q, there
exists a (history-independent) steering strategy ψ :“ tψt utPrT s with ψt : Π` Ñ U, s.t., πT `1 “ π                  r.

Proof. For agent n P rN s, given a πt , we consider the following steering reward functions
                                       n,πt
unt,h psh , anh q “νt,h
                    n
                        psh , anh q ´ Ah|r          n
                                           n psh , ah q ´ Ea     n p¨|s q rν
                                                           r n „πt,h   h
                                                                             n
                                                                                      anh q ´ An,π
                                                                            t,h psh , r
                                                                                                   t
                                                                                                           anh qs
                                                                                               h|r n psh , r


                                                           23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                            n
                   ´ minn tνt,h ps̄h , ānh q ´ An,π t          n
                                                 h|r n ps̄h , āh q ´ Ea
                                                                             n p¨|s q rν
                                                                       r n „πt,h   h
                                                                                         n
                                                                                                    anh q ´ An,π
                                                                                         t,h ps̄h , r
                                                                                                                 t
                                                                                                                          anh qsu,
                                                                                                             h|r n ps̄h , r
                       s̄h ,āh

       n
where νt,h : S ˆ An Ñ R will be defined later. By construction, we have:
                        n          n
             n p¨|s q ru
      Eanh „πt,h   h    t,h psh , ah qs                                                                                   (2)
                n
   “ ´ minn tνt,h ps̄h , ānh q ´ An,π t          n
                                   h|r n ps̄h , āh q ´ Ea
                                                               n p¨|s q rν
                                                         r n „πt,h   h
                                                                           n
                                                                                     anh q ´ An,π
                                                                          t,h ps̄h , r
                                                                                                  t
                                                                                                           anh qsu,
                                                                                              h|r n ps̄h , r              (3)
       s̄h ,āh

which is a constant and independent w.r.t. sh , anh . Besides, by definition, we can ensure the non-
negativity of unt,h . As a result,

                                  @t P rT s,     Qt,π t            n
                                                  h|r n `un psh , ah q
                                                             t

                                               “At,π  t         n      n         n
                                                  h|r n psh , ah q ` ut,h psh , ah q ` Ch psh q                    (Eq. (3))
                                                 n
                                               “νt,h psh , anh q ` Ch1 psh q.                                             (4)

where we use Ch psh q and Ch1 psh q to denote some state-dependent but action-independent value.
According to Lem. D.6, under the above steering reward design, the dynamics of π1 , ..., πt , ..., πT
can be described by the following dynamics:
                                                n                n               n
       @t P rT s, @n P rN s, h P rHs, sh P S : θt`1,h p¨|sh q Ð θt,h p¨|sh q ` ανt,h psh , anh q                          (5)
                                                                    n                                n
                                                                   πt`1,h p¨|sh q Ð arg min Dϕn pz, θt`1,h p¨|sh qq,      (6)
                                                                                    zP∆pAn q

                                         n
Now we consider the following choice of νt,h :

                                         n                       θrhn panh |sh q ´ θhn panh |sh q
                                        νt,h psh , anh q “                                        ,
                                                                                αT
which implies θT `1 “ θ,
                      r and therefore, πT `1 “ π
                                               r . Besides, the steering reward function can be
upper bounded by:
                                                 n,πt
unt,h psh , anh q ď2 maxn |νt,h
                            n
                                ps̄h , ānh q ´ Ah|r            n
                                                     n ps̄h , āh q ´ Ea     n p¨|s q rν
                                                                       r n „πt,h   h
                                                                                         n
                                                                                                   anh q ´ An,π
                                                                                        t,h ps̄h , r
                                                                                                                t
                                                                                                                         anh qs|
                                                                                                            h|r n ps̄h , r
                     s̄h ,āh
                                 2
                ď2H `              p max |θrn pan |sh q ´ θhn panh |sh q|q,
                                αT n,h,sh ,anh h h
which implies the appropriate choice of Umax .
                                                                                                                           ˝
Theorem D.8. Under Assump. D, given the initial π1 :“ π P Π` , for any T ě 1 and ε ą 0, if
the agents follow Def. 4.1 with exact Q value, then ΨεT,Umax ‰ H if the following conditions are
satisfied:

                        r P Π` such that η goal pr
• There exists feasible π                        π q ě maxπ η goal pπq ´ ε

• Denote θ and θr as the dual variables associated with π and πr , respectively. We require Umax ě
         2
  2H ` αT  pmaxn,h,sh ,anh |θrhn panh |sh q ´ θhn panh |sh q|q

Proof. The proof is a directly application of Lem. D.7.                                                                    ˝
NPG as a Special Case For NPG, we have the following results.
Lemma D.9. Given @π, π     r P Π` , T ě 1, if the agents follow Def. 4.1 with exact adv-value and start
from π1 “ π, by choosing Umax appropriately, there exists a (history-independent) steering strategy
ψ :“ tψt utPrT s with ψt : Π` Ñ U, s.t., πT `1 “ π  r.
Theorem D.10. Under Assump. D, given any initial π1 P Π` , for any T ě 1 and ε ą 0, if the agents
follow Def. 4.1 with exact Q value, by choosing Umax appropriately, we have Ψε ‰ H.


                                                                     24
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Proof for Lem. D.9 and Thm. D.10 The proof is by directly applying Lem. D.7 and Thm. D.8 since
                                                                                  r P Π` , we
NPG is a special case of PMD with KL-Divergence as Bregman Divergence. For any π, π
consider the dual variables θ, θr such that:
θhn p¨|sh q “ log πhn p¨|sh q ´ Eanh „πhn rlog πhn panh |sh qs,       θrhn p¨|sh q “ log π
                                                                                         rhn p¨|sh q ´ Eanh „πhn rlog π
                                                                                                                      rhn panh |sh qs.
                                                                                                                        (7)

Choice of Umax in Lem. D.9              By applying Lem. D.7 and Thm. D.8, we consider the following
choice of Umax
                                  2            rn psh , anh q
                                               π                                rhn psh , r
                                                                                π         anh q
              Umax ě 2H `           p max | log hn            ´ Ea  n „π n rlog                 s|q.                     (8)
                                 αT n,h,sh ,ah πh psh , anh q       h   h
                                                                                πhn psh , r
                                                                                          anh q
                                                                  r



Choice of Umax in Thm. D.10 We denote π ˚ P arg maxπPΠ η goal pπq R Π` .
When π ˚ P Π` , we can directly apply Thm. D.8 with π
                                                    r Ð π ˚ , and choosing Umax correspondingly
following Eq. (8).
However, in some cases, π ˚ R Π` because it takes deterministic action in some states. In that
                                                                           r :“ p1 ´ Op Lε qqπ ˚ `
case, since η goal is L-Lipschitz in π, we can consider the mixture policy π
   ε
Op L qπUniform , where πUniform is the uniform policy. As a result, we have π r P Π` as well as
 goal                   goal
η pr  π q ě maxπPΠ η pπq ´ ε. Then the Umax can be chosen following Eq. (8).

D.2.2     T HE G ENERAL I NCENTIVE D RIVEN AGENTS UNDER A SSUMP. B
Theorem D.11 (Formal Version of Thm. 4.2 for the general PMD). Under Assump. D and Assump. C,
given the initial π1 :“ π P Π` , for any ε ą 0, if the agents follow Def. 4.1 under the Assump. B,
then ΨεT,Umax ‰ H if the following conditions are satisfied:

                                                 π q ě maxπ η goal pπq ´ 2ε
                        r P Π` such that η goal pr
• There exists feasible π

• Denote θ and θr as the dual variables associated with π and π
                                                              r , respectively. We require Umax ě
          λmin        λmin T r                     λ2max    L}θ´θ}
  2pH ` αλ2 p1 ` λmax q }θ ´ θ}2 q and T “ Θp λ2 log µε 2 q.
                                                              r
               max                                                min

Remark D.12. In Thm. D.2.2, our bound for Umax here is just a worst-case bound to handle the
noisy updates in the worst case. With high probability, the dual variable θt will converge to θr and the
steering reward does not have to be as large as Umax .

Proof. Given a πt , we consider the following steering reward ut :
unt,h psh , anh q “νt,h
                    n
                        psh , anh , πt q ´ An,π t        n
                                            h|r n psh , ah q ´ Ea
                                                                      n p¨|s q rν
                                                                r n „πt,h   h
                                                                                  n
                                                                                           anh , πt q ´ An,π
                                                                                 t,h psh , r
                                                                                                             t
                                                                                                                     anh qs
                                                                                                         h|r n psh , r
                            n
                   ´ minn tνt,h ps̄h , ānh , πt q ´ An,π t          n
                                                      h|r n ps̄h , āh q ´ Ea
                                                                                  n p¨|s q rν
                                                                            r n „πt,h   h
                                                                                              n
                                                                                                         anh , πt q ´ An,π
                                                                                              t,h ps̄h , r
                                                                                                                           t
                                                                                                                                    anh qsu,
                                                                                                                       h|r n ps̄h , r
                      s̄h ,āh

Here we choose νt,hn
                     psh , anh , πt q :“ γ1 ¨ pθrhn panh |sh q ´ θt`1,h
                                                                  n
                                                                        panh |sh qq, where θr denotes the dual
variable of policy π
                   r and γ will be determined later. Comparing with the design in the proof of
Thm. D.8, here the “driven term” νhn need to depend on πt because of the randomness in updates.
As we can see, unt,h psh , anh q ě 0, and for each t, we have:

             Er}θr ´ θt`1 }22 s “Er}θr ´ θt }22 s ´ 2Erxθr ´ θt , θt`1 ´ θt ys ` Er}θt`1 ´ θt }22 s
                                “Er}θr ´ θt }2 s ´ 2αErxθr ´ θt , A pπt ys ` Er}A   pπt }2 s
                                                  2                          |r`ut               |r`ut 2
                                                                  2
                                                   α        α
                                 ďp1 ´ 2λmin         ` λ2max 2 qEr}θr ´ θt }22 s,
                                                   γ        γ
which implies
                                                                  α        α2
                           Er}θr ´ θT `1 }22 s ď p1 ´ 2λmin         ` λ2max 2 qT }θr ´ θ}22 .
                                                                  γ        γ


                                                            25
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                λ2max α
We consider the choice γ “       λmin , which implies,

                                                                    λ2min T r
                                Er}θr ´ θT `1 }22 s ď p1 ´                q }θ ´ θ}22 .
                                                                    λ2max
                 λ2                                                 ν 2 ε2
                  log 2L}µε
                         θ´θ}2 r
When T “ 2c0 λmax
              2                ě c0 log               λ2      p            2
                                                                             q for some constant c0 , we have:
                  min                              1´ λ2min       2L2 }θ´θ}
                                                                       r
                                                                           2
                                                       max

                                                                        µε
                                            Er}θr ´ θT `1 }2 s ď           ,
                                                                        2L
which implies,
                                           ε                       ε L
        Erηpπ ˚ q ´ η goal pπT `1 qs ď       ` LEr}r
                                                   π ´ πT `1 }2 s ď ` Er}θr ´ θT `1 }2 s “ ε.
                                           2                       2 µ
Next, we discuss the choice of Umax , by Assump. B, we know,
                                             pπt }2 ď }θr ´ θt }2 ` α}A
                  }θr ´ θt`1 }2 “}θr ´ θt ´ αA                        pπt }2
                                               |r`ut                    |r`ut

                                   ď}θr ´ θt }2 ` αλmax }Aπ t
                                                          |r`ut }2
                                            λmin r
                                   ďp1 `         q}θ ´ θt }2
                                            λmax
where we use the fact that }Aπ              1 r
                               |r`uτ }2 “ γ }θ ´ θτ }2 and our choice of γ. Therefore, for all t P rT s,
                                 τ


}θr ´ θt }2 ď p1 ` λmin qT }θr ´ θ}2 . To ensure our design of un is feasible, we need to set:
                      λmax                                                  t,h

                                            1      λmin T r
                             Umax “2pH `      p1 `      q }θ ´ θ}2 q
                                            γ      λmax
                                             λmin       λmin T r
                                     “2pH `        p1 `      q }θ ´ θ}2 q.
                                            αλ2max      λmax
                                                                                                                   ˝
Proof for Thm. 4.2 As we discuss in Example. D.3, Assump. C is satisfied with µ “ 1. The proof
is a direct application of Thm. D.8 with the same choice of dual variables as Eq. (7).

E    M ISSING P ROOFS FOR E XISTENCE WHEN THE T RUE M ODEL f ˚ IS
     U NKNOWN
In the following, we establish some technical lemmas for the maximal likelihood estimator. Given a
steering dynamics model class F and the true dynamics f ˚ „ p0 and a steering strategy ψ : Π Ñ U,
we consider a steering trajectory τT0 :“ tπ1 , u1 , ..., πT0 , uT0 , πT0 `1 u generated by:
                             @t P rT0 s,    ut Ð ψpπt q, πt`1 „ f ˚ p¨|πt , ut q,                                 (9)
                                               1
where πt`1 is independent w.r.t. πt1 for t ă t conditioning on πt . In the following, we will denote
τt :“ tπ1 , u1 , ..., πt , ut , πt`1 u to be the trajectory up to step t.
For any f P F, we define:
                                                      T0
                                                      ź
                                      pf pτT0 q :“            f pπt`1 |πt , ut q.                                (10)
                                                      t“1


Given τT0 , we use τ̄T0 to denote the “tangent” trajectory tpπt , ut , π̄t`1 quTt“1      0
                                                                                            where π̄t`1 „
 ˚
f p¨|πt , ut q is independently sampled from the same distribution as πt`1 conditioning on the
same πt and ut .
Lemma E.1. Let l : Π ˆ U ˆ Π Ñ R be a real-valued loss function. Define LpτT0 q :“
řT0                                      ř T0
  t“1 lpπt , ut , πt`1 q and Lpτ̄T0 q :“   t“1 lpπt , ut , π̄t`1 q. Then, for arbitrary t P rT0 s,
                             ErexppLpτt q ´ log Eτ̄T0 rexppLpτ̄t qq|τt sqs “ 1.


                                                           26
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Proof. We denote E i :“ Eπ̄i`1 rexpplpπi , ui , π̄i`1 qq|πi , ui , f ˚ s. By definition, we have:
                                               t
                                               ÿ                                   k
                                                                                   ź
                                  Eτ̄t rexpp         lpπi , ui , π̄i`1 qq|τt s “         Ei.
                                               i“1                                 i“1

Therefore,
 EτT0 rexppLpτT0 q ´ log Eτ̄T0 rexppLpτ̄T0 qq|τT0 sqs
                                               řT0
                                         expp t“1      lpπt , ut , πt`1 qq
“EτT0 ´1 YtπT0 ,uT0 u rEπT0 `1 r               řT0                               |τT0 ´1 Y tπT0 , uT0 uss
                                 Eτ̄T0 rexpp t“1 lpπt , ut , πt`1 qq|τT0 s
                                        řT0
                                 expp t“1       lpπt , ut , πt`1 qq
“EτT0 ´1 YtπT0 ,uT0 u rEπT0 `1 r             śT0                    |τT0 ´1 Y tπT0 , uT0 uss
                                                        t
                                                 t“1 E
                            řT0 ´1
                        expp t“1       lpπt , ut , πt`1 qq               lpπT0 , uT0 , πT0 `1 q
“EτT0 ´1 YtπT0 ,uT0 u r           śT0 ´1 t                   ¨ EπT0 `1 r                        |τT0 ´1 Y tπT0 , uT0 uss
                                      t“1 E
                                                                                  E T0
               řT0 ´1
           expp t“1      lpπt , ut , πt`1 qq
“EτT0 ´1 r          śT0 ´1 t                  s “ ... “ 1.
                        t“1 E

                                                                                                                  ˝
Lemma E.2. [Property of the MLE Estimator] Under the condition in Prop. 4.4, given
the true model f ˚ and any deterministic steering strategy ψ : Π Ñ U, define fMLE Ð
           řT0
arg maxf PF t“1  log f pπt`1 |πt , ut q, where the trajectory is generated by:
                             @t P rT0 s,       ut Ð ψpπt q, πt`1 „ f ˚ p¨|πt , ut q,
then, for any δ P p0, 1q, w.p. at least 1 ´ δ, we have:
                             T0
                             ÿ                                                            |F|
                                  H2 pfMLE p¨|πt , ut q, f ˚ p¨|πt , ut qq ď logp             q.
                            t“1
                                                                                           δ

Proof. Given a model f P F, we consider the loss function:
                                    #             1

                              1
                                      1
                                      2 log ff˚pπ
                                                pπ
                                                    |π,uq
                                                    1 |π,uq , if f ˚ pπ 1 |π, uq ‰ 0
                   lM pπ, u, π q :“
                                     0,                       otherwise
Considering the event E:
                                                                                           |F|
             E :“ t´ log Eτ̄T0 rexp LM pτ̄T0 q|τT0 s ď ´LM pτT0 q ` logp                       q,   @f P Fu.
                                                                                            δ
                               řT0                                        řT0
where we define LM pτT0 q :“ t“1    lM pπt , ut , πt`1 q and LM pτ̄T0 q :“ t“1 lM pπt , ut , π̄t`1 q.
Besides, by applying Lem. E.1 on lM defined above and applying Markov inequality and the union
bound over all f P F, we have PrpEq ě 1 ´ δ. On the event E, we have:
                                  ´ log Eτ̄T0 rexp LfMLE pτ̄T0 q|τT0 s
                                                              |F|
                             ď ´ LfMLE pτT0 q ` logp              q
                                                               δ
                                                                          |F|
                             ďlMLE pf ˚ q ´ lMLE pfMLE q ` logp               q
                                                                           δ
                                      |F|
                             ď logp       q.                                   (fMLE maximizes the log-likelihood)
                                       δ
Therefore,
                                        d
                           T0
                  |F|     ÿ                f pπ̄t`1 |πt , ut q
             logp     qě´     log Eτ̄T r    ˚ pπ̄
                                                                  |πt , ut , f ˚ s
                   δ      t“1
                                      0   f       t`1 |πt , u t q


                                                             27
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025



                                                    d
                                T0
                                ÿ                        f pπ̄t`1 |πt , ut q
                            ě         1 ´ Eπ̄t`1 r                            |πt , ut , f ˚ s          (´ log x ě 1 ´ x)
                                t“1
                                                        f ˚ pπ̄t`1 |πt , ut q
                                T0
                                ÿ
                            “         H2 pf p¨|πt , ut q, f ˚ p¨|πt , ut qq.
                                t“1
                                                                                                                         ˝
Example 4.4. [One-Step Difference] If @π P Π, there exists a steering reward uπ P U, s.t.
minf,f 1 PF H2 pf p¨|π, r ` uπ q, f 1 p¨|π, r ` uπ qq ě ζ, for some universal ζ ą 0, where H is the
Hellinger distance, then for any δ P p0, 1q, F is pδ, TFδ q-identifiable with TFδ “ Opζ ´1 logp|F|{δqq.

Proof. Consider the steering strategy ψpπq “ uπ . Given any f P F, and the trajectory sampled by
ψ and f , by Lem. E.2, w.p. 1 ´ |Fδ | , if fMLE ‰ f , we have:
                                              T0
                                      |F|    ÿ
                            2 logp        qě     H2 pf p¨|πt , ut q, fMLE p¨|πt , ut qq ě T0 ζ.
                                       δ     t“1

By union bound over all f P F, if T0 “ r ζ4 log |Fδ | s ` 1, the following holds:
                                           «                                               ff
                                                                ÿTδ
                                                                         1
    max Ef,ψ rIrf “ fMLE ss “ max Ef,ψ Irf “ arg max                log f pπt`1 |πt , ut qs ě 1 ´ δ.
        f PF                                f PF                       f 1 PF   t“1

                                                                                                                         ˝
Theorem 4.5. [A Sufficient Condition for Existence] Given any ε ą 0, ΨεT pF; π1 q5 ‰ H, if D Tr ă T ,
                   ε                            ε{2
s.t., (1) F is p 2ηmax , Trq-identifiable, (2) ΨT ´Tr pF; πTr q ‰ H for any possible πTr generated at step
Tr during the steering.

Proof. We denote ψExplore :“ tψExplore,t utPrT s to be the exploration strategy to identify f ˚ . Given a
                      ε{2            ε{2                ε{2
πTr , we denote ψπTĂ :“ tψπ Ă,t utPrT s P ΨT ´Tr pπTr q to be one of the steering strategy with ε-optimal
                           T
gap starting from πTr .

We consider the history-dependent steering strategy ψ :“ tψt utPrT s , such that for t ď Tr, ψt “
                                               ε{2
ψExplore,t , and for all t ą Tr, we have ψt “ ψπ ,t .
                                                              T
                                                              Ă


As a result, for any f P F, the final gap would be:
                                                 ε
                     ∆ψ,T pf q “ PrpfMLE “ f q ¨ ` PrpfMLE ‰ f q ¨ ηmax ď ε,
                                                 2
which implies ψ P ΨεT pF; π1 q.                                                                                          ˝
F       G ENERALIZATION TO PARTIAL O BSERVATION MDP S ETUP
F.1       POMDP BASICS

Partial Observation Markov Decision Process A (finite-horizon) Partial-Observation Markov
Decision Process (with hidden states) can be specified by a tuple M :“ tν1 , T, X , U, O, T, η, Ou.
Here ν1 is the initial state distribution, L is the maximal horizon length, X is the hidden state space,
U is the action space, O is the observation space. Besides, T : X ˆ U Ñ X denotes the stationary
transition function, O : X Ñ ∆pOq denotes the stationary emission model, i.e. the probability of
some observation conditioning on some state. We will denote Hh :“ O1 ˆ U1 ... ˆ Oh to be the
history space, and use τh :“ to1 , u1 , ..., oh u to history observation up to step h. We consider the
history dependent policy ψ :“ tψ1 , ..., ψH u with ψh : Hh Ñ ∆pUq. Starting from the initial state
x1 , the trajectory induced by a policy ψ is generated by:
        @h P rHs,      oh „ Op¨|xh q,           uh „ ψh p¨|τh q,        ηh „ ηh poh , uh q,      xh`1 „ Tp¨|xh , uh q.
    5
        Here we highlight the dependence on initial policy, model, and time for clarity (see Footnote 2)


                                                                  28
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                          Steering Reward                                           Steering Reward
                            𝑢" ∼ 𝜓" (⋅ |𝑜" )                                       𝑢! ∼ 𝜓! (⋅ |𝑜" , 𝑢" , 𝑜! )

                                    𝑢!                                                        𝑢"

              𝑜!                                                        𝑜"

                   Observation Emission                                      Observation Emission
                       𝑜" ∼ 𝕆(⋅ |𝑥" )                                            𝑜! ∼ 𝕆(⋅ |𝑥" )
                                                                                                                                             …
    𝑥!                                                        𝑥#                                                        𝑥#

         𝝅!          𝜏!         State Transition                   𝝅"         𝜏"          State Transition                   𝝅#   𝜏#
                            𝜋 ! ∼ 𝑓(⋅ |𝜋 " , 𝜏 " , 𝑟 + 𝑢" )                           𝜋 # ∼ 𝑓(⋅ |𝜋 # , 𝜏 ! , 𝑟 + 𝑢! )
                                  𝜏 ! ∼ 𝐺(⋅ |𝜋 ! )                                          𝜏 # ∼ 𝐺(⋅ |𝜋 # )


Figure 4: Probabilistic Graphic Model (PGM) of the POMDP formulation of the steering
process. Starting with the initial state x1 :“ pπ1 , τ1 q, for all t ě 1, the mediator receives observation
ot „ Op¨|xt q and output the steering reward given the history ut „ ψp¨|o1 , u1 , ..., ot q. The agents
then update their policies following the dynamics f and the modified reward function r ` ut .


F.2      S TEERING P ROCESS AS A POMDP

Given a game G, we consider the following Markovian agent dynamics:
                                           @t P rT s,         τt „ πt ,        πt`1 „ f p¨|πt , τt , rq,
where τt :“ tst,k  t,k         t,k  t,k K
              1 , a1 , , ..., sH , aH uk“1 is several trajectories generated by the policy πt .

In each step t, we assume the agents first collect trajectories τt with policy πt , and then optimize their
policies following some update rule f p¨|πt , τt , rq. Comparing with the Markovian setup in Sec. 3,
here f has additional dependence on the trajectories τt .
Based on this new formulation, the dynamics given the steering strategy is defined by:
          @t P rT s,        τt „ πt ,          ut „ ψt p¨|τ1 , u1 , ..., τt´1 , ut´1 , πt q,                    πt`1 „ f p¨|πt , r ` ut q,
In Fig. 4, we illustrate the steering dynamics by Probabilistic Graphical Model (PGM). Here we treat
the joint of πt and τt as the hidden state at step t, and the trajectory τt is the partial observation ot
received by the mediator. Next, we introduce the notion of decodable POMDP, where the hidden
state is determined by a short history.
Definition F.1 (m-Decodable POMDP). Given a POMDP M , we say it is m-decodale, if there exists
a decoder ϕ, such that, xh “ ϕpoh´m , uh´m , ...oh´1 , uh´1 , oh q,

In our steering setting, if for any f P F, f is m-decodable, we just need to learn a steering strategy
ψ :“ pO ˆ Uqm ˆ O Ñ U, which predicts the steering reward given the past m-step history. This
is the motivation for our experiment setup in the Grid World Stag Hunt game in Sec. 6.1. More
concretely, we assume the agents trajectories in the past few steps can be used as sufficient statistics
for the current policy, and use them as input of the steering strategy (see Appx. G.2.2 for more
details).

G        M ISSING E XPERIMENT D ETAILS
G.1       A BOUT I NITIALIZATION IN E VALUATION

In some experiments, we will evaluate our steering strategies with multiple different initial policy π1 ,
in order to make sure our evaluation results are representative.
Here we explain how we choose the initial policies π1 . We will focus on games with two actions
which is the only case we use this kind of initialization. For each player, given an integer i, we
                                                                             1 3
construct an increasing sequence with common difference Seqi :“ p 2i           , 2i , ..., 2i´1
                                                                                            2i q. Then, we
consider the initial policies π1 such that π pa q “ 1 ´ π pa q P Seqi , π pa q “ 1 ´ π 2 pa2 q P Seqi .
                                             1 1           1 2              2 1

In this way, we obtain a set of initial policies uniformly distributed in grids with common difference


                                                                             29
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


1
i . As a concrete example, the initial points in Fig. 1-(b) marked in color black is generated by the
above procedure with i “ 10.

G.2     E XPERIMENTS FOR K NOWN M ODEL S ETTING

G.2.1    E XPERIMENT D ETAILS IN N ORMAL -F ORM S TAG H UNT G AME
We provide the missing experiment details for the steering experiments in Fig. 1-(b).

Choice of η goal Weřconsidern the total utility as the goal function. But for the numerical stability, we
choose η goal pπq “ nPrN s J|r pπq ´ 10 where we shift the reward via the maximal utility value 10.

The Steering Strategy The steering strategy is a 2-layer MLP with 256 hidden layers and tanh as
the activation function. Given a time step t and the policy πt :“ tπt1 , πt2 u with πtn pHq ` πtn pGq “ 1
for n P t1, 2u, the input of the steering strategy is
                     d                  d               d                 d
                        πt1 pHq           πt1 pHq         πt2 pHq           πt2 pHq T ´ t
                plog            , ´ log           , log           , ´ log          ,      q.         (11)
                        πt1 pGq           πt1 pGq         πt2 pGq           πt2 pGq 100
Here the first (second) two components correspond to the “dual variable” of the policy πt1 pHq and
πt1 pGq (πt2 pHq and πt2 pGq), respectively; the last component is the time embedding because our
steering strategy is time-dependent.
The steering strategy will output a vector with dimension 4, which corresponds to the steering rewards
for two actions of two players. Note that here the steering reward function u1 : S ˆ A1 r0, Umax s
(for agent 1) and u2 :“ S ˆ A2 Ñ r0, Umax s (agent 2) is defined on the joint of state space and
individual action space. This can be regarded as a specialization of the setup in our main text, where
we consider un : S ˆ A Ñ r0, Umax s @n P rN s, which is defined on the joint of state space and the
entire action space.

Training Details The maximal steering reward Umax is set to be 10, and we choose β “ 25. We
use the PPO implementation of StableBaseline3 (Raffin et al., 2021). The training hyper-parameters
can be found in our codes in our supplemental materials.
During the training, the initial policy is randomly selected from the feasible policy set, in order
to ensure the good performance in generalizing to unseen initialization points. Another empirical
trick we adopt in our experiments is that, we strengthen the learning signal of the goal function
by including η goal pπt q for each step t P rT s. In another word, we actually optimize the following
objective function:
                                                             T
                         1 ÿ         ”                      ÿ                                       ı
         ψ ˚ Ð arg max           Eψ,f β ¨ η goal pπT `1 q `     β ¨ η goal pπt q ´ η cost pπt , ut q .   (12)
                    ψPΨ |F|
                            f PF                            t“1

The main reason is that here T “ 500 is very large, and if we only have the goal reward at the
terminal step, the learning signal is extremely sparse and the learning could fail.

Other Experiment Results In Fig. 5, we investigate the trade-off between steering gap and the
steering cost when choosing different coefficients β. In general, the larger β can result in lower
steering gap and higher steering cost.

G.2.2    E XPERIMENT D ETAILS IN G RID -W ORLD V ERSION OF S TAG H UNT G AME
We recall the illustration in LHS of Fig. 2. We consider a 3x3 grid world environment with two agents
(blue and red). At the bottom-left and up-right blocks, we have ‘stag’ and ‘hares’, respectively, whose
positions are fixed during the game. At the beginning of each episode, agents start from the up-left
and bottom-right blocks, respectively.
For each time step h P rHs, every agent can take four actions {up,down,left,right} to move
to the blocks next to their current blocks. But if the agent hits the wall after taking the action (e.g. the
agent locates at the most right column and takes the action right), it will not move. As long as one


                                                     30
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                           4                               10
                                           3


                             , T(f * )(1e-3)


                                                                 C , T(f * )
                                           2                                   5
                                           1
                                           0 = 10   = 25 = 100                 0 = 10   = 25 = 100

Figure 5: Trade-off between Steering Gap (Left) and Steering Cost (Right). (averaged over 5x5
uniformly distributed grids as initializations of π1 , see Appx. G.1).


agent reaches the block with either stag or hare, the agents will receive rewards and be reset to the
initial position (up-left and bottom-right blocks). The reward is defined by the following.

• If both agents reach the block with stag at the same time, each of them receive reward 0.25.
• If both agents reach the block with hares at the same time, each of them receive reward 0.1.
• If one agent reaches the block with hares, it will get reward 0.2 and the other get reward 0.
• In other cases, the agents receive reward 0.

We choose H “ 16. The best strategy is that all the agents move together towards the block with
Stag, so within one episode, the agents can reach the Stag 16 / 2 = 8 times, and the maximal total
return would be 8 * 0.25 = 4.0.
In the following, we introduce the training details. Our grid-world environment and the PPO training
algorithm is built based on the open source code from (Lu et al., 2022).

Agents Learning Dynamics The agents will receive a 3x3x4 image encoding the position of
all objects to make the decision. The agents adopt a CNN, and utilize PPO to optimize the CNN
parameters with learning rate 0.005.

Steering Setup and Details in Training Steering Strategy Our steering strategy is another CNN,
which takes the agents recent trajectories as input. More concretely, for each steering iteration t, we
ask the agents to interact and generated 256 episodes with length H, and concatenate them together
to a tensor with shape [256 * H, 3, 3, 4]. The mediator takes that tensor as input and output an
8-dimension steering reward vector. Here the steering rewards corresponds to the additional rewards
given to the agents when one of them reach the blocks with stag or hares (we do not provide individual
incentives for states and actions before reaching those blocks). To be more concrete, the 8 rewards
correspond to the additional reward for blue and red agents for the following 4 scenarios: (1) both
agents reach stag together (2) both agents reach hares together (3) this agent reach stag while the
other does not reach stag (4) this agent reach hares while the other does not reach hares.
The steering strategy is also trained by PPO. We choose β “ 25 and learning rate 0.001. We consider
the total utility as the goal function, and we adopt the similar empirical trick as the normal-form
version, where we include η goal into the reward function for every t P rT s (Eq. (12)). The results in
Fig. 2 is the average of 5 steering strategies trained by different seeds for 80 iterations. The two-sigma
error bar is shown.

G.2.3    E XPERIMENTS IN M ATCHING P ENNIES
Matching Pennies is a two-player zero-sum game with two actions H=Head and T=Tail and its payoff
matrix is presented in Table 2.

Choice of η goal In this game, the unique Nash Equilibrium is the uniform policy π NE with
π n,NE pHq “ π n,NE pTq “ 12 for all n P t1, 2u. We consider the distance with π NE as the goal
function, i.e. η goal “ ´}π ´ π NE }2 .

Experiment Setups We follow the same steering strategy and training setups for Stag Hunt Game
in Appx. G.2.1. The agents follow NPG to update the policies with learning rate α “ 10.


                                                             31
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Table 2: Payoff Matrix of Two-Player Game Matching Pennies. Two actions H and T stand for Head
and Tail, respectively.

                                                                         H                         T
                                                                H     (1, -1)                   (-1, 1)
                                                                T     (-1, 1)                   (1, -1)


       1.0        No Steering               1.0       With Steering
                                                                                            10


                                                                              , T(f * )(1e-3)
 2(Head)


                                      2(Head)


                                                                                                                       C , T(f * )
       0.5                                  0.5                                                 5                                0.5

                                                                                                                                 0.1
           0.0        0.5       1.0             0.0       0.5          1.0                      0 = 10    = 25 = 100               0 = 10   = 25 = 100
                    1(Head)                              1(Head)

                 (a) Dynamics of Agents Policies.                                               (b) Trade-off between Accuracy and Cost by β.

Figure 6: Experiments in MatchingPennies. (a) x and y axes correspond to the probability that
agents take Head. Black dots mark the initial policies, and red curves represents the trajectories
of agents policies. The steering strategy to plot the figure is trained with β “ 25. (b) We compare
β “ 10, 25, 100. Error bar shows 95% confidence intervals. (averaged over 5x5 uniformly distributed
grids as initializations of π1 , see Appx. G.1)



Experiment Results As shown in Fig. 6-(a), we can observe the cycling behavior without steering
guidance (Akin and Losert, 1984; Mertikopoulos et al., 2018). In contrast, our learned steering
strategy can successfully guide the agents towards the desired Nash. In Fig. 6-(b), we also report the
trade-off between steering gap and steering cost with different choice of β.


G.3          E XPERIMENTS FOR U NKNOWN M ODEL S ETTING

G.3.1            D ETAILS FOR E XPERIMENTS WITH S MALL M ODEL S ET F

The results in Table 1 is averaged over 5 seeds and the error bars show 95% confidence intervals.

                         ˚         ˚                       ˚         ˚
Training Details for ψ0.7    and ψ1.0   The training of ψ0.7   and ψ1.0  follow the similar experiment
setup as Appx. G.2.2, except here the agents adopt random learning rates. For the choice of β, we
train the optimal steering strategy with β P t10, 20, 30, 40, 50, 60, 70, 80, 90, 100u for both f0.7 and
f1.0 , and choose the minimal β such that the resulting steering strategy can achieve almost 100%
accuracy (i.e. ∆ψ,f ď ε for almost all 5x5 uniformly distributed initial policies generated by process
in Appx. G.1). As we reported in the main text, we obtain β “ 70 for f0.7 and β “ 20 for f1.0 .

                          ˚                            ˚
Training Details for ψBelief    For the training of ψBelief , the input of the steering strategy is the
original state (Eq. (11)) appended by the belief state of the model. In each steering step t P rT s, we
assume the mediator can observe a learning rate sample α, and use it to update the model belief state
correspondingly. The regularization coefficient β for the training of ψBelief is set to be the expected
regularization coefficient over the belief state β “ bpf0.7 q ¨ 70 ` bpf1.0 q ¨ 20. In another word, we
use the sum of the coefficient of two models weighted by the belief state. This is reasonable by the
                                                                                                 ˚
definition of the reward function in the belief state MDP lifted from the original POMDP. ψBelief     is
trained the PPO algorithm.
                          ˚
During the training of ψBelief , we find that the train is not very stable, possibly because the chosen
β for two models are quite different. Therefore, we keep tracking the steering gap of the steering
strategy during the training and save the model as long as it outperforms the previous ones in steering
gap. Our final evaluation is based on that model.


                                                                             32
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


G.3.2    D ETAILS FOR E XPERIMENTS WITH L ARGE M ODEL S ET F
We set Umax “ 1.0, and the random exploration strategy (red curve in the left sub-plot in Fig. 3)
will sample the steering reward uniformly from the interval r0, Umax s. We use the PPO (Raffin et al.,
2021) to train of exploration policy and also the steering strategy given hidden model. To amplify the
exploration challenge, we set β n “ 1 when π n pAq ď 0.5 and increase to β n “ 10 when π n pAq ď 0.5.
As a result, if the mediator follows first-explore-then-exploit strategy and fail to distinguish avaricious
agents from the normal ones, adopting large steering reward can lead to much worse performance.
For the training of exploration policy, although the learning signal Irf “ fMLE s in Proc. 2
is supported by theory, it contains much less information than the posterior probability
rPrpf |π1 , u1 , ..., πT , uT , πT `1 qsf PF . Therefore, empirically, we instead train a history-independent
steering strategy to maximize the posterior probability of f :
                                         1 ÿ            ÿ
              ψ Explore Ð arg max                Eψ,f r     Prpλn |π1 , u1 , ..., πTr , uTr πTr `1 qs.   (13)
                                   ψ |F|
                                            f PF   nPrN s

Here we use the sum of posteriors of λ s since the λn s are independent for all n P rN s. We observe it
                                         n

results in better performance, and it is doable by keep tracking the model belief state of each agent. Be-
sides, similar to Stag Hunt games, we observe that using the posterior Prpλn |π1 , u1 , ..., πt , ut , πt`1 q
as rewards in the non-terminal steps t ă T increase the performance, and we use the same trick
(Eq. (12)).
To plot the results in the middle and right sub-plots in Fig. 3, for each model f ˚ P tf1 , f2 , f3 u, we
train three steering strategies (with the same state design in Eq. (11)). The first one is the oracle
strategy, which starts with π1 and steering for T “ 500 steps. The second one is the FETE strategy,
including an exploration policy and another exploitation policy. The exploration policy is trained
following the above Eq. (13) with exploration horizon Tr “ 30. Then, we estimate the model
from samples generated by the exploration policy, and train another exploitation policy following
the remaining step of FETE with exploitation horizon T “ 470 (Procedure 2). The third strategy
FETE-RE is the same as FETE except we just use random policy as the exploration policy, and
estimate the model by interaction samples generated by that. During the evaluation, for FETE and
FETE-RE, we steer with the exploration policy for the first 30 steps, and execute the exploitation
policy for the rest. The results are averaged over 5 seeds and two-sigma error bar is shown.

G.4     E XPLANATION OF THE C ONSISTENCY OF THE A DAPTION

We first want to highlight it is not easy to have an apples-to-apples comparison with (Canyakmaz
et al., 2024). First, because the experiment setting in (Canyakmaz et al., 2024) does not present
significant exploration challenges, we design and decide to evaluate both methods in the “avaricious
agents” setting (Fig. 3). Second, SIAR-MPC is specialized for polynomial function classes and the
dynamics tractable by MPC, making it difficult to generalize beyond that setting. Therefore, we have
to do some necessary adaption. To ensure the fair comparison, we consider to use FETE-RE as the
adaption of SIAR-MPC in our setting. For the exploration stage, FETE-RE aligns with SIAR-MPC
in using random exploration. For the model identification and exploitation phase, FETE-RE adopts
MLE estimation and RL methods to train the exploitation policy, which inherit the same inspirits as
SIAR-MPC and also aligned with our original FETE.
From another perspective, the main focus of our empirical comparison between FETE and (Canyak-
maz et al., 2024) is the impact of different exploration strategies on the final steering gap and steering
costs. This is reasonable. Because from the discussion in Sec. 5.2, we can conclude that our FETE
is more general compared with SIAR-MPC in (Canyakmaz et al., 2024) in terms of both the model
estimation strategy and exploitation strategy. The main distinction and improvement of our FETE
compared with (Canyakmaz et al., 2024) is our strategic exploration strategy.

G.5     A S UMMARY OF THE C OMPUTE R ESOURCES BY E XPERIMENTS IN THIS PAPER

Experiments on Two-Player Normal-Form Games For the experiments in ‘Stag Hunt’ and
‘Matching Pennies’ (illustrated in Fig. 1, 5, 6), we only use CPUs (AMD EPYC 7742 64-Core
Processor). It takes less than 5 hours to finish the training.


                                                     33
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Experiments on Grid-World Version of ‘Stag Hunt’ For the experiments in grid-world ‘Stag
Hunt’ (illustrated in Fig. 2), we use one RTX 3090 and less than 5 CPUs (AMD EPYC 7742 64-Core
Processor). The training (per seed) takes around 48 hours.

Experiments on N -Player Normal-Form Cooperative Games For the experiments in cooperative
games (illustrated in Fig. 3), we only use CPUs (AMD EPYC 7742 64-Core Processor). It takes less
than 10 hours to finish the training.


H     A DDITIONAL D ISCUSSION ABOUT G ENERALIZING OUR R ESULTS

In this section, we discuss some extensions of the principle and algorithms in this paper to more
general settings.

Non-Tabular Setting When the game is non-tabular and its state and action spaces are infinite,
the steering problem itself is fundamentally challenging without additional assumptions, since the
policies are continuous distributions with infinite dimension and the learning dynamics can be
arbitrarily complex. Nonetheless, when the agents’ policies and steering rewards are parameterized
by finite variables, our methods and algorithms can still be generalized by treating the parameters as
representatives.
As a concrete example, the Linear-Quadratic (LQ) game is a popular model involving countinuous
state and action spaces (Jacobson, 1973; Başar and Bernhard, 2008; Zhang et al., 2019). In zero-sum
LQ game, the game dynamics are characterized by a linear system:
                                             xt`1 “ Axt ` Byt ` Czt ,
with one-step reward function

                    r1 pxt , yt , zt q “ ´r2 pxt , yt , zt q “ xJ        J u       J v
                                                                t Qxt ` yt R yt ´ zt R zt .

Here xt , xt`1 P Rd are the system states, yt P Rm1 and zt P Rm2 denote the actions of two agents.
Besides, the agents policies are parameterized by matrices Kt P Rm1 ˆd , Lt P Rm2 ˆd , i.e.
                                             yt “ ´Kt xt ,    zt “ ´Lt xt .
Following the quadratic form of the original reward, one may consider quadratic steering reward
functions with parameters Θt :“ pΘQ          u   v               Q    u    v
                                       t , Θt , Θt q and Ξt :“ pΞt , Ξt , Ξt q, such that, the steering
reward for two agents at step t is specified by:
                                                        Q
                              u1t pxt , yt , zt q “ xJ          J u        J v
                                                     t Θt xt ` yt Θt yt ´ zt Θt zt ,
                                                         Q
                               u2t pxt , yt , zt q “ xJ          J u        J v
                                                      t Ξt xt ` yt Ξt yt ´ zt Ξt zt ,

and the reward after modification would be:
                                                      Q
       r1 pxt , yt , zt q ` u1t pxt , yt , zt q “xJ               J   u    u       J   v    v
                                                  t pΘt ` Qqxt ` yt pΘt ` R qyt ´ zt pΘt ` R qzt ,
                                                      Q
       r2 pxt , yt , zt q ` u2t pxt , yt , zt q “xJ               J   u    u       J   v    v
                                                  t pΘt ´ Qqxt ` yt pΘt ´ R qyt ´ zt pΘt ´ R qzt .

Although the state, action and steering reward spaces are continuous, both the policies and steering
reward are determined by their parameters. Therefore, the agents’ learning dynamics can be modeled
by a function f ˚ mapping between those parameters instead:
                                         Q            u        u    u        v  Q            u       u    u        v
pKt`1 , Lt`1 q „ f ˚ p¨| looomooon
                         pKt , Lt q , pΘ t ` Q, Θt ` R , Θt ` R , Ξt ´ Q, Ξt ´ R , Ξt ´ R qq.
                                      loooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooomoooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooon
                          agents’ policies                             modified rewards

Besides, the learning of steering strategy is equivalent to learning a function mapping ψ from
parameters in history tpKτ , Lτ , Θτ , Ξτ qut´1
                                             τ “1 Y tpKt , Lt qu to the next steering reward parameter
pΘt , Ξt q. Since both the policy parameters and steering reward parameters have finite dimension, this
problem is tractable under our frameworks.


                                                         34
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Uncountable function class F Our results can be extended to cases where the model class F is
infinite but has a finite covering number. We denote Fε0 as the ε0 -cover for F, s.t.
                                                     ´                        ¯
                 @f P F, Df 1 P Fε0 , s.t. max TV f p¨|π, uq ´ f 1 p¨|π, uq ď ε0 .
                                                   πPΠ,u

where TV denotes the total variation distance. If F is uncoutable but Fε0 is finite, we run our
algorithms with Fε0 instead of F. Under Assump. A, we denote fε˚0 P Fε0 is the function ε0 close to
f ˚ . By simmulation lemma, then we have:
                     |Eψ,f ˚ rη goal pπT `1 qs ´ Eψ,fε˚ rη goal pπT `1 qs| ďT ¨ ε0 ¨ ηmax
                                                         0
                     T
                     ÿ                                   T
                                                         ÿ
         |Eψ,f ˚ r       η cost pπt , ut qs ´ Eψ,fε˚ r       η cost pπt , ut qs| ďT 2 ¨ ε0 ¨ max η cost pπ, uq.
                                                   0                                        π,u
                  t“1                                  t“1


As we can see, we can still optimize the objective in Eq. (1) with Fε0 , and then transfer guarantees
on steering gap and cost for fε˚0 (e.g. the the worst case guarantees in Prop. 3.3) to f ˚ with additional
OpT 2 ¨ ε0 q errors, which is ignorable when ε0 is small enough.

Non-Markovian Learning Dynamics In general, non-Markovian learning dynamics is intractable,
as implied by the fundamental difficulty in learning optimal policies in POMDPs. However, when
some special structures exhibit, our methods for Markovian agents can be generalized. One example
is the non-Markovian agents with finite-memory, i.e.,
                            πt`1 „ f ˚ p¨|πt´m`1 , r ` ut´m`1 , ..., πt , r ` ut q.
This can be reformulated by a Markovian dynamics
                                            xt`1 „ F ˚ p¨|xt , r ` ut q,
with the same steering rewards as actions but a new definition of “state”: xt :“ tπt´m`1 , r `
ut´m`1 , ..., πt´1 , r ` ut´1 , πt u. Comparing with Def. 3.1, the dimension of the state space is
expanded by m times, which is still tractable for small m.

Neural Networks as Model Class to Approximate Complex f ˚ The main principle for choosing
F is to ensure our “realizability” assumption holds with high probability, i.e. the true model f ˚ P F.
The concrete choice of F depends on the prior knowledge we have about the agents’ learning
dynamics. In general, the less prior knowledge we have, the larger F should be to ensure realizability,
and vice versa.
In practice, one “safe-choice” can be consider a class of parameterized neural networks as F, since it
has been proven in deep RL and supervised learning literature that neural networks have powerful
approximation ability when f ˚ is potentially very complex. Because in our formulation, we allow
the randomness of next policy πt`1 (instead of a deterministic output) given πt and r ` ut , we
may consider a neural network taking the concatenation of πt , r ` ut and another random Gaussian
vector ξ as inputs. Here the noise vector is introduced to model the stochasticity of πt .
The parameters of neural networks are in general continous variables, which implies the model class
is uncountable. However, if the parameters has bounded value range, we can show the finite covering
number on the parameter space. If we consider Lipschitz continuous activation functions (which is
most of the cases), it implies the bounded covering number.
Besides, when considering neural networks, the resulting model class F can be extremely large
and the MLE-based strategic exploration in Procedure 2 will be inefficient. We highlight that we
design such exploration step in order to align with the main principle: the algorithm design should be
supported by theoretical guarantees on the performance of the learned steering strategy. This focus on
theoretical rigor is the main factor limiting the scalability of our algorithms in more complex settings.
Conversely, if we relax the requirements on theoretical guarantees, it is not very challenging to adapt
our algorithms to complex scenarios. For example, we can instead consider more scalable exploration
methods, such as Random Network Distillation (RND) (Burda et al., 2018) or Bootstrapped DQN
(Osband et al., 2016), although without theoretical guarantees.



                                                             35
