Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


R ETRIEVAL -AUGMENTED G ENERATION WITH
E STIMATION OF S OURCE R ELIABILITY
 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                             A BSTRACT

         Retrieval-augmented generation (RAG) addresses key limitations of large lan-
         guage models (LLMs), such as hallucinations and outdated knowledge, by incor-
         porating external databases. These databases typically consult multiple sources to
         encompass up-to-date and various information. However, standard RAG methods
         often overlook the heterogeneous source reliability in the multi-source database
         and retrieve documents solely based on relevance, making them prone to propa-
         gating misinformation. To address this, we propose Reliability-Aware RAG (RA-
         RAG) which estimates the reliability of multiple sources and incorporates this in-
         formation into both retrieval and aggregation processes. Specifically, it iteratively
         estimates source reliability and true answers for a set of queries without ground
         truth answers. Then, it selectively retrieves relevant documents from a few of re-
         liable sources and aggregates them using weighted majority voting, where the se-
         lective retrieval ensures scalability while not compromising the performance. We
         also introduce a benchmark designed to reflect real-world scenarios with heteroge-
         neous source reliability and demonstrate the effectiveness of RA-RAG compared
         to a set of baselines.


1   I NTRODUCTION

Large language models (LLMs) have demonstrated remarkable capabilities across various tasks
but are often limited by hallucinations and a lack of access to real-time information. Retrieval-
augmented generation (RAG) offers a promising solution by integrating external databases, allow-
ing LLMs to access more accurate and up-to-date information (Guu et al., 2020; Lewis et al., 2020).
However, these databases often consist of content from multiple sources with varying levels of reli-
ability, which can make RAG systems vulnerable to misinformation from unreliable sources. Stan-
dard RAG methods retrieve documents based on only relevance to the query, without considering
the accuracy or trustworthiness of the information retrieved. As a result, RAG systems are prone to
propagating misinformation. This issue is exacerbated by the advances of LLMs, which enable a
massive production of plausible yet false documents and disables identifying the credibility of doc-
uments by linguistic features (Menczer et al., 2023; Augenstein et al., 2024; Hong et al., 2024; Zou
et al., 2024; Shafran et al., 2024; Chaudhari et al., 2024; Chen & Shu, 2023).
Several recent efforts have sought to improve the robustness of RAG systems against misinformation
(Pan et al., 2023; Weller et al., 2024; Xiang et al., 2024; Deng et al., 2024; Pan et al., 2024). How-
ever, these approaches have notable limitations. Deng et al. (2024) use LLMs to evaluate document
reliability based on their internal knowledge, which is ineffective when LLMs indeed need to consult
with external knowledge. Pan et al. (2023); Weller et al. (2024); Xiang et al. (2024) use counting-
based methods such as majority voting (MV) or selecting responses that exceed a certain threshold.
However, these methods are effective only when the portion of misinformation in the retrieved doc-
uments is minor, overlooking the heterogeneity in source reliability. Pan et al. (2024) propose a
heuristic estimation, which categorizes the source reliability into two groups (low, high) based on a
common reputation of the source. To learn how to aggregate responses according to source reliabil-
ity, they generate labeled dataset to fine-tune LLMs. However, the reputation of sources, particularly
social media and blogs, is often unclear and susceptible to manipulation. Additionally, a simple two-
level credibility score cannot capture subtle differences in reliability and requires additional training
to utilize this information.


                                                   1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


           Stage 1: Iterative Reliability Estimation                                       Stage 2: Reliable and Efficient Inference
                                                                $𝒋
                                      1. Estimating True Answer 𝒚                        𝜿 Reliable and Relevant Source Selection (𝜿-RRSS)
                       Sources                              In (𝟑)
  Questions                                      A                                                 Sorted(Source, key=Reliability)
                               𝑆"                  𝑣$ = 0.3  $ = A
                                                             𝒚                 Ground Truth:                 𝑣𝒗!
   𝑞"              A                  𝑣# = 0.4 𝑦( " 𝑣! = 0.5                   Sigmund Freud                 0.7           Sigmund Freud
           ...
                   A
                               𝑆%          A             B                     Who is regarded                                                       Weighted
                                                                                                             0.4             I don’t know          Majority Voting
   𝑞#                                                                           as the founder
                   B           𝑆&                                    In (𝟒)   of psychoanalysis?
                                             correct A =                                                                                          Sigmund Freud: 0.7
                                       B                                                                                     B.F. Skinner          B.F. Skinner: 0.35
           ...


                                                        𝑣$   ↑                                               0.2

                         ...
   𝑞   $
                               𝑆'
                                                     ↑
                                        correct 𝑣# 𝑦( "          ↓
                                                           𝑣! incorrect                                                      B.F. Skinner


                                                                                                                     ...
                                                                                                       ...
                                                                                                      ...
                                               = A           B ≠                                                                                       Sigmund
                                                                                                             0.1             BREAK (𝜅=3)                 Freud
                                    2. Estimating Source Reliability 𝒗𝒊
           : Generated answers
                                      Output: Estimated Reliability 𝒗            Retriever                                                               B.F.
       : Filtering the answer not                                                                                                                      Skinner
       based on the documents             0.7, 0.4, 0.2, … , 0.1                                                                     Majority Voting



Figure 1: Overview of the RA-RAG framework. In the first stage, RA-RAG iteratively estimates
the reliability of each source vi for i ∈ [N ] based on estimated true answers ŷ j for each question
j, as outlined in equation (3) and (4). Based on the estimated reliability, in the second stage, the
retriever selects κ sources through the Reliable and Relevant Source Selection (κ-RRSS) process,
detailed in Section 3.4. The final answer is determined using a weighted majority voting process,
with the weights derived from the estimated reliability.

To overcome these limitations, we formalize a multi-source RAG framework based on weighted
majority voting (WMV) that distinguishes between different sources in the database and integrates
information from multiple sources given their reliability. However, as it is hard to know the source
reliability in advance, we introduce Reliability-Aware RAG (RA-RAG), an effective method that
estimates the reliability of each source and uses this information to guide the retrieval and aggre-
gation process. RA-RAG operates in two stages illustrated in Figure 1. The first stage focuses on
estimating source reliabilities for a set of queries with no labelings. Specifically, we devise an it-
erative reliability estimation that alternates estimating the true answers and the reliability of each
source. In the second stage, RA-RAG aims at reliable and efficient inference, which aggregates doc-
uments from sources given the estimated source reliability while ensuring computational scalability
even with numerous sources without compromising performance. To do so, we propose WMV with
κ-reliable and relevant source selection (κ-RRSS), in which RA-RAG consults with only a small
number of selective sources that are reliable with relevant documents.
RA-RAG also addresses two specific issues inherent in RAG systems: misalignment of responses,
where the model generates answers based on internal knowledge rather than retrieved documents,
and response variation, where semantically identical answers are phrased differently. These issues
can hinder both the aggregation of responses and the estimation of source reliability. To overcome
these challenges, RA-RAG incorporates a misalignment filtering mechanism to detect and exclude
hallucinated responses, and a keyword-based system prompt to regularize response variation.
To evaluate the effectiveness of RA-RAG, we develop a realistic benchmark of multi-source RAG
with heterogeneous source reliability, reflecting the complexity of real-world scenarios. Our bench-
mark contrasts with previous works (Weller et al., 2024; Xiang et al., 2024; Deng et al., 2024; Pan
et al., 2024) that relied on setups with artificially injected misinformation into retrieved documents,
as we construct an environment where the database consists of multiple sources with heterogeneous
reliability. Our experimental results show that RA-RAG consistently outperforms various baselines,
highlighting its robustness and effectiveness in accurately aggregating information from multiple
sources.
We defer an extensive discussion of related works to Appendix A, while we summarise our main
contributions as follows:

 • We formalize the multi-source RAG (Section 2) and propose an effective approach, called RA-
   RAG (Section 3). It estimates the source reliability without additional labelings via the iterative
   reliability estimation (Section 3.3). Then, based on the estimated reliability, it efficiently re-
   trieves reliable and relevant documents by κ-RRSS and robustly aggregates them with WMV
   (Section 3.4).
 • We also address the inherent issues of RAG systems: variation and misalignment in the generated
   responses. To mitigate the issues, we devise the keyword-based system prompt (Section 3.1) and
   the misalignment filtration (Section 3.2).


                                                                                  2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


    • We construct the realistic benchmark of the multi-source RAG frameworks with diverse source
      reliability, which allows us to evaluate and analyze multi-source RAG systems (Section 4). Our
      code and datasets will be released.
    • Our experimental results demonstrate that RA-RAG consistently outperforms a number of base-
      lines, showcasing its robustness and effectiveness in accurately aggregating information from
      multiple sources, even in conflicting and unreliable information (Section 5).

2      P ROBLEM F ORMULATION
In this section, we formally describe the problem of retrieval-augmented generation (RAG) with a
multi-source database. We introduce the standard RAG system in Section 2.1 and outline the multi-
source RAG framework in Section 2.2, followed by a discussion of key challenges in Section 2.3.

2.1     R ETRIEVAL -AUGMENTED G ENERATION (RAG)

A typical RAG system generates a response ŷ by retrieving relevant information from a database D
using a retrieval mechanism R, followed by a language model G to generate the final response. To
be specific, consider a closed-ended query q associated with a true answer y. Retriever R selects
the top-K most relevant documents from database D based on a similarity measure between query
q and each document t ∈ D. The set of retrieved documents is denoted by R(q, D). Using the
retrieval result R(q, D) and a system prompt P, language model G generates a response ŷ, which
can be represented as follows: ŷ = G(q, R(q, D), P) . In this framework, system prompt P guides
language model G to generate response ŷ based on the retrieval result R(q, D). A critical limita-
tion arises when the retrieved documents come from unreliable sources, as the similarity measure
used in retrieval does not account for the truthfulness or reliability of the information. This be-
comes particularly problematic when database D includes documents from multiple sources with
different levels of reliability, such as news articles, Wikipedia, or social media. Such a multi-source
database is often necessary to cover up-to-date and diverse content. Although prompts can attempt
to filter out unreliable information based on linguistic features, this is not always reliable. With
the growing sophistication of language models, generating plausible yet false information—such as
fake news—has become easier (Menczer et al., 2023; Augenstein et al., 2024). This underscores the
need for additional mechanisms to assess the reliability of retrieved documents, beyond their mere
relevance to the query.

2.2     M ULTI -S OURCE RAG

To address the vulnerability to misinformation in retrieval, we propose a multi-source RAG frame-
work that explicitly distinguishes between the sources of documents. Let N be the number of distinct
                                                                        SN
sources contributing to database D. We partition the database as D = i=1 Si , where Si is the set
of documents originating from source i ∈ [N ]. Such a partition of dataset D enables the system to
account for the reliability of each document’s source, based on weighted majority voting (WMV).
For a given query q, let ỹi = G(q, R(q, Si ), P) represent the response generated using documents
exclusively from source i. Once the probability that a retrieved document from source i is correct is
estimated as vi , and a set of candidate responses M is obtained from ỹi ’s, we can apply WMV to
aggregate the responses:
                                                     vi 1(ỹi = u) .
                                                 X
                                   ŷ = arg max                                                  (1)
                                         u∈M
                                                i∈[N ]
If all sources are assumed to have equal reliability, this reduces to majority voting (MV) that selects
the most consensus among ỹi ’s. However, WMV is superior to MV when the reliability of each
source vi can be properly estimated. Hence, the key components in a multi-source RAG framework
are (i) the reliability estimation for vi ’s and (ii) the response aggregation of ỹi ’s based on WMV.

2.3     C HALLENGES IN M ULTI - SOURCE RAG

To develop an effective mechanism for reliability estimation and response aggregation in the multi-
source RAG framework, we need to address four key challenges: (i) response variations, (ii) mis-
aligned response, (iii) limited access to ground truth, and (iv) scalability in the number of sources.


                                                  3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Response variations. Even when focusing on closed-ended queries, language models often generate
semantically identical answers with paraphrasing, complicating the application of weighted majority
voting (WMV). For example, in response to the question, “What is the largest planet in our solar
system?”, the model might generate “The largest planet in our solar system is Jupiter” or “Jupiter is
the largest planet in our solar system.” These responses convey the same meaning, but if treated as
different outputs, they can reduce the effectiveness of WMV. Therefore, techniques for normalizing
or aligning semantically equivalent responses are essential to ensure that the aggregation process
accurately reflects consensus.
Misaligned responses. Since the reliability of sources is inferred based on the outputs generated by
the language model, the model must generate responses strictly from the documents retrieved from
each source. However, language models often produce hallucinations or responses influenced by
their internal knowledge, particularly when dealing with complex queries or ambiguous contextual
information (Kaddour et al., 2023; Ji et al., 2023; Xie et al., 2024; Kortukov et al., 2024; Xu et al.,
2024). These misaligned responses complicate the reliability estimation process by distorting the
relationship between the response and the quality of the retrieved documents. Thus, it is necessary
to develop a filtering mechanism to exclude responses that do not rely on the retrieved documents,
ensuring that the answers are grounded in the provided information.
Limited access to ground truth. A straightforward reliability estimation can be conducted with
the true labels for a number of queries. However, acquiring the labels is costly and time-intensive,
particularly when dealing with unverified, up-to-date information. Hence, we consider a set of
queries with no labels and devise an iterative algorithm that alternates between estimating both the
reliability of sources and the true answers (Section 3.3).
Scalability in the number of sources. In a multi-source RAG framework, retrieving documents
from a large number of sources can lead to significant computational overhead. Generating re-
sponses ỹi for every source may become impractical as the number of sources increases. To ensure
scalability in real-world applications, it is critical to use strategies that reduce computational costs,
such as optimizing retrieval processes or limiting the number of sources considered during inference.
Effective solutions will enable multi-source RAG systems to scale efficiently without compromising
performance (Section 3.4).


3     R ELIABILITY-AWARE R ETRIEVAL -AUGMENTED G ENERATION (RA-RAG)

To mitigate the impact of misinformation on RAG systems, we propose the Reliability-Aware
Retrieval-Augmented Generation (RA-RAG), which addresses the challenges of the multi-source
RAG framework outlined in Section 2.3. RA-RAG operates in two stages: (i) iterative reliability
estimation (Section 3.3) and (ii) reliable and efficient inference (Section 3.4). In the first stage, the
iterative algorithm given a set of queries with no labels estimates the reliability of sources before
deploying the RAG system. In the second stage, a WMV mechanism combined with κ-reliable
and relevant source selection (κ-RRSS) uses the estimated reliability to retrieve documents and ef-
fectively aggregate the information. In advance of describing the two stages of RA-RAG, we first
present two common components used for both stages: keyword-based system prompt (Section 3.1)
and misalignment filtration (Section 3.2). They are mainly to address the problems of variation and
misalignment in the language model’s responses. The detailed algorithm of RA-RAG can be found
in Appendix B, and the code will be distributed.

3.1   K EYWORD - BASED S YSTEM P ROMPT

Even for closed-ended queries that elicit simple answers, such as “What is the largest planet in our
solar system?”, the language model often generates responses of the same semantic meaning but in
various forms. This decreases the effectiveness of response aggregation with WMV and thus dis-
turbs the reliability estimation as well. To address this, we employ a system prompt to ensure that
the language model generates keyword-based answers without unnecessary details. For example,
the keyword-based response to the aforementioned query would be “Jupiter”, rather than a more
detailed response, “Jupiter is the largest planet in our solar system.”. In addition, the prompt also
guides the language model to say IDK (which stands for “I don’t know” and indicates the absten-
tion) when irrelevant documents are retrieved. The detailed prompt is provided in Appendix G. This


                                                   4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


keyword-based answer allows us to effectively aggregate the LLMs response for WMV while re-
ducing hallucinations to generate responses irrelevant to retrieval results. We note that Xiang et al.
(2024) use a post-processing method with the spaCy library (Honnibal et al., 2020) to extract key-
words like adjectives, adverbs, and other elements from LLM outputs. However, we observe that
prompt engineering alone can effectively generate the desired keyword-based outputs without the
need for additional processing. The detailed experimental results are provided in Appendix E.

3.2     M ISALIGNMENT F ILTRATION

Although the system prompt directs the language model to generate ỹi based on the retrieval result
R(q, Si ), responses irrelevant to the retrieval result are often generated. This can distract the relia-
bility estimation and WMV, as discussed in Section 2.3. To mitigate this issue, we further employ
a filtration function falign to detect misaligned responses and replace them with IDK, indicating the
abstention. In this paper, we use the ROUGE-1 precision score (Lin, 2004) which computes the ratio
of the number of unigrams in response ỹi that appear also in retrieval result R(q, Si ). A low score
implies that the response is irrelevant to the retrieved documents. Specifically, falign replaces ỹi with
IDK if the score for a response is below 0.9 and keep ỹi otherwise. Given that the responses are in a
keyword-based form, the ROUGE-1 precision score effectively captures how well the words in the
response match the provided context. As a result, we can obtain a refined set of answer candidates:
                               Mfiltered = {falign (ỹi , R(q, Si )) | i ∈ [N ]} .                       (2)
We demonstrate the effectiveness of falign based on ROUGE-1 precision in Section 5.3. However,
our choice of falign based on the ROUGE-1 score can be replaced with asking the relevance of the
response to the retrieved result to the language model, while it requires substantial cost as well as
the risk of hallucination.

3.3     S TAGE 1: I TERATIVE R ELIABILITY E STIMATION

To estimate the reliability of sources and effectively aggregate the outputs, we utilize the WMV
method proposed by Li & Yu (2014), which is a simple and effective approach for aggregating
crowdsourced labels in classification tasks, applied to the filtered outputs. Given the set {q j | j ∈
[M ]} of M queries, the iterative reliability estimation is described as follows:
 • Step 0. We initialize the source weights vi = 1 for all sources i ∈ [N ] and repeat Step 1 to
   Step 2 until vi ’s converge.
 • Step 1. We estimate each answer ŷ j for each j ∈ [M ] using WMV:

                                                    vi 1(ỹij = u) ,
                                               X
                              ŷ j = arg max                                                             (3)
                                                     j
                                                  u∈M
                                                     filtered   i∈[N ]


      where ỹij = G(q j , R(q j , Si ), Pkeyword ) is a response to q j based on documents from source i and
      Mjfiltered = {falign (ỹij , R(q, Si )) | i ∈ [N ]} is the filtered candidates of responses to q j .
 • Step 2. Given the estimated ŷ j ’s, we estimate source reliability ŵi for each i ∈ [N ] as follows:

                                      j=1 1 falign (ỹi , R(q , Si )) = ŷ
                                  PM                   j      j            j

                         ŵi = PM                                              .                     (4)
                                     j=1 1 falign (ỹi , R(q , Si )) ̸= IDK
                                                     j      j


      Then, we normalize ŵi as vi = N ŵi − 1 giving larger weights to reliable sources and smaller
      weights to unreliable sources. This leads to more accurate estimates of wi . Following the ap-
      proach of Li & Yu (2014), which uses the number of labels L as a scaling factor, we use N ,
      the number of sources, because the maximum possible number of responses occurs when each
      source provides a distinct answer. However, in real-world applications, it is unlikely that all
      sources will offer completely distinct responses, especially when N is large. Thus, N can be
      reasonably limited to a manageable size.
                                 P vi , we compute the refined estimated answers using the
 • Step 3. With the converged weights
   WMV, i.e., ŷ j = arg maxu∈Mj    i∈[N ] vi 1(ỹi = u) for all j ∈ [M ].
                                       filtered


                                                                5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


3.4   S TAGE 2: R ELIABLE AND E FFICIENT I NFERENCE

In real-world applications, integrating information from all sources can cause a significant com-
putational burden, especially when the number of sources is large. The WMV process, ŷ j =
                         i∈[N ] vi 1(ỹi = u), becomes increasingly expensive as N grows. For better
                       P               j
arg maxu∈Mj
              filtered
scalability, we select a subset of sources, denoted as W, where |W| < N . Then, the WMV pro-
                                                             i′ ∈W vi′ 1(ỹi′ = u), where Mfiltered-W =
                                                                                           j
cess is applied using W: ŷ j = arg maxu∈Mj
                                                          P
                                                  filtered-W

{falign (ỹij′ , R(q, Si′ )) | i′ ∈ W}. A simple way to select W is to choose the κ most reliable sources.
However, high reliability alone doesn’t always mean these sources will contain relevant documents
for the given query, which can lead to performance degradation. Therefore, it’s important to consider
both reliability and relevance.
To achieve this, we identify the κ most reliable and relevant sources. We start by ordering the
sources by reliability and then check if they contain documents relevant to the query. This process
continues until we find κ sources, which we call the κ-Reliable and Relevant Source Selection (κ-
RRSS). Although similarity scores from the retrieval process can suggest relevance, they are often
noisy, as high scores may just reflect shared words without capturing the actual context. Instead,
we use the LLM’s responses and apply a filtering method, falign , to assess relevance. If the filtered
LLM response is “I don’t know”, we consider the source as lacking relevant information. Once the
κ sources are selected, we use their outputs in the WMV process to generate the final answers.


4     B ENCHMARK OF M ULTI -S OURCE RAG

We construct a benchmark designed to assess performance in environments where the database con-
tains sources with heterogeneous reliability, which reflect the complexities of real-world scenarios.
Each source Si is characterized by two parameters: (1) the probability ri of containing the relevant
documents to a given question (related to the corpus size), and (2) its reliability pi , representing
the probability that Si contains factual documents. We use two types of priors to model the reli-
ability pi : the beta prior and the spammer-hammer prior. For the beta priors, pi is sampled from
Beta (2w̄/1−w̄, 2), which has an expected mean of w̄. This enables the simulation of scenarios with
sources that have heterogeneous reliability. For the spammer-hammer prior, pi is set to either 0.1
or 0.9, where pi = 0.1 represents a spammer, an unreliable source that provides mostly incorrect
information for the given query and pi = 0.9 represents a hammer, a reliable source that provides
mostly accurate information.
To construct the corpus for each source Si based on this framework, we use three datasets: Natural
Questions (NQ) (Kwiatkowski et al., 2019), HotpotQA (Yang et al., 2018), and TriviaQA (TQA)
(Joshi et al., 2017). For the HotpotQA dataset, we use only single-hop queries. We focus on closed-
ended queries because open-ended queries (e.g., “Describe the various uses of forests to human be-
ings” from the NQ dataset) often lack definitive answers, making aggregation from multiple sources
difficult. To identify closed-ended queries, we first use GPT-4o-mini (OpenAI, 2024) to filter out
open-ended queries and then manually review any remaining ones. The filtering prompt is provided
in Appendix F.1. Due to computational constraints, we select 1,600 queries per dataset: 200 for
reliability estimation and 1,400 as test data. The corpus for each source Si is generated through the
following steps:
1. Collecting factual documents: We first collect documents containing the correct answers from
   the Wikipedia corpus using Contriever (Izacard et al., 2022) for the NQ and TQA datasets. For
   the HotpotQA dataset, we use the contexts provided within the dataset itself.
2. Generating diverse factual information: To generate diverse factual information that conveys
   the same meaning but in different expressions, we use GPT-4o-mini to paraphrase the collected
   documents, creating 9 documents for each query. This diversity makes it more challenging to
   aggregate the LLM’s outputs.
3. Generating diverse misinformation: Unlike classification tasks with predefined label sets, in-
   correct answers can vary infinitely in query-answering tasks. To simplify our experiment, we
   use GPT-4o-mini to generate 9 distinct incorrect answers for each query and then create three
   corresponding documents for each incorrect answer using GPT-4o-mini.


                                                    6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


4. Constructing the corpus for Si : The corpus for each source Si is generated independently,
   based on its ri and pi . If Si contains relevant documents for a given query (as determined by
   ri ), the truthfulness of these documents is decided by pi . If Si is assigned to provide factual
   information, it randomly selects three documents from pool of the previously generated factual
   documents. Conversely, if Si is designated to provide misinformation, it randomly choose one
   of the nine incorrect answers and includes the corresponding three misinformation documents
   generated earlier. Since the corpus for each source is constructed independently, each source
   contains a different set of knowledge. For instance, for a given query, Si may have relevant
   documents, while Sj may not, where i ̸= j and i, j ∈ [N ].

The specific prompts used to generate the data are detailed in Appendix F.

5      E XPERIMENTS
In this section, we conduct comprehensive experiments on the benchmarks to evaluate the effective-
ness of RA-RAG. Detailed descriptions of the experimental setup can be found in Section 5.1, and
the results are presented in Section 5.2. Additionally, we perform ablation studies on the individual
modules within RA-RAG to evaluate its overall effectiveness, as discussed in Section 5.3.

5.1     E XPERIMENTAL S ETTINGS

Models. For the LLMs, we use Llama3-8B Instruct (Dubey et al., 2024), Phi3-mini Instruct (Abdin
et al., 2024), and GPT-4o mini (OpenAI, 2024). As the retriever, we utilize Contriever (Izacard et al.,
2022), which calculates similarity scores by taking the dot product between the embedding vectors
of a query and documents in the database.
Baselines. We evaluate our framework against the following baselines:

    • Oracle WMV: Oracle Weighted Majority Voting aggregates outputs using the true reliability
      values of each source, representing an ideal scenario where the source reliability is available.
    • WMV: Weighted Majority Voting aggregates outputs from all sources using the estimated relia-
      bility values, i.e., Weighted Majority Voting excludes the RRSS process from RA-RAG.
    • MV: Majority Voting aggregates outputs by assigning equal weight to each response.
    • Naive RAG: Naive RAG follows the traditional RAG approach, retrieving documents and gen-
      erating outputs without considering the reliability of the sources in the database.
    • Naive LLM: Naive LLMs generate outputs for the given query without using a retriever.

Settings for multi-source RAG. In our multi-source RAG setup, we retrieve the top 3 documents
from each source and select 4 sources for the κ-RRSS process. For Naive RAG, we retrieve the
top-10 documents, as multi-source RAG typically handles a larger volume of information. When
constructing sources for the multi-source RAG benchmark, we set the beta prior with w̄ = 0.6. To
simplify the setup, we assign ri = 0.6 for all sources. Due to computational constraints, the number
of sources is limited to between 3 and 9. We use Exact Match (EM) (Rajpurkar et al., 2016) as the
evaluation metric, with all experimental results averaged over 10 random trials.

5.2     M AIN R ESULTS

Beta prior. We conduct experiments using a beta prior across different numbers of sources to
demonstrate the effectiveness of our method with heterogeneous reliability. Figure 2 shows that
our RA-RAG framework demonstrates significant performance improvements, outperforming both
MV and Naive RAG. Notably, our RA-RAG, which uses κ = 4 for κ-RRSS (the subset of
sources), achieves performance comparable to WMV, which aggregates information from all avail-
able sources. The performance of WMV closely matches the oracle WMV, demonstrating that our
approach effectively estimates source reliability. In contrast, the Naive RAG exhibits poor perfor-
mance when source reliability varies, leading to a high likelihood of retrieving a mixture of factual
information and misinformation, for both the NQ and TQA datasets. This inconsistency results in
conflicting knowledge, complicating LLMs’ ability to generate accurate outputs.


                                                   7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2025



                                           Llama3-8B                                       Phi3-mini                                    GPT-4o-mini
                         0.7                                           0.7                                             0.7


      Exact Match (EM)
                         0.6                                           0.6                                             0.6
                         0.5                                           0.5                                             0.5
 NQ                      0.4                                           0.4                                             0.4
                         0.3                                           0.3                                             0.3
                         0.2                                           0.2                                             0.2
                               3    4     5     6    7      8      9         3      4     5       6       7   8    9         3   4      5    6    7      8   9
                         0.9                                           0.9                                             0.9
      Exact Match (EM)


                         0.8                                           0.8                                             0.8
                                                                                                                                                  Oracle WMV
                         0.7                                           0.7                                             0.7
 TQA


                                                                                                                                                  WMV
                                                                                                                                                  RA-RAG (Ours)
                         0.6                                           0.6                                             0.6                        MV
                                                                                                                                                  Naive RAG
                         0.5                                           0.5                                             0.5                        Naive LLM
                               3    4     5     6    7      8      9         3      4     5       6       7   8    9         3   4      5    6    7     8     9
                                        Number of Sources                               Number of Sources                            Number of Sources
Figure 2: Exact Match against the number of sources, comparing the heterogeneous reliability via
beta priors on the NQ and TQA datasets across the Llama3-8B, Phi3-mini, and GPT-4o-mini lan-
guage models. See Figure 8 in Appendix C.1 for the HotpotQA dataset.

                         Question: The gulf stream the world's fastest ocean current flows along the western side of this water body
                         Ground Truth (GT): atlantic ocean
                                                         southern            atlantic             I don’t         indian         southern        gulf of
                          Multi-Source Outputs
                                                          ocean               ocean                know           ocean           ocean          mexico
                               True Reliability             0.39                 0.97              0.55           0.78               0.53         0.79
                          Estimated Reliability             0.36                 0.92              0.56           0.82               0.54         0.76

                                               MV Answer: southern ocean                          RA-RAG Answer: atlantic ocean

Figure 3: A qualitative comparison between MV and RA-RAG on the NQ dataset. Additional
examples are available in Appendix D.


We provide a qualitative example in Figure 3 to illustrate how RA-RAG effectively estimates source
reliabilities and improves answer accuracy. While MV selects “southern ocean” based on response
frequency, RA-RAG correctly identifies “atlantic ocean” by leveraging well-estimated reliabilities
that align closely with true values. This example highlights RA-RAG’s robustness in overcoming
conflicting or inaccurate information by focusing on more reliable sources, ensuring more accurate
predictions.
Spammer-hammer prior. To evaluate the robustness of our method in the presence of spammers
in the database, we conduct experiments using the spammer-hammer prior with a total of 9 sources,
using Llama3-8B on the NQ dataset. The experimental results for TQA and HotpotQA datasets are
provided in Appendix C.2. As shown in Figure 4, our RA-RAG framework demonstrates robustness
against spammers, while the performance of Naive RAG degrades significantly as the number of
spammers increases. When the number of spammers exceeds five, MV performs worse than Naive
RAG. This decline results from the dominance of misinformation from spammers, which leads MV
to select incorrect answers.

5.3                  A BLATION STUDIES AND A NALYSIS

Effectiveness of filtering with falign . We conduct an ablation study to evaluate the necessity of
falign for accurate reliability estimation, across different types of retrieved documents: factual, mis-
information, and irrelevant. Table 1 shows the proportions of answers both without (w/o) and with
(w/) filtering, categorized by answer types: correct, incorrect, IDK (I don’t know), and hallucination,
based on 1,600 queries in the TQA dataset, using a single source with pi = 0.5 and ri = 0.5. Further
results for other datasets and models are in Appendix C.5. Table 1 shows that LLM misalignment
occurs when the documents contain misinformation or are irrelevant, resulting in correct or hallu-
cinated answers that are not based on the retrieved documents. In particular, in cases of irrelevant
documents, LLMs often generate either correct answers or hallucinations. However, after applying
the falign , these misaligned responses (marked in blue) are significantly reduced. Additionally, the


                                                                                              8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                                                                                          -RRSS
                                                                                                              0.72       MV
                     0.7
Exact Match (EM)


                                                                                           Exact Match (EM)
                                                                                                              0.70
                     0.6
                                   Oracle WMV                                                                 0.68
                     0.5           WMV
                                   RA-RAG (Ours)
                                   MV                                                                         0.66
                     0.4           Naive RAG
                           1           2       3      4         5       6        7                                   1       2    3   4     5       6    7   8    9
                Number of Spammers
Figure 4: EM against the number of spammers, Figure 5: EM for different numbers of κ on the
comparing robustness using spammer-hammer NQ dataset.
priors on the NQ dataset.
                     1.4
                                   RA-RAG                                                                                RA-RAG with -RRSS ( = 4)
                     1.2           WMV                                                                                   RA-RAG with -RSS ( = 4)
                                                                                                              0.70
Inference Cost ($)


                                                                                           Exact Match (EM)
                     1.0
                     0.8
                     0.6                                                                                      0.65
                     0.4
                     0.2                                                                                      0.60
                     0.0
                               5            6         7             8        9                                       5            6         7            8        9
               Number of Sources                            Number of Sources
Figure 6: Comparison of inference costs be- Figure 7: Comparison of κ-RRSS and κ-RSS
tween RA-RAG and WMV using the GPT-4o- (κ = 4) across different number of sources.
mini.


      Table 1: Percentage of type of answers by retrieved document type in
      the filtering with falign ablation study on Llama3-8B and TQA dataset. Table 2:      Ablation
                                                                               study on the risk of
          Types of     Filtering            Types of Retrieved Documents       distorted  reliability
          Answers       (falign )  Factual    Misinformation        Irrelevant estimation   without
          Correct
                          w/o       92.82%         5.43%              25.55%   f align .
                                                w/        92.82%             0.82%(-4.61)                            4.30% (-21.25)
                                                w/o         -                 81.52%                                     -                      Method           EM
                      Incorrect
                                                w/          -                 81.52%                                     -
                                                                                                                                          Oracle WMV         0.549
                                                w/o       0.00%                4.89%                                55.52%                 Ours (w/)         0.543
                           IDK
                                                w/        0.00%             11.68%(+6.79)                        86.36%(+30.84)
                                                                                                                                           Ours (w/o)        0.465
                                                w/o       7.18%               8.15%                                   18.92%                  MV             0.449
             Hallucination
                                                w/        7.18%              5.98%(-2.17)                            9.34%(-9.58)


increase in IDK responses (marked in red) indicates that filtering effectively mitigates the influence
of irrelevant documents and misinformation.
Risk of distortion of reliability estimation without filtering. As highlighted in our analysis, LLMs
frequently generate either correct answers or hallucinations when processing irrelevant documents.
This issue becomes particularly problematic when dealing with low-reliability sources that have a
small corpus. As the corpus size shrinks, i.e., contains fewer relevant documents, more queries are
needed to accurately estimate the reliability of these sources. However, this can lead to LLMs pro-
ducing a large number of correct answers or hallucinations, potentially resulting in an overestimation
of the sources’ reliability. To illustrate this risk, we conduct experiments using the spammer-hammer
prior. Specifically, we experiment with five sources from the TQA dataset using Llama3-8B: four
spammers with ri = 0.1 and one hammer with ri = 0.6, using 800 queries for reliability estimation.
As illustrated in Table 2, without filtering, the estimated weights are distorted, giving more weight
to the spammers and leading to poor performance. However, applying filtering effectively mitigates
this distortion in reliability estimation, yielding performance close to the Oracle WMV.
Effectiveness of κ-RRSS. To determine the optimal value of κ for κ-RRSS, we conduct ablation
studies using different values of κ with 9 sources on the NQ dataset, employing Llama3-8B. As


                                                                                       9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


shown in Figure 5, when κ = 4, RA-RAG outperforms MV and shows a slight performance drop
compared to WMV, which uses all available sources. This result, with κ being less than half the total
number of sources, shows that selecting a small subset of sources can achieve performance close to
using all sources. The results for additional datasets are provided in Appendix C.3. In addition, to
quantitatively evaluate the efficiency of κ-RRSS, we assess the inference cost using GPT-4o mini
by the number of sources. As shown in Figure 6, RA-RAG incurs lower inference costs than WMV,
which aggregates all sources, and the efficiency of our RA-RAG framework becomes increasingly
evident as the number of sources grows.
To analyze the importance of considering relevance in κ-RRSS, we evaluate a variant: κ-RSS (Re-
liable Source Selection), which selects κ sources based solely on reliability scores in descending
order, without checking whether the sources contain relevant documents on NQ dataset. As shown
in Figure 7, using κ-RSS leads to significant performance degradation, since high reliability alone
does not guarantee that the selected sources will contain documents relevant to the given query.


6   C ONCLUSION

In this paper, we introduce RA-RAG, an effective multi-source RAG mechanism that estimates
source reliability without using true labels and efficiently aggregates information through WMV,
addressing the inherent problems of RAG systems. We also present a comprehensive benchmark
that reflects real-world scenarios with diverse source reliability. Our experimental results show that
RA-RAG consistently outperforms a set of baselines, demonstrating its robustness and effectiveness
even when handling conflicting and unreliable information.
Limitations and future directions. Despite RA-RAG’s robustness, several challenges remain: (1)
While aggregating keyword-based LLM responses using a system prompt is effective and does not
require additional post-processing or modules, this approach has limitations, such as difficulty in
handling homonyms and varied expressions, which make consistent aggregation challenging. There-
fore, more advanced approaches, such as using LLMs capable of capturing semantic meaning, are
needed for more general and reliable aggregation. We discuss advanced aggregation methods we
have explored in Appendix I. (2) In this work, we primarily focus on short-form generation tasks.
However, RA-RAG can be extended to long-form generation tasks by using text decomposition,
where long-form responses are broken down into a series of short-form responses to evaluate long-
form factuality (Min et al., 2023; Wei et al., 2024; Farquhar et al., 2024). This decomposition
reduces the long-form generation task into multiple short-form tasks, allowing our approach to be
applied. Further exploration and details of this extension is provided in Appendix J. (3) While falign
effectively filters misaligned responses, it struggles to detect incorrect answers based on retrieved
documents. More reliable evaluation methods, such as applying modules from advanced RAG, are
necessary. Since our approach does not require training, it can be applied in a plug-and-play manner
alongside advanced RAG systems. (4) While we assume the availability of queries to estimate source
reliability, real-world applications often require generating these queries, which adds complexity to
accurately estimating source reliability.


7   R EPRODUCIBILITY S TATEMENT

As mentioned, we will release the source code and datasets for the multi-source RAG benchmark and
the set of method including RA-RAG and the other baselines. Our experiments have been produced
using LLama3-8B Instruct, Phi3-mini Instruct and ChatGPT-4o-mini from July to September 2024.
We will also distribute the intermediate outputs of the LLMs so that every evaluation in this work
can be reproducible.


R EFERENCES
Marah Abdin, Sam Ade Jacobs, Ammar Ahmad Awan, Jyoti Aneja, Ahmed Awadallah, Hany
 Awadalla, Nguyen Bach, Amit Bahree, Arash Bakhtiari, Harkirat Behl, et al. Phi-3 technical re-
 port: A highly capable language model locally on your phone. arXiv preprint arXiv:2404.14219,
 2024.


                                                 10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Akari Asai, Zeqiu Wu, Yizhong Wang, Avirup Sil, and Hannaneh Hajishirzi. Self-RAG: Learning
  to retrieve, generate, and critique through self-reflection. In The Twelfth International Confer-
  ence on Learning Representations, 2024. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=
  hSyW5go0v8.
Isabelle Augenstein, Timothy Baldwin, Meeyoung Cha, Tanmoy Chakraborty, Giovanni Luca
   Ciampaglia, David Corney, Renee DiResta, Emilio Ferrara, Scott Hale, Alon Halevy, et al. Fac-
   tuality challenges in the era of large language models and opportunities for fact-checking. Nature
   Machine Intelligence, pp. 1–12, 2024.
Bahadir Aydin, Yavuz Selim Yilmaz Yavuz Selim Yilmaz, Yaliang Li, Qi Li, Jing Gao, and Murat
  Demirbas. Crowdsourcing for multiple-choice question answering. In Proceedings of the AAAI
  Conference on Artificial Intelligence, volume 28, pp. 2946–2953, 2014.
Harsh Chaudhari, Giorgio Severi, John Abascal, Matthew Jagielski, Christopher A Choquette-Choo,
  Milad Nasr, Cristina Nita-Rotaru, and Alina Oprea. Phantom: General trigger attacks on retrieval
  augmented language generation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2405.20485, 2024.
Canyu Chen and Kai Shu.        Can llm-generated misinformation be detected?         arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2309.13788, 2023.
Jiawei Chen, Hongyu Lin, Xianpei Han, and Le Sun. Benchmarking large language models in
   retrieval-augmented generation. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence,
   volume 38, pp. 17754–17762, 2024.
Sijia Chen and Baochun Li. Toward adaptive reasoning in large language models with thought
   rollback. In Forty-first International Conference on Machine Learning, 2024.
Boyi Deng, Wenjie Wang, Fengbin Zhu, Qifan Wang, and Fuli Feng. Cram: Credibility-aware atten-
  tion modification in llms for combating misinformation in rag. arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.11497,
  2024.
Abhimanyu Dubey, Abhinav Jauhri, Abhinav Pandey, Abhishek Kadian, Ahmad Al-Dahle, Aiesha
  Letman, Akhil Mathur, Alan Schelten, Amy Yang, Angela Fan, et al. The llama 3 herd of models.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2407.21783, 2024.
Martin Ester, Hans-Peter Kriegel, Jörg Sander, Xiaowei Xu, et al. A density-based algorithm for
 discovering clusters in large spatial databases with noise. In kdd, volume 96, pp. 226–231, 1996.
Sebastian Farquhar, Jannik Kossen, Lorenz Kuhn, and Yarin Gal. Detecting hallucinations in large
  language models using semantic entropy. Nature, 630(8017):625–630, 2024.
Baocheng Geng, Qunwei Li, and Pramod K Varshney. Prospect theory based crowdsourcing for
  classification in the presence of spammers. IEEE Transactions on Signal Processing, 68:4083–
  4093, 2020.
Kai Greshake, Sahar Abdelnabi, Shailesh Mishra, Christoph Endres, Thorsten Holz, and Mario
  Fritz. Not what you’ve signed up for: Compromising real-world llm-integrated applications with
  indirect prompt injection. In Proceedings of the 16th ACM Workshop on Artificial Intelligence
  and Security, pp. 79–90, 2023.
Kelvin Guu, Kenton Lee, Zora Tung, Panupong Pasupat, and Mingwei Chang. Retrieval augmented
  language model pre-training. In International conference on machine learning, pp. 3929–3938.
  PMLR, 2020.
Giwon Hong, Jeonghwan Kim, Junmo Kang, Sung-Hyon Myaeng, and Joyce Jiyoung Whang. Why
  so gullible? enhancing the robustness of retrieval-augmented models against counterfactual noise.
  In Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: NAACL 2024, pp. 2474–2495,
  2024.
Matthew Honnibal, Ines Montani, Sofie Van Landeghem, Adriane Boyd, et al. spacy: Industrial-
 strength natural language processing in python. 2020.


                                                 11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Gautier Izacard, Mathilde Caron, Lucas Hosseini, Sebastian Riedel, Piotr Bojanowski, Armand
  Joulin, and Edouard Grave. Unsupervised dense information retrieval with contrastive learn-
  ing. Transactions on Machine Learning Research, 2022. ISSN 2835-8856. URL https:
  //openreview.net/forum?id=jKN1pXi7b0.
Ziwei Ji, Nayeon Lee, Rita Frieske, Tiezheng Yu, Dan Su, Yan Xu, Etsuko Ishii, Ye Jin Bang,
  Andrea Madotto, and Pascale Fung. Survey of hallucination in natural language generation. ACM
  Computing Surveys, 55(12):1–38, 2023.
Zhengbao Jiang, Frank Xu, Luyu Gao, Zhiqing Sun, Qian Liu, Jane Dwivedi-Yu, Yiming Yang,
  Jamie Callan, and Graham Neubig. Active retrieval augmented generation. In Houda Bouamor,
  Juan Pino, and Kalika Bali (eds.), Proceedings of the 2023 Conference on Empirical Meth-
  ods in Natural Language Processing, pp. 7969–7992, Singapore, December 2023. Associa-
  tion for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2023.emnlp-main.495. URL https:
  //aclanthology.org/2023.emnlp-main.495.
Mandar Joshi, Eunsol Choi, Daniel Weld, and Luke Zettlemoyer. TriviaQA: A large scale distantly
 supervised challenge dataset for reading comprehension. In Regina Barzilay and Min-Yen Kan
 (eds.), Proceedings of the 55th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics
 (Volume 1: Long Papers), pp. 1601–1611, Vancouver, Canada, July 2017. Association for Com-
 putational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/P17-1147. URL https://aclanthology.org/
 P17-1147.
Jean Kaddour, Joshua Harris, Maximilian Mozes, Herbie Bradley, Roberta Raileanu, and
  Robert McHardy. Challenges and applications of large language models. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2307.10169, 2023.
David R Karger, Sewoong Oh, and Devavrat Shah. Budget-optimal crowdsourcing using low-rank
  matrix approximations. In 2011 49th Annual Allerton Conference on Communication, Control,
  and Computing (Allerton), pp. 284–291. IEEE, 2011.
Evgenii Kortukov, Alexander Rubinstein, Elisa Nguyen, and Seong Joon Oh. Studying large lan-
  guage model behaviors under realistic knowledge conflicts, 2024.
Lorenz Kuhn, Yarin Gal, and Sebastian Farquhar. Semantic uncertainty: Linguistic invariances for
  uncertainty estimation in natural language generation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.09664, 2023.
Tom Kwiatkowski, Jennimaria Palomaki, Olivia Redfield, Michael Collins, Ankur Parikh, Chris
  Alberti, Danielle Epstein, Illia Polosukhin, Jacob Devlin, Kenton Lee, et al. Natural questions: a
  benchmark for question answering research. Transactions of the Association for Computational
  Linguistics, 7:453–466, 2019.
Patrick Lewis, Ethan Perez, Aleksandra Piktus, Fabio Petroni, Vladimir Karpukhin, Naman Goyal,
  Heinrich Küttler, Mike Lewis, Wen-tau Yih, Tim Rocktäschel, et al. Retrieval-augmented genera-
  tion for knowledge-intensive nlp tasks. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 33:
  9459–9474, 2020.
Hongwei Li and Bin Yu. Error rate bounds and iterative weighted majority voting for crowdsourcing.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:1411.4086, 2014.
Qunwei Li, Aditya Vempaty, Lav R Varshney, and Pramod K Varshney. Multi-object classification
  via crowdsourcing with a reject option. IEEE Transactions on Signal Processing, 65(4):1068–
  1081, 2016.
Chin-Yew Lin. ROUGE: A package for automatic evaluation of summaries. In Text Summarization
  Branches Out, pp. 74–81, Barcelona, Spain, July 2004. Association for Computational Linguis-
  tics. URL https://aclanthology.org/W04-1013.
Qiang Liu, Jian Peng, and Alexander T Ihler. Variational inference for crowdsourcing. Advances in
  neural information processing systems, 25, 2012.
Filippo Menczer, David Crandall, Yong-Yeol Ahn, and Apu Kapadia. Addressing the harms of
   ai-generated inauthentic content. Nature Machine Intelligence, 5(7):679–680, 2023.


                                                12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Sewon Min, Kalpesh Krishna, Xinxi Lyu, Mike Lewis, Wen-tau Yih, Pang Wei Koh, Mohit Iyyer,
  Luke Zettlemoyer, and Hannaneh Hajishirzi. Factscore: Fine-grained atomic evaluation of factual
  precision in long form text generation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.14251, 2023.
OpenAI. Gpt-4o-mini: Advancing cost-efficient intelligence. https://openai.com/index/
  gpt-4o-mini-advancing-cost-efficient-intelligence, 2024.
Myle Ott, Michael Auli, David Grangier, and Marc’Aurelio Ranzato. Analyzing uncertainty in
 neural machine translation. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 3956–3965.
 PMLR, 2018.
Ruotong Pan, Boxi Cao, Hongyu Lin, Xianpei Han, Jia Zheng, Sirui Wang, Xunliang Cai, and
  Le Sun. Not all contexts are equal: Teaching llms credibility-aware generation. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2404.06809, 2024.
Yikang Pan, Liangming Pan, Wenhu Chen, Preslav Nakov, Min-Yen Kan, and William Yang Wang.
  On the risk of misinformation pollution with large language models. In The 2023 Conference
  on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, 2023. URL https://openreview.
  net/forum?id=voBhcwDyPt.
Pranav Rajpurkar, Jian Zhang, Konstantin Lopyrev, and Percy Liang. SQuAD: 100,000+ questions
  for machine comprehension of text. In Jian Su, Kevin Duh, and Xavier Carreras (eds.), Pro-
  ceedings of the 2016 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, pp.
  2383–2392, Austin, Texas, November 2016. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi:
  10.18653/v1/D16-1264. URL https://aclanthology.org/D16-1264.
Ananya B Sai, Akash Kumar Mohankumar, and Mitesh M Khapra. A survey of evaluation metrics
  used for nlg systems. ACM Computing Surveys (CSUR), 55(2):1–39, 2022.
Avital Shafran, Roei Schuster, and Vitaly Shmatikov. Machine against the rag: Jamming retrieval-
  augmented generation with blocker documents. arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.05870, 2024.
Laurens Van der Maaten and Geoffrey Hinton. Visualizing data using t-sne. Journal of machine
  learning research, 9(11), 2008.
Eric Wallace, Kai Xiao, Reimar Leike, Lilian Weng, Johannes Heidecke, and Alex Beutel.
  The instruction hierarchy: Training llms to prioritize privileged instructions. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2404.13208, 2024.
Guangya Wan, Yuqi Wu, Jie Chen, and Sheng Li. Dynamic self-consistency: Leveraging reasoning
  paths for efficient llm sampling. arXiv preprint arXiv:2408.17017, 2024.
Wenhui Wang, Furu Wei, Li Dong, Hangbo Bao, Nan Yang, and Ming Zhou. Minilm: Deep self-
 attention distillation for task-agnostic compression of pre-trained transformers. Advances in Neu-
 ral Information Processing Systems, 33:5776–5788, 2020.
Xuezhi Wang, Jason Wei, Dale Schuurmans, Quoc V Le, Ed H. Chi, Sharan Narang, Aakanksha
  Chowdhery, and Denny Zhou. Self-consistency improves chain of thought reasoning in language
  models. In The Eleventh International Conference on Learning Representations, 2023. URL
  https://openreview.net/forum?id=1PL1NIMMrw.
Jason Wei, Xuezhi Wang, Dale Schuurmans, Maarten Bosma, Fei Xia, Ed Chi, Quoc V Le, Denny
  Zhou, et al. Chain-of-thought prompting elicits reasoning in large language models. Advances in
  neural information processing systems, 35:24824–24837, 2022.
Jerry Wei, Chengrun Yang, Xinying Song, Yifeng Lu, Nathan Hu, Dustin Tran, Daiyi Peng, Ruibo
   Liu, Da Huang, Cosmo Du, et al. Long-form factuality in large language models. arXiv preprint
   arXiv:2403.18802, 2024.
Orion Weller, Aleem Khan, Nathaniel Weir, Dawn Lawrie, and Benjamin Van Durme. Defend-
  ing against disinformation attacks in open-domain question answering. In Yvette Graham and
  Matthew Purver (eds.), Proceedings of the 18th Conference of the European Chapter of the Asso-
  ciation for Computational Linguistics (Volume 2: Short Papers), pp. 402–417, St. Julian’s, Malta,
  March 2024. Association for Computational Linguistics. URL https://aclanthology.
  org/2024.eacl-short.35.

                                                13
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Chong Xiang, Tong Wu, Zexuan Zhong, David Wagner, Danqi Chen, and Prateek Mittal. Certifiably
  robust rag against retrieval corruption. arXiv preprint arXiv:2405.15556, 2024.
Jian Xie, Kai Zhang, Jiangjie Chen, Renze Lou, and Yu Su. Adaptive chameleon or stubborn sloth:
   Revealing the behavior of large language models in knowledge conflicts. In The Twelfth Interna-
   tional Conference on Learning Representations, 2024. URL https://openreview.net/
   forum?id=auKAUJZMO6.
Rongwu Xu, Zehan Qi, Cunxiang Wang, Hongru Wang, Yue Zhang, and Wei Xu. Knowledge
  conflicts for llms: A survey. arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.08319, 2024.
Zhilin Yang, Peng Qi, Saizheng Zhang, Yoshua Bengio, William Cohen, Ruslan Salakhutdinov,
  and Christopher D. Manning. HotpotQA: A dataset for diverse, explainable multi-hop question
  answering. In Ellen Riloff, David Chiang, Julia Hockenmaier, and Jun’ichi Tsujii (eds.), Proceed-
  ings of the 2018 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, pp. 2369–
  2380, Brussels, Belgium, October-November 2018. Association for Computational Linguistics.
  doi: 10.18653/v1/D18-1259. URL https://aclanthology.org/D18-1259.
Shunyu Yao, Jeffrey Zhao, Dian Yu, Nan Du, Izhak Shafran, Karthik Narasimhan, and Yuan Cao.
  React: Synergizing reasoning and acting in language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2210.03629,
  2022.
Shunyu Yao, Dian Yu, Jeffrey Zhao, Izhak Shafran, Tom Griffiths, Yuan Cao, and Karthik
  Narasimhan. Tree of thoughts: Deliberate problem solving with large language models. Ad-
  vances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 36, 2024.
Dejun Yue, Ge Yu, Derong Shen, and Xiaocong Yu. A weighted aggregation rule in crowdsourcing
  systems for high result accuracy. In 2014 ieee 12th international conference on dependable,
  autonomic and secure computing, pp. 265–270. IEEE, 2014.
Zexuan Zhong, Ziqing Huang, Alexander Wettig, and Danqi Chen. Poisoning retrieval corpora by
  injecting adversarial passages. In The 2023 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Lan-
  guage Processing, 2023. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=8FgdMHbW27.
Aojun Zhou, Ke Wang, Zimu Lu, Weikang Shi, Sichun Luo, Zipeng Qin, Shaoqing Lu, Anya Jia,
  Linqi Song, Mingjie Zhan, et al. Solving challenging math word problems using gpt-4 code
  interpreter with code-based self-verification. In The Twelfth International Conference on Learning
  Representations, 2023.
Wei Zou, Runpeng Geng, Binghui Wang, and Jinyuan Jia. Poisonedrag: Knowledge poi-
 soning attacks to retrieval-augmented generation of large language models. arXiv preprint
 arXiv:2402.07867, 2024.


                                                14
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A    R ELATED WORKS
Vulnerabilities of RAG to misinformation. Retrieval-Augmented Generation (RAG) systems ad-
dress inherent limitations of LLMs, such as hallucinations and a lack of access to up-to-date knowl-
edge (Lewis et al., 2020; Guu et al., 2020), by integrating external databases through retrievers
with LLMs. However, standard RAG systems often fall short in handling more complex real-world
scenarios. To address these challenges, several advanced RAG systems (Jiang et al., 2023; Asai
et al., 2024) have been developed, incorporating multiple modules to enhance their performance.
Despite these advancements, concerns about misinformation threats within RAG frameworks are
growing, as misinformation in retrieved results can lead LLMs to generate unreliable outputs (Pan
et al., 2023; Chen et al., 2024; Greshake et al., 2023; Hong et al., 2024). Furthermore, recent studies
(Zhong et al., 2023; Zou et al., 2024; Shafran et al., 2024; Chaudhari et al., 2024) have highlighted
the vulnerability of RAG systems to data poisoning attacks, where adversaries craft a small number
of malicious documents to disrupt the system’s reliability. These attacks exploit a key weakness
in RAG systems that rely on relevance scores for retrieval; by creating malicious documents with
high similarity scores to target questions, adversaries can deceive the RAG system into retrieving
misleading information. Notably, Zou et al. (2024) demonstrated that even advanced RAG systems
are highly susceptible to such data poisoning attacks.
Robust RAG against misinformation threat. In response to misinformation threats in RAG sys-
tems, several robust methods have been proposed. Pan et al. (2023) uses majority voting to enhance
output reliability, while Weller et al. (2024) employs query augmentation to retrieve diverse docu-
ments and evaluates the frequency of generated outputs against the retrieved content. Xiang et al.
(2024) adopts an isolate-then-aggregate strategy, generating LLM responses for each passage sep-
arately and then aggregating them securely to produce robust outputs. Deng et al. (2024) assigns
heuristic reliability scores to the document based on source reputation and applies prompt engineer-
ing to prioritize documents from reputable sources, whereas Pan et al. (2024) uses GPT’s internal
knowledge to generate reliability scores of the document and adjust attention weights accordingly.
However, these methods heavily depend on heuristics, with Weller et al. (2024); Pan et al. (2023);
Xiang et al. (2024) being effective only when the true documents are the majority of the retrieved
results. Moreover, heuristic approaches for determining the reliability scores of documents are often
impractical in real-world scenarios, as the reliability of sources such as social media or blogs are
often unknown or uncertain, and LLMs cannot rely on internal knowledge to assess up-to-date in-
formation. In contrast, our approach systematically estimates source reliability within the database
and efficiently aggregates information from multiple sources, resulting in more robust and reliable
outcomes.
Robust answer aggregation. In many AI systems, gathering information from diverse sources is
essential for tasks such as data labeling, knowledge retrieval, and enhancing large language model
(LLM) performance. A central challenge in these tasks is how to aggregate potentially conflicting
information from various sources, especially when the quality and reliability of these sources are
variable. The most straightforward strategy is majority voting (MV), which assigns the most fre-
quent label or answer across sources. However, MV can be error-prone, especially when dealing
with sources of varying reliability. To address this, studies such as Karger et al. (2011); Liu et al.
(2012); Yue et al. (2014); Li & Yu (2014); Aydin et al. (2014); Li et al. (2016); Geng et al. (2020)
have proposed weighted majority voting (WMV) approaches that account for source reliability, lead-
ing to more accurate aggregation of information.
Robust aggregation also plays a crucial role in enhancing the reliability of LLM outputs, particularly
in recent complex reasoning tasks. For instance, Wang et al. (2023) introduces a method that samples
diverse reasoning outputs in CoT (Wei et al., 2022) and aggregates the final output through majority
voting. Similarly, Zhou et al. (2023); Wan et al. (2024) calculate confidence scores for each CoT
output to perform weighted majority voting, thereby improving the robustness of answers. Further,
Chen & Li (2024) adopts a reasoning roll-back strategy in Tree-of-Thoughts (ToT) (Yao et al., 2024)
and applies weighted majority voting to produce the final output.


                                                  15
 Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


  B                      D ETAILED ALGORITHM FOR RA-RAG


 Algorithm 1 First Stage: Iterative Reliability Estimation
                                                  SN
  1: Input: multi-source database Dmulti = i=1 Si , the number of queries M1 ,
     filtering function falign , IDK=“I don’t know”
  2: Output: estimated weights {v1 , . . . , vN }
                       j                                     j
  3: Mj = {falign (ỹi , R(q j , Si )) | i ∈ [N ]} , where ỹi = LLM(q j , R(q j , Si ), Pkeyword )
  4: Initialization: vi = 1, ∀i ∈ [N ]
  5: repeat
           ŷ j = arg maxu∈Mj i∈[N ] vi 1(falign (ỹij , R(q j , Si )) = u), ∀j ∈ [M1 ]
                                   P
  6:
                                                  1(falign (ỹij ,R(qj ,Si ))=ŷj )
                                         PM
     7:                         ŵi ← PMj=11(f                j     j
                                                                                      , ∀i ∈ [N ]
                                            j=1      align (ỹi ,R(q ,Si ))̸=IDK)

     8:      vi ← N ŵi − 1, ∀i ∈ [N ]
     9: until convergence or reaches T iterations.



 Algorithm 2 Second Stage: Reliable and Efficient Inference
                                                  SN
  1: Input: multi-source database Dmulti = i=1 Si , the number of queries M2 , Retriever R, esti-
     mated weights {v1 , . . . , vN }, the number of reliable and relevant sources K < N
  2: Output: {ŷ j | j ∈ [M2 ]}
  3: Sort the sources {S1 , . . . , SN } based on their estimated weights {v1′ , . . . , vN         ′
                                                                                                      } in descending
                     ′           ′              ′    ′               ′
     order to get {S1 , . . . , SN } such that v1 ≥ v2 ≥ . . . ≥ vN
  4: for j = 1 to M2 do
  5:   Construct κ-RRSS ← {i′ | falign (ỹij′ , R(q j , Si′′ )) ̸= IDK, i′ ∈ [N ]} with up to K elements,
       i.e., |κ-RRSS| = k
  6:   Construct Mjκ-RRSS = {falign (ỹij′ , R(q j , Si′′ ) | i′ ∈ κ-RRSS}
  7:   Compute the final answer:

                                                            vi′ 1(falign (ỹij′ , R(q j , Si′′ ) = u)
                                                   X
                           ŷ j = arg max   j
                                                                  u∈Mκ-RRSS
                                                                                 i′ ∈κ-RRSS

     8: end for


  C                      E XTENDED E XPERIMENTAL R ESULTS AND A NALYSIS

  C.1                         E XPERIMENTAL R ESULTS OF B ETA P RIOR ON H OTPOT QA DATASET


                                         Llama3-8B                                        Phi3-mini                           GPT-4o-mini
                        0.7                                            0.7                                      0.7
     Exact Match (EM)


                        0.6                                            0.6                                      0.6
HotpotQA


                                                                                                                                         Oracle WMV
                                                                                                                                         WMV
                        0.5                                            0.5                                      0.5                      RA-RAG (Ours)
                                                                                                                                         MV
                        0.4                                            0.4                                      0.4                      Naive RAG
                                                                                                                                         Naive LLM
                        0.3 3     4     5     6       7     8      9 0.3 3        4      5    6     7     8   9 0.3 3   4     5     6    7     8     9
                                      Number of Sources                               Number of Sources                     Number of Sources

 Figure 8: EM against the number of sources, comparing the heterogeneous reliability via beta priors
 on the HotpotQA dataset across the Llama3-8B, Phi3-mini, and GPT-4o-mini language models.



                                                                                         16
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


C.2      E XPERIMENTAL R ESULTS OF S PAMMER - HAMMER PRIOR ON TQA AND H OTPOT QA
         DATASETS

                                                          TQA                                                     HotpotQA
                               0.9                                                       0.9

            Exact Match (EM)
                               0.8                                                       0.8
                               0.7                                                       0.7
                               0.6                                                       0.6        Oracle WMV
                                                                                                    WMV
                               0.5                                                       0.5        RA-RAG (Ours)
                               0.4                                                       0.4        MV
                                                                                                    Naive RAG
                               0.3                                                       0.3
                                      1   2       3        4        5       6       7           1     2       3       4       5       6       7
                                              Number of Spammers                                          Number of Spammers

Figure 9: EM against the number of spammers, comparing robustness using spammer-hammer pri-
ors on the TQA and HotpotQA datasets.


C.3      A BLATION S TUDY OF κ-RRSS FOR TQA AND H OTPOT QA DATASETS

                                                          TQA                                                     HotpotQA
                               0.88                                                                   -RRSS
                                                                                                     MV
            Exact Match (EM)


                                                                                         0.72
                               0.86
                               0.84                                                      0.70
                               0.82                                                      0.68
                               0.80
                                                                                         0.66
                               0.78
                                      1   2   3       4    5    6       7       8   9           1    2    3       4   5   6       7       8   9


                Figure 10: EM for different numbers of κ on the TQA and HotpotQA datasets.


C.4      Q UALITATIVE R ESULTS OF F ILTERING W ITH fALIGN

As shown in Table 1, LLMs often fail to respond with “I don’t know” when no relevant document
is provided. Instead, they tend to hallucinate or even generate the correct answer. To address this
issue, which significantly affects our datasets, we use falign to filter out ungrounded responses to the
provided contexts. The impact of falign is illustrated in the following examples in Figure 11: In the
first example, the LLM responds with “Andrew Garfield,” which is correct but not grounded in any
relevant information from the context. In the second example, the LLM generates the answer “opti-
cal smoke detector,” despite lacking supporting context. Utilizing falign , we identify these responses
as ungrounded to the contexts, and therefore replace the answer with “I don’t know.”

      Query: Which type of fire detector uses the effect of smoke on a light source and photo-electric cell
      Contexts: light snow is defined as a type of precipitation that consists of small ice crystals. It can
      occur when the atmospheric conditions lead to rain sleet or snow that contains a high concentration of
      acids, which we refer to as light snow.
      The atomic number of indium is 52, as it is located in the 5th period of the periodic table. Indium is
      a post-transition metal, known for its malleability and low melting point. This unique characteristic
      relates directly to the query mentioned.
      Light snow typically forms in cold temperatures and accompanies weather systems. In discussions
      about precipitation types, it’s essential to note that rain sleet or snow that contains a high concentration
      of acids is classified under this term: light snow.
      LLM’s Output: optical smoke detector
      Ground Truth (GT): optical smoke detector
      Target Answer: I don’t know
      Replaced Answer with falign : I don’t know


                                                                                    17
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


   Query: Who plays the main character in Hacksaw Ridge?
   Contexts: The main character in Hacksaw Ridge is played by Tom Hardy. Known for his versatile
   roles, Tom Hardy delivers a compelling performance that highlights the character’s bravery and con-
   viction during intense wartime scenarios.
   Hacksaw Ridge features Tom Hardy in the primary role, bringing depth to the character through his
   powerful portrayal. As audiences witness the harrowing events of war, Tom Hardy’s performance
   stands out as a testament to courage and resilience.
   Tom Hardy stars as the lead in Hacksaw Ridge, showcasing his exceptional acting skills. The film
   portrays the true story of a conscientious objector who served in World War II, with Tom Hardy em-
   bodying this heroic figure.
   LLM’s Output: Andrew Garfield
   Ground Truth (GT): Andrew Garfield
   Target Answer: Tom Hardy
   Replaced Answer with falign : I don’t know



Figure 11: Examples of a situation where an LLM provides a correct answer based on its internal
knowledge, despite the context containing the misinformation.


                                                   18
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


C.5   E XTENDED A BLATION STUDIES FOR FILTERING

Table 3: Percentage of types of answers by retrieved document type in the filtering with falign abla-
tion study on Phi-3 mini and NQ dataset.

             Types of      Filtering               Types of Retrieved Documents
             Answers        (falign )    Factual         Misinformation           Irrelevant
                             w/o         83.50%               0.77%                8.37%
              Correct
                             w/          82.25%               0.77%                2.59%
                             w/o            -                88.92%                   -
             Incorrect
                             w/             -                88.66%                   -
                             w/o         2.50%                3.35%                65.15%
               IDK
                             w/          5.00%                3.87%                82.76%
                             w/o         14.00%               6.96%                26.48%
           Hallucination
                             w/          12.75%               6.70%                14.66%


Table 4: Percentage of types of answers by retrieved document type in the filtering with falign abla-
tion study on Phi-3 mini and TQA dataset.

             Types of      Filtering               Types of Retrieved Documents
             Answers        (falign )    Factual         Misinformation           Irrelevant
                             w/o         93.54%               4.08%                36.49%
              Correct
                             w/          93.06%               0.82%                 4.79%
                             w/o            -                82.34%                   -
             Incorrect
                             w/             -                81.79%                   -
                             w/o         0.00%                3.53%                33.66%
               IDK
                             w/          0.72%                9.51%                83.29%
                             w/o         6.46%               10.05%                29.85%
           Hallucination
                             w/          6.22%               7.88%                 11.92%


Table 5: Percentage of types of answers by retrieved document type in the filtering with falign abla-
tion study on Phi-3 mini and HotpotQA dataset.

             Types of      Filtering               Types of Retrieved Documents
             Answers        (falign )    Factual         Misinformation           Irrelevant
                             w/o         82.78%               6.65%                20.87%
              Correct
                             w/          81.52%               1.06%                 8.32%
                             w/o            -                16.56%                   -
             Incorrect
                             w/             -                68.62%                   -
                             w/o         0.25%               3.99%                 36.67%
               IDK
                             w/          3.04%               14.63%                71.65%
                             w/o         16.96%              18.88%                42.46%
           Hallucination
                             w/          15.44%              15.69%                20.02%


                                                   19
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Table 6: Percentage of types of answers by retrieved document type in the filtering with falign abla-
tion study on GPT-4o-mini and NQ dataset.

             Types of      Filtering               Types of Retrieved Documents
             Answers        (falign )    Factual         Misinformation           Irrelevant
                             w/o         82.25%               1.03%                2.71%
              Correct
                             w/          82.25%               0.77%                1.72%
                             w/o            -                86.60%                   -
             Incorrect
                             w/             -                86.60%                   -
                             w/o         6.25%                5.15%                92.36%
               IDK
                             w/          6.75%                5.93%                93.72%
                             w/o         11.50%               7.22%                4.93%
           Hallucination
                             w/          11.00%               6.70%                4.56%


Table 7: Percentage of types of answers by retrieved document type in the filtering with falign abla-
tion study on GPT-4o-mini and TQA dataset.

             Types of      Filtering               Types of Retrieved Documents
             Answers        (falign )    Factual         Misinformation           Irrelevant
                             w/o         92.58%               2.72%                9.34%
              Correct
                             w/          92.58%               1.09%                3.81%
                             w/o            -                71.74%                   -
             Incorrect
                             w/             -                71.74%                   -
                             w/o         0.48%               19.29%                88.82%
               IDK
                             w/          0.72%               21.47%                95.09%
                             w/o         6.94%                6.25%                1.84%
           Hallucination
                             w/          6.70%                5.71%                1.11%


Table 8: Percentage of types of answers by retrieved document type in the filtering with falign abla-
tion study on GPT-4o-mini and Hotpot QA dataset.

             Types of      Filtering               Types of Retrieved Documents
             Answers        (falign )    Factual         Misinformation           Irrelevant
                             w/o         85.32%               6.65%                10.01%
              Correct
                             w/          84.30%               0.80%                 3.14%
                             w/o            -                64.36%                   -
             Incorrect
                             w/             -                64.36%                   -
                             w/o         1.01%               17.02%                81.06%
               IDK
                             w/          2.78%               23.94%                91.19%
                             w/o         13.67%              11.97%                8.93%
           Hallucination
                             w/          12.91%              10.90%                5.67%


                                                   20
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


D    Q UALITATIVE R ESULTS OF MV AND O URS


MV (Majority Voting) focuses on selecting the most frequent answer among multiple sources. While
simple, this approach is prone to errors, especially when the correct and incorrect answers appear
with similar frequencies. In such cases, MV might choose the wrong answer simply because it is
more common, without considering the reliability of the sources. In contrast, Our RA-RAG assigns
weights to sources based on their reliability, allowing it to identify the correct answer in situations
where MV fails.


    Query: Who is regarded as the founder of psychoanalysis
    Ground Truth (GT): Sigmund Freud
    multi-source Outputs: I don’t know, I don’t know, Sigmund Freud, I don’t know, B.F. skinner, B.F.
    Skinner, John Watson
    Reliabilites of Sources: 0.7, 0.91, 0.83, 0.61, 0.47, 0.22, 0.51
    Estimated Reliabilites: 0.69, 0.9, 0.87, 0.73, 0.55, 0.3, 0.54
    MV Answer: B.F. skinner
    Our Answer: Sigmund Freud


    Query: How many numbers are in the euromillions draw
    Ground Truth (GT): 7
    multi-source Outputs: 7, 7, 10, 10
    Reliabilites of Sources: 0.79, 0.92, 0.64, 0.43
    Estimated Reliabilites: 0.89, 0.91, 0.7, 0.6
    Naive RAG Answer: 10
    MV Answer: 10
    Our Answer: 7


    Query: Who used the word physiology for the first time
    Ground Truth (GT): Jean Fernel
    multi-source Outputs: i don’t know, Jean Fernel, I don’t know, Galileo, I don’t know, I don’t know,
    Galileo
    Reliabilites of Sources: 0.56, 0.89, 0.68, 0.52, 0.48, 0.7, 0.17
    Estimated Reliabilites: 0.65, 0.88, 0.78, 0.57, 0.55, 0.75, 0.25
    MV Answer: Galileo
    Our Answer: Jean Fernel


               Figure 12: The comparisons between MV and Our RA-RAG answers.


E    C OMPARISON OF PERFORMANCE BETWEEN KEYWORD - BASED ANSWER
     GENERATION USING PROMPT ENGINEERING AND KEYWORD EXTRACTION
     METHODS



We conduct experiments to compare the performance of using prompt engineering alone against
combining it with the keyword extraction method proposed by Xiang et al. (2024). As shown in
Figure 13, prompt engineering alone achieves performance comparable to the combined approach
with post-processing for keyword extraction, demonstrating its effectiveness without the need for
additional processing steps.


                                                    21
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                               0.75
                                                          RA-RAG with keyword extraction
                                               0.70       RA-RAG


                            Exact Match (EM)
                                               0.65
                                               0.60
                                               0.55
                                               0.50
                                               0.45
                                                      3     4       5        6      7      8   9
                                                                  Number of Sources
Figure 13: Performance Comparison Between Prompt Engineering and Keyword Extraction Meth-
ods



F      P ROMPT FOR CONSTRUCTING MULTI - SOURCE BENCHMARK

F.1     P ROMPT FOR OPEN - ENDED QUESTION FILTERING



      Prompt You are given a question and its corresponding answer list, check the question is closed-ended
      question that has a single correct answer.
      Answer in yes or no.
      Question: {question}
      Answer: {answer}


                      Figure 14: The prompt used for filtering open-ended queries.



F.2     P ROMPTS FOR FACTUAL DATA G ENERATION

For Natural Questions (NQ) (Kwiatkowski et al., 2019) and HotpotQA (Yang et al., 2018), we use
Contriever (Izacard et al., 2022) to retrieve passages that are likely to contain relevant answers. For
TriviaQA (Joshi et al., 2017), we focus on single-hop queries from its training subset, where the
answer-containing contexts are already provided.
From the retrieved passages across all datasets, GPT-4o-mini (OpenAI, 2024) is employed to para-
phrase up to two original contexts at a time. We generate new paraphrased versions for each original
context, ensuring a fixed number of context pairs (num pairs = 5). Additionally, the word length
of each generated passage is controlled by setting a word limit (V ) of 50. We finally choose 9
contexts after these processes.


      Prompt Generate {num pairs} different paraphrased contexts based on the given query, answer, and
      context. Each context should be approximately {V} words and must include information that allows
      the answer to be found within it. Write in English.
      Context: {context}
      Question: {question}
      Answer: {answer}


                       Figure 15: The prompt used for generating factual contexts.

                                                                        22
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


F.3     P ROMPTS FOR M ISINFORMATION G ENERATION

We create alternative responses that deviate from the correct answers, serving as potential misinfor-
mation candidates. A secondary prompt is then designed to incorporate these incorrect alternatives,
to elicit misleading or false information from the model.
We use the GPT-4o-mini (OpenAI, 2024) to generate plausible misinformation. However, GPT-
4o-mini often shows resistance to producing misinformation, according to Wallace et al. (2024),
sometimes reinserting correct answers even in contexts intended to contain falsehoods. To mitigate
this, we carefully craft prompts and post-process the model’s outputs to remove contradictory or
repeated correct information.


      Prompt Generate nine counterfactual answers, based on the question and its original answers.
      Ensure that each counterfactual answer is a plausible but incorrect response, clearly different from the
      original answers.
      Avoid repeating or paraphrasing the original answer or question.
      The counterfactual answers should be relevant to the context but should introduce a distinct and clearly
      incorrect or alternative response.
      You should write the answers in short closed form, limit to maximum 4 words length.
      The answers should not be sentence form, but rather a short phrase or word.
      Write in English.


                   Figure 16: The prompt used for generating counterfactual answers.


      Prompt You are an inhabitant of the real world, providing content for a Wikipedia-like website.
      Instructions:
            1. Create three corpora of exactly {V} words that provide detailed information supporting the
               answer {answer} to the question {question}.
            2. Begin with a clear statement that {answer} is the answer to {question} in your world.
            3. Provide background information, including specific details and numbers, that explains why
               {answer} is the answer.
            4. Mention the question {question} and the answer {answer} multiple times for rein-
               forcement.
            5. In your world, {answer} is known as the answer to {question}.
            6. Refer to your world as “our world” or “the real world”, and write in English.
            7. Do not use frequency adverbs, passive voice, contrasting conjunctions, or any language that
               could be considered humorous or imply ambiguity.
            8. Do not mention any different answer after phrases like “actually” or “in fact”, “however” or
               any other examples.
            9. Do not try to correct the answer.

      Remember:
             • Keep it simple and clear.
             • Your knowledge is limited to your world.
             • Repeatedly mention that {answer} is the answer to {question} in your world.
             • Include specific details and numbers.
             • Avoid frequency adverbs, passive voice, contrasting conjunctions, humorous, or ambiguous
               language.
             • Do not mention any different answer after phrases like “actually” or “in fact”.


                   Figure 17: The prompt used for generating counterfactual contexts.

                                                        23
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


G    I NSTRUCTION PROMPT FOR A KEYWORD - BASED ANSWER GENERATION .



    Prompt Answer the question based on the given context without using any internal knowledge. Pro-
    vide only essential keywords without explanations or additional details. If you don’t confidently know
    the answer from the given context, just say “I don’t know”.
    Context: The Voting Rights Act of 1965 was a landmark piece of federal legislation in the United
    States that prohibits racial discrimination in voting. This act was signed into law by President Lyndon
    B. Johnson during the height of the Civil Rights Movement. It aimed to overcome legal barriers at the
    state and local levels that prevented African Americans from exercising their right to vote under the
    15th Amendment.
    Question: Who was the Voting Rights Act of 1965 designed to help?
    Answer: African Americans
    Context: In the midst of the 20th century, amidst geopolitical tensions and scientific breakthroughs,
    the race for space exploration was at its peak. Governments invested heavily in technology, and astro-
    nauts trained rigorously. During this time, monumental achievements in aeronautics paved the way for
    future interstellar missions, forever changing humanity’s place in the cosmos.
    Question: Which astronauts were part of the Apollo 11 mission that first landed humans on the moon?
    Answer: I don’t know
    Context: The process of photosynthesis occurs in the chloroplasts of plant cells, where sunlight is
    used to convert carbon dioxide and water into glucose and oxygen. This process is crucial for the
    survival of plants and, by extension, all life on Earth, as it is the primary source of organic matter and
    oxygen in the environment.
    Question: Where does the process of photosynthesis take place in plant cells?
    Answer: In the chloroplasts
    Context: The Inflation Reduction Act was signed into law by President Joe Biden in August 2022.
    This comprehensive bill aims to reduce inflation by lowering the federal deficit, reducing healthcare
    costs, and promoting clean energy. It includes significant investments in renewable energy and electric
    vehicles.
    Question: What was the total cost of the Inflation Reduction Act?
    Answer: I don’t know
    Context: The Paris Agreement is a landmark international treaty that aims to combat climate change
    by limiting global warming to well below 2 degrees Celsius compared to pre-industrial levels. The
    agreement was signed by 196 countries and emphasizes the need for global cooperation in reducing
    greenhouse gas emissions.
    Question: What is the main goal of the Paris Agreement?
    Answer: Limiting global warming


       Figure 18: The in-context learning prompt used for keyword based answer generation.


H    D ISCUSSION ABOUT OTHER AGGREGATION M ETHODS

In Section 3.1, we address the challenge of aggregating multiple-output answers to reach a consensus
response. One possible solution is to use large language models (LLMs) to perform this aggregation
automatically. To explore this approach, we experiment with different prompting strategies using
LLama-3 8B Instruct (Dubey et al., 2024), such as zero-shot prompting, in-context learning, and
Chain-of-Thoughts (CoT) prompting Wei et al. (2022) for answer aggregation.
However, our results show that Llama-3 8B Instruct struggles with this task. It has difficulty effec-
tively clustering even straightforward examples, likely due to challenges with complex reasoning
and sensitivity to numerical details. Additionally, LLMs’ inherent probabilistic nature leads to in-
consistent clustering results when applied to identical examples. To ensure stability and reliability
in our experiments, we adopt an EM-based aggregation approach. For illustration, we provide a
representative example where the LLM failed to aggregate responses accurately, underscoring the
limitations of this approach.


                                                       24
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


   Prompt Please cluster the following answers based on their similarity and provide an aggregated
   summary for each cluster, without modifying the original form of the answers in your final output.


                   Figure 19: The zero-shot prompt used for answer aggregation.


   Prompt You are tasked with clustering and aggregating a series of responses based on their similarity.
   Your goal is to identify distinct groups of answers that belong together based on meaning or context.
   When creating clusters:
          • Do not modify the form of the answers; maintain them exactly as they are written.
          • Group answers that convey the same or closely related information, even if they differ
            slightly in format.
          • Prioritize factors such as dates, events, or locations mentioned in the answers when cluster-
            ing.
          • If an answer cannot be clearly grouped with others, it should remain in its own separate
            cluster.

   Examples:
   1. Answers:
          • “june 15, 2020”
          • “june 15, 2020, paris”
          • “15 june 2020”
          • “march 10, 2021”
          • “march 10, 2021, tokyo”
   Cluster 1: “june 15, 2020”, “june 15, 2020, paris”, “15 june 2020”
   Cluster 2: “march 10, 2021”, “march 10, 2021, tokyo”
   2. Answers:
          • “october 1, 2015”
          • “october 1, 2015, london”
          • “october 12, 2016”
          • “october 12, 2016”
          • “not sure”
   Cluster 1: “october 1, 2015”, “october 1, 2015, london”
   Cluster 2: “october 12, 2016”, “october 12, 2016”
   Cluster 3: “not sure”
   3. Answers:
          • “september 23, 2018”
          • “no idea”
          • “october 10, 2020”
          • “september 23, 2018, berlin”
          • “november 5, 2019”
   Cluster 1: “september 23, 2018”, ”september 23, 2018, berlin”
   Cluster 2: “no idea”
   Cluster 3: “october 10, 2020”
   Cluster 4: “november 5, 2019”


                                                    25
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


   4. Answers:
          • “may 3, 2017”
          • “i’m not sure”
          • “december 18, 2017”
          • “may 3, 2017, new york”
          • “june 11, 2019”
   Cluster 1: “may 3, 2017”, “may 3, 2017, new york”
   Cluster 2: “december 18, 2017”
   Cluster 3: “i’m not sure”
   Cluster 4: “june 11, 2019”
   5. Answers:
          • “october 30, 2012”
          • “october 30, 2012”
          • “october 30, 2012, cape girardeau”
          • “december 25, 2012”
          • “march 8, 2015”
   Cluster 1: “october 30, 2012”, “october 30, 2012”, “october 30, 2012, cape girardeau”
   Cluster 2: “december 25, 2012”
   Cluster 3: “march 8, 2015”


             Figure 20: The in-context learning prompt used for answer aggregation.


   Prompt Instructions to Cluster and Aggregate the Answers:
   List All Answers: Begin by writing down all the provided answers exactly as they appear.
   Identify Identical Answers: Look for answers that are exactly the same in wording and group them
   together.
   Identify Similar Answers: Find answers that are similar in content but not identical in wording. Con-
   sider context to decide if they should be grouped together.
   Create Clusters: Form clusters for each group of identical or similar answers. Each cluster should
   contain all answers that are grouped together.
   Maintain Original Form: Ensure that the original wording of the answers is preserved. Do not modify,
   correct, or rephrase any of the answers.
   Present the Clusters: Display each cluster, Include all clusters, even those with only one answer.


                     Figure 21: The CoT prompt used for answer aggregation.


                                                    26
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


    Answer List: gotham, gotham, i don’t know, gotham, gotham, gotham, i don’t know, gotham
    EM Cluster:
           • Cluster 1: gotham (6 times)
           • Cluster 2: i don’t know (2 times)
    0-shot Cluster:
           • Cluster 1: gotham (5 times)
           • Cluster 2: i don’t know (2 times)
    In-context Cluster:
           • Cluster 1: gotham (5 times)
           • Cluster 2: i don’t know (2 times)
    CoT Cluster:
           • Cluster 1: gotham (5 times)
           • Cluster 2: i don’t know (2 times)


    Answer List: south korean, south korean, south korean, singaporean, south korean, south korean,
    south korean, south korean
    EM Cluster:
           • Cluster 1: south korean (7 times)
           • Cluster 2: singaporean (1 time)
    0-shot Cluster:
           • Cluster 1: south korean (7 times)
    In-context Cluster:
           • Cluster 1: south korean (7 times)
    CoT Cluster:
           • Cluster 1: south korean (7 times)


 Figure 22: Examples of situations where EM’s aggregation succeeds, but LLM fails to aggregate.
In another aggregation approach, we use sentence-transformer (Wang et al., 2020) to embed the
answers and apply DBSCAN (Ester et al., 1996) for clustering. Unlike other clustering methods,
DBSCAN does not require the number of clusters to be specified beforehand, making it a suitable
choice for this setting. We use a cosine similarity threshold of 0.07 for clustering. However, finding
an optimal threshold for embedding distance that accurately groups all answers remains challenging,
leading to suboptimal cluster quality.
Several examples illustrate this challenge: while the first is clustered correctly, the others are not,
with the same threshold. To highlight this limitation, we provide a t-SNE plot (Van der Maaten &
Hinton, 2008) , demonstrating the difficulties in clustering answers based on their embeddings.

    Answer List: under the liver, below the liver, beneath the liver, underneath the liver, above the liver,
    under the liver
    DBSCAN Cluster:
           • Cluster 1: under the liver, below the liver, beneath the liver, underneath the liver, under the
             liver
           • Cluster 2: above the liver


                                                      27
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


   Answer List: turn off the light, switch off the light, extinguish the light, turn the light off, shut off the
   light, turn off the light
   DBSCAN Cluster:
           • Cluster 1: turn off the light, turn the light off, turn off the light
           • Cluster 2: switch off the light
           • Cluster 3: extinguish the light
           • Cluster 4: shut off the light


   Answer List: 100, one hundred, a hundred, hundred, 100.0
   DBSCAN Cluster:
           • Cluster 1: 100
           • Cluster 2: one hundred
           • Cluster 3: a hundred, hundred
           • Cluster 4: 100.0


   Answer List: first, 1st, number one, one, 1
   DBSCAN Cluster:
           • Cluster 1: first
           • Cluster 2: 1st
           • Cluster 3: number one
           • Cluster 4: one
           • Cluster 5: 1


   Answer List: July 4th, 4th of July, July 4
   DBSCAN Cluster:
           • Cluster 1: July 4th, 4th of July
           • Cluster 2: July 4


   Answer List: July 5th, 2014, July 5th, 2015, July 5th, 2016, July 5th, 2017, July 5th, 2018, July 5th,
   2019, July 5th, 2020
   DBSCAN Cluster:
           • Cluster 1: July 5th, 2014 , July 5th, 2015 , July 5th, 2016 , July 5th, 2017 , July 5th, 2018 ,
             July 5th, 2019
           • Cluster 2: July 5th, 2020


   Answer List: thousand, one thousand, a thousand, two thousand
   DBSCAN Cluster:
           • Cluster 1: thousand, a thousand
           • Cluster 2: one thousand
           • Cluster 3: two thousand


                                                        28
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                                         4 4th
                                                                    July July 4thof July



                                           first                                          July 5th, 2015
                                          1st                                           July 5th, 2014
                                         1                                                         July 5th, 2016
                                        one                                                          July 5th, 2017
                                                                                                       July 5th, 2018
                                        number one              switch off the light                     July 5th, 2019
                                                                                                          July 5th, 2020
                                                              turnturn
                                                                   off the  lightlight
                                                                       off the
                                              two thousand    turn the shut
                                                                        light off
                                                                              off the light
                                          one thousand                   extinguish the light                       a thousand
                                        one hundred
                                      a hundred
                                     hundred

                               100
                             100.0
                                                                      below the liver
                                                                   above beneath
                                                                         the liver the liver
                 thousand                                                  underneath the liver
                                                                                     under the liver


             Figure 23: An example of situations where DBSCAN clustering fails.


                                                         29
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


I   A DVANCED AGGREGATION C ONSIDERING S EMANTIC M EANING

Aggregating responses from LLMs is a fundamental challenge across various domains, including
reasoning tasks Wang et al. (2023); Yao et al. (2022) and uncertainty estimation Ott et al. (2018);
Sai et al. (2022); Kuhn et al. (2023); Yao et al. (2022). To illustrate the core concept of our frame-
work, we use a simple keyword-based system prompt as a proof of concept in this work. However,
keyword-based response aggregation has limitations in handling diverse expressions and synonyms.
To address these limitations, we integrate a more robust approach into our framework: bidirectional
entailment clustering, as proposed in Farquhar et al. (2024). This method uses natural language
inference (NLI) classifiers or LLMs to compare pairs of responses. By evaluating mutual entailment,
whether response A entails response B and vice versa, bidirectional entailment clustering identifies
semantically equivalent responses. These equivalent responses are grouped into clusters, enabling
aggregation based on semantic meaning rather than exact wording.
Experimental setting. We evaluate this approach on the NQ dataset using a beta prior with five
sources, as detailed in Section 5.2. For entailment assessment, we employ LLama3-8B and aggrega-
tion is performed at the cluster level, enhancing the accuracy of reliability estimation and weighted
majority voting. To address the strictness of the exact match (EM) metric, we consider an answer
correct if it belongs to a cluster containing the ground truth.
Experimental results. Table 9 shows the performance improvements achieved by integrating this
method into our framework. As shown in Figure 24, bidirectional entailment clustering effectively
groups diverse expressions with the same meaning, demonstrating robustness to linguistic variabil-
ity. However, due to the imperfect performance of the LLM, Figure 25 presents a few instances
of incorrect clustering. While these errors are relatively rare in our observations, future advance-
ments in LLM development and semantic clustering algorithms are expected to further minimize
such errors.

                                           Method                    EM
                                    RA-RAG + bidirectional
                                                                    0.635
                                     entailment clustering
                                           RA-RAG                   0.615

              Table 9: Effectiveness of bidirectional entailment clustering in RA-RAG


    Question: When is the opening ceremony of the Olympics 2018?
    Clustering results:
           • Cluster 1: “20:00 KST on 9 February 2018”, “9 February 2018 at 20:00 KST”
           • Cluster 2: “I don’t know”, “I don’t know”
           • Cluster 3: “12 February 2018”

    Question: Where is the highest level of fluoride stored in the teeth?
    Clustering results:
           • Cluster 1: “Enamel surface”, “Surface of enamel”, ‘Tooth enamel’
           • Cluster 2: “I don’t know”, “I don’t know”

    Question: When did McGee become a regular on NCIS?
    Clustering results:
           • Cluster 1: “Second season”, “Season two”
           • Cluster 2: “I don’t know”
           • Cluster 3: “Season six”


Figure 24: Examples of bidirectional entailment clustering. Diverse expressions with same mean-
ings, highlighted in blue, are effectively aggregated.


                                                      30
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


   Question: Who is the first Prime Minister of France?
   Clustering results:
          • Cluster 1: “Nicolas Sarkozy”
          • Cluster 2: “Michel Debre”, “Charles de Gaulle”
          • Cluster 3: “I don’t know”, “I don’t know”


   Question: What was the final episode of Quantum Leap?
   Clustering results:
          • Cluster 1: “Leap Home’”
          • Cluster 2: “Final image”, “Mirror image”
          • Cluster 3: “I don’t know”
          • Cluster 4: “Leap to destiny”


Figure 25: Examples of incorrectly clustered responses using bidirectional entailment clustering.
Clustering failure cases, highlighted in red, occur due to hallucinations of the LLM.


                                                   31
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


J                E XTENSION OF RA-RAG FOR L ONG - FORM G ENERATION
While RA-RAG is primarily designed for short-form generation tasks, it can be extended to handle
long-form generation. This extension leverages the concept of text decomposition, which breaks
down a long-form response into a series of short-form responses, as described in Min et al. (2023),
Wei et al. (2024), and Farquhar et al. (2024). An overview of our approach is shown in Figure 26.
Through experiments, we validate the feasibility of this extension using the example presented in
Figure 26. In this approach, multi-source RAG generates long responses by retrieving documents
from multiple sources. However, due to heterogeneity in source reliability, it is essential to verify
the truthfulness of each piece of factual information in the responses and robustly aggregate the
information to produce a final, reliable response. This process involves the following steps:

                  1. Factoid decomposition: The long response is decomposed into individual factual claims.
                  2. Question generation for checking factual information: For each factual claim, three
                     questions targeting different aspects of the fact are generated, following the method de-
                     scribed in Farquhar et al. (2024).
                  3. Response generation for each question: The LLM is prompted to provide answers to the
                     generated questions, using the initial long response as context.
                  4. Aggregating responses for generated questions: The answers to each question are ag-
                     gregated from multiple sources using weighted majority voting with estimated reliability
                     of the sources to produce robust answers.
                  5. Final response synthesis: Finally, the LLM synthesizes a cohesive and refined long-form
                     response using the set of questions and their corresponding robust answers as input.

The prompts used for each step are provided in Appendix K. We use LLama3-8B for these experi-
ments.
While we demonstrate the feasibility of extending RA-RAG for long-form generation, evaluating
its effectiveness across diverse cases remains an important next step. Specifically, this requires the
development of benchmarks for long-form generation tasks that involve multiple sources with het-
erogeneous reliability. Additionally, our current extension for long-form generation involves com-
putationally intensive processes due to its complexity. Reducing these computational costs while
preserving effectiveness will be a crucial step for future improvements.

                         Query: Who is Geoffrey Hinton?               : Fact    : Misinformation

                      Geoffrey         Geoffrey Hinton was
                      Hinton, born                             Q. Who is                                                          Answer Selection by
                                       born in 1945.
                      1945, is a                               credited                                                         Weighted Majority Voting
                      British-         He is a British-        with being a
                                       Canadian computer                                             A1. computer scientist
                      Canadian                                 pioneer in                                                       computer scientist: 1.4
                      computer         scientist.              the                                                              Mathematician: 0.4
                                                                                                     A2. 1945
                 𝑺𝟏   scientist,                               development
                      best known as    He is one of the        of deep                               A3. British-canadian       1947: 1.0
                      one of the       pioneering figures      learning?                                                        1945: 0.8
                                                                                                                  …


                      pioneering       in artificial           Q. What is
LLM Generation


                      figures in       intelligence (AI).      Geoffrey                                     𝑣1 = 0.8            British-canadian: 0.8
                      artificial                               Hinton's                                                         Italian: 0.6
                      intelligence     He is one of the        profession?                                                      German: 0.4
                                       pioneering figures
                                                                    …


                      (AI) and deep
                                                                                                                                             …


                      learning.        in deep learning.
                                                                                 Q1. What is
                                                                                 Geoffrey
                      Born on 1947,    Geoffrey Hinton was                       Hinton's
                                                               Q. When did
                      Geoffrey         born in 1947.                             profession?                                     computer scientist
                                                               Geoffrey
                      Hinton is a                                                Q2. When did        A1. computer scientist
                                       Geoffrey Hinton is      Hinton come
                      Italian                                                    Geoffrey                                        1947
                                       an Italian computer     into this
                      computer                                                   Hinton come         A2. 1947
                                       scientist.              world?                                                            British-canadian
                      scientist,                                                 into this
                 𝑺𝟐                                            Q. Where is
                                                                                 world?              A3. Italian
                                                                                                                                             …


                      recognized as    Geoffrey Hinton is      Geoffrey
                                                                                 Q3. What is
                                                                                                                  …


                      a founding       recognized as a         Hinton from?
                      figure in the    founding figure in                        Geoffrey
                                                                    …


                                                                                 Hinton's                   𝑣2 = 0.6
                      fields of        the fields of deep
                                                                                 nationality?                                    Geoffrey Hinton is a
                      deep learning.   learning.                                                                                 British-Canadian
                                                                                       …


                                                               Q. What is
                                                                                                                                 computer scientist,
                                                               Geoffrey         A Set of Queries     A1. mathematician           born in 1947. He is a
                                       Geoffrey Hinton was     Hinton's
                      Geoffrey                                                                                                   pioneering figure in
                                       born in 1947.           nationality?                          A2. 1947
                      Hinton, born                                                                                               the development of
                                                               Q. What type
                                       Geoffrey Hinton is                                                                        deep learning, a key
                      on 1947, is a                            of expert is                          A3. German
                                       a mathematician.                                                                          field in artificial
                      German                                   Geoffrey
                                                                                                                  …


                 𝑺𝟑   mathematician.   Geoffrey Hinton is      Hinton?
                                                                                                                                 intelligence. ...
                                       German.                                                              𝑣3 = 0.4
                                                                    …


                 LLM’s Responses with                                                                                                   Final Answer
                 Retrieved Documents Factoid Decomposition   Query Generation                      Answers for Each Questions            Generation


                             Figure 26: Overview of extension of RA-RAG for long-form generation


                                                                                32
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


K    P ROMPTS FOR LONG - FORM GENERATION
We provide the three prompts used in factoid decomposition, query generation, and final answer
generation for the long-form generation pipeline.


    Prompt: Please list the specific factual propositions found in the given context as much as possible.
    Include every factual claim without omissions, ensuring each proposition contains only one claim.
    Provide each claim as a separate sentence, with each sentence beginning on a new line and using a
    hyphen (-) as the bullet point.


                         Figure 27: The prompt used in factoid decomposition.


    Prompt: Generate a list of three questions, that might have generated the sentence in the context of
    the preceding original text. Please do not use specific facts that appear in the follow-up sentence and
    your internal knowledge when formulating the question. Make the questions diverse. Avoid yes-no
    questions. The questions should be a closed-ended question that the answer is short, e.g., name, place,
    or thing. Use the format “1. question”.


                            Figure 28: The prompt used in query generation.


    Prompt: Please generate a concise biography of Geoffrey Hinton using the following questions and
    answers.


                            Figure 29: The prompt used in query generation.


                                                      33
