Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


ATTRIBUTE - BASED V ISUAL R EPROGRAMMING
FOR V ISION -L ANGUAGE M ODELS

  Chengyi Cai1 Zesheng Ye1 Lei Feng2,3 Jianzhong Qi1 Feng Liu1вҲ—
 1
  The University of Melbourne 2 Southeast University 3 Idealism Technology (Beijing)
 {chengyi.cai1,zesheng.ye,jianzhong.qi}@unimelb.edu.au
 lfengqaq@gmail.com fengliu.ml@gmail.com



                                               A BSTRACT

             Visual reprogramming (VR) reuses pre-trained vision models for downstream im-
             age classification tasks by adding trainable noise patterns to inputs. When applied
             to vision-language models (e.g., CLIP), existing VR approaches follow the same
             pipeline used in vision models (e.g., ResNet, ViT), where ground-truth class la-
             bels are inserted into fixed text templates to guide the optimization of VR pat-
             terns. This label-based approach, however, overlooks the rich information and
             diverse attribute-guided textual representations that CLIP can exploit, which may
             lead to the misclassification of samples. In this paper, we propose Attribute-based
             Visual Reprogramming (AttrVR) for CLIP, utilizing descriptive attributes (De-
             sAttrs) and distinctive attributes (DistAttrs), which respectively represent com-
             mon and unique feature descriptions for different classes. Besides, as images of
             the same class may reflect different attributes after VR, AttrVR iteratively refines
             patterns using the k-nearest DesAttrs and DistAttrs for each image sample, en-
             abling more dynamic and sample-specific optimization. Theoretically, AttrVR is
             shown to reduce intra-class variance and increase inter-class separation. Empiri-
             cally, it achieves superior performance in 12 downstream tasks for both ViT-based
             and ResNet-based CLIP. The success of AttrVR facilitates more effective integra-
             tion of VR from unimodal vision models into vision-language models. Our code
             is available at https://github.com/tmlr-group/AttrVR.


1        I NTRODUCTION
Recent studies (Xu et al., 2024; Chen et al., 2024; Wang et al., 2024) have demonstrated that down-
stream tasks can be efficiently addressed by repurposing pre-trained models from data-rich domains.
For repurposing pre-trained image classifiers with a fixed label space (e.g., pre-trained ResNet (He
et al., 2016), ViT (Dosovitskiy, 2020)), visual reprogramming (VR) (Cai et al., 2024b; Chen et al.,
2023; Chen, 2024), also known as adversarial reprogramming (Tsai et al., 2020; Elsayed et al.,
2019), is a model-agnostic technique that adjusts the input space while preserving the original mod-
els. VR (full problem setup detailed in Appendix A.1) trains additive noise patterns on images using
downstream samples and their corresponding labels. Recently, VR has been extended to vision-
language models (VLMs), such as CLIP (Radford et al., 2021), for downstream image classifica-
tion. Existing implementations of VR for CLIP (Oh et al., 2023; Bahng et al., 2022) also follow the
pipeline of vision models (i.e, image classifiers), relying on template-prompted ground-truth labels
(e.g., вҖҳThis is a photo of [label]вҖҷ) to train the noise patterns.
However, VLMs are intrinsically different from unimodal vision classifiers in their capability to
align attribute descriptions with image embeddings. Using label-based VR methods might fail to
fully leverage such capability. Besides, similar syntactic structures in template-prompted ground-
truth labels imply approximate text embeddings, leading to misclassifications of samples. Fig-
ure 1(a) shows the t-SNE (Van der Maaten & Hinton, 2008) embedding visualization results (the up-
per plot) of images with VR patterns (the lower plot) learned by template-prompted labels. Classes
вҖҳBritish ShorthairвҖҷ and вҖҳRussia BlueвҖҷ from the OxfordPets (Parkhi et al., 2012) dataset are used as
examples. Many samples are observed to have similar distances to the cluster centers of both classes,
     вҲ—
         Correspondence to Feng Liu (fengliu.ml@gmail.com)


                                                      1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


    (a)                                            (b)


                                                                  Average Cosine Distance (1 - Cosine Similarity) Between
                                                                        Prompted Labels and Attribute Embeddings


                                                                Examples of DesAttr                        Examples of DistAttr
    An Example of           An Example of
    British Shorthair        Russian Blue                The British Shorthair is a medium-sized      The British Shorthair has a broad and
      with Visual                                            cat with a solid, muscular build      sturdy build, with a round head and cheeks
                              with Visual
    Reprogramming           Reprogramming
                                                       The Russian Blue is a medium-sized cat      The Russian Blue has a distinctive coat of
        Patterns               Patterns
                                                           with a lean and muscular body             short, dense, and plush blue-gray fur



Figure 1: T-SNE visualization results of (a) embeddings of images with label-based (i.e., вҖҳThis
is a photo of [label]вҖҷ) VR and (b) embeddings of text DesAttrs and DistAttrs for classes вҖҳBritish
ShorthairвҖҷ and вҖҳRussia BlueвҖҷ. Examples of images with VR or attributes are shown below. Misclas-
sifications occur in images with label-based VR, whereas attributes are easily distinguishable.


making them prone to misclassification. In contrast, Figure 1(b) shows the text embeddings visu-
alization results of attributes generated by large language model (LLM) GPT-3.5 (Brown, 2020)
given the class name вҖҳBritish ShorthairвҖҷ and вҖҳRussia BlueвҖҷ, respectively. The text embeddings of
attributes exhibit greater distinguishability compared to the embeddings of images with label-based
approaches. Further, we use Descriptive attributes (DesAttrs) marked with вҖҳ.вҖҷ to denote the com-
mon characteristics of certain classes (with examples shown in the figure), and distinctive attributes
(DistAttrs) marked with вҖҳ+вҖҷ to describe features that differentiate the class from others or exhibit in-
dividual differences. An important observation is that DesAttrs primarily concentrate near the cluster
centers, while DistAttrs tend to be located away from the non-intended classes, e.g., DistAttrs of the
red cluster are away from the blue cluster, especially the bottom left ones. The same is observed at
the top-right corner of the blue cluster. This is also confirmed by the cosine distance: Eembeddings
of DistAttrs are farther away from the prompted labels compared with DesAttrs (Figure 1(b)).
Such observations suggest that guiding VR training with DesAttrs and DistAttrs could improve
classification accuracy compared with template-prompted ground-truth labels. In Section 4, we for-
malize DesAttrs and DistAttrs (Definitions 2 and 3) and propose Attribute-based Visual Reprogram-
ming (AttrVR), which harnesses the attribute-querying ability of LLMs to describe DesAttrs and
DistAttrs, capturing multiple common and unique features for each downstream class. Moreover, as
images of the same class may reflect different attributes with evolving VR patterns, AttrVR queries
the k-nearest DesAttrs and DistAttrs for individual image samples at each training epoch. By itera-
tively updating the VR patterns with sample-specific attributes, AttrVR fosters more context-aware
image-attribute alignment and mitigates the ambiguity caused by fixed template-prompted labels.
In Section 5, we further establish that guiding the representation learning with DesAttrs and DistAt-
trs reduces intra-class variation and increases inter-class separation of image representations. This
yields a more discriminative embedding space, thereby facilitating classification performance.
Experiments conducted on 12 widely-used benchmarks demonstrate the effectiveness of AttrVR
in Section 6. AttrVR consistently outperforms other VR methods when using different encoder
backbones or fewer training samples. Visualizations of the embedding space and individual sam-
ples with their top-matched attributes also substantiate the efficacy of AttrVR. Additional ablation,
hyper-parameter (see Section 6) and aggregation studies (see Appendix C.3) further examine the
contributions of different components within AttrVR.
Overall, both theoretical analysis and experimental results demonstrate that AttrVR has a clear ad-
vantage over label-based VR when applying CLIP to downstream classification tasks. The introduc-
tion of AttrVR represents a meaningful step towards adapting VR from repurposing single-modal
pre-trained models with predefined label space to multimodal models (i.e., VLMs) for classification.


                                                   2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


2   R ELATED W ORKS
Prompting in Classification. Prompt learning (Jia et al., 2022; Bahng et al., 2022; Oh et al., 2023)
enables efficient adaptation of large pre-trained models to specific downstream tasks without fully
finetuning the original models. Prompts can be trainable parameters integrated into different regions
of pre-trained models. For vision models like ViT (Dosovitskiy, 2020), VPT (Jia et al., 2022) incor-
porates prompts in conjunction with the embeddings of input patches in each layer. EEVPT (Han
et al., 2023) and TransHP (Wang et al., 2023) improve VPT by adding prompts within self-attention
layers or learning prompt tokens for encoding coarse image categories.
For VLMs such as CLIP (Radford et al., 2021), prompt learning methods are typically based on
few-shot samples from downstream tasks. CoOP (Zhou et al., 2022b) optimizes the text prompts
focusing on the text encoder part of CLIP, while CoCoOP (Zhou et al., 2022a) further improves it
by conditioning text prompts on input images. Beyond text prompts, MaPLe (Khattak et al., 2023)
develops layer-specific mapping functions to connect visual and text prompts. PromptKD (Li et al.,
2024b) appends a projection to the image encoder and employs knowledge distillation to train the
prompts.
Model Reprogramming and Input VR. In contrast to prompting methods that introduce param-
eters within the model, model reprogramming (Chen, 2024) modifies the input and output spaces
of downstream tasks. Therefore, it does not require meticulous design of parameter placement and
is compatible with any model architecture. It has been applied in repurposing language (Ham-
bardzumyan et al., 2021; Vinod et al., 2020), graph (Jing et al., 2023), vision (Tsai et al., 2020; Chen
et al., 2023; Cai et al., 2024a) and acoustic models (Yang et al., 2021; 2023a; Hung et al., 2023).
Input VR refers to methods that add trainable noise patterns to images to repurpose pre-trained mod-
els, being model-agnostic and preserving the original model parameters. The differences between
input VR, visual prompting and finetuning are outlined in Appendix A.1. Recent work on unimodal
vision classifiers adds trainable noise that overlays resized images (Cai et al., 2024b) or pads around
(Elsayed et al., 2019; Tsai et al., 2020; Chen et al., 2023) images, and then optimizes noise patterns
using ground-truth labels. When applying VR to VLMs (Chen et al., 2023; Bahng et al., 2022; Oh
et al., 2023), template-prompted ground-truth labels are used to train the noise patterns.
Visual Attribute Query. Visual Attribute Query (Pratt et al., 2023) refers to querying an LLM to
obtain the corresponding visual features given downstream task labels. Current studies improve the
zero-shot generalization performance (Pratt et al., 2023; Menon & Vondrick, 2023; Li et al., 2024a)
and machine learning interpretability (Yang et al., 2023b; Yan et al., 2023) for VLMs.
Pratt et al. (2023) and Menon & Vondrick (2023) utilize GPT-3 (Brown, 2020) to generate descrip-
tions of downstream task labels, thereby enhancing zero-shot classification accuracy. LaBo (Yang
et al., 2023b) extends this approach by generating thousands of candidate concepts and constructing
a class-concept weight matrix. To address the impact of redundancy in attribute descriptions, Yan
et al. (2023) learn a concise set of attributes, Tian et al. (2024) introduce attribute sampling and
proposes class-agnostic negative prompts, while WCA (Li et al., 2024a) calculates the similarity
between descriptions and local visual regions.

3   P RELIMINARIES
CLIP-based Classification. CLIP (Radford et al., 2021) is a pre-trained VLM with an image en-
coder fimg : X S вҶ’ Z and a text encoder ftxt : V вҶ’ Z, where X S вҠҶ RdS is a dS -dimensional
image space, and V is the text space. These encoders map an image X S вҲҲ X S and a text description
V вҲҲ V, into a shared embedding space Z вҠҶ Rd . Then, the embedding similarity score between the
image and the text description is calculated as
          simCLIP (X S , V ) = cos (Zimg , Ztxt ) /П„, with Zimg = fimg (X S ), and Ztxt = ftxt (V ),   (1)

where cos(В·, В·) denotes cosine similarity and П„ is a temperature parameter. Upon pre-training, CLIP
can align semantically similar image-text pairs by maximizing their embedding similarity scores.
When it comes to a downstream classification task defined over X T Г— Y T , where X T вҠҶ RdT
is a dT -dimensional image space and Y T is the label space of the downstream task, CLIP em-
ploys label prompting. For example, given the downstream label variable Y T вҲҲ Y T , TP(Y T ) вүң


                                                      3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


вҖңThis is a photo ofвҖқ вҲҘ Y T , where вҲҘ denotes concatenation, is commonly used to map a label y T вҲҲ
Y T into a text description. Following, CLIP leverages the pre-trained visual-text alignment ca-
pability and assigns a label to X T by selecting the most similar TP(Y T = y T ) in the embed-
ding space Z. Then, for a shape-compatible image xT , i.e., dT = dS , label prediction follows
arg maxY T вҲҲY T pCLIP (Y T | X T ) with a normalized conditional probability:
                                                                 exp simCLIP (xT , TP(y T ))

                              T     T       T       T
                   pCLIP (Y       =y |X =x )= P                                       T       вҖІ
                                                                                                  .               (2)
                                                              y вҖІ вҲҲY T exp (simCLIP (x , TP(y )))
Input VR for CLIP-based Classification. Input VR (Cai et al., 2024b) extends the applicability
of frozen pre-trained models (e.g., CLIP) to downstream tasks with mismatched input shape, i.e.,
dT Мё= dS . It introduces a learnable input transform fin : RdT вҶ’ RdS defined as fin (X T |Оҙ) вүң
Pad(X T ) + Оҙ вҠҷ M , where Pad(В·) zero-pads around the input image and Оҙ вҲҲ RdS are trainable
parameters. M is a binary mask with вҖҳ0вҖҷs in the area where X T is located and вҖҳ1вҖҷs in the padding
area. The Hadamard product вҠҷ ensures that Оҙ only affects the padded regions. Thus, the transformed
image is given by:
                                                XМғ T = fin (X T |Оҙ) вҲҲ RdS ,                                       (3)

which allows CLIP to process inputs from X T by embedding them in X S with learned contextual
information. With TP(Y T ) that maps class label to a text description, the VR-adapted CLIP pre-
diction pvr (Y T |X T ) вҲқ exp(simCLIP (XМғ T , TP(Y T )|Оҙ)) essentially follows Eq. (2) but is adapted
                                                                                                      i.i.d
for transformed input images. Given a downstream dataset DT = {(xT      T N
                                                                   i , yi )}i=1 вҲј X
                                                                                     T
                                                                                       Г— Y T,
                     T
where N = n Г— |Y | with n samples per class, the optimization of VR pattern Оҙ is driven by the
cross-entropy loss, such that
                                            1 XN h                               i
                         Оҙ вҲ— = arg min вҲ’           log pvr (Y T = yiT |X T = xT
                                                                              i ) .                               (4)
                                        Оҙ   N  i=1
                       T                                                                                      T
Limitation of TP(Y ). Eq. (4) implies that the optimization of Оҙ exclusively relies on TP(Y ) for
supervision. However, as two labels yp , yq вҲҲ Y T share similar syntactic structures in their fixed
template-based TP(Y T = yp ) and TP(Y T = yq ), the image-class embedding similarity scores,
simCLIP (xМғT , TP(yp )) and simCLIP (xМғT , TP(yq )), may differ only slightly for the same input xT .
This marginal gap in similarity scores heightens the misclassification risks, particularly in few-shot
settings, where the small sample size exacerbates the challenge of resolving ambiguities between
closely related text prompts. Figure 1(a) illustrates this concern, highlighting the potential classifi-
cation errors due to the limited discriminative power of the text prompts.

4    ATTRIBUTE - BASED V ISUAL R EPROGRAMMING
Describing Classes with Attributes. The aforementioned limitation calls for more informative and
discriminative information of label beyond TP(Y T ). Motivated by Figure 1(b), we leverage visual
attributes (Ferrari & Zisserman, 2007) to capture more fine-grained visual features specific to each
class than label-only representations. We thus propose attribute-based VR (AttrVR) that substitutes
template-prompted ground-truth labels with descriptive and distinctive attributes, based on CLIPвҖҷs
pre-trained visual-text alignment capability. AttrVR aligns image representations with fine-grained
attributes-based representations of classes that more effectively distinguish different classes than
template-prompted labels. We begin by formalizing relevant concepts used in AttrVR.
Definition 1 (Attributes). Let X be the input space of images, Y be the set of class labels, and A
be the universal set of all possible attributes (e.g., tall plant, red color). Define a mapping fm from
a class label y to a set of attributes A(y). For each attribute a вҲҲ A, define an indicator function
fa : X вҶ’ {0, 1}, such that fa (x) = 1 if attribute a is identified in input x based on a specified
similarity criterion1 , and 0 otherwise. Then, for any class y вҲҲ Y, the set of attributes A(y) is
connected to images by the features that characterize samples belonging to that class.
To further characterize the attributes most relevant for class description and distinction, we introduce
two subsets from A(y), namely descriptive attributes (DesAttrs) and distinctive attributes (DistAt-
trs). DesAttrs refer to the most common visual features across multiple samples belonging to the
same class, describing the class by capturing its general characteristics.
   1
     The criterion can vary based on different contexts (Kumar et al., 2011; Pham et al., 2021). In this study, we
focus on CLIP similarity in the embedding space Z induced by VLM, which will be elaborated on in Section 4.


                                                            4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


(a) Label-based Visual Reprogramming      Epoch рқ‘–     Epoch рқ‘– + 1           (b) Attribute-based Visual Reprogramming      Epoch рқ‘–   Epoch рқ‘– + 1
                                          Cosine       Cosine


                               Encoder
                                         Similarity   Similarity


                                Image


                                                                                                                Encoder
                                                                                                                 Image
   Image     :                                                                 Image                                                              вҖҰ
                                                                                          :
  Input VR                                                                   Input VR
                                                                    вҖҰ

   Text                                                                     Descriptive British Shorthairs
                   This is a                                                            : have a round face


                               Encoder


                                                                                                                Encoder
  Prompt                                                                    Attributes


                                Text
                                                                                                вҖҰвҖҰ                                                вҖҰ


                                                                                                                 Text
              :    photo of
   Class           [British                                                  Distinctive   British Shorthairs
   Labels         Shorthair]                                                             : have full cheeks
                                                                             Attributes           вҖҰвҖҰ
                               CLIP                                                                             CLIP


Figure 2: The comparison of (a) previous label-based VR and (b) our attribute-based VR. Previous
VR methods use fixed template-prompted ground-truth labels for all samples to optimize the VR
pattern Оҙ (using Eq. (2) and Eq. (3)), whereas our method iteratively selects k nearest DesAttrs and
DistAttrs for individual samples in each epoch to optimize the VR pattern Оҙ (using Eq. (9)).


Definition 2 (Descriptive Attributes). For a class y вҲҲ Y and a set cardinality m вҲҲ N+ , DesAttrs
are defined as the m most frequently identified attributes from the samples within class y,
             Ades (y) вүң {ai вҲҲ A(y) | Uy (ai ) вүҘ Uy (a), вҲҖi вҲҲ {1, . . . , m}, вҲҖa вҲҲ A(y) \ {a1 , . . . , ai }} ,                                    (5)
                                                                                                 P
where Xy denotes the set of all images in class y, and Uy (a) = xвҲҲXy fa (x)/|Xy | is the frequency
of attribute a вҲҲ A in class y вҲҲ Y. Uy (a) can be used to rank the m highest-frequency attributes.

In contrast, DistAttrs are visual features that distinguish a class from other classes, appearing in the
class while being the least common in the other classes.
Definition 3 (Distinctive Attributes). For a class y вҲҲ Y and a set cardinality m вҲҲ N+ , DistAttrs
are defined as the m attributes that are most uniquely associated with class y,
             Adist (y) вүң {ai вҲҲ A(y) | Vy (ai ) вүҘ Vy (a), вҲҖi вҲҲ {1, . . . , m}, вҲҖa вҲҲ A(y) \ {a1 , . . . , ai }} ,                                   (6)
                               P           P
where Vy (a) = 1вҲ’( yвҖІ вҲҲY\{y} xвҲҲXyвҖІ fa (x)/(|X |вҲ’|Xy |)) calculates the presence of an attribute
a вҲҲ A in samples of class y вҲҲ Y against its presence in all other classes y вҖІ вҲҲ Y \ {y}.

Intuitively, describing Ades (y) вҲӘ Adist (y) leads to more information of y than relying on TP(y).
Method Overview. For downstream image classification, AttrVR follows the general input VR
pipeline by optimizing the padded VR noise pattern Оҙ over a dataset DT = {(xT           T N
                                                                                   i , yi )}i=1 drawn
        T     T
from X Г— Y , as introduced in Section 3. Yet, it diverges from label-based VR approaches in two
key strategies (see Figure 2). First, for each label y T вҲҲ Y T , AttrVR replaces previously used text
prompts TP(Y T = y T ), adopts DesAttrs (Definition 2) and DistAttrs (Definition 3) that describe
common and unique attributes of y T as the supervision signal. Second, AttrVR employs a k-nearest
neighbor iterative updating strategy to ensure that attribute assignments are continuously refined,
allowing the most relevant attributes for each sample to adapt dynamically as the trainable noise Оҙ
evolves across epochs. The detailed strategies are elaborated on below.
Generating Attributes with LLMs. The concept of attributes (Definition 1) is built upon fm that
maps class labels to subsets of A. However, fm is intractable due to the exponential growth of
the possible number of attributes, making direct computation and storage of all possible attribute
combinations impractical. Moreover, manually defining attributes for each class is also infeasible in
complex domains where attributes may not be easily enumerated or predefined. To this end, we use
powerful LLMs with visual attribute query capabilities (Pratt et al., 2023), denoted by fLLM (Y T ),
as a tractable surrogate for implementing fm (Y T ). LLMs can infer relevant attributes for any class
with context-driven queries, bypassing the need to compute the entire power set of A вҖ“ they generate
Ades (Y T = y T ) and Adist (Y T = y T ) according to different downstream tasks and class labels.
Concretely, we adopt GPT-3.5 (Brown, 2020) to generate Ades (y T ) and Adist (y T ) each containing
m attributes, by prompting the LLM with task-specific and class-specific queries, formulated as
                 AМғdes (y T ) = fLLM (y T |[des prompt]), AМғdist (y T ) = fLLM (y T |[dist prompt]).                                              (7)

As a result, we collect 2m attributes for each class y T вҲҲ Y T , which will be used for optimizing Оҙ.
The details of attribute generation (prompts, settings, etc.) are in Appendix A.2.1.


                                                                        5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


k-nearest Iterative Updating Strategy. Recall that CLIP-based image classification is performed
upon ranking the image-text embedding similarity scores. However, the most similar attribute de-
scriptions even from the same attribute set may vary between: (1) different images of the same
class, i.e., inconsistencies of visual features among different samples, and (2) the same image with
evolving VR patterns, i.e., changes in Оҙ during training, leading to potential misalignment between
image and relevant attributes. In response, we propose k-nearest neighbor attribute query to reduce
the sensitivity to individual attributes for addressing (1) and employ an iterative updating strategy
to adapt to changing VR patterns as a workaround for (2).
Specifically, consider the training dataset DT of the downstream task. For each downstream image
xT                                         T
  i , we first obtain its transformation xМғi (cf. Eq. (3)). Then, we identify sample-specific k-nearest
DesAttrs for xi by computing the CLIP embedding similarity between xМғT
                 T
                                                                               i and all attributes from
the LLM-generated DesAttrs AМғdes (y T ), ranked in descending order of similarity, such that
          AМғkdes (xT    T (e)
                   i , y |Оҙ   ) = {aj }kj=1 : simCLIP (xTi , aj |Оҙ (e) ) > simCLIP (xTi , a|Оҙ (e) ),
                                                                                                                        (8)
                                                                        вҲҖa вҲҲ AМғdes (y T ) \ {a1 , . . . , ajвҲ’1 }.

Here, Оҙ (e) refers to the VR pattern in the training epoch e. Similarly, the sample-specific k-nearest
DistAttrs AМғkdist (xT    T (e)
                    i , y |Оҙ   ) can be obtained in the same manner.
Then, the attribute-based embedding similarity score between xTi and вҲҖy
                                                                        T
                                                                          вҲҲ Y T , which incor-
porates its both sample-specific AМғdes вүң AМғdes (xi , y |Оҙ ) and AМғdist вүң AМғkdist (xT
                                   k       k     T T (e)          k                     T (e)
                                                                                   i , y |Оҙ   ), is
computed by a weighted aggregation:
                                  О» X                            1вҲ’О»               X                         вҖІ (e)
       simAttr (xT    T (e)
                 i , y |Оҙ   )=         simCLIP (xМғT
                                                  i , a|Оҙ
                                                          (e)
                                                              )+                             simCLIP (xМғT
                                                                                                        i , a |Оҙ   ),   (9)
                                  k  k
                                                                  k
                                     aвҲҲAМғdes                                    aвҖІ вҲҲAМғk
                                                                                      dist


where О» вҲҲ [0, 1] balances the contribution of DesAttrs and DistAttrs. Then, the predictive proba-
bility pvr (Y T = yiT |X T = xT                                  T
                              i ) is determined for each sample xi with a softmax(В·) resembling
Eq. (2), but now with a new attribute-based embedding similarity score simAttr (xT    T (e)
                                                                                 i , y |Оҙ   ) eval-
uated at each epoch e. We iteratively update the VR pattern, optimizing parameters Оҙ (e+1) вҶҗ
            (e)
Оҙ (e) вҲ’ ОұвҲҮОҙ with respect to the cross-entropy loss (cf. Eq. (4)) under learning rate Оұ, over the
training dataset DT .

Algorithm 1 Training Pipeline of AttrVR                                      Comparison with Label-based VR.
                                                                             Besides using easily distinguish-
 1: Input: Few-shot training data D T = {(xT                  T N
                                                         i , yi )}i=1 ,      able attributes that replace previous
    hyper-parameters k, О», learning rate Оұ, epoch number                     template-prompted labels with sim-
    E, and pre-trained CLIP model                                            ilar syntactic structures to facilitate
 2: Output: Trained VR pattern Оҙ (E) applying AttrVR                         classification, AttrVR also aligns with
 3: # Step 1: Calculate and Store Attribute Embeddings                       the evolving nature of Оҙ. In contrast
 4: for y вҲҲ Y T do                                                           to label-based VR that aligns images
 5:    Obtain AМғdes (y) and AМғdist (y) by Eq. (7)                            of the same class with a fixed TP(y T ),
 6:    Get Ztxt (a) for вҲҖa вҲҲ AМғdes (y) вҲӘ AМғdist (y)                          AttrVR re-queries AМғkdes (xTi , y T |Оҙ (e) )
 7: end for                                                                  and AМғkdist (xTi , y T |Оҙ (e) ) for each
 8: # Step 2: Begin Training the VR Pattern                                  image at every epoch.            This en-
 9: Initialize Оҙ (0) вҶҗ {0}dS                                                 ables AttrVR to iteratively refine
10: for e = 0 to E вҲ’ 1 do                                                    image-attribute alignment, yielding
11:    for i = 1 to N do                                                     refined simAttr (xT          T (e)
                                                                                                    i , y |Оҙ    ) over
12:        Compute AМғkdes (xTi , y|Оҙ
                                     (e)
                                         ), AМғkdist (xT
                                                      i , y|Оҙ
                                                              (e)
                                                                  ) by       epochs. In other words, while both
           Eq. (8) with Stored Embeddings for вҲҖy вҲҲ Y T                       label-based VR and AttrVR target
13:        Compute pvr (yiT |xTi ) by Eq. (9)                                the cross-entropy objective, AttrVR
14:    end for                                                               benefits from contextually relevant
                              (e)
15:    Оҙ (e+1) вҶҗ Оҙ (e) вҲ’ ОұвҲҮОҙ # Iterative Update                              optimization with sample-specific
16: end for                                                                  k-nearest attributes as supervision
                                                                             signals.
Training Pipeline and Efficiency. Algorithm 1 outlines the pipeline of AttrVR. We note that the
text embeddings of DesAttrs and DistAttrs are pre-computed before training, introducing negligible
computational overhead compared to label-based VR. See Appendix C.5 for details.


                                                            6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


5    U NDERSTANDING THE E FFECTS OF ATTRIBUTES

This section will justify why DesAttrs and DistAttrs would facilitate classification. The ease of
classification decision boundary depends on class separability (Lorena et al., 2019), which quantifies
how well different classes can be distinguished in the embedding space. This measure is jointly
determined by intra-class variance (i.e., the spread of embeddings within a class) and inter-class
distance (i.e., the separation of embeddings from different classes).
Definition 4 (Class Separability). Let X and Y be the input and class spaces as in Definition 1. Let
Z be the image embedding space induced by the image encoderP        Zimg : X вҶ’ Z. For each class
y вҲҲ Y, let Xy be the set of all images with label y, and let Вөy = xвҲҲXy zimg (x)/|Xy | be the mean
image embedding of class y. Then, class separability (CS) is defined as:
                      1 X 1 X                                     1       X
      CS(Y; Z) = вҲ’                       вҲҘZimg (x) вҲ’ Вөy вҲҘ2 +                         вҲҘВөy вҲ’ ВөyвҖІ вҲҘ2             ,
                     |Y| yвҲҲY |Xy | xвҲҲX                       |Y|(|Y| вҲ’ 1)      вҖІ
                                                                                     |      {z         }
                                       y                                  yМё=y
                                                                                      вҖІ
                                                                                 d(y,y )вүң inter-class distance
                             |             {z            }
                                 Tr(Пғ 2 (y))вүң intra-class variation

The value of CS(Y; Z) measures the difference of average intra-class variance, i.e., Tr(Пғ 2 (y)), and
inter-class distance, i.e., d(y, y вҖІ ), across all classes. A higher value indicates the image embeddings
are better separated in the embedding space. Thus, the goal of maximizing class separability is
equivalent to reducing intra-class variation while increasing inter-class distance.
Lemma 1. Let Ades (y) вҠҶ A(y) be the set of descriptive attributes for class y as with Definition 2.
Let ОЈA and ОЈL be the covariance matrices of the embeddings optimized with respect to Ades (y) and
y, respectively. Then, for any class y вҲҲ Y, we have Tr (ОЈA (y)) вүӨ Tr (ОЈL (y)).

Lemma 1 (details in Appendix B) shows that Ades (y) leads to reduced intra-class variances of image
embeddings Zimg (x), as the most frequently identified attributes in Xy imply that text embedding
Ztxt (a) of attributes closely align with Zimg (x) for x вҲҲ Xy . In addition, aggregating over Ades (y)
pulls Zimg (x) towards to class mean Вөy , reducing the dispersion of per-class sample embeddings.
Lemma 2. Let Adist (y) вҠҶ A(y) be the set of distinctive attributes for class y as with Definition 3.
Let dA (y, y вҖІ ) and dL (y, y вҖІ ) be в„“2 distance between mean embeddings of two classes y Мё= y вҖІ , opti-
mized with respect to Adist (y) and y. Then, for any y, y вҖІ вҲҲ Y, we have dA (y, y вҖІ ) вүҘ dL (y, y вҖІ ) if
|Adist (y)| > |Y|, which is easy to satisfy since |Y| is fixed while the size of Adist (y) is unrestricted.

Lemma 2 (details in Appendix B) implies that Adist (y) promotes inter-class separation. Adist (y)
is uniquely associated with class y and minimally present in classes y вҖІ . For samples xвҖІ вҲҲ XyвҖІ , the
similarity between Zimg (xвҖІ ) and Ztxt (a) is low for a вҲҲ Adist (y). Thus, the mean embeddings of
different classes are pushed further apart due to the minimal overlap between Adist (y) and Adist (y вҖІ ).
Corollary 1. Let ZA and ZL be the embedding spaces obtained through attribute-based and label-
based optimization. Denote the respective class separability by CS(Y; ZA ) and CS(Y; ZL ), as with
Definition 4. Then, under the conditions of Lemmas 1 and 2, it holds that CS(Y; ZA ) > CS(Y; ZL ).

Merits of attribute-based optimization inspire a practical VR solution. However, Lemmas 1 and 2 ex-
amine the effects of DesAttrs and DistAttrs in isolation, but attribute sets may overlap. Quantifying
their combined effect is challenging due to the complex non-linearity of neural network optimiza-
tion, making a careful balance between DesAttrs and DistAttrs essential for better performance.

6    E XPERIMENTS

Baselines and Benchmarks. To evaluate AttrVR, we use CLIP as the pre-trained model and conduct
experiments on 12 downstream classification tasks with 16 shots for each class following Oh et al.
(2023). These datasets encompass diverse visual domains, involving scenes, actions, textures, and
fine-grained details (see Appendix A.2.2). We include four baselines, including (1) ZS, which is the
zero-shot performance of CLIP, (2) AttrZS, which applies our DesAttrs and DistAttrs for zero-shot
classification (see Appendix A.3), and state-of-the-art VR methods for VLMs: (3) VP (Bahng et al.,
2022), which overlays VR patterns on resized images, and (4) AR (Tsai et al., 2020; Chen et al.,
2023), which pads VR patterns around images. See the implementation details in Appendix A.2.3.
Regarding hyper-parameters in AttrVR, we set k = 3 and О» = 0.5 and will discuss their impact.


                                                              7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Table 1: Accuracy comparison of different methods trained on 16-shot downstream classification
tasks, using ViT-B16-based CLIP as the pre-trained model (Mean % Вұ Std %, ours are highlighted
and the highest is in bold).
 Method    Aircraft   Caltech   Cars   DTD    ESAT   Flowers    Food     Pets    SUN    UCF       IN      Resisc    Avg.
   ZS       22.4       89.0     65.2   41.1   38.7    65.5       84.4    86.1    61.7   66.7     64.2      55.9      61.7
  AttrZS    28.5       94.1     65.1   54.3   50.8    81.6       86.5    91.6    65.6   69.3     69.3      62.2      68.2
    VP      32.1       93.5     65.5   61.4   91.2    82.5       82.3    91.0    65.8   73.8     64.2      79.1      73.5
            Вұ0.6       Вұ0.1     Вұ0.3   Вұ0.5   Вұ0.3    Вұ0.4       Вұ0.1    Вұ0.3    Вұ0.2   Вұ0.5     Вұ0.1      Вұ0.3
   AR       31.7       95.5     68.0   62.0   93.4    85.9       85.2    92.7    67.9   78.1     66.0      81.6      75.7
            Вұ0.3       Вұ0.2     Вұ0.3   Вұ0.1   Вұ0.1    Вұ0.7       Вұ0.1    Вұ0.1    Вұ0.3   Вұ0.2     Вұ0.0      Вұ0.3
  AttrVR    36.6       95.7     68.3   65.6   93.8    92.9       85.9    93.3    69.6   79.0     69.4      82.6      77.7
            Вұ0.3       Вұ0.1     Вұ0.3   Вұ0.8   Вұ0.3    Вұ0.4       Вұ0.1    Вұ0.0    Вұ0.1   Вұ0.6     Вұ0.0      Вұ0.4


Figure 3: Accuracy comparison of different VR methods trained on different shots from [1, 4, 8, 16,
32]. Pre-trained ViT-B16-based CLIP is used. The striped area indicates the error bars.


Overall Performance Comparison. Using CLIP with a ViT-B16 visual encoder as the pre-trained
model, the comparison results are shown in Table 1. It can be observed that even only using De-
sAttrs and DistAttrs for zero-shot classification already outperforms some baseline few-shot VR
methods on the Caltech, Food, and SUN datasets. This demonstrates the effectiveness of DesAttrs
and DistAttrs. However, VR methods remain necessary for datasets with significant domain differ-
ences, such as EuroSAT and DTD. AttrVR surpasses the baseline VR methods VP and AR across all
datasets, achieving an average improvement of 2% over the state-of-the-art methods across the 12
datasets. The advantages of AttrVR are particularly notable in fine-grained classification tasks with
distinct visual feature differences, such as Flowers (+7.0%), DTD (+3.6%), and Aircraft (+4.9%).
On the Food dataset, AttrVR shows slightly lower accuracy than AttrZS, which may be because the
images used by VR methods have a smaller size than those used in the zero-shot settings.
Results of Sample Efficiency. We evaluate the performances of all VR methods across sparse (1-,
4-, 8-shots) and abundant (32-shots) training settings on Flowers, Texture, and Aircraft datasets. Fig-
ure 3 shows that AttrVR maintains stronger performance across all settings than baselines, demon-
strating both resilience to data scarcity and effective use of additional samples when available.
Results on Different Backbones. We investi-                Table 2: Average accuracy of different VR meth-
gate how VR methods perform across multiple                ods on 12 datasets, using different backbones as
pre-trained backbones from the CLIP model fam-             CLIP visual encoders (Mean Accuracy %, ours
ily, ranging from ResNet50 to ViT-L14. Table               are highlighted and the highest is in bold, RN
2 presents the mean accuracy over 12 datasets,
                                                           stands for ResNet).
demonstrating that (1) all VR methods become
more effective with more powerful backbones,                            RN50    RN101   ViT-B32        ViT-B16     ViT-L14
and (2)AttrVR consistently outperforms baseline                ZS       53.4    56.1      58.2          61.7        68.7
VR methods regardless of the backbone archi-                 AttrZS     59.9    62.4      63.8          68.2        73.2
tectural scales. Detailed results and analysis for             VP       53.2    57.1      67.5          73.5        61.1
each dataset are provided in the Appendix C.1.                AR        59.9    62.3      65.5          75.7        71.9
                                                             AttrVR     64.2    66.8      69.1          77.7        75.5

Visualization Results of AttrVR. Figure 4 illustrates the results of applying the trained VR pattern
to images from the Flowers task with the label вҖҳglobe thistleвҖҷ and images from the Texture task with
the label вҖҳBandedвҖҷ. It also shows the closest DesAttrs and DistAttrs corresponding to these results.
For вҖҳglobe thistleвҖҷ, the closest DesAttr primarily describes its height and width, while the DistAttr


                                                       8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                    Descriptive    вҖҰ a plant that grows up to 3 feet tall                                                       Descriptive   вҖҰ alternating bands of different textures


                                                                                                                                    Most Matched [Attributes]
                        Most Matched [Attributes]
                                                                   and 12-24 inches wide.


Label [Globe Thistle]
                                                     Attributes                                                                                                  Attributes   that run parallel to each other.


                                                                                                                   Label [Banded]
                                                    Distinctive    вҖҰ its unique spherical shape, which                                                          Distinctive    вҖҰdifferent colors, textures, or mineral
                                                    Attributes     sets it apart from other flowers ...                                                         Attributes     composition within a material...

                                                    Descriptive   вҖҰ a tall and spiky perennial plant that                                                       Descriptive   вҖҰ alternating bands of different colors,
                                                     Attributes   typically grows to be 2-3 feet in height.                                                      Attributes   patterns, or lines.
                                                    Distinctive   вҖҰ numerous globe-shaped flower heads,                                                         Distinctive   вҖҰ different colors or textures running
                                                    Attributes    each with spiky blue or purple petals.                                                        Attributes    horizontally, vertically, or diagonally ...



Figure 4: Visualization of images with AttrVR patterns, and their nearest DesAttrs and DistAttrs,
using the ViT-B16-based CLIP as the pre-trained model. Two images labeled вҖҳGlobe ThistleвҖҷ from
вҖҳFlowersвҖҷ and two labeled вҖҳBandedвҖҷ from вҖҳTextureвҖҷ are chosen as examples (more in Appendix C.2).


                                                                      ZS                                      VP                                                 AR                               AttrVR


Figure 5: T-SNE visualization results of image embeddings from seven classes in the Flowers task,
utilizing the ViT-B16-based CLIP as the pre-trained model. In the first plot, embeddings of zero-
shot images are indicated with ZS. The following three plots display embeddings of images with VR
patterns, categorized by different training methods and marked as VP, AR, and AttrVR, respectively.

highlights features that differentiate it from other flowers, such as its spherical shape. Different
samples of вҖҳglobe thistleвҖҷ may have different closest DistAttrs; for instance, the image with blue-
violet petals will be closest to a DistAttr with a similar description. Similarly, for images with the
вҖҳBandedвҖҷ label, the DesAttrs mainly describes the common feature of alternating textures, while the
DistAttrs capture unique characteristics of the class or individuals, such as вҖҳmineral compositionвҖҷ or
вҖҳdiagonal texturesвҖҷ shown in Figure 4.
Visualization Results of Embedding Space. Figure 5 plots the 2D t-SNE embeddings (Van der
Maaten & Hinton, 2008) of classifying samples from the Flowers task under input VR methods,
with different colors representing different categories. It can be observed that in the zero-shot (ZS)
scenario, some classes, such as вҖҳmoon orchidвҖҷ (marked with pink dots), are scattered and difficult
to classify. However, label-based VR methods, such as VP and AR, help to clarify the boundaries
of these classes, making the samples easier to distinguish. Despite this improvement, some classes,
like вҖҳcanterbury bellsвҖҷ (marked with green dots) and вҖҳsweet peaвҖҷ (marked with red dots) still remain
relatively indistinguishable. After applying our AttrVR, the embeddings of various categories cluster
more distinctly in the 2D visualization plane, resulting in clearer and more separable distributions.
Ablation Studies. Table 3 presents the ablation studies, and sequentially details: (1) w/o VR: the re-
sults of AttrVR without training the input VR, where only zero-padded images from the downstream
task are classified by our DesAttrs and DistAttrs, along with k-nearest neighbor attribute selection
for zero-shot results; (2) w/o DesAttrs: the results of training AttrVR utilizing only DistAttrs, ex-
cluding DesAttrs; (3) w/o DistAttrs: the results of training AttrVR utilizing only DesAttrs, excluding
DistAttrs; (4) w/o both Attrs: the results without both attributes, which correspond to the results of
the label-based VR approach; and (5) Ours: the results using our proposed method, AttrVR.
In the absence of training VR patterns, performance on downstream tasks can be unsatisfactory
when there is a significant domain shift from the pre-trained CLIP modelвҖҷs domain. For instance,
low accuracy is observed when the downstream tasks involve remote sensing datasets such as ESAT
or Resisc, or texture datasets like DTD. Thus, training VR patterns is crucial for effectively adapting
the pre-trained model to unfamiliar domains.
In the absence of DesAttrs, the method relies only on unique attributes during training, emphasizing
class differences in the downstream task. This approach works well when the downstream domain
closely matches the pre-trained model, as in broad classification tasks like Caltech. However, for
tasks with significant domain shifts and few classes, such as the 10-class remote sensing dataset
ESAT, it may miss some overall attributes relevant to certain classes, resulting in lower performance.


                                                                                                              9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Table 3: Ablation studies of AttrVR, using ViT-B16-based CLIP as the pre-trained model (Mean %
Вұ Std %, ours are highlighted and the highest is in bold).
      Method         Aircraft   Caltech   Cars   DTD    ESAT    Flowers    Food   Pets   SUN    UCF    IN     Resisc   Avg.
      w/o VR          25.4       94.1     62.3   54.3   48.5        80.8   84.8   91.6   64.3   68.4   68.0   61.2     67.0
                      Вұ0.4       Вұ0.1     Вұ0.1   Вұ0.1   Вұ0.3        Вұ0.3   Вұ0.1   Вұ0.1   Вұ0.0   Вұ0.3   Вұ0.1   Вұ0.1
    w/o DesAttrs      36.1       95.9     68.2   64.8   93.1        92.6   85.8   93.3   69.4   78.0   69.3   81.9     77.4
                      Вұ0.4       Вұ0.1     Вұ0.1   Вұ0.4   Вұ0.2        Вұ0.6   Вұ0.0   Вұ0.1   Вұ0.0   Вұ0.4   Вұ0.1   Вұ0.6
    w/o DistAttrs     35.9       95.6     68.2   64.4   93.8        92.4   85.7   93.0   67.7   78.6   68.9   81.8     77.2
                      Вұ0.3       Вұ0.1     Вұ0.2   Вұ1.1   Вұ0.3        Вұ0.1   Вұ0.0   Вұ0.2   Вұ0.2   Вұ0.5   Вұ0.0   Вұ0.1
    w/o both Attrs    31.7       95.5     68.0   62.0   93.4        85.9   85.2   92.7   67.9   78.1   66.0   81.6     75.7
                      Вұ0.3       Вұ0.2     Вұ0.3   Вұ0.1   Вұ0.1        Вұ0.7   Вұ0.1   Вұ0.1   Вұ0.3   Вұ0.2   Вұ0.0   Вұ0.3
        Ours          36.6       95.7     68.3   65.6   93.8        92.9   85.9   93.3   69.6   79.0   69.4   82.6     77.7
                      Вұ0.3       Вұ0.1     Вұ0.3   Вұ0.8   Вұ0.3        Вұ0.4   Вұ0.1   Вұ0.0   Вұ0.1   Вұ0.6   Вұ0.0   Вұ0.4


Figure 6: Performance comparison applying different hyper-parameters. The first row shows the
impact weight О» that balances DesAttrs and DistAttrs. The second row shows the impact of k, being
the number of nearest attributes selected for classification. Pre-trained ViT-B16-based CLIP is used.

In the absence of DistAttrs, the method may overlook some attributes crucial for differentiating
between categories in the downstream task. For datasets with many hard-to-differentiate classes,
such as action classification datasets like UCF or texture classification datasets like DTD, not using
DistAttrs can negatively impact classification performance. Besides, without both attributes, AttrVR
degenerates into label-based VR, forfeiting its advantages in fine-grained classification tasks.
Hyper-parameter Analyses. Figure 6 illustrates the impact of the hyper-parameters О» and k. The
weight О» is used to balance the contributions of DesAttrs and DistAttrs. For different tasks, the
optimal О» varies, with accuracy generally rising and then dropping as О» increases, indicating a
moderate О» is needed to balance DesAttrs and DistAttrs. For convenience, we set О» = 0.5 for all.
The parameter k represents the number of nearest attributes selected for classification; a value that
is too small may result in unstable classification, while a value that is too large may lead to attribute
redundancy. We chose k = 3 for all datasets in this paper (see Appendix C.6 for its impact).
More Experiments. Appendix C.3 includes the aggregation studies of the k-nearest attributes se-
lection. Appendix C.4 shows that label-based VR patterns are not compatible with AttrVR patterns.
Appendix C.7, C.9 includes results of generating attributes with other LLMs or VLMs, and Ap-
pendix C.8 demonstrates how AttrVR handles cases when generated attributes are of low quality.

7      C ONCLUSION
We introduce AttrVR, which extends unimodal Visual Reprogramming to VLMs (e.g., CLIP) for
downstream classification tasks, specifically targeting the CLIPвҖҷs inherent ability to align visual and
textual information. Instead of using template-prompted labels, AttrVR optimizes through label-
based attributes, making direct use of CLIPвҖҷs cross-modal alignment properties. Both theoretical
analysis and experimental results show that AttrVR outperforms conventional label-based VR. The
visualization results, along with ablation, aggregation, and hyper-parameter studies, validate the
effectiveness of AttrVR in reprogramming CLIP. The introduction of AttrVR marks an advancement
in adapting VR from repurposing single-modal pre-trained models with predefined label spaces to
multimodal models.


                                                               10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
CYC, ZSY, and FL are supported by the Australian Research Council (ARC) with grant number
DE240101089, and FL is also supported by ARC with grant number LP240100101, DP230101540
and the NSF&CSIRO Responsible AI program with grant number 2303037. JZQ is supported by
ARC with grant number DP240101006. This research is also supported by The University of Mel-
bourneвҖҷs Research Computing Services and the Petascale Campus Initiative. We sincerely appreciate
the time and dedication of the reviewers in carefully reviewing our manuscript.

E THICS S TATEMENT
Since the method proposed in this paper is used to improve VR performance for downstream classi-
fication tasks with CLIP, there is no potential negative impact.

R EPRODUCIBILITY S TATEMENT
Appendix B offers clear explanations of the theoretical results in Section 5. For reproducing the
experimental results presented in Section 6, we have included a link to our anonymous downloadable
source code in the abstract. Appendix A.2.2 provides details about the open-source datasets utilized
in our experiments.

R EFERENCES
Hyojin Bahng, Ali Jahanian, Swami Sankaranarayanan, and Phillip Isola. Exploring visual prompts
  for adapting large-scale models. arXiv, 2022.
Lukas Bossard, Matthieu Guillaumin, and Luc Van Gool. Food-101вҖ“mining discriminative compo-
  nents with random forests. In ECCV, 2014.
Tom B Brown. Language models are few-shot learners. In NeurIPS, 2020.
Chengyi Cai, Zesheng Ye, Lei Feng, Jianzhong Qi, and Feng Liu. Bayesian-guided label mapping
  for visual reprogramming. In NeurIPS, 2024a.
Chengyi Cai, Zesheng Ye, Lei Feng, Jianzhong Qi, and Feng Liu. Sample-specific masks for visual
  reprogramming-based prompting. In ICML, 2024b.
Aochuan Chen, Yuguang Yao, Pin-Yu Chen, Yihua Zhang, and Sijia Liu. Understanding and im-
  proving visual prompting: A label-mapping perspective. In CVPR, 2023.
Hao Chen, Jindong Wang, Ankit Shah, Ran Tao, Hongxin Wei, Xing Xie, Masashi Sugiyama, and
  Bhiksha Raj. Understanding and mitigating the label noise in pre-training on downstream tasks.
  In ICLR, 2024.
Pin-Yu Chen. Model reprogramming: Resource-efficient cross-domain machine learning. In AAAI,
  2024.
Gong Cheng, Junwei Han, and Xiaoqiang Lu. Remote sensing image scene classification: Bench-
  mark and state of the art. Proceedings of the IEEE, 2017.
Mircea Cimpoi, Subhransu Maji, Iasonas Kokkinos, Sammy Mohamed, and Andrea Vedaldi. De-
 scribing textures in the wild. In CVPR, 2014.
Jia Deng, Wei Dong, Richard Socher, Li-Jia Li, Kai Li, and Li Fei-Fei. Imagenet: A large-scale
   hierarchical image database. In CVPR, 2009.
Alexey Dosovitskiy. An image is worth 16x16 words: Transformers for image recognition at scale.
  arXiv, 2020.
Gamaleldin F Elsayed, Ian Goodfellow, and Jascha Sohl-Dickstein. Adversarial reprogramming of
  neural networks. In ICLR, 2019.


                                                11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Li Fei-Fei, Rob Fergus, and Pietro Perona. Learning generative visual models from few training
  examples: An incremental bayesian approach tested on 101 object categories. In CVPR workshop,
  2004.
Vittorio Ferrari and Andrew Zisserman. Learning visual attributes. NeurIPS, 2007.
K Hambardzumyan, H Khachatrian, and J May. Warp: Word-level adversarial reprogramming. In
  ACL-IJCNLP, 2021.
Cheng Han, Qifan Wang, Yiming Cui, Zhiwen Cao, Wenguan Wang, Siyuan Qi, and Dongfang Liu.
  EЛҶ 2vpt: An effective and efficient approach for visual prompt tuning. In ICCV, 2023.
J Harold, G Kushner, and George Yin. Stochastic approximation and recursive algorithm and appli-
   cations. Application of Mathematics, 1997.
Kaiming He, Xiangyu Zhang, Shaoqing Ren, and Jian Sun. Deep residual learning for image recog-
  nition. In CVPR, 2016.
Patrick Helber, Benjamin Bischke, Andreas Dengel, and Damian Borth. Eurosat: A novel dataset
  and deep learning benchmark for land use and land cover classification. IEEE Journal of Selected
  Topics in Applied Earth Observations and Remote Sensing, 2019.
Yun-Ning Hung, Chao-Han Huck Yang, Pin-Yu Chen, and Alexander Lerch. Low-resource music
  genre classification with cross-modal neural model reprogramming. In ICASSP, 2023.
Menglin Jia, Luming Tang, Bor-Chun Chen, Claire Cardie, Serge Belongie, Bharath Hariharan, and
 Ser-Nam Lim. Visual prompt tuning. In ECCV, 2022.
Yongcheng Jing, Chongbin Yuan, Li Ju, Yiding Yang, Xinchao Wang, and Dacheng Tao. Deep
  graph reprogramming. In CVPR, 2023.
Muhammad Uzair Khattak, Hanoona Rasheed, Muhammad Maaz, Salman Khan, and Fahad Shah-
 baz Khan. Maple: Multi-modal prompt learning. In CVPR, 2023.
Jonathan Krause, Michael Stark, Jia Deng, and Li Fei-Fei. 3d object representations for fine-grained
  categorization. In ICCV workshops, 2013.
Neeraj Kumar, Alexander Berg, Peter N Belhumeur, and Shree Nayar. Describable visual attributes
  for face verification and image search. TPAMI, 2011.
Jinhao Li, Haopeng Li, Sarah Erfani, Lei Feng, James Bailey, and Feng Liu. Visual-text cross
   alignment: Refining the similarity score in vision-language models. In ICML, 2024a.
Zheng Li, Xiang Li, Xinyi Fu, Xin Zhang, Weiqiang Wang, Shuo Chen, and Jian Yang. Promptkd:
  Unsupervised prompt distillation for vision-language models. In CVPR, 2024b.
Ana C Lorena, LuДұМҒs PF Garcia, Jens Lehmann, Marcilio CP Souto, and Tin Kam Ho. How complex
  is your classification problem? a survey on measuring classification complexity. CSUR, 2019.
Ilya Loshchilov and Frank Hutter. Sgdr: Stochastic gradient descent with warm restarts. In ICLR,
   2016.
Subhransu Maji, Esa Rahtu, Juho Kannala, Matthew Blaschko, and Andrea Vedaldi. Fine-grained
  visual classification of aircraft. arXiv, 2013.
Sachit Menon and Carl Vondrick. Visual classification via description from large language models.
  In ICLR, 2023.
Maria-Elena Nilsback and Andrew Zisserman. Automated flower classification over a large number
 of classes. In Indian conference on computer vision, graphics & image processing, 2008.
Changdae Oh, Hyeji Hwang, Hee-young Lee, YongTaek Lim, Geunyoung Jung, Jiyoung Jung,
  Hosik Choi, and Kyungwoo Song. Blackvip: Black-box visual prompting for robust transfer
  learning. In CVPR, 2023.


                                                12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Omkar M Parkhi, Andrea Vedaldi, Andrew Zisserman, and CV Jawahar. Cats and dogs. In CVPR,
 2012.
Khoi Pham, Kushal Kafle, Zhe Lin, Zhihong Ding, Scott Cohen, Quan Tran, and Abhinav Shrivas-
  tava. Learning to predict visual attributes in the wild. In CVPR, 2021.
Sarah Pratt, Ian Covert, Rosanne Liu, and Ali Farhadi. What does a platypus look like? generating
  customized prompts for zero-shot image classification. In ICCV, 2023.
Alec Radford, Jong Wook Kim, Chris Hallacy, Aditya Ramesh, Gabriel Goh, Sandhini Agarwal,
  Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, Pamela Mishkin, Jack Clark, et al. Learning transferable visual
  models from natural language supervision. In ICML, 2021.
Khurram Soomro, Amir Roshan Zamir, and Mubarak Shah. A dataset of 101 human action classes
  from videos in the wild. Center for Research in Computer Vision, 2012.
Xinyu Tian, Shu Zou, Zhaoyuan Yang, and Jing Zhang. Argue: Attribute-guided prompt tuning for
  vision-language models. In CVPR, 2024.
Yun-Yun Tsai, Pin-Yu Chen, and Tsung-Yi Ho. Transfer learning without knowing: Reprogramming
  black-box machine learning models with scarce data and limited resources. In ICML, 2020.
Hsi-Ai Tsao, Lei Hsiung, Pin-Yu Chen, Sijia Liu, and Tsung-Yi Ho. Autovp: An automated visual
  prompting framework and benchmark. In ICLR, 2024.
Laurens Van der Maaten and Geoffrey Hinton. Visualizing data using t-sne. JMLR, 2008.
Ria Vinod, Pin-Yu Chen, and Payel Das. Reprogramming language models for molecular represen-
  tation learning. In NeurIPS, 2020.
Wenhao Wang, Yifan Sun, Wei Li, and Yi Yang. Transhp: Image classification with hierarchical
 prompting. In NeurIPS, 2023.
Zhengbo Wang, Jian Liang, Ran He, Zilei Wang, and Tieniu Tan. Connecting the dots: Collaborative
  fine-tuning for black-box vision-language models. In ICML, 2024.
Jianxiong Xiao, James Hays, Krista A Ehinger, Aude Oliva, and Antonio Torralba. Sun database:
   Large-scale scene recognition from abbey to zoo. In CVPR, 2010.
Zhuoyan Xu, Zhenmei Shi, Junyi Wei, Fangzhou Mu, Yin Li, and Yingyu Liang. Towards few-shot
  adaptation of foundation models via multitask finetuning. In ICLR, 2024.
An Yan, Yu Wang, Yiwu Zhong, Chengyu Dong, Zexue He, Yujie Lu, William Yang Wang, Jingbo
  Shang, and Julian McAuley. Learning concise and descriptive attributes for visual recognition. In
  ICCV, 2023.
Chao-Han Huck Yang, Yun-Yun Tsai, and Pin-Yu Chen. Voice2series: Reprogramming acoustic
  models for time series classification. In ICML, 2021.
Chao-Han Huck Yang, Bo Li, Yu Zhang, Nanxin Chen, Rohit Prabhavalkar, Tara N Sainath, and
  Trevor Strohman. From english to more languages: Parameter-efficient model reprogramming
  for cross-lingual speech recognition. In ICASSP, 2023a.
Yue Yang, Artemis Panagopoulou, Shenghao Zhou, Daniel Jin, Chris Callison-Burch, and Mark
  Yatskar. Language in a bottle: Language model guided concept bottlenecks for interpretable
  image classification. In CVPR, 2023b.
Kaiyang Zhou, Jingkang Yang, Chen Change Loy, and Ziwei Liu. Conditional prompt learning for
  vision-language models. In CVPR, 2022a.
Kaiyang Zhou, Jingkang Yang, Chen Change Loy, and Ziwei Liu. Learning to prompt for vision-
  language models. IJCV, 2022b.


                                                13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A      A PPENDIX 1: M ORE T RAINING I NFORMATION
A.1      T HE P ROBLEM S ETTING OF VR FOR CLIP

 Downstream      CLIP вҖ“ Visual Finetuning                       Downstream      CLIP вҖ“ Visual Prompt                       Downstream       CLIP вҖ“ Visual
   Tasks                                                          Tasks          Image Encoder (ViT)                         Tasks         Reprogramming
                     Image Encoder


                                            Cosine Similarity


                                                                                                       Cosine Similarity
                     (ResNet / ViT)


                                                                                                                                                            Cosine Similarity
                                                                                                                                           Image Encoder
                              вҖҰ                                                 вҖҰ     вҖҰ        вҖҰ                                           (ResNet / ViT)


   This is a                                                      This is a                                                  This is a         Text
   photo of              Text                                     photo of            Text
                                                                                                                             photo of         Encoder
 [Russia Blue]          Encoder                                 [Russia Blue]        Encoder
                                                                                                                           [Russia Blue]



Figure 7: Different problem settings for repurposing CLIP for image classification tasks. The left
shows finetuning the visual encoder, the middle illustrates a generalized approach to visual prompt-
ing, and the right depicts visual reprogramming (VR). The trainable parameters are highlighted in
вҖҳfiresвҖҷ. VR merely modifies the input image space, making it applicable to any encoder architecture.

The problem setting for VR and its differences from other repurposing methods for CLIP in image
classification tasks are illustrated in Figure 7. For finetuning methods, the weights in the pre-trained
ResNet-based or ViT-based CLIP are optimized directly using samples from the downstream task,
making the Image Encoder variable. Visual prompting methods (Jia et al., 2022; Khattak et al.,
2023) add parallel trainable weights next to the embedding patches in the first layer or each layer of
the Image Encoder, but this approach is only applicable when ViT is used as the visual encoder.
Unlike fine-tuning or visual prompting, VR (Chen et al., 2023; Bahng et al., 2022) focuses on modi-
fying the input space of the model rather than the pre-trained model itself. VR directly incorporates
trainable parameters into the input images to achieve the repurposing of the pre-trained CLIP. Com-
pared to other methods, VR offers the following advantages:

          вҖў Since VR only modifies the input space, it has fewer parameters (see Table 9 for details),
            and the number of parameters is independent of the size of the pre-trained model, only
            depending on the input image size. This results in lower training time overhead.
          вҖў By solely altering the input space, VR ensures that the original parameters of the pre-trained
            model remain unchanged, effectively addressing practical issues such as catastrophic for-
            getting in large models and copyright concerns.
          вҖў As the VR pattern is applied only to the images before input, it is independent of the archi-
            tecture of the pre-trained modelвҖҷs image encoder, making it applicable to all architectures.
          вҖў The VR method is orthogonal to other fine-tuning methodsвҖ”VR modifies the input space,
            while other methods adjust the internal parameters of the model. Therefore, VR can be
            combined with various methods to further enhance performance.

A.2      I MPLEMENT D ETAILS

A.2.1        G ENERATING D ES ATTRS AND D ISTATTRS
We used GPT-3.5 (Brown, 2020) to generate DesAttrs and DistAttrs. The specific hyper-parameter
settings for text generation were as follows: temperature set to 0.99, maximum token size of 50,
and generating 25 entries for each category. The termination signal was вҖҳ.вҖҷ, and only entries with a
length greater than 20 characters were considered valid and retained.
To generate DesAttrs, we queried each class in every downstream task with the following input
instruction:

          вҖў Describe the appearance of the [Task Info.] [Class Name],

where [Task Info.] represents the description of downstream tasks, shown in Table 4, and [Class
Name] represents the name of label y T вҲҲ Y T .
To generate DistAttrs, we use the following input instruction:


                                                                                   14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


         вҖў Describe the unique appearance of a/an                                                 [Class      Name]           from the
           other [Task Info.].

Using this approach, we successfully generated DesAttrs and DistAttrs. In the experiments, we set
m = 20 as the size for sets AМғdes (y T ) and AМғdist (y T ). When the number of valid entries generated for
class y T is less than m, we randomly resampled to ensure that each class had exactly 20 attributes,
facilitating subsequent experiments.

A.2.2      DATASET D ETAILS

                                                 Table 4: Dataset Information

         Aircraft    Caltech      Cars         DTD          ESAT         Flowers   Food    Pets    SUN      UCF       IN          Resisc
 Task     aircraft             fine-grained             remote sensing                                                            remote
                     object                   texture                    flower    food     pet    scene    action   object
 Info.    model                 automobile                land cover                                                           sensing scene
 Class
           100        100          196          47           10           102      101      37      397      101     1000           45
 Num.
 Batch
            64         64          64           64           64            64       64      64      64       64       64            64
 Size



This paper establishes benchmarks for downstream classification tasks following prior work (Oh
et al., 2023), employing the same methodology to split the 16-shot training, validation, and test
sets. The 12 datasets are listed as follows: FGVCAircraft (Aircraft) (Maji et al., 2013), Caltech101
(Caltech) (Fei-Fei et al., 2004), StanfordCars (Cars) (Krause et al., 2013), Texture (DTD) (Cimpoi
et al., 2014), EuroSAT (ESAT) (Helber et al., 2019), Flowers102 (Flowers) (Nilsback & Zisserman,
2008), Food101 (Food) (Bossard et al., 2014), OxfordPets (Pets) (Parkhi et al., 2012), SUN397
(SUN) (Xiao et al., 2010), UCF101 (UCF) (Soomro et al., 2012), ImageNet (IN) (Deng et al., 2009),
Resisc45 (Resisc) (Cheng et al., 2017). All image datasets are publicly available. Detailed task
information and the batch size used for training VR are provided in Table 4.

A.2.3      T RAINING VR PATTERNS

For all VR baseline methods compared in the paper, we adopted the following uniform training
settings: an initial learning rate of 40, a momentum of 0.9 using the SGD optimizer (Harold et al.,
1997), and a cosine annealing learning rate scheduler (Loshchilov & Hutter, 2016). The total number
of learning epochs was set to 200. The experimental results represent the average across three seeds.
Regarding method-specific hyper-parameters, for VP (Bahng et al., 2022), we maintained consis-
tency with the original work, using a VR noise pattern with a frame size of 30, as detailed in Table
9. For AR (Chen et al., 2023; Tsai et al., 2020), as noted by Tsao et al. (2024), the size of different
VR patterns can impact the results. In this study, we conducted experiments with frame sizes of
[8, 16, 32, 48] and selected 16 as the final frame size due to its optimal performance with fewer
parameters. To ensure a fair comparison, our AttrVR adopted the same parameter settings as AR.


A.3      D ETAILS A BOUT Z ERO - SHOT ATTR ZS

For the i-th downstream image xT                        T
                                   i and certain label y , AttrZS is the zero-shot version of AttrVR
where we do not train the VR noise pattern. AttrZS first resizes the sample to the required input size
for the model, then calculates the similarity between the resized sample and the attribute descriptions
of each class in a single pass, applying the similar equation of AttrVR:

                                              О» X                      1вҲ’О»                  X                          вҖІ
                 simAttrZS (xT   T
                             i ,y ) =              simCLIP (xМғT
                                                              i , a) +                                 simCLIP (xМғT
                                                                                                                  i , a ),               (10)
                                              k  k
                                                                        k
                                               aвҲҲAМғdes                                    aвҖІ вҲҲAМғk
                                                                                                dist


                                                                                                     вҖІ
 where k, О» are hyper-parameters that are also used in AttrVR, xМғT   i is the resized image and a, a are
                                           k       k                                              T T
attributes chosen from the attribute set AМғdes , AМғdist . Then the label with largest simAttrZS (xi , y )
will be the prediction result for sample xT
                                          i .


                                                                   15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


B    A PPENDIX 2: M ORE T HEORETICAL J USTIFICATION

Lemma 3 (cf. Lemma 1). Let Ades (y) вҠҶ A(y) be the set of descriptive attributes for class y as with
Definition 2. Let ОЈA and ОЈL be the covariance matrices of the embeddings optimized with respect
to Ades (y) and y, respectively. Then, for any class y вҲҲ Y, we have Tr (ОЈA (y)) вүӨ Tr (ОЈL (y)).

Proof. Let Xy be the set of all images belonging to class y. We begin by defining the following:
let ZL : X вҶ’ Rd be the label-based embedding function, let ZA : X вҶ’ Rd be the attribute-based
embedding function, and let Za : X вҶ’ Rd be the embedding function for a single attribute a вҲҲ A.
Denote the mean embeddings, covariance matrices, and traces resulting from ZL by
                           ВөL = ExвҲҲXy [ZL (x)] ,
                           ПғL = ExвҲҲXy (ZL (x) вҲ’ ВөL )вҠӨ (ZL (x) вҲ’ ВөL ) ,

                                      h                i
                                                     2
                       Tr(ПғL ) = ExвҲҲXy вҲҘZL (x) вҲ’ ВөL вҲҘ .

Similarly, for ZA , we have
                           ВөA = ExвҲҲXy [ZA (x)] ,
                          ОЈA = ExвҲҲXy (ZA (x) вҲ’ ВөA )вҠӨ (ZA (x) вҲ’ ВөA ) ,

                                      h                i
                                                     2
                       Tr(ПғA ) = ExвҲҲXy вҲҘZA (x) вҲ’ ВөA вҲҘ .

By Definition 2, we further express ZA (x) in terms of Za (x):
                                                       1           X
                                   ZA (x) =                                  Za (x),
                                                   |Ades (y)|
                                                                aвҲҲAdes (y)

and accordingly, the attribute-mean is
                                                      1            X
                      ВөA = [ZA (x)] =                                        ExвҲҲXy [Za (x)] .
                                                |Ades (y)|
                                                                aвҲҲAdes (y)

Then, the difference between embedding and mean is
                                           1               X
                 ZA (x) вҲ’ ВөA =                                      Za (x) вҲ’ ExвҲҲXy [Za (x)] .
                                       |Ades (y)|
                                                      aвҲҲAdes (y)


JensenвҖҷs inequality states that for any convex function f and probability measure p, we have:
f (Ep [X]) вүӨ Ep [f (X)]. Applying this to the squared norm (which is convex), we obtain:
                                                                                                     2
                               2               1           X
              вҲҘZA (x) вҲ’ ВөA вҲҘ =                                      (Za (x) вҲ’ ExвҲҲXy [Za (x)])
                                        |Ades (y)|
                                                       aвҲҲAdes (y)
                                           1               X                                         2
                                   вүӨ                                (Za (x) вҲ’ ExвҲҲXy [Za (x)])            .
                                       |Ades (y)|
                                                      aвҲҲAdes (y)

Taking expectations on both LHS and RHS leads to
                                            1              X                 h
                                                                                                             2
                                                                                                                 i
        ExвҲҲXy вҲҘZA (x) вҲ’ ВөA вҲҘ2 вүӨ

                                                                   ExвҲҲXy         (Za (x) вҲ’ ExвҲҲXy [Za (x)])           .   (11)
                                        |Ades (y)|
                                                      aвҲҲAdes (y)



We also know that for any attribute a вҲҲ Ades (y),
                              Uy (a) вүҘ Uy (aвҖІ ),           вҲҖaвҖІ вҲҲ A(y) \ Ades (y),


                                                           16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


where Uy (a) = |X1y | xвҲҲXy fa (x) is the frequency of attribute a in class y. Define ZМ„a =
                       P

ExвҲҲXy [Za (x)] as the mean embedding for attribute a in class y, we can then express the variance of
attribute-based embedding as:
                                     пЈ®                                           пЈ№
                                                                               2
           h
                          2
                            i                 1         X
   ExвҲҲXy вҲҘZA (x) вҲ’ ВөA вҲҘ = ExвҲҲXy пЈ°                              (Za (x) вҲ’ ZМ„a ) пЈ»
                                     пЈҜ                                           пЈә
                                         |Ades (y)|
                                                                    aвҲҲAdes (y)

                                            1                 X
                                                                      ExвҲҲXy (Za (x) вҲ’ ZМ„a )вҠӨ (ZaвҖІ (x) вҲ’ ZМ„aвҖІ ) .

                                    =
                                        |Ades (y)|
                                                     a,aвҖІ вҲҲAdes (y)

By the Cauchy-Schwarz inequality, we have:
               h                                      r hi              i h                 i
                                вҠӨ                                     2                   2
       ExвҲҲXy       (Za (x) вҲ’ ZМ„a ) (ZaвҖІ (x) вҲ’ ZМ„aвҖІ ) вүӨ E Za (x) вҲ’ ZМ„a    E ZaвҖІ (x) вҲ’ ZМ„aвҖІ     .                (12)
                                                                          h       i
                                                                                2
 Since we have already established the relationship between ExвҲҲXy вҲҘZA (x) вҲ’ ВөA вҲҘ    and
      h               i
                    2
ExвҲҲXy Za (x) вҲ’ ZМ„a      , we then proceed to prove that for any a вҲҲ Ades (y),
                                h                        i
                                                     2
                                                             вүӨ Uy (a)ExвҲҲXy вҲҘZL (x) вҲ’ ВөL вҲҘ2 .

                        ExвҲҲXy       Za (x) вҲ’ ZМ„a                                                               (13)

 By definition of fa (x), it takes value 1 if attribute a is in x, and 0 otherwise. We express Za (x) in
terms of ZL (x) and fa (x):
                                    Za (x) = fa (x)ZL (x) + (1 вҲ’ fa (x))ZМ„a ,
since Uy (a) is the frequency of attribute a in class y. Expanding the LHS, we have:
                   h                 i           h                                     i
                                   2                                                 2
          ExвҲҲXy Za (x) вҲ’ ZМ„a           = ExвҲҲXy fa (x)ZL (x) + (1 вҲ’ fa (x))ZМ„a , вҲ’ZМ„a
                                                 h                         i
                                                                         2
                                       = ExвҲҲXy fa (x)2 ZL (x) вҲ’ ZМ„a
                                                        h                          i
                                                                       2
                                       = Uy (a)ExвҲҲXy ZL (x) вҲ’ ZМ„a | fa (x) = 1
                                                        h                i
                                                                       2
                                       вүӨ Uy (a)ExвҲҲXy вҲҘZL (x) вҲ’ ВөL вҲҘ ,

where the second equality holds since fa (x)2 = fa (x) and ExвҲҲXy [fa (x)] = Uy (a), the last inequal-
ity is justified based on a mild assumption that ZМ„a is closer to the class-specific mean embeddings
than ВөL for a descriptive attribute.
Applying Eq. (12) and Eq. (13) to Eq. (11):
         h
                         2
                           i        1                         X
                                                                      ExвҲҲXy (Za (x) вҲ’ ZМ„a )вҠӨ (ZaвҖІ (x) вҲ’ ZМ„aвҖІ )

  ExвҲҲXy вҲҘZA (x) вҲ’ ВөA вҲҘ =
                                |Ades (y)|
                                                     a,aвҖІ вҲҲAdes (y)
                                            1                 X       q                      h                i
                                                                                                            2
                                    вүӨ                                     Uy (a)Uy (aвҖІ )ExвҲҲXy вҲҘZL (x) вҲ’ ВөL вҲҘ
                                        |Ades (y)|
                                                     a,aвҖІ вҲҲAdes (y)
                                                     2
                                      |Ades (y)|         h
                                                                          2
                                                                            i
                                    вүӨ             ExвҲҲX y
                                                           вҲҘZ L (x) вҲ’ ВөL вҲҘ
                                      |Ades (y)|2
                                             h                   i
                                                               2
                                    = ExвҲҲXy вҲҘZL (x) вҲ’ ВөL вҲҘ .

The second inequality follows that Uy (a) вүӨ 1 for all attributes. By definition of Tr(В·), we have
derived Tr(ОЈA ) вүӨ Tr(ОЈL ).
Lemma 4 (cf. Lemma 2). Let Adist (y) вҠҶ A(y) be the set of distinctive attributes for class y as
with Definition 3. Let dA (y, y вҖІ ) and dL (y, y вҖІ ) be в„“2 distance between mean embeddings of two
classes y Мё= y вҖІ , optimized with respect to Adist (y) and y. Then, for any y, y вҖІ вҲҲ Y, we have
dA (y, y вҖІ ) вүҘ dL (y, y вҖІ ) if |Adist (y)| > |Y|.


                                                               17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Proof. Let Xy be the set of all images belonging to class y. We begin by defining the following:
let ZL : X вҶ’ Rd be the label-based embedding function, let ZA : X вҶ’ Rd be the attribute-based
embedding function. Let TL and TA be the text embedding functions for prompted class labels and
attributes, respectively.
For any class y вҲҲ Y, define: ВөL (y) = ExвҲҲXy [ZL (x)] and ВөA (y) = ExвҲҲYx [ZA (x)]. For any two
classes y, y вҖІ вҲҲ Y, define distances by
                                           dL (y, y вҖІ ) = вҲҘВөL (y) вҲ’ ВөL (y вҖІ )вҲҘ ,
                                           dA (y, y вҖІ ) = вҲҘВөA (y) вҲ’ ВөA (y вҖІ )вҲҘ .

By Definition 3, for any a вҲҲ Adist (y) and y Мё= y вҖІ , y, y вҖІ вҲҲ Y we have:
                                          ExвҲҲXy [fa (x)] > ExвҲҲX вҖІ] [fa (x)] .
                                                                     y


Then, we derive an inequality regarding the similarity:
                          ExвҲҲXy [sim(ZA (x), TA (a))] > ExвҲҲXy [sim(ZA (x), TA (a))] ,                             (14)

 for any a вҲҲ Adist P (y) and y Мё= yвҖІ, where ZL (x) = arg maxz sim(z, TL (y)) and ZA (x) =
            1
arg maxz Adist (y)  aвҲҲAdist (y) sim(z, TA (a)), sim(В·, В·) denotes the cosine similarity.

We then define a transformation П•(В·) that maps the embeddings to a space where the Euclidean dis-
tance corresponds to the dissimilarity in the original space, which is isometric with respect to the
cosine similarity in the embedding space. In this space, each dimension corresponds to the dissim-
ilarity with a specific attribute, preserving the similarity between z and each attribute embedding,
such that                    hp                              q                      i
                   П•(z) =       1 вҲ’ sim(z, TA (a1 )), . . . , 1 вҲ’ sim(z, TA (a|A| )) ,
where A = yвҲҲY Adist (y). Then, for any two classes y and y вҖІ , the distance between their mean
              S
embeddings:
                                                2
          вҲҘП•(ВөA (y)) вҲ’ П•(ВөA (y вҖІ ))вҲҘ
              |A|                                                                          2
              X     p                                       p
          =              1 вҲ’ sim(ВөA (y), TA (ai )) вҲ’         1 вҲ’ sim(ВөA (y вҖІ ), TA (ai ))
              i=1
                   X           p                                   p                              2
          =                        1 вҲ’ sim(ВөA (y), TA (ai )) вҲ’      1 вҲ’ sim(ВөA (y вҖІ ), TA (ai ))
              ai вҲҲAdist (y)
                      X            q                                     q                                2
              +                        1 вҲ’ sim(ВөA (y), TA (aj )) вҲ’           1 вҲ’ sim(ВөA (y вҖІ ), TA (aj )) .
                  aj вҲҲA
                     / dist (y)

Referring to Eq. (14), we know that the inequality relationship accumulates because of the summa-
tion over all |A| terms.
We then define a similar transformation for the label-based method:
                          hp                               q                      i
                П•L (z) =      1 вҲ’ sim(z, TL (y1 )), . . . , 1 вҲ’ sim(z, TL (y|Y| )) .

Accordingly, the distance between mean embeddings under label-based methods:
                                          |Y|                                  q                           2
                                          X    p
                              вҖІ                                                              вҖІ        вҖІ
вҲҘП•L (ВөL (y)) вҲ’ П•L (ВөL (y ))вҲҘ =                      1 вҲ’ sim(ВөL (y), TL (yi )) вҲ’ 1 вҲ’ sim(ВөL (y ), TL (yi )) .
                                          i=1
                                           p                                    p                                2
                                                                                    1 вҲ’ sim(ВөA (y вҖІ ), TA (ai ))
                      P
Denote SA         вүң       ai вҲҲAdist (y)         1 вҲ’ sim(ВөA (y), TA (ai )) вҲ’                                        and
SL вүң вҲҘП•L (ВөL (y)) вҲ’ П•L (ВөL (y вҖІ ))вҲҘ, and the average contribution of each component by SМ„A =
    1                     1
|Adist (y)| SA and SМ„L = |Y| SL , it is easy to check that SМ„A > SМ„L , because ExвҲҲXy [fai (x)] >
ExвҲҲXyвҖІ [fai (x)].


                                                            18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Then, as we assume |Adist (y)| > |Y| (this assumption is mild in common practical classification
tasks, where |Y| often ranges from 10 to 100, whereas we can easily identify |Adist (y)| > 100 dis-
tinctive attributes for a class of objects because of the dimensionality of natural language vocabulary
and sentences.), we have concluded that SA > SL , implying that
               X       p                                p                             2
                           1 вҲ’ sim(ВөA (y), TA (ai )) вҲ’ 1 вҲ’ sim(ВөA (y вҖІ ), TA (ai ))
             ai вҲҲAdist (y)
                                 |Y|                                     q                           2
                                 X     p
                             >                                                         вҖІ        вҖІ
                                              1 вҲ’ sim(ВөL (y), TL (yi )) вҲ’ 1 вҲ’ sim(ВөL (y ), TL (yi )) .
                                 i=1
                      p                           p                             2
                       1 вҲ’ sim(ВөA (y), TA (aj )) вҲ’ 1 вҲ’ sim(ВөA (y вҖІ ), TA (aj )) is non-negative, we
     P
As     aj вҲҲA
          / dist (y)
                                                 2
arrive at вҲҘП•(ВөA (y)) вҲ’ П•(ВөA (y вҖІ ))вҲҘ > вҲҘП•L (ВөL (y)) вҲ’ П•L (ВөL (y вҖІ ))вҲҘ.
Recall that transformations П•(В·) and П•L (В·) are isometric with respect to the cosine similarity, we
have
                            вҲҘП•(ВөA (y)) вҲ’ П•(ВөA (y вҖІ ))вҲҘ = c В· dA (y, y вҖІ ),
                                        вҲҘП•(ВөL (y)) вҲ’ П•(ВөL (y вҖІ ))вҲҘ = c В· dL (y, y вҖІ ),
for some constant c > 0. Dividing both sides by c, we can conclude dA (y, y вҖІ ) > dL (y, y вҖІ ).

C      A PPENDIX 3: M ORE E XPERIMENTAL R ESULTS
C.1      M ORE R ESULTS OF D IFFERENT BACKBONES

Table 5: Accuracy comparison using RN50-based CLIP as the pre-trained model (Mean % Вұ Std %,
ours are highlighted and the highest is in bold).
    RN50      Aircraft    Caltech      Cars    DTD     ESAT   Flowers   Food   Pets   SUN    UCF    IN     Resisc   Avg.
   ZS          15.5          82.1      56.2     37.5   29.2    58.0     75.8   79.7   56.1   57.6   55.5   37.7     53.4
  AttrZS       19.4          87.1      56.5     51.9   34.8    75.1     78.0   88.3   60.4   60.9   61.2   45.8     59.9
   VP          16.2          80.1      44.0     43.4   59.7    53.6     65.3   77.2   48.8   52.0   49.7   47.7     53.2
  AR           18.6          86.5      53.9     46.4   66.6    60.9     74.2   82.5   56.8   59.7   54.4   58.4     59.9
 AttrVR        20.7          89.1      53.9     54.4   72.0    74.8     75.3   88.9   59.9   63.6   59.2   58.2     64.2


Table 6: Accuracy comparison using RN101-based CLIP as the pre-trained model (Mean % Вұ Std
%, ours are highlighted and the highest is in bold).
 RN101        Aircraft    Caltech      Cars    DTD     ESAT   Flowers   Food   Pets   SUN    UCF    IN     Resisc   Avg.
   ZS          17.1          86.0      63.9     39.0   28.1    59.7     79.6   81.9   56.5   58.4   58.7   44.4     56.1
  AttrZS       20.8          90.9      63.0     51.4   35.1    75.8     81.2   89.5   62.1   63.7   63.8   51.2     62.4
   VP          19.3          83.0      53.7     43.4   62.8    57.2     71.2   80.2   53.5   54.2   53.1   54.0     57.1
  AR           19.5          89.7      62.0     46.3   70.4    60.4     78.0   84.4   58.4   60.6   57.9   60.2     62.3
 AttrVR        23.3          92.0      62.2     55.6   70.3    76.2     79.5   89.3   62.1   64.5   62.2   64.5     66.8


Table 7: Accuracy comparison using ViT-B32-based CLIP as the pre-trained model (Mean % Вұ Std
%, ours are highlighted and the highest is in bold).
 ViT-B32       Aircraft   Caltech      Cars     DTD    ESAT   Flowers   Food   Pets   SUN    UCF    IN     Resisc   Avg.
     ZS         18.3         89.4      60.1     40.0   37.0     60.8    79.2   82.5   59.4   61.4   60.1    49.8    58.2
    AttrZS      22.2         91.5      59.2     50.7   44.3     76.0    81.0   89.5   63.6   66.8   64.3    56.5    63.8
     VP         24.3         92.3      58.6     54.9   85.9     71.2    75.0   86.8   61.0   67.3   59.0    73.9    67.5
     AR         21.8         92.7      56.9     49.9   85.6     66.7    75.7   84.7   59.9   63.5   57.5    71.6    65.5
    AttrVR      24.5         92.0      56.6     56.8   88.6     77.8    77.2   89.8   62.8   67.9   61.0    73.9    69.1


Tables 5-8 present the results of different methods using various architectures of the CLIP image
encoder. For all models, we employed the same VR parameter numbers and hyper-parameter settings
as those used in ViT-B16. In this configuration, the VR method requires downscaling the images


                                                               19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Table 8: Accuracy comparison using ViT-L14-based CLIP as the pre-trained model (Mean % Вұ Std
%, ours are highlighted and the highest is in bold).
 ViT-L141   Aircraft   Caltech   Cars   DTD    ESAT   Flowers   Food   Pets   SUN    UCF    IN     Resisc   Avg.
   ZS        29.7       90.4     77.1   51.1   55.3    73.7     88.9   89.0   65.0   72.9   71.3   60.4     68.7
  AttrZS     35.3       94.4     77.0   61.1   54.4    85.6     91.4   94.2   69.8   75.2   76.2   63.9     73.2
    VP       25.7       88.3     59.8   45.5   30.9    69.1     74.9   84.5   57.6   63.4   58.8   74.4     61.1
   AR        31.7       93.0     75.6   55.9   70.4    74.7     89.0   91.5   65.4   73.9   69.7   72.2     71.9
  AttrVR     38.2       96.1     74.8   61.1   74.9    85.8     90.0   94.3   68.6   77.8   73.8   70.1     75.5



and adding trainable noise at the edges or directly on the images, which can sometimes adversely
affect image quality and, consequently, classification results. As a result, on certain benchmarks that
demand high detail and resolution, such as Cars and Food, the accuracy may be lower than that of
zero-shot learning. In summary, the following observations can be drawn from the tables:

       вҖў When comparing zero-shot methods, our proposed approach, AttrZS, which uses DesAttrs
         and DistAttrs in conjunction with k-nearest neighbor attribute selection, achieves an aver-
         age accuracy improvement of 4.5% to 6.5% across 12 benchmarks compared to label-based
         zero-shot classification. This clearly demonstrates the effectiveness of using attributes in-
         stead of labels.
       вҖў When comparing VR for CLIP methods, even in cases where the baseline VR methods,
         such as VP and AR, exhibit underfitting with RN50 or overfitting with ViT-L14, replacing
         label-based VR with AttrVR consistently improves average accuracy by 3.6% to 4.5%.
       вҖў Furthermore, AttrVR outperforms AttrZS, especially in downstream tasks where there is a
         significant domain shift between the task domain and the CLIP pretraining domain (e.g.,
         ESAT and Resisc). This advantage is even more pronounced when using a small image
         encoder (e.g., RN50), in the pre-trained CLIP model.

C.2   M ORE R ESULTS OF T OP M ATCHED ATTRIBUTES

Figure 8 and Figure 9 show the visualization of image samples with AttrVR patterns, and their near-
est k = 3 DesAttrs and DistAttrs before and after training VR patterns. To illustrate the differences
between individual samples within the same class, we selected two samples from the same task and
class for demonstration. Figure 8 shows two samples labeled as вҖҳbandedвҖҷ from the Texture task,
while Figure 9 displays two samples labeled as вҖҳGlobe ThistleвҖҷ from the Flowers task. From the
visualization results, we can draw the following conclusions:
The necessity of the Iterative Updating Strategy: It is evident that the DesAttrs and DistAttrs closest
to the same training sample differ before and after VR pattern training. Prior to training, the attribute
descriptions that are closer to the sample often share similar keywords; for instance, the DesAttrs
describing вҖҳbandedвҖҷ tend to emphasize вҖҳdifferent bandsвҖҷ (Figure 8), while those describing вҖҳGlobe
ThistleвҖҷ focus on the height of the flowers (Figure 9). However, after VR pattern training, the
DesAttrs and DistAttrs that are close to the same sample or different samples vary significantly.
The necessity of both DesAttrs and DistAttrs: DesAttrs and DistAttrs have different focal points.
DesAttrs primarily describe the overall characteristics; for example, shown in Figure 9, in the de-
scription of Globe Thistle, keywords like вҖҳtallвҖҷ and вҖҳ3 feetвҖҷ would appear. In contrast, DistAttrs
emphasize features that distinguish Globe Thistle from other flower categories, such as вҖҳspherical
shapeвҖҷ and вҖҳglobe-shapedвҖҷ. During the training of the VR pattern, both the overall information of
individual classes and the distinguishing features between different classes are needed. This aligns
with the experimental results in Table 3.
Combining DistAttrs with k-nearest neighbor attribute selection enhances the ability to capture
unique features of individual samples: Some distinguishing characteristics of a specific class may not
be universal (i.e., some samples possess these features while others do not). In such cases, AttrVR
employs k-nearest neighbor attribute selection to filter out attributes that are unique to individual
samples. For instance, in the вҖҳBandedвҖҷ examples in Figure 8, the first image depicts land sediment,
leading to the presence of the keyword вҖҳrock or sedimentвҖҷ, while the second image features diagonal
stripes, resulting in the closest DistAttr including the keyword вҖҳdiagonalвҖҷ.


                                                      20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                   Top 1   вҖҰ appears as a series of distinct horizontal or vertical bandsвҖҰ


                     Descriptive
  Before Training


                     Attributes
  VR - [Banded]                    Top 2   вҖҰ distinct stripes or bands of different colors, materials, or thicknesses.

                                   Top 3   вҖҰ alternating bands or stripes of different colors, patterns, or materials.

                                   Top 1   вҖҰ has distinct stripes or layers that are visible on the surface.


                     Distinctive
                     Attributes
                                   Top 2   вҖҰbands or layers of different colors, textures, or mineral composition
                                           within a material, such as a rock or sediment.
                                   Top 3   вҖҰ distinctive layers or bands of different materials or colors.

                                   Top 1   вҖҰ alternating bands of different textures that run parallel to each other.
                     Descriptive
  After Training     Attributes
  VR - [Banded]                    Top 2   вҖҰ parallel lines or bands that run across the surface.

                                   Top 3   вҖҰ alternating bands of different colors, patterns, or lines.
                                            вҖҰbands or layers of different colors, textures, or mineral composition
                                   Top 1
                    Distinctive
                    Attributes


                                            within a material, such as a rock or sediment.
                                   Top 2   вҖҰ distinctive layers or bands of different materials or colors.

                                   Top 3   вҖҰ alternating bands of different colors or patterns.



                                   Top 1   вҖҰ alternating bands of different colors, patterns, or lines.
                     Descriptive


  Before Training
                     Attributes


  VR - [Banded]                    Top 2   вҖҰ appears as a series of distinct horizontal or vertical bandsвҖҰ

                                   Top 3   вҖҰ there are distinct, parallel bands or stripes visible.

                                   Top 1   вҖҰ parallel stripes or bands that are often of different colors or textures.
                     Distinctive
                     Attributes


                                   Top 2   вҖҰ alternating bands of contrasting colors, shades, or textures.
                                   Top 3   вҖҰ alternating stripes or bands of different colors or textures.

                                   Top 1   вҖҰ alternating bands of different colors, patterns, or lines.
                     Descriptive


  After Training
                     Attributes


  VR - [Banded]                    Top 2   вҖҰ appears as a series of distinct horizontal or vertical bandsвҖҰ
                                   Top 3   вҖҰ distinct and repetitive lines or bands that run parallel to each other.
                                           вҖҰ alternating bands of different colors or textures running horizontally,
                                   Top 1
                    Distinctive
                    Attributes


                                           vertically, or diagonally across a surface.
                                   Top 2   вҖҰ stripes of different colors or textures running horizontally or vertically
                                   Top 3   вҖҰ parallel stripes or bands that are often of different colors or textures.


Figure 8: Visualization of images with AttrVR patterns, and their nearest k = 3 DesAttrs and
DistAttrs before and after training VR patterns, using the ViT-B16-based CLIP as the pre-trained
model. Two images labeled вҖҳBandedвҖҷ from the Texture task are chosen as examples. The closest
DesAttr and DistAttr after training convergence of VR patterns are highlighted with red borders.


C.3   M ORE R ESULTS OF AGGREGATION S TUDIES

Aside from the k nearest neighbor (knn) attribute selection method applied in AttrVR, we also
conduct some aggregation studies replacing fknn with the following modules to test its impact:
The maximum similarity (max). Unlike AttrVR, in this experiment, we retained only the nearest
attribute with the maximum similarity in the knn attribute selection phase for subsequent calcula-
tions. The specific logits output simmax    T T (e)
                                     Attr (xi , y |Оҙ ) given sample xT          T   T
                                                                     i , label y вҲҲ Y with pattern
Оҙ (e) can be expressed as:

       simmax    T T (e)
          Attr (xi , y |Оҙ ) = О»simCLIP (xМғT
                                          i , ades |Оҙ
                                                      (e)
                                                          ) + (1 вҲ’ О»)simCLIP (xМғT
                                                                                i , adist |Оҙ
                                                                                             (e)
                                                                                                 ),


                                                            21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                     Top 1    вҖҰ has a tall, sturdy stem reaching up to 3 feet in height.


                       Descriptive
Before Training VR


                       Attributes
 - [Globe Thistle]                   Top 2    вҖҰ a striking plant that can grow up to 4 feet tall.

                                     Top 3    вҖҰ a perennial plant that grows up to 3 feet tall.

                                     Top 1    вҖҰ has a unique appearance that sets it apart from other flowers.


                      Distinctive
                      Attributes
                                     Top 2    вҖҰ has a distinct appearance that sets it apart from other flowers.

                                     Top 3    вҖҰ has a distinctly unique appearance compared to other flowers.

 After Training VR
                      Descriptive    Top 1    вҖҰ a plant that grows up to 3 feet tall and 12-24 inches wide.
                      Attributes
  - [Globe Thistle]                  Top 2    вҖҰ is a striking flowering plant belonging to the Asteraceae family.

                                     Top 3    вҖҰ a perennial plant that grows up to 3 feet tall.

                                     Top 1    вҖҰ its unique spherical shape, which sets it apart from other flowers ...
                      Distinctive
                      Attributes


                                     Top 2    вҖҰ a perennial herbaceous plant that is easily distinguishable from other вҖҰ

                                     Top 3 вҖҰ a distinctive spherical flower head that measures about 2 inches in diameter.



                                     Top 1    вҖҰ is a striking flowering plant belonging to the Asteraceae family.
                      Descriptive


Before Training VR
                      Attributes


 - [Globe Thistle]                   Top 2    вҖҰ a striking plant that can grow up to 4 feet tall.

                                     Top 3    вҖҰ has a tall, sturdy stem reaching up to 3 feet in height.

                                     Top 1    вҖҰ has a distinct appearance that sets it apart from other flowers.
                      Distinctive
                      Attributes


                                     Top 2    вҖҰ has a unique appearance that sets it apart from other flowers.

                                     Top 3 вҖҰ a unique spherical head made up of tightly packed, spiky, purple-blue flowers.

                                     Top 1 вҖҰ a tall and spiky perennial plant that typically grows to be 2-3 feet in height.
                      Descriptive


 After Training VR
                      Attributes


  - [Globe Thistle]                  Top 2    вҖҰ is a striking flowering plant belonging to the Asteraceae family.
                                     Top 3 вҖҰ eye-catching plant that has a spherical shape with spiky, round flowers.

                                     Top 1 вҖҰ numerous globe-shaped flower heads, each with spiky blue or purple petals.
                      Distinctive
                      Attributes


                                     Top 2 вҖҰ its unique spherical shape, which sets it apart from other flowers ...

                                     Top 3 вҖҰ a distinctive spherical flower head that measures about 2 inches in diameter.


Figure 9: Visualization of images with AttrVR patterns, and their nearest k = 3 DesAttrs and
DistAttrs before and after training VR patterns, using the ViT-B16-based CLIP as the pre-trained
model. Two images labeled вҖҳGlobe ThistleвҖҷ from the Flowers task are chosen as examples. The
closest DesAttr and DistAttr after training convergence of VR patterns are highlighted with red
borders.


where AМғk=1    T T (e)
         des (xi , y |Оҙ ) = {ades } and AМғk=1    T T (e)
                                          dist (xi , y |Оҙ ) = {adist } can be obtained with Eq. (8)
setting k = 1.
The average similarity (avg). In this experiment, we do not compare the similarity between vari-
ous attributes and individual samples; instead, we simply calculate the average similarity between
all DesAttrs, DistAttrs and a single sample. The specific logits output simavg    T T (e)
                                                                           Attr (xi , y |Оҙ  ) given
          T        T      T              (e)
sample xi , label y вҲҲ Y with pattern Оҙ can be expressed as:
                               О»         X                                        1вҲ’О»          X
simavg    T T (e)
   Attr (xi , y |Оҙ )=                                 simCLIP (xМғT
                                                                 i , a|Оҙ
                                                                         (e)
                                                                             )+                              simCLIP (xМғT    вҖІ (e)
                                                                                                                        i , a |Оҙ   ),
                               m                                                   m
                                     aвҲҲAМғdes (y T )                                      aвҖІ вҲҲAМғdist (y T )



                                                                22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 10: Results of aggregation studies, using the ViT-B16-based CLIP as the pre-trained model.
вҖҳMaxвҖҷ calculates the maximum attribute similarity, вҖҳavgвҖҷ calculates the average attribute similarity,
вҖҳmeanвҖҷ calculates the similarity of the mean attribute, вҖҳrndвҖҷ calculates the average similarity of
randomly selected k attributes, and вҖҳknnвҖҷ represents the k-nearest iterative updating strategy applied
in AttrVR.


where AМғdes (y T ) and AМғdist (y T ) are attributes set with a size of m, generated by Eq. (7).
The random similarity (rnd). In this experiment, we simply calculate the average similarity be-
tween k randomly selected DesAttrs, DistAttrs and a single sample, where k is the same hyper-
parameter applied in AttrVR. Similarly, the logits output simrnd     T T (e)
                                                              Attr (xi , y |Оҙ      ) given sample xT
                                                                                                   i ,
       T    T                  (e)
label y вҲҲ Y with pattern Оҙ can be expressed as:
                                       О»        X
               simrnd     T T (e)
                   Attr (xi , y |Оҙ )=                       simCLIP (xМғT i , a|Оҙ
                                                                                 (e)
                                                                                     )+
                                       k               T
                                               aвҲҲrand(AМғdes (y ),k)
                                         1вҲ’О»             X
                                                                                           вҖІ (e)
                                                                           simCLIP (xМғT
                                                                                      i , a |Оҙ   ),   (15)
                                          k
                                               aвҖІ вҲҲrand(AМғdist (y T ),k)

where AМғdes (y T ) and AМғdist (y T ) are attributes set with a size of m, generated by Eq. (7) and
rand(A, k) is the random sampling function that chooses k items from set A.
Mean attribute similarity (mean). In this experiment, we remove the knn attribute selection mod-
uel. Instead, we first compute the text embedding centers Zdes (y T ) and Zdist (y T ) for the DesAttr
and DistAttr sets of label y T вҲҲ Y T . We then use these centers to calculate the similarity with
each sample in the downstream task and update the VR pattern Оҙ (e) accordingly. The logits output
simmean    T T (e)
    Attr (xi , y |Оҙ   ) of sample xT            T
                                   i and label y can be formulated as:

  simmean   T T (e)
     Attr (xi , y |Оҙ  ) = О»simCLIP (xМғT          T
                                      i , Zdes (y )|Оҙ
                                                      (e)
                                                          ) + (1 вҲ’ О»)simCLIP (xМғT           T
                                                                                i , Zdist (y )|Оҙ
                                                                                                 (e)
                                                                                                     ),
                      1    X                                 1     X
  where Zdes (y T ) =            ftxt (a), Zdist (y T ) =                 ftxt (aвҖІ ).
                      m        T
                                                            m   вҖІ       T
                          aвҲҲAМғdes (y )                                 a вҲҲAМғdist (y )

Conclusion. The results for each module are shown in Figure 10. It can be observed that the knn
attribute selection module in the current AttrVR achieves the highest accuracy. This is attributed
to the fact that the knn module filters out redundant or irrelevant feature descriptions, while also
determining the sample class based on the nearest attributes, thereby enhancing the robustness of
classification.

C.4    C ROSS T EST B ETWEEN L ABEL - BASED VR AND ATTRVR

To demonstrate that the improvement in downstream task accuracy with AttrVR is due to the VR
learning guided by attributes, rather than solely the attributes themselves enhancing the zero-shot
accuracy during test time, we designed a cross test between the label-based VR method and AttrVR
in this section.
We conduct the following experiments: (1) Label: Adding the VR pattern learned from labels to the
images and classifying the images using the labels; (2) Label2Attr: Adding the VR pattern learned
from labels to the images and classifying the images using the DesAttrs and DistAttrs presented in


                                                       23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 11: Cross test results between label-based VR and out AttrVR, using the ViT-B16-based
CLIP as the pre-trained model. вҖҳLabelвҖҷ and вҖҳAttrвҖҷ respectively show the results of label-based VR
(i.e., AR) and AttrVR. вҖҳAttr2LabelвҖҷ shows the results of classifying downstream images with the
AttrVR pattern using a template-prompted label, whereas вҖҳLabel2AttrвҖҷ shows the results of classify-
ing downstream images with the VR pattern trained by the label-based method using DesAttrs and
DistAttrs.


this paper; (3) Attr2Label: Adding the VR pattern learned from AttrVR to the images and classifying
the images using the labels; (4) Attr: Adding the VR pattern learned from AttrVR to the images and
classifying the images using our DesAttrs and DistAttrs.
The experimental results are shown in Figure 11. By analyzing the results, we can draw the following
two conclusions:

        вҖў The performance improvement of AttrVR arises from the VR learning process based on
          attributes, rather than from the zero-shot classification performance gains obtained during
          testing by using attributes. It is evident that the results from label2Attr are significantly
          worse than those from AttrVR, and even slightly inferior to those from the label-based VR
          method. Therefore, it can be concluded that the major contribution comes from the VR
          learning process in AttrVR, rather than the attributes used during testing.
        вҖў The VR patterns learned through label-based VR and AttrVR are not interchangeable. The
          accuracy observed in the cross test (refer to Label2Attr and Attr2Label in Figure 11) is
          significantly lower than the accuracies obtained from both label-based VR and AttrVR.
          This demonstrates that the two VR patterns are not generalizable to one another. Thus,
          repurposing VLMs using attributes and repurposing VLMs using template-prompted labels
          are fundamentally different approaches. This further highlights the innovation of AttrVR.

C.5     A NALYSIS OF T RAINING C OST

C.5.1    T IME C OST C OMPARISON B ETWEEN BASELINES AND ATTRVR

Table 9: Training cost of different VR methods, using the ViT-B16-based CLIP as the pre-trained
model and the Flowers task as an example.

                                                             VP       AR         AttrVR
                            Parameter Number              69.8k       39.9k       39.9k
                     Training Time for each Epoch (s)   2.97Вұ0.02   2.85Вұ0.03   2.83Вұ0.03
                       Training Time in Total (min)     9.78Вұ0.07   9.44Вұ0.05   9.54Вұ0.04


This section provides a summary of the parameter counts and runtime for different VR methods.
Experiments are conducted on a single A100 GPU.
The VP (Bahng et al., 2022) method employs a noise pattern with a frame size of 30. For an input
image size of 224 Г— 224, the parameter count is calculated as 224 Г— 224 Г— 3 вҲ’ (224 вҲ’ 60) Г— (224 вҲ’
60) вҲ— 3 = 69840. In contrast, both AR (Chen et al., 2023; Tsai et al., 2020) and AttrVR (ours) use
a noise pattern with a frame size of 16, resulting in a parameter count of 224 Г— 224 Г— 3 вҲ’ (224 вҲ’
32) Г— (224 вҲ’ 32) вҲ— 3 = 39936.


                                                        24
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Detailed results are presented in Table 9. We can draw the following conclusions:

        вҖў Compared to VP and AR, the additional time incurred by our AttrVR involves calculating
          the text embeddings for all DesAttrs and DistAttrs once, as well as the knn attributes
          selection once per epoch (see Algorithm 1). However, Table 9 shows that both the time for
          a single epoch and the total training time are similar between AttrVR and AR. Therefore,
          the extra time overhead introduced by AttrVR can be considered negligible.
        вҖў In comparison to VP, AR and AttrVR have fewer parameters, resulting in a lower overall
          training time.

C.5.2     T IME C OST OF ATTRVR U SING S ELECTING M ODULES

Table 10: Training cost of different selecting modules of AttrVR, using the ViT-B16-based CLIP as
the pre-trained model and the Flowers task as an example.

                                                                                                                    AttrVR (w knn)
                                    AttrVR (w mean)    AttrVR (w avg)      AttrVR (w max)       AttrVR (w rnd)
                                                                                                                         (ours)
     Batch Forward Time (ms)           7.67Вұ0.56             7.57Вұ0.43           7.30Вұ0.04          16.63Вұ0.10        7.39Вұ0.04
 Training Time for each Epoch (s)      2.88Вұ0.08             2.84Вұ0.01           2.86Вұ0.04           2.86Вұ0.03        2.83Вұ0.03
   Training Time in Total (min)        9.55Вұ0.12             9.51Вұ0.07           9.53Вұ0.05           9.75Вұ0.12        9.54Вұ0.04


Table 10 shows the time for using different selection modules in AttrVR (i.e., mean, avg, max, rnd,
knn, see Appendix C.3 for module details). It is observed that the additional computational overhead
introduced by the knn attribute selection is negligible, though it requires sorting and averaging the
nearest k attributes for each sample. The reason is shown below:
Assuming there are n samples and m attributes for each class, the time complexity for computing the
mean or maximum is O(nm), while the complexity for sorting and averaging the top k attributes is
O(n(m log m + k)). Since feature selection does not require training, the difference between these
complexities is insignificant. In our case, m = 20, k = 3, making the computational difference
almost negligible. Moreover, when compared to the computational cost of the CLIP forward pass,
these overheads tend to be trivial.

C.6     I MPACT OF S HARED AND DATASET- SPECIFIC H YPER - PARAMETERS

Table 11: Differences between shared and dataset-optimized hyper-parameters (using ViT-16-based
CLIP as the example).

                         Aircraft   Caltech   Cars    DTD       ESAT     Flowers     Food    Pets    SUN     UCF      IN    Resisc
     AR (Baseline)         31.7      95.5     68.0    62.0      93.4      85.8       85.2    92.7     67.9   78.1    66.0    81.6
 AttrVR (k=3, О»=0.5)       36.6      95.7     68.3    65.6      93.8      92.9       85.9    93.3     69.6   79.0    69.4    82.6
 AttrVR (optimized k)      36.6      95.8     68.6    65.6      93.8      92.9       85.9    93.3     69.7   79.0    69.5    82.8
 AttrVR (optimized О»)      37.0      95.9     68.5    66.0      93.8      92.9       85.9    93.3     70.0   79.0    69.5    82.6
  Dataset-optimized k       3         1        1       3         3         3          3       3        5      3       5       1
  Difference Between
                           0.0       -0.1     -0.3    0.0        0.0       0.0        0.0    0.0      -0.1   0.0     -0.1    -0.2
 Shared and Specific k
  Dataset-optimized О»      0.75      0.25     0.75    0.25       0.5       0.5        0.5    0.5      0.25   0.5     0.25    0.5
  Difference Between
                           -0.4      -0.2     -0.2    -0.4       0.0       0.0        0.0    0.0      -0.4   0.0     -0.1    0.0
 Shared and Specific О»


Further experiments are conducted where we select the optimal k and О» for each dataset and compare
them with shared hyper-parameters k and О». The optimized hyper-parameter values, performance,
and accuracy differences are presented in Table 11. As shown, the differences between the optimal
k and О» for each dataset and shared value k = 3, О» = 0.5 are minimal. Therefore, we believe that
our choice for shared k and О» can be widely used across datasets.

C.7     M ORE R ESULTS OF U SING D IFFERENT LLM S

It is also feasible to replace the GPT-3.5 LLM model used by our AttrVR with smaller or open-
source LLMs. Even in scenarios where LLMs are unavailable, the VR training and knn selection


                                                               25
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Table 12: Results of using other LLMs to generate attributes (using ViT-16-based CLIP as the
example).

                                  Baseline: AR                                Ours: AttrVR
                                                 Handcraft        Phi 3.1      Llama 3.1     GPT-4o         GPT-3.5
                  LLMs                  -
                                                 Prompts         Mini 128k       Mini         Mini        Turbo (ours)
             Open-source                 -           -             Yes           Yes            No             No
              Parameters                 -           -             3.8B           8B           NA             NA
         Aircraft (accuracy, %)      31.7Вұ0.3    33.6Вұ0.8        35.5Вұ0.5      35.7Вұ0.3      36.8Вұ0.9       36.6Вұ0.3
          DTD (accuracy, %)          62.0Вұ0.1    63.0Вұ0.7        65.1Вұ0.6      64.8Вұ0.7      65.9Вұ0.9       65.6Вұ0.8
         Flowers (accuracy, %)       85.9Вұ0.7    87.5Вұ0.6        89.9Вұ0.5      90.1Вұ0.1      92.7Вұ0.1       92.9Вұ0.4



modules in our AttrVR can still be utilized to obtain optimized handcrafted prompts (Radford et al.,
2021) with labels for individual samples, thereby improving baseline performance. Moreover, the
attribute generation process by LLMs is independent of training, which means it does not introduce
additional training time overhead, and whether the LLM is open-source or not does not affect this
aspect.
Table 12 shows the impact of different attribute generation methods: (1) baseline method AR (with-
out attributes), (2) handcrafted prompts with labels (without LLMs), (3) LLM Phi 3.1 Mini 128k,
(4) LLM Llama 3.1 Mini, (5) LLM GPT-4o Mini, (6) GPT-3.5 Turbo (used in AttrVR).
The following conclusions can be drawn from Table 12:

       вҖў Even when using only handcrafted prompts with labels without LLM-generated attributes,
         AttrVR still outperforms the baseline.
       вҖў Using smaller or open-source models can also achieve significant improvements compared
         to the baseline. So choosing which LLM to use might not be that important.
       вҖў Higher-quality LLMs (such as the GPT series) tend to yield slightly better results, making
         them more suitable for generating attributes.

C.8   T HE C ASE OF G ENERATED ATTRIBUTES WITH L OW Q UALITY


Table 13: Results of randomly-chosen attributes and knn-chosen (ours) attributes facing attributes
with different quality (using ViT-16-based CLIP as the example)

                                     Normal-quality                                  Low-quality                  High-quality
                                       Attributes                                     Attributes                   Attributes
                   Aircraft   DTD      Flowers   Food   SUN         IN       Cars   ESAT     UCF        Resisc   Caltech   Pets
 AR (Baseline)       31.7     62.0      85.8     85.2   67.9       66.0      68.0   93.4      78.1      81.6      95.5     92.7
 AttrVR (w rnd)      36.4     64.3      90.5     85.6   68.3       69.0      67.8   92.4      77.6      80.9      96.2     93.6
 AttrVR (w knn)      36.6     65.6      92.9     85.9   69.6       69.4      68.3   93.8      79.0      82.6      95.7     93.3


Some of the generated attributes might have low qualities, and may negatively impact model perfor-
mance. However, since the knn attribute selecting module in AttrVR is designed to select the most
relevant attributes for each sample, it effectively filters out low-quality ones, ensuring the quality
and relevance of the final selected attributes.
In Table 13, we present a comparison between attributes randomly selected from the generated set
(marked with вҖҳw rndвҖҷ) and those selected using our knn module (marked with вҖҳw knnвҖҷ). When the
generated attributes are of low quality, it is likely that randomly selecting attributes might yield worse
results than not using attributes (e.g. Cars, ESAT, UCF, Resisc dataset). However, the knn module in
AttrVR effectively selects high-quality and relevant attributes, leading to results that outperform the
baseline method. On the contrary, when the attributes are of sufficiently high quality (e.g, Caltech,
Pets), randomly selecting attributes may already achieve a high accuracy. Then the advantages of
our knn module might diminish. In most cases, knn module successfully helps to ensure that only
attributes with higher quality and relevance will be considered.


                                                            26
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


C.9   M ORE R ESULTS OF U SING M ULTIMODAL L ARGE L ANGUAGE M ODEL (MLLM)
      I NSTEAD OF LLM S

Table 14: Results of using MLLM instead of LLMs to generate attributes (using ViT-16-based CLIP
as the example).

                                   Aircraft (accuracy, %)   DTD (accuracy, %)   Flowers (accuracy, %)
           AR (Baseline Method)          31.7Вұ0.3               62.0Вұ0.1              85.9Вұ0.7
        AttrVR (GPT-4o-mini-LLM)         36.8Вұ0.9               65.9Вұ0.9              92.7Вұ0.1
        AttrVR (GPT-4o-mini-VLM)         36.6Вұ0.4               68.2Вұ0.3              93.7Вұ0.4


The Multimodal Large Language Model (MLLM) can generate attributes and integrate seamlessly
into our AttrVR framework by replacing the LLMs. In this section, the experiment is conducted
using the VLM module in GPT-4o-mini to generate attributes per class based on five randomly
sampled images with the size of 224 Г— 224 from the training set and the prompts below.

      вҖў DesAttr: This is a photo of [Class Name]. Describe the appearance
        of the [Task Info.] [Class Name].
      вҖў DistAttr: This is a photo of [Class Name].   Describe the unique
        appearance of a/an [Class Name] from the other [Task Info.].

where [Task Info.] represents the description of downstream tasks, shown in Table 4, and [Class
Name] represents the name of each target class.
Comparative results with generating attributes using the LLM module in GPT-4o-mini are presented
in Table 14, from which we draw the following conclusions:

      вҖў VLM-generated attributes yield better results in visually distinctive tasks (e.g., texture in
        DTD dataset). while their advantage over LLM-generated attributes diminishes in tasks
        with subtle visual differences (e.g., different models of airplanes in Aircraft dataset).
      вҖў AttrVR outperforms the baseline in all cases, using either LLM-generated or VLM-
        generated attributes, demonstrating its robustness regardless of the attribute generation
        model.


                                                    27
