Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


T HE C OMPUTATIONAL C OMPLEXITY OF P OSITIVE
N ON -C LASHING T EACHING IN G RAPHS
 Robert Ganian, Liana Khazaliya & Mathis Rocton
 Algorithms and Complexity Group, TU Wien, Vienna, Austria
 {rganian,lkhazaliya,mrocton}@ac.tuwien.ac.at

 Fionn Mc Inerney
 Telefónica Scientific Research, Barcelona, Spain
 fmcinern@gmail.com



                                            A BSTRACT

         We study the classical and parameterized complexity of computing the positive
         non-clashing teaching dimension of a set of concepts, that is, the smallest number
         of examples per concept required to successfully teach an intelligent learner un-
         der the considered, previously established model. For any class of concepts, it is
         known that this problem can be effortlessly transferred to the setting of balls in a
         graph G. We establish (1) the NP-hardness of the problem even when restricted to
         instances with positive non-clashing teaching dimension k = 2 and where all balls
         in the graph are present, (2) near-tight running time upper and lower bounds for
         the problem on general graphs, (3) fixed-parameter tractability when parameter-
         ized by the vertex integrity of G, and (4) a lower bound excluding fixed-parameter
         tractability when parameterized by the feedback vertex number and pathwidth of
         G, even when combined with k. Our results provide a nearly complete understand-
         ing of the complexity landscape of computing the positive non-clashing teaching
         dimension and answer open questions from the literature.


1   I NTRODUCTION
While typical machine learning models task a learner with finding a concept C from a concept
class C based on an—often randomly drawn—sample, in machine teaching (specifically in its com-
monly considered batch variant) the learner is provided a set of examples by a teacher; crucially,
here the examples can be selected in a way which allows the concept to be reconstructed from as
few examples as possible. Machine teaching is a core topic in computational learning theory and has
found applications in a variety of areas including robotics (Thomaz & Cakmak, 2009; Akgun et al.,
2012), trustworthy AI (Mei & Zhu, 2015; Zhang et al., 2018), inverse reinforcement learning (Ho
et al., 2016; Brown & Niekum, 2019), and education (Zhu, 2015; Chen et al., 2018; Zhu et al., 2018).
While numerous models of machine teaching have been investigated to date (Shinohara & Miyano,
1991; Goldman & Kearns, 1995; Goldman & Mathias, 1996; Zilles et al., 2011; Gao et al., 2017;
Mansouri et al., 2019; Telle et al., 2019), in this article we focus on the recently developed positive
non-clashing teaching model (Kirkpatrick et al., 2019; Fallat et al., 2023).
In non-clashing teaching, given a finite binary concept class C, for each pair C1 , C2 of distinct con-
cepts in C, at least one example provided for at least one of C1 or C2 must not be consistent with
the other concept. A key feature of non-clashing teaching is that it is the most efficient model (in
terms of the number of required examples) satisfying the Goldman-Mathias collusion-avoidance cri-
terion (Goldman & Mathias, 1996)—the “gold standard” for ensuring that the learner cannot cheat,
e.g., via a hidden communication channel with the teacher. Moreover, a teaching model is positive if
the examples provided for each concept C are required to be positively labeled for C. The restriction
of teaching models to the positive setting is common and well-motivated from applications in, e.g.,
recommendation systems (Schwab et al., 2000), computational biology (Wang et al., 2006; Yousef
et al., 2008), and grammatical inference (Stolcke & Omohundro, 1994; Denis, 2001); see also the
early works of Angluin (Angluin, 1980a;b). Non-clashing teaching has been proposed and studied


                                                  1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


in the positive setting not only within the initial papers introducing the concept (Kirkpatrick et al.,
2019; Fallat et al., 2023), but also in subsequent works (e.g., (Chalopin et al., 2024)).
While positive non-clashing teaching has the potential to be highly efficient, realizing this potential
requires us to solve the computational task of actually constructing a small set of examples for the
given concepts. More precisely, one aims at computing (a witness for) the teaching dimension of a
given concept class, i.e., the minimum integer k such that each concept is provided with at most k
examples that satisfy the conditions of the model. On the positive side, instead of considering
various different types of concepts and examples, we can restrict our attention to the setting where
each concept is a ball in some input-specified graph G, and the possible examples are vertices of G.
Indeed, it is known that any finite binary concept class C ⊆ 2V can be represented by a set B of balls
in a graph G as follows: V (G) = V ∪ {xC | C ∈ C}, xC is adjacent to xC ′ for all C, C ′ ∈ C, xC is
adjacent to v ∈ V if and only if v ∈ C, and B = {B1 (xC ) | C ∈ C} (Chalopin et al., 2023; 2024).
On the negative side, the problem is computationally intractable, and remains so even in the re-
stricted setting where every possible concept (i.e., every ball in G) is present; to distinguish this case
from the general one where not all concepts need to be present, we refer to it as strict. In particular,
Chalopin, Chepoi, Mc Inerney, and Ratel (2024) recently carried out an initial complexity-theoretic
investigation of computing the positive non-clashing teaching dimension in the strict setting. There,
they established the NP-hardness of the problem for instances with large teaching dimension (even
when restricted to the highly restricted class of split graphs), obtained runtime upper and lower
bounds under the Exponential Time Hypothesis (Impagliazzo et al., 2001), and designed a so-called
fixed-parameter algorithm for the problem when parameterized by the size of the vertex cover of G.
In this article, we significantly improve over each of these results, answer two open questions posed
by the authors of the aforementioned work (Chalopin et al., 2024), and obtain a nearly complete
understanding of the computational complexity of computing the positive non-clashing teaching
dimension (in both the strict and non-strict settings).

Contributions. Let us refer to the problems of computing the positive non-clashing teaching di-
mension in the strict and non-strict settings as S TRICT N ON -C LASH and N ON -C LASH, respectively.
Formal definitions complementing the informal descriptions given above are provided in Section 2.
Our first result concerns the complexity of S TRICT N ON -C LASH on instances with constant pos-
itive non-clashing teaching dimension. The reductions of Chalopin, Chepoi, Mc Inerney, and
Ratel (2024) only establish the NP-hardness of the problem for instances with large (i.e., input-
dependent) positive non-clashing teaching dimension k. In fact, as their first open question, the
authors ask whether S TRICT N ON -C LASH is NP-hard or polynomial-time solvable when the sought-
after dimension k is a fixed constant; the question is not only theoretically interesting, but also highly
relevant as instances of small teaching dimension are precisely the candidates for efficient teaching.
We settle this by a highly non-trivial reduction (Theorem 1) which establishes that determining
whether the positive non-clashing teaching dimension is at most 2 is NP-hard—and remains so even
when restricted to the same class of split graphs where S TRICT N ON -C LASH was previously shown
to be NP-hard (for large k) (Chalopin et al., 2024). We note that this result is, in a sense, best possi-
ble: determining whether an instance of S TRICT N ON -C LASH has a positive non-clashing teaching
dimension of 1 is trivial as it is equivalent to testing whether G is edgeless (Chalopin et al., 2024).
Next, we proceed to the running time bounds for solving the problem. Typically, the running time
upper bounds are given by an exact algorithm, while the lower bounds are obtained from a suitable
“tight” reduction under the Exponential Time Hypothesis (Impagliazzo et al., 2001). In the preced-
ing work, Chalopin, Chepoi, Mc Inerney, and Ratel (2024) obtained algorithmic lower and upper
                             2
bounds of 2o(n·d) and 2O(n ·d) , where n and d are the number of vertices and the diameter of G, re-
spectively. From our reduction and a more careful algorithmic analysis, we obtain a lower bound of
2o(n·d·k) and an upper bound of 2O(n·d·k·log n) (Theorem 4 and Proposition 5)—making the bounds
almost tight, with just a logarithmic factor in the exponent separating the two.
While the aforementioned bounds apply to the problem in general, often one may only need
to solve the problem on “well-structured” graphs. The more refined parameterized complexity
paradigm (Downey & Fellows, 2013; Cygan et al., 2015) offers the perfect tools to analyze and
identify precisely which structural properties of input graphs—usually captured by a suitable in-
teger parameter k—allow us to circumvent its general intractability. The analog to the complex-


                                                    2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


ity class P in the parameterized setting is FPT (“fixed-parameter tractable”), which characterizes
parameterized problems solvable in f (k) · nO(1) time; intuitively, this means that the problem is
solvable in uniformly polynomial time for each constant value of k. Parameterized complexity is
well-established and has been successfully applied for non-clashing teaching (Chalopin et al., 2024)
as well as in a variety of related subfields of learning theory (Downey et al., 1993; Li & Liang, 2018;
Ganian & Korchemna, 2021; Ordyniak & Szeider, 2021; Brand et al., 2023; Eiben et al., 2023a;b).
In their previous work, Chalopin, Chepoi, Mc Inerney, and Ratel (2024) established the fixed-
parameter tractability of S TRICT N ON -C LASH when parameterized by the vertex cover number
of the input graph G—or, equivalently, the vertex deletion distance to a graph consisting only of
isolated vertices. The drawback of that result is that the vertex cover number is a highly “restrictive”
parameter, in the sense that it achieves low values only on rather simple graphs. This is also re-
flected in the open question posed in that article, which asked about the problem’s complexity under
other parameterizations. As our third contribution, we establish (in Theorem 17) the fixed-parameter
tractability of N ON -C LASH—i.e., the more general task of computing the non-clashing teaching di-
mension when not all concepts (i.e., balls) need to be present—parameterized by the vertex integrity
of G. Vertex integrity is a well-studied graph parameter (Drange et al., 2016; Gima et al., 2022;
Gima & Otachi, 2024; Hanaka et al., 2024) that essentially captures the vertex deletion distance to a
graph consisting only of small connected components; it is known (and easily observed) to be a less
restrictive parameterization than the vertex cover number (cf. Section 2), meaning that our result
significantly pushes the boundaries of tractability even for the simpler strict variant of the problem.
The proof of Theorem 17 is highly non-trivial. In particular, while the algorithm itself is simple and
merely uses a data reduction technique (“kernelization” (Cygan et al., 2015)) that iteratively removes
certain parts of the instance, the crucial correctness proof underlying the result is very involved and
relies on identifying a carefully defined set of “canonical” examples for our instances. The algorithm
is also constructive, meaning that it can output a set of examples for the concepts as a witness.
As our final contribution, in Theorem 18 we complement Theorem 17 with a complexity-theoretic
lower bound excluding fixed-parameter tractability under many other graph parameters previously
considered in the literature, including pathwidth, treewidth, and the feedback vertex number—the
latter two of which were explicitly mentioned in the aforementioned open question (Chalopin et al.,
2024). We do so through a complex W[1]-hardness reduction (which can be seen as a parameterized
analog to classical reductions used to establish NP-hardness) that excludes, under well-established
complexity assumptions, N ON -C LASH from being in FPT even when combining all the parameter-
izations mentioned in the previous sentence with the positive non-clashing teaching dimension k.

Related Work. It is known that N ON -C LASH is significantly more challenging than the special
case captured by S TRICT N ON -C LASH. For instance, the reduction of Kirkpatrick, Simon, and
Zilles (2019, Subsection 7.1) establishes that N ON -C LASH is NP-hard even if the task is to deter-
mine whether the positive non-clashing teaching dimension of the instance is 1; on the other hand,
the analogous question for S TRICT N ON -C LASH is trivial as it simply requires determining whether
the input graph is edgeless or not (Chalopin et al., 2024). In fact, unless P = NP, that reduction
also rules out a polynomial-time 1.999-approximation algorithm. For clarity, note that while that re-
duction does not consider concepts that are balls in a graph, as mentioned earlier, every finite binary
concept class can be easily transformed into a class of balls in a graph (Chalopin et al., 2023; 2024).
Apart from the computational questions resolved in this work, another prominent open question is
whether the non-clashing teaching dimension is upper-bounded by the VC-dimension (Kirkpatrick
et al., 2019; Fallat et al., 2023; Simon, 2023). It is known that the non-clashing teaching dimension
(where one allows negative examples) can be significantly smaller than the positive variant, e.g.,
balls in cycles have a non-clashing teaching dimension of 2, but their positive non-clashing teaching
dimension is not bounded by any constant (Chalopin et al., 2024). It was also pointed out that balls
in cacti or planar graphs could be good candidates for concept classes negatively answering this
question (Chalopin et al., 2024). Further, Simon (2023) recently explored the relationship between
non-clashing teaching and recursive teaching and identified the precise gap between the two notions.
Concept classes consisting of balls in a graph are a discrete analog of the geometric concept classes
of balls in a Euclidean space which have been investigated in PAC-learning, e.g., as part of the more
general Dudley concept classes (Floyd, 1989; Ben-David & Litman, 1998). Apart from non-clashing
teaching, they have also been explored for the closely related and well-studied sample compression


                                                   3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


schemes (Chalopin et al., 2023) introduced by Littlestone and Warmuth (1986). As discussed in
prior works (Kirkpatrick et al., 2019; Fallat et al., 2023; Chalopin et al., 2024), non-clashing teach-
ing maps can be viewed as signed variants of representation maps for concept classes, a notion intro-
duced to design unlabeled sample compression schemes for maximum concept classes (Kuzmin &
Warmuth, 2007) (and subsequently the more general ample concept classes (Chalopin et al., 2022)).

2       P RELIMINARIES
We assume familiarity with graph terminology (Diestel, 2024). We only consider simple, finite, and
undirected graphs. For an integer n ≥ 1, we set [n] := {1, . . . , n}. As we only consider finite
binary concept classes which can be represented as balls in graphs (Chalopin et al., 2023; 2024), we
introduce the terminology for positive non-clashing teaching directly in the setting of graphs.

P OSITIVE N ON -C LASHING T EACHING IN G RAPHS . Let G be a graph. For an integer r ≥ 0 and
a vertex v ∈ V (G), the ball Br (v) is the set of all vertices at distance at most r from its center v.
Let B be a set of balls of G. A positive teaching map T for B is a mapping which assigns to each
ball B ∈ B a teaching set T (B) ⊆ B, i.e., a subset of the vertices of B. The dimension of T is
maxB∈B |T (B)|—in other words, the largest image of T . A positive teaching map T is called non-
clashing for B if for each pair of distinct balls B1 , B2 ∈ B, there exists a vertex w ∈ T (B1 )∪T (B2 )
such that w ̸∈ B1 ∩ B2 . Note that w must lie in B1 ∪ B2 by definition, and hence, this condition
ensures that one of the balls has a teaching set which is not contained in the other ball. We say that
w distinguishes B1 and B2 , or distinguishes B1 from B2 (or vice versa). If a teaching map is not
non-clashing, we say that there is a conflict between any two balls for which there is no element
distinguishing them. We now define our problems of interest:1
    S TRICT N ON -C LASH
    Input:      A graph G and an integer k.
    Question: Is there a positive non-clashing teaching map for the set of all balls of G with
                dimension at most k?

    N ON -C LASH
    Input:      A graph G, a set B of balls of G, and an integer k.
    Question: Is there a positive non-clashing teaching map for B with dimension at most k?

We call a teaching map satisfying the conditions of the respective problem statement a solution. To
avoid any confusion, we remark that the above definitions—as well as every result obtained in this
article—concerns non-clashing teaching in the previously studied positive setting.

PARAMETERIZED C OMPLEXITY. In parameterized complexity (Downey & Fellows, 2013; Cygan
et al., 2015), the running-times of algorithms are studied with respect to a parameter p ∈ N and input
size n. It is normally used for NP-hard problems, with the aim of finding a parameter describing a
feature of the instance such that the combinatorial explosion is confined to this parameter. A param-
eterized problem is fixed-parameter tractable (FPT) if it can be solved by an algorithm running in
time f (p) · nO(1) , where f is a computable function; these are fixed-parameter algorithms. Proving
that a problem is W[1]-hard via a parameterized reduction from a W[1]-hard problem rules out the
existence of a fixed-parameter algorithm under the well-established hypothesis that W[1] ̸= FPT.
S TRICT N ON -C LASH is known to be fixed-parameter tractable when parameterized by the vertex
cover number of G, i.e., the minimum integer a such that there is a subset X ⊂ V (G) of at most a
vertices where G − X is an edgeless graph. In this article, we consider three parameters which are
upper-bounded by the vertex cover number (or, more precisely, the vertex cover number plus one):

           • the vertex integrity of G, which is the minimum integer b such that there is a vertex subset
             X ⊂ V (G) where for every connected component H of G − X, |V (H) ∪ X| ≤ b;
           • the feedback vertex number of G (denoted by fvs(G)), which is the minimum integer c
             such that there is a vertex subset X ⊂ V (G) where G − X is acyclic;
    1
        While we use decision variants, our algorithms are constructive and can output a teaching map as a witness.


                                                          4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


             • the pathwidth of G (denoted by pw(G)), which has a more involved definition based on the
               notion of path decompositions. However, for the purposes of this article it is sufficient to
               note the well-known facts (Downey & Fellows, 2013; Cygan et al., 2015) that deleting one
               vertex from each connected component of G will decrease the pathwidth by at most one,
               and that a graph consisting of a disjoint union of paths and subdivided caterpillars (i.e.,
               graphs consisting of a central path with pendent paths attached to it) has pathwidth 2.


3   I NTRACTABILITY AND RUNNING T IME L OWER B OUNDS

In this section, we establish that S TRICT N ON -C LASH is NP-hard even when k = 2, and thus, that
it cannot be 1.499-approximated in polynomial time unless P = NP. Recall that the former result is
tight in the sense that S TRICT N ON -C LASH is trivial when k = 1 (Chalopin et al., 2024).
Theorem 1. S TRICT N ON -C LASH is NP-hard even when restricted to split graphs with k = 2.

We prove Theorem 1 via a polynomial-time reduction that, given an instance of 3-SAT, constructs
an equivalent instance (G, k) of S TRICT N ON -C LASH, where G is a split graph and k = 2.

 3-SAT
 Input: A CNF formula over a set of clauses C = {c1 , . . . , cm } containing variables from X =
 {x1 , . . . , xn }, where each clause has exactly 3 literals.
 Question: Is there a variable assignment τ : X → {True, False} satisfying each clause in C?

Reduction. Given an instance ϕ = (C, X ) of 3-SAT, we construct the graph G as follows (see
Figure 1b for an illustration).

                                                      a
                                                                                    R∗       R′

                                                          S∗          A             ri∗

                                                 S′       s∗k         ti           ri∗∗       ri′

                                              s′k         s∗∗         fi           ri∗∗∗      ri′′
                                                           k


                                              s′′k        s∗∗∗                      rj∗
                                                           k
                                                                      tj
                                                                                   rj∗∗       rj′
                                                                      fj
                                                                                   rj∗∗∗      rj′′


                                                          s∗l         tq            rq∗

                                               s′l        s∗∗         fq           rq∗∗       rq′
                                                           l


                                              s′′l        s∗∗∗                     rq∗∗∗      rq′′
                                                           l
                                                                      tp
                                              s′0                                   rp∗
                                                                      fp
                                                                                   rp∗∗       rp′

                  v∗                                                                          rp′′
                                                                                   rp∗∗∗
         ′
     v           v ∗∗                                                                         r0′

    v ′′         v ∗∗∗

(a) The force-gadget.          (b) An example of the graph G obtained by applying our reduction on the 3-SAT
The dotted edge cor-           instance with X = {xi , xj , xq , xp } and C = {(xi ∨ xj ∨ xq ), (xj ∨ xq ∨ xp )}.
responds to the ab-            Vertices in ovals form independent sets, while cliques are depicted by rectangles.
sence of that edge.            Blue edges denote the existence of all possible edges between the two sets.


                                                           5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


       • First, for each i ∈ [n], we create a pair of vertices {ti , fi }. We set A := {ti , fi }i∈[n] .
       • For each i ∈ [n], we introduce a variable force-gadget, which consists of a set of vertices
         {ri∗ , ri∗∗ , ri∗∗∗ , ri′ , ri′′ } and edges as depicted in Figure 1a.
       • For each i ∈ [n], we attach the variable force-gadget to the pair {ti , fi } as shown in
         Figure 1b, by making both ri∗ and ri∗∗∗ adjacent to both ti and fi . This gadget will
         guarantee that the corresponding assignment of the ith variable is well-defined. We set
         R∗ := {ri∗ , ri∗∗ , ri∗∗∗ }i∈[n] and R′ := {r0′ } ∪ {ri′ , ri′′ }i∈[n] , where r0′ is a new vertex.
       • Similarly, for each k ∈ [m], we introduce a clause force-gadget on the set of new vertices
         {s∗k , s∗∗   ∗∗∗ ′     ′′
                 k , sk , sk , sk } (as depicted in Figure 1a). This gadget corresponds to the clause ck
         of the instance ϕ. We add adjacencies according to the appearance of literals in ck , i.e., if
         xi ∈ ck for some i ∈ [n], then we connect both s∗k and s∗∗∗      k   to fi ; and if xi ∈ ck , then we
         connect both s∗k and s∗∗∗  j   to t i . Intuitively, we connect the gadget   to those vertices whose
         underlying assignments (True or False for ti and fi , resp.) do not satisfy cj , while
         the opposite assignments would (see Figure 1b). We set S ∗ := {s∗k , s∗∗               ∗∗∗
                                                                                           k , sk }k∈[m] and
           ′        ′      ′     ′′                   ′
         S := {s0 } ∪ {sk , sk }k∈[m] , where s0 is a new vertex.
       • We add all possible edges between (a) S ∗ and R∗ ; (b) R∗ and S ′ ; (c) S ∗ and R′ .
       • We add all possible edges within S ∗ , and within R∗ .
       • Lastly, we add a special vertex a and make it adjacent to all the other vertices of the graph.

This concludes the construction of G; given an instance ϕ = (C, X ) of 3-SAT, the reduction outputs
the S TRICT N ON -C LASH instance (G, 2). We now prove its correctness via the next two lemmas.
Lemma 2. If ϕ is a YES-instance of 3-SAT, then (G, 2) is a YES-instance of S TRICT N ON -C LASH.
Lemma 3. If (G, 2) is a YES-instance of S TRICT N ON -C LASH, then ϕ is a YES-instance of 3-SAT.

The proof of Theorem 1 then follows from Lemma 2 and Lemma 3. In particular, they prove that
there is a polynomial-time reduction which transforms any instance of 3-SAT with n variables and
m clauses into an equivalent instance (G, 2) of S TRICT N ON -C LASH where |V (G)| = O(n + m)
and G is a split graph of diameter 2. The properties of this reduction also allow us to infer more
precise algorithmic lower bounds. In particular, since an algorithm solving S TRICT N ON -C LASH in
2o(|V (G)|·d·k) time would allow us to solve 3-SAT in 2o(n+m) time:
Theorem 4. Unless the Exponential Time Hypothesis fails, there is no algorithm solving S TRICT
N ON -C LASH in time 2o(|V (G)|·d·k) , where d and k are the diameter of G and the target positive
non-clashing teaching dimension of the instance, respectively.

We complement this lower bound with a refined upper bound for the more general N ON -C LASH:
Proposition 5. N ON -C LASH can be solved in 2O(|V (G)|·d·k·log |V (G)|) time.

4   F IXED -PARAMETER T RACTABILITY VIA V ERTEX I NTEGRITY
Given that N ON -C LASH is NP-hard, it is natural to ask whether the problem can be solved effi-
ciently on inputs exhibiting some well-defined structural properties. In this section, we establish
the fixed-parameter tractability of N ON -C LASH when parameterized by the vertex integrity of the
input graph. Consider an instance (G, B, k) of N ON -C LASH and let p be the vertex integrity of G.
As the first step, we invoke the known algorithm to compute a “witness” for the vertex integrity in
time pO(p) |V (G)| (Fellows & Stueckle, 1989), i.e., a set X ⊂ V (G) such that |V (H) ∪ X| ≤ p for
each connected component H of G − X. Let H denote the set of connected components of G − X.
To make use of the vertex integrity of G, we will partition the components of H into a parameter-
bounded number of equivalence classes such that the elements belonging to the same class share
some structural properties that will allow us to consider them, to some extent, interchangeable.
Definition 1. Two subgraphs H, H ′ ∈ H are twin-blocks with respect to B, denoted H ∼B H ′ , if
there exists an isomorphism αH,H ′ from H to H ′ with the following properties:

       • for each u ∈ V (H) and v ∈ X, uv ∈ E(G) if and only if αH,H ′ (u)v ∈ E(G), and
       • for each u ∈ V (H) and r ∈ N, Br (u) ∈ B if and only if Br (αH,H ′ (u)) ∈ B.


                                                      6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Intuitively, H ∼B H ′ if and only if there is a bijection αH,H ′ between the vertices of the two
subgraphs which preserves (1) edges inside H and H ′ , (2) edges to X, and (3) the existence of balls
in B centered at the vertices of H and H ′ . We refer to αH,H ′ as the canonical isomorphism between
the two twin-blocks at hand, and if multiple choices of α exist, we choose and fix one arbitrarily; we
drop the indices of α when the subgraphs are clear from the context. Observe that for any choice of
H and H ′ , H ∼B H ′ can be tested in time at most pO(p) by enumerating all possible choices of α.
Clearly, ∼B is an equivalence relation and we denote by [H]∼B the equivalence class containing H.
For u ∈ V (H), we further define [u]∼B = {αH,H ′ (u) | H ′ ∈ [H]∼B }, and similarly for Br (u) ∈ B,
[Br (u)]∼B = {Br (u′ ) ∈ B | u′ ∈ [u]∼B }; intuitively, these refer to the sets of counterparts of u
and Br (u) in the equivalence class, respectively. For brevity, we overload the notation ∼B and use
v ∼B w (or Br (v) ∼B Br (w)) to express that v ∈ [w]∼B (or Br (v) ∈ [Br (w)]∼B , respectively).
                                                                                            3
Observation 6. The number of equivalence classes on H defined by ∼B is at most 2O(p ) .

While the equivalence relation ∼B is defined based on the input (in particular, G and B), our proof
requires also considering a more refined equivalence relation based on the structure of a hypothetical
positive non-clashing teaching map. Toward this, we use the following notion to capture how a
hypothetical teaching set interacts with the balls centered in the components of H.
Definition 2. The blueprint S of a teaching set T (B) for a ball B = Br (u) centered in H ∈ H is a
tuple (SX , SH , Sf ) composed of:

      1. the set SX = T (B) ∩ X,
      2. the set SH = T (B) ∩ V (H),
      3. the set Sf = {fH0 | H0 ∈ H} of functions, where for each H0 the function fH0 : V (H0 ) →
         {0, 1, 2} specifies whether for a vertex v ∈ V (H0 ), the set ([v]∼B ∩ T (B)) \ V (H) of
         counterparts of v outside of H has size 0, 1 or at least 2.

Intuitively, the blueprint specifies how the teaching set for B interacts with (1) the set X and (2) the
vertices inside H itself; for the rest of the graph, the blueprint also counts how many “equivalent”
vertices it contains from each equivalence class of H, but only up to 2. At this point, it may not be
clear why we do not differentiate between any size greater than 2; the reason is that if the actual size
is 3 or more, there are superfluous elements in the teaching set, as we prove below. In fact, we prove
a more general statement which holds regardless of whether vertices in H are counted or not.
Lemma 7. Let u ∈ V (G), B = Br (u) ∈ B, and T be a positive non-clashing teaching map for B.
Suppose there exist H0 ∈ H and v ∈ V (H0 ) such that |[v]∼B ∩ T (B)| ≥ 3. Then, there exists z in
[v]∼B ∩ T (B) such that removing z from T (B) yields a positive non-clashing teaching map for B.

As a corollary of Lemma 7, we can obtain an upper bound on the positive non-clashing teaching
dimension of our instance, which will be useful later in this section.
Corollary 8. Let G be a graph with vertex integrity p and B an arbitrary set of balls of G. Then,
                                                                                             3
the positive non-clashing teaching dimension of B is upper-bounded by a function s(p) = 2O(p ) .

Returning to the notion of blueprints defined earlier, we can now formalize a refined notion of
equivalence that also takes into account the behavior of a hypothetical solution.
Definition 3. Given B = Br (u) centered in H, and H ′ ∼B H, we say that B and B ′ = Br (α(u))
                                                                ′    ′     ′
share the same blueprint if, for (SX , SH , (fH0 )H0 ∈H ) and (SX , SH , (fH  )
                                                                             0 H0 ∈H
                                                                                     ), the respective
                       ′                                  ′                                         ′
blueprints of B and B , the following hold: (1) SX = SX , (2) ∀v ∈ V (H), v ∈ SH ⇔ α(v) ∈ SH          ,
                             ′
and (3) ∀H0 ∈ H, fH0 = fH0 .
Definition 4. Given a positive non-clashing teaching map T for B, we say that two components
H, H ′ ∈ H are perfectly-equivalent twin-blocks (or simply perfectly equivalent) with respect to T
on B, denoted H ≡TB H ′ , if H ∼B H ′ and, for all u ∈ V (H), r ∈ N, and Br (u) ∈ B, it holds that
Br (u) and Br (α(u)) share the same blueprint. Note that ≡TB is an equivalence relation.

Crucially, we can also bound the number of equivalence classes for this refined equivalence defined
w.r.t. a hypothetical teaching map. We denote the equivalence class of H by [H]≡TB .
                                                                                         O(p3 )
Observation 9. The number of equivalence classes on H defined by ≡TB is at most 22                .


                                                   7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


With this refined equivalence in hand, we proceed to the second milestone required for our algorithm:
a structural result establishing the existence of “well-behaved teaching maps”. Roughly speaking,
by “well-behaved” we mean teaching maps which only use examples (i.e., vertices) from X and a
bounded number of “core” components in H, with some controlled exceptions. Toward formalizing
this, let us fix an arbitrary total ordering ≺ on the components in H.
Definition 5. For B ∈ B and x ∈ T (B) ∩ V (H) for some H ∈ H, the (B, x)-core K(B,x) contains
the first s(p) + 1 elements w.r.t. ≺ of {H ′ ∈ [H]∼B | ∃B ′ ∈ [B]≡TB , α(x) ∈ T (B ′ ) ∩ V (H ′ )}. The
B-core is the union of the (B, x)-cores for all such x, and the core K is the union for all B ∈ B of
the B-cores.
Definition 6. A component H ∈ H is in the 1-extended core K1 if H ∈ K or there exists B ∈ B
and x ∈ V (H) such that (1) B is centered in K or in X, and (2) x ∈ T (B). Going one step further,
a component H ∈ H is in the 2-extended core K2 if H ∈ K1 or there exists B ∈ B and x ∈ V (H)
such that (1) B is centered in K1 or in X, and (2) x ∈ T (B).
For A ∈ {K, K1 , K2 }, note that A is a subset of H, but by slight abuse of notation, we will write
x ∈ V (A) for x ∈ V (G) to denote ∃H ∈ A with x ∈ V (H) when not leading to any ambiguity. It
is not difficult to see that the definitions yield the following.
                                                                                          O(p3 )
Observation 10. The number of components in K2 is upper-bounded by c(p) = 22                       .
We can now formalize the notion of “well-behaved” teaching maps via the property of compactness.
Definition 7. A teaching map T is compact if, for any H ∈ H \ K2 and any x ∈ V (H), each ball
whose teaching set contains x is centered in H.
Our next aim is to prove in Lemma 13 that we can safely restrict our attention to computing compact
teaching maps only. Before we can establish that result, we first prove two auxiliary statements.
Lemma 11. Let T be a positive non-clashing teaching map for B. Let B ∈ B be centered in
HB ∈ H \ K1 with x ∈ T (B) ∩ V (H) for some H ∈ H \ HB and Hi ∈ K(B,x) . By definition,
there exists xi ∈ [x]∼B ∩ V (Hi ). If replacing x by xi in T (B) creates a conflict, then there exists
zi ∈ T (B) ∩ V (Hi ).
Lemma 12. Let T be an optimal positive non-clashing teaching map for B, with B ∈ B centered in
HB ∈ H \ K1 . For x ∈ T (B) ∩ V (H) for some H ∈ H \ HB , if |K(B,x) | = s(p) + 1, then there
are Hi ∈ K(B,x) and xi ∈ [x]∼B ∩ V (Hi ) such that replacing x by xi in T (B) creates no conflict.
Lemma 13. If B has positive non-clashing teaching dimension k, then it also admits a compact
positive non-clashing teaching map of dimension k.
We now proceed to the crux of our algorithm: the proof that one can reduce the size of the instance
(G, B) without changing its positive non-clashing teaching dimension (formalized in Lemma 15).
Toward this, it will be useful to focus on how the balls in B interact with certain subgraphs of G.
Definition 8. Let G′ be an induced subgraph of G. Then, B induces the set B ′ of vertex sets w.r.t. G′ ,
where B ′ = {Br (u) ∩ V (G′ ) | Br (u) ∈ B ∧ u ∈ V (G′ )}.
We note that B ′ need not necessarily be a set of balls in G′ itself: for instance, it may well happen
that for some B ∈ B ′ the vertex set B ∩ V (G′ ) is not even connected. However, under some
conditions on G′ that we will be able to guarantee, B ′ is, in fact, a set of balls in G′ .
Lemma 14. Let G be a graph, B a set of balls in G, and G′ an induced subgraph of G. If V (G′ )
contains X and, for every H ∈ H, either (1) V (H) ⊆ V (G′ ) or (2) V (H)∩V (G′ ) = ∅∧∃H ′ , H ′′ ∈
[H]∼B , H ′ ̸= H ′′ , V (H ′ ) ∪ V (H ′′ ) ⊆ V (G′ ) holds, then the set B ′ induced by B w.r.t. G′ is a set
of balls in G′ . Moreover, there is a bijection between balls in B ′ and balls in B centered in G′ .
We define the reduced graph G′ of G as the graph obtained from G by removing all but f (p) =
                 b(p)
c(p) + p·c(p)+p
          s(p)
                      + 1 twin-blocks from each large class of ∼B , where b(p) = O(p3 ) is the
maximum number of distinct balls centered in any component of H. Let B ′ be the set induced by B
on G′ according to Definition 8. By Lemma 14, B ′ is a set of balls in G′ . The size of G′ is at most
                        3       O(p3 )
g(p) = p + f (p) · 2O(p ) = 22       . Thus, an optimal positive non-clashing teaching map for B ′ can
be computed (e.g., by brute force) in time that depends only on p. We now aim at proving that B ′ is
equivalent to B, i.e., that the optimal positive non-clashing teaching dimension is the same for both.


                                                     8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Lemma 15. Suppose that there is a solution for (G, B, k). Then, there exists a solution T ′ for the
reduced instance (G′ , B ′ , k).

The following lemma establishes that a solution for the reduced instance can be lifted to one for the
original instance; note that this also ensures that our algorithm will be constructive.
Lemma 16. Let k ∈ N and T ′ be a compact solution for the instance (G′ , B ′ , k). We can construct
                                                 O(p3 )
a compact solution T for (G, B, k) in 22                  · |V (G)|O(1) time.

Finally, we obtain our main parameterized tractability result by combining the previous ingredients.
In particular, in the proof, we construct (G′ , B ′ , k), solve the problem there, and argue correctness.
Theorem 17. N ON -C LASH is FPT parameterized by the vertex integrity of the input graph G.

5       H ARDNESS FOR C LASSICAL S TRUCTURAL PARAMETERIZATIONS
In this section, we prove that N ON -C LASH is intractable w.r.t. the feedback vertex number and
pathwidth; the same then holds for generalizations of these measures like treewidth or clique-width.
Theorem 18. N ON -C LASH is W[1]-hard parameterized by fvs(G) + pw(G) + k.

We establish Theorem 18 by describing a parameterized reduction below and proving its correct-
ness in Lemma 19. We reduce from a problem called NAE-I NTEGER -3-SAT, which is W[1]-hard
parameterized by the number of variables (Bringmann et al., 2016), and is defined as follows.

 NAE-I NTEGER -3-SAT
 Input: A set of clauses C over variables X , and an integer d. Any clause c ∈ C has the form
 x ≤ cx , y ≤ cy , and z ≤ cz , where cx , cy , cz ∈ {1, . . . , d}.
 Question: Is there a variable assignment X → {1, . . . , d} such that for each clause, either 1 or
 2 of its three inequalities are satisfied?

The Reduction. Given an instance ϕ of NAE-I NTEGER -3-SAT, we construct an instance (G, B, k)
of N ON -C LASH in polynomial time as follows, starting with the graph G.

           • For each variable x ∈ X , make a (variable) path P x := (x1 , . . . , xd ) of order d.
           • For each clause c ∈ C, make two vertices c and c′ and, w.l.o.g., suppose that the clause c
             contains the variables x, y, and z, and that cx ≤ cy ≤ cz . Connect the vertex c to xd , yd ,
             and zd by three distinct paths of lengths 4d, 4d + cy − cx , and 4d + cz − cx , respectively.2
             These long paths ensure that there are no unwanted shortcuts in G and that, for rc =
             5d − cx − 1, the ball Brc (c) contains all of P x , P y , and P z except for their first cx , cy ,
             and cz vertices (whose respective indices correspond to the respective variable values that
             satisfy the clause c), respectively. Similarly, connect the vertex c′ to x1 , y1 , and z1 by three
             distinct paths of lengths 4d + cz − cx , 4d + cz − cy , and 4d, respectively. Analogously, this
             ensures that, for rc′ ′ = 4d+cz −1, the ball Brc′ ′ (c′ ) contains the opposite vertices to Brc (c)
             in P x , P y , and P z (whose respective indices correspond to the respective variable values
             that do not satisfy the clause c), while ensuring that no unwanted shortcuts exist in G.
           • For each clause c ∈ C and each variable q ∈ X such that c does not contain q, in G, connect
             the vertices c and c′ to q1 by distinct paths of length 3d. These paths ensure that the balls
             Brc (c) and Brc′ ′ (c′ ) described above contain every other variable path completely, while
             ensuring that no unwanted shortcuts exist in G.
           • Let S be the set of all the vertices that currently exist in G. For each x ∈ X , in G, make
             a vertex fx and connect it to each vertex in S except those in P x via a distinct path of
             length 6d. Finally, for all x, y ∈ X , make fx adjacent to fy . This ensures that, for each
             x ∈ X , the ball B6d (fx ) contains every vertex in G except for those in P x , while ensuring
             that no unwanted shortcuts exist in G. This completes the construction of G (see Figure 2).

Set k := |X |. Let B consist of V (G), B6d (fx ) for all x ∈ X , and Brc (c) and Brc′ ′ (c′ ) for all c ∈ C.
    2
        “Connect two vertices u, v by a path of length p” means to make u and v the endpoints of a path of length p.


                                                             9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                        fq
                                                                                                                   c′


                           ue
                                       fz


                           iq
                        cl
                           fy                                       cx                     cy
                                                                −                      −
                   fx                                      cz                     cz
                                                       +                      +                     4d


                                                                                                                            3d
                                                    4d                     4d

                                                   x1                      y1                         z1                          q1

                                                   x2                      y2                         z2                          q2


                                                                     ···
                                             ···


                                                                                                                            ···
                                                                                                ···
                                                                           ycy
                                Br′ (c′ )
                                  c′               xc x                                                                           qi
                                 Brc (c)                                                              zcz


                                                                     ···
                                             ···


                                                                                                                            ···
                                                                                                ···
                                                   xd−1                    yd−1                       zd−1                        qd−1

                                                   xd                      yd                         zd                          qd

                                                                         4d                4d
                                                     4d                     +                   +
                                                                                                    cz


                                                                                                              3d
                                                                                 cy                      −
                                                                                      −                      cx
                                                                                          cx
                                                                                                                        c

Figure 2: Colorful edges denote paths of the depicted lengths. Two black curves separate the clique
from the rest of the graph. Each dotted edge shows that a vertex of the clique is adjacent to all the
vertices of the graph below the separating curves except those in the adjacent rectangle. The gray
curve gives an intuition of which vertices of Px , Py , and Pz are contained in Brc (c) and Brc′ ′ (c′ ).


Correctness of the Reduction. Suppose, given an instance ϕ of NAE-I NTEGER -3-SAT, that the
reduction from the subsection above returns (G, B, k) as an instance of N ON -C LASH.
Lemma 19. ϕ is a YES-instance of NAE-I NTEGER -3-SAT if and only if (G, B, k) is a YES-instance
of N ON -C LASH.

Proof of Theorem 18. Lemma 19 establishes the correctness of the polynomial-time reduction from
the beginning of Section 5. To complete the proof, it remains to show that fvs(G) + pw(G) + k is
bounded above by a function of |X |. This clearly holds for k which is, by definition, |X |. Deleting
from G the vertices x1 , xd , and fx for all x ∈ X results in an acyclic graph G′ ; in particular G has
a feedback vertex set of size 3|X |. To establish a bound on pw(G), it now suffices to show that G′
also has bounded pathwidth. Note that G′ consists of a set of connected components, each of which
is either a subdivided caterpillar (this is what remains of each component containing a variable path)
or a vertex (of the form c or c′ ) with multiple pendent subdivided caterpillars and (simple) paths.
Since deleting one further vertex from each connected component may only reduce the pathwidth
by 1 and we need a single such deletion operation to reach a graph class of constant pathwidth (see
Section 2), we also obtain that pw(G) is bounded by a function of |X |.

6    C ONCLUDING R EMARKS
Our computational upper and lower bounds provide a near-comprehensive understanding of the com-
plexity of computing the positive non-clashing teaching dimension. Apart from our contributions to
the previously studied strict setting, we consider it notable that our work is the first to also tackle the
complexity of non-clashing teaching in the non-strict setting—i.e., the more general (and arguably
more natural) case where not all possible concepts are present. One open question highlighted by
our work concerns the tiny remaining gap between the algorithmic lower and upper bounds obtained
in Theorem 4 and Proposition 5. More general directions for future work are to perform a similar
complexity analysis in the non-positive setting and to consider approximation algorithms.


                                                                                 10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
This work was funded by the Austrian Science Fund (FWF) [10.55776/Y1329 and
10.55776/COE12], the WWTF Vienna Science and Technology Fund (Project 10.47379/ICT22029),
the      European Union’s Horizon 2020 research and innovation COFUND programme Log-
iCS@TUWien (grant agreement No 101034440), the Spanish Ministry of Economic Affairs
and Digital Transformation and the European Union-NextGenerationEU through the project 6G-
RIEMANN (TSI-063000-2021-147), and the Smart Networks and Services Joint Undertaking (SNS
JU) under the European Union’s Horizon Europe and innovation programme under Grant Agreement
No. 101139067 (ELASTIC). Views and opinions expressed are however those of the authors only
and do not necessarily reflect those of the European Union (EU). Neither the EU nor the granting
authority can be held responsible for them.

R EFERENCES
Baris Akgun, Maya Cakmak, Jae W. Yoo, and Andrea L. Thomaz. Trajectories and keyframes
  for kinesthetic teaching: A human-robot interaction perspective. In Proc. of the 7th ACM/IEEE
  International Conference on Human-Robot Interaction (HRI 2012), pp. 391–398, 2012.
Dana Angluin. Inductive inference of formal languages from positive data. Information and Control,
  45:117–135, 1980a.
Dana Angluin. Finding patterns common to a set of strings. Journal of Computer and System
  Sciences, 21:46–62, 1980b.
Shai Ben-David and Ami Litman. Combinatorial variability of Vapnik-Chervonenkis classes with
  applications to sample compression schemes. Discrete Applied Mathematics, 86:3–25, 1998.
Cornelius Brand, Robert Ganian, and Kirill Simonov. A parameterized theory of PAC learning. In
  Proc. of the 37th AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI 2023), pp. 6834–6841, 2023.
Karl Bringmann, Danny Hermelin, Matthias Mnich, and Erik Jan van Leeuwen. Parameterized
  complexity dichotomy for steiner multicut. Journal of Computer and System Sciences, 82(6):
  1020–1043, 2016.
Daniel S. Brown and Scott Niekum. Machine teaching for inverse reinforcement learning: Al-
  gorithms and applications. In Proc. of the 33rd AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence
  (AAAI 2019), volume 33, pp. 7749–7758, 2019.
Jérémie Chalopin, Victor Chepoi, Shay Moran, and Manfred K. Warmuth. Unlabeled sample com-
    pression schemes and corner peelings for ample and maximum classes. Journal of Computer and
    System Sciences, 127:1–28, 2022.
Jérémie Chalopin, Victor Chepoi, Fionn Mc Inerney, Sébastien Ratel, and Yann Vaxès. Sample
    compression schemes for balls in graphs. SIAM Journal on Discrete Mathematics, 37(4):2585–
    2616, 2023.
Jérémie Chalopin, Victor Chepoi, Fionn Mc Inerney, and Sébastien Ratel. Non-clashing teaching
    maps for balls in graphs. In Proc. of the 37th Annual Conference on Learning Theory (COLT
    2024), volume 247 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pp. 840–875, 2024.
Yuxin Chen, Adish Singla, Oisin Mac Aodha, Pietro Perona, and Yisong Yue. Understanding the
  role of adaptivity in machine teaching: The case of version space learners. In Advances in Neural
  Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), volume 31, pp. 1483–1493, 2018.
Marek Cygan, Fedor V. Fomin, Lukasz Kowalik, Daniel Lokshtanov, Dániel Marx, Marcin
 Pilipczuk, Michal Pilipczuk, and Saket Saurabh. Parameterized Algorithms. Springer, 2015.
François Denis. Learning regular languages from simple positive examples. Machine Learning, 44:
  37–66, 2001.
Reinhard Diestel. Graph Theory, 6th Edition, volume 173 of Graduate texts in mathematics.
  Springer, 2024.


                                                11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Rodney G. Downey and Michael R. Fellows. Fundamentals of Parameterized Complexity. Texts in
  Computer Science. Springer, 2013.
Rodney G. Downey, Patricia A. Evans, and Michael R. Fellows. Parameterized learning complexity.
  In Proc. of the 6th Annual ACM Conference on Computational Learning Theory (COLT 1993),
  pp. 51–57, 1993.
Pål Grønås Drange, Markus S. Dregi, and Pim van ’t Hof. On the computational complexity of
   vertex integrity and component order connectivity. Algorithmica, 76(4):1181–1202, 2016.
Eduard Eiben, Robert Ganian, Iyad A. Kanj, Sebastian Ordyniak, and Stefan Szeider. The computa-
  tional complexity of concise hypersphere classification. In Proc. of the International Conference
  on Machine Learning (ICML 2023), volume 202 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research,
  pp. 9060–9070, 2023a.
Eduard Eiben, Sebastian Ordyniak, Giacomo Paesani, and Stefan Szeider. Learning small deci-
  sion trees with large domain. In Proc. of the 32nd International Joint Conference on Artificial
  Intelligence (IJCAI 2023), pp. 3184–3192, 2023b.
Shaun Fallat, David Kirkpatrick, Hans U. Simon, Abolghasem Soltani, and Sandra Zilles. On batch
  teaching without collusion. Journal of Machine Learning Research, 24:40:1–40:33, 2023.
Michael R Fellows and Sam Stueckle. The immersion order, forbidden subgraphs and the complex-
 ity of network integrity. J. Combin. Math. Combin. Comput, 6(1):23–32, 1989.
S. Floyd. Space-bounded learning and the Vapnik-Chervonenkis dimension. PhD thesis, U.C.
  Berkeley, 1989.
Robert Ganian and Viktoriia Korchemna. The complexity of Bayesian network learning: Revisit-
  ing the superstructure. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021),
  volume 34, pp. 430–442, 2021.
Ziyuan Gao, Christoph Ries, Hans U. Simon, and Sandra Zilles. Preference-based teaching. Journal
  of Machine Learning Research, 18:1–32, 2017.
Tatsuya Gima and Yota Otachi. Extended MSO model checking via small vertex integrity. Algorith-
  mica, 86(1):147–170, 2024.
Tatsuya Gima, Tesshu Hanaka, Masashi Kiyomi, Yasuaki Kobayashi, and Yota Otachi. Exploring the
  gap between treedepth and vertex cover through vertex integrity. Theoretical Computer Science,
  918:60–76, 2022.
Sally A. Goldman and Michael J. Kearns. On the complexity of teaching. Journal of Computer and
  System Sciences, 50(1):20–31, 1995.
Sally A. Goldman and H. David Mathias. Teaching a smarter learner. Journal of Computer and
  System Sciences, 52(2):255–267, 1996.
Tesshu Hanaka, Michael Lampis, Manolis Vasilakis, and Kanae Yoshiwatari. Parameterized vertex
  integrity revisited. In Proc. of the 49th International Symposium on Mathematical Foundations
  of Computer Science (MFCS 2024), volume 306 of LIPIcs, pp. 58:1–58:14. Schloss Dagstuhl -
  Leibniz-Zentrum für Informatik, 2024.
Mark K. Ho, Michael Littman, James MacGlashan, Fiery Cushman, and Joseph L. Austerweil.
 Showing versus doing: Teaching by demonstration. In Advances in Neural Information Process-
 ing Systems (NeurIPS 2016), volume 33, pp. 3027–3035, 2016.
Russell Impagliazzo, Ramamohan Paturi, and Francis Zane. Which problems have strongly expo-
  nential complexity? Journal of Computer and System Sciences, 63(4):512–530, 2001.
David Kirkpatrick, Hans U. Simon, and Sandra Zilles. Optimal collusion-free teaching. In Proc.
  of the 30th International Conference on Algorithmic Learning Theory (ALT 2019), volume 98 of
  Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pp. 506–528, 2019.


                                                12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Dima Kuzmin and Manfred K. Warmuth. Unlabelled compression schemes for maximum classes.
  Journal of Machine Learning Research, 8:2047–2081, 2007.
Yuanzhi Li and Yingyu Liang. Learning mixtures of linear regressions with nearly optimal complex-
  ity. In Proc. of the 31st Conference on Learning Theory (COLT 2018), volume 75 of Proceedings
  of Machine Learning Research, pp. 1125–1144, 2018.
N. Littlestone and M. K. Warmuth. Relating data compression and learnability. Unpublished, 1986.
Farnam Mansouri, Yuxin Chen, Ara Vartanian, Jerry Zhu, and Adish Singla. Preference-based batch
  and sequential teaching: Towards a unified view of models. In Advances in Neural Information
  Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), volume 32, pp. 9195–9205, 2019.
Shike Mei and Xiaojin Zhu. Using machine teaching to identify optimal training-set attacks on
  machine learners. In Proc. of the 29th AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI 2015),
  volume 29, pp. 2871–2877, 2015.
Sebastian Ordyniak and Stefan Szeider. Parameterized complexity of small decision tree learning. In
  Proc. of the 35th AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI 2021), pp. 6454–6462, 2021.
Ingo Schwab, Wolfgang Pohl, and Ivan Koychev. Learning to recommend from positive evidence. In
  Proc. of the 5th International Conference on Intelligent User Interfaces (IUI 2000), pp. 241–247,
  2000.
Ayumi Shinohara and Satoru Miyano. Teachability in computational learning. New Generation
  Computing, 8:337–347, 1991.
Hans U. Simon. Tournaments, johnson graphs, and NC-teaching. In Proc. of the 34th International
  Conference on Algorithmic Learning Theory (ALT 2023), volume 201 of Proceedings of Machine
  Learning Research, pp. 1411–1428, 2023.
Andreas Stolcke and Stephen Omohundro. Inducing probabilistic grammars by Bayesian model
  merging. In Proc. of the 2nd International Colloquium on Grammatical Inference (ICGI 1994),
  pp. 106–118, 1994.
Jan Arne Telle, José Hernández-Orallo, and Cèsar Ferri. The teaching size: computable teachers
  and learners for universal languages. Machine Learning, 108(8-9):1653–1675, 2019.
Andrea L. Thomaz and Maya Cakmak. Learning about objects with human teachers. In Proc. of the
  4th ACM/IEEE International Conference on Human-Robot Interaction (HRI 2009), pp. 15–22,
  2009.
Chunlin Wang, Chris Ding, Richard F. Meraz, and Stephen R. Holbrook. PSoL: a positive sample
  only learning algorithm for finding non-coding RNA genes. Bioinformatics, 22(21):2590–2596,
  2006.
Malik Yousef, Segun Jung, Louise C. Showe, and Michael K. Showe. Learning from positive ex-
 amples when the negative class is undetermined - microRNA gene identification. Algorithms for
 Molecular Biology, 3(2), 2008.
Xuezhou Zhang, Xaiojin Zhu, and Stephen Wright. Training set debugging using trusted items. In
  Proc. of the 32nd AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI 2018), pp. 4482–4489, 2018.
Xiaojin Zhu. Machine teaching: An inverse problem to machine learning and an approach toward
  optimal education. In Proc. of the 29th AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI 2015),
  volume 29, pp. 4083–4087, 2015.
Xiaojin Zhu, Adish Singla, Sandra Zilles, and Anna N. Rafferty. An overview of machine teaching.
  Arxiv:1801.05927, 2018. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/1801.05927.
Sandra Zilles, Steffen Lange, Robert Holte, and Martin Zinkevich. Models of cooperative teaching
  and learning. Journal of Machine Learning Research, 12:349–384, 2011.


                                                13
