Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


DATA M IXING L AWS : O PTIMIZING DATA M IXTURES BY
P REDICTING L ANGUAGE M ODELING P ERFORMANCE
 Jiasheng Ye1∗, Peiju Liu1∗ , Tianxiang Sun1 , Jun Zhan1 , Yunhua Zhou2† , Xipeng Qiu1†
 1
  Fudan University, 2 Shanghai AI Labortory
 {jsye23,pjliu23}@m.fudan.edu.cn
 zhouyunhua@pjlab.org.cn xpqiu@fudan.edu.cn



                                             A BSTRACT
           Pretraining data of large language models composes multiple domains (e.g., web
           texts, academic papers, codes), whose mixture proportions crucially impact the
           competence of outcome models. While existing endeavors rely on heuristics or
           qualitative strategies to tune the proportions, we discover the quantitative pre-
           dictability of model performance regarding the mixture proportions in function
           forms, which we refer to as the data mixing laws. Fitting such functions on sample
           mixtures unveils model performance on unseen mixtures before actual runs, thus
           guiding the selection of an ideal data mixture. Furthermore, we propose nested
           use of the scaling laws of training steps, model sizes, and our data mixing laws to
           predict the performance of large models trained on massive data under various mix-
           tures with only small-scale training. Experimental results verify that our method
           effectively optimizes the training mixture of a 1B model trained for 100B tokens in
           RedPajama, reaching a performance comparable to the one trained for 48% more
           steps on the default mixture. Extending the application of data mixing laws to
           continual training accurately predicts the critical mixture proportion that avoids
           catastrophic forgetting and outlooks the potential for dynamic data schedules.1

1        I NTRODUCTION
Pretraining data for large language models (LLMs) are typically a mixture of multiple domains,
varying from English to minority languages (Doddapaneni et al., 2021; Li et al., 2023), from casual
dialogs to formal academic writings (Taylor et al., 2022), and from texts to modalities like images and
speeches (Zhan et al., 2024), among others. These data interplay with each other, showing complex
relationships including facilitation, being unrelated, or conflict (Guo et al., 2024). This necessitates
adjusting the mixture proportions of training data to balance the model capabilities while harnessing
synergies across domains, thus enhancing the competence of the outcome models, as highlighted by
extensive practices (Gururangan et al., 2020; Zhou et al., 2023; Xie et al., 2024a; Fan et al., 2024).
Nonetheless, it remains elusive to figure out an ideal training data mixture. Most existing practices
tune the mixture through heuristics to upsample a proportion of high-quality or underrepresented data
without disclosing the concrete criteria in detail (Gao et al., 2020; Touvron et al., 2023a; Bai et al.,
2023; Bi et al., 2024). While some studies propose automatic algorithms to qualitatively optimize data
mixture (Xie et al., 2024a; Fan et al., 2024), it is hard to predate the effect of these strategies before
the actual training run. In contrast, encouraged by advances in scaling laws that show model losses
on a given set of evaluation data are quantitatively predictable for a wide range of variables (Kaplan
et al., 2020; Hoffmann et al., 2022), we wonder whether this also holds for mixture proportions, so
that we can estimate the outcome model performance given any mixture before actually training
on them, including the desired one that reaches minimum loss.
In this paper, we answer this proposition affirmatively. The intuition is that predicting the performance
of unseen data mixture only involves interpolating among seen mixtures because the proportions are
bounded between 0 and 1. For this reason, numerous function forms can lead to descent prediction
accuracy, among which we try to find a simple one. In particular, we find that, given a mixture of M
     ∗
       Equal contribution.
     †
       Corresponding authors.
     1
       Codes and data are available at: https://github.com/yegcjs/mixinglaws.


                                                    1
                                     ② Model Size Laws


Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025



    Small Steps, Small Models, Seen Mixture              Observed Samples           ① Training Step Laws
          ①                                                                                                       ③ Data Mixing Laws

    Large Steps, Small Models, Seen Mixture
                           ②

    Large Steps, Large Models, Seen Mixture
                                                                                                                      Minimum Loss
                                             ③                   ② Model Size Laws

 Large Steps, Large Models, Unseen Mixture                                                         × " mixtures
                                                             Tra
                                                                ini
                                                                      ng
         ① Training Step Laws; ② Model Size Laws;                        S   tep
                 ③ Data Mixing Laws (ours)                                      s



Figure 1: Illustration on our pipeline to optimize data mixture. Left: Our pipeline takes three steps.
Starting from small-scale training results, the three steps use the scaling laws of training steps, model
sizes, and data mixing laws to predict model performance on large steps, large models, and unseen
mixtures, respectively. Right: Visualization of the three-step pipeline to predict model performance
on the target model size, training step, and mixtures.
domains, an exponential function over the linear combination of the proportions, i.e.,
                                                                   
                                                          M
                                                          X
                             Li (r1...M ) = ci + ki exp     tij rj ,                                                                 (1)
                                                                                     j=1

can predict the validation loss Li on any of the training domains i accurately under a fixed model
size and amount of training data, where r1...M are the proportions of the M domains and ci , ki , tij
are parameters to fit. Fitting such functions on all the evaluated domains and calculating the weighted
sum according to their proportions in the validation data leads to the prediction of final validation
loss. Further, treating the validation proportions as learnable parameters allows fitting the estimated
losses on a validation set end-to-end without explicitly decomposing it into known domains.
Despite the predictability, fitting the function between mixture proportions and validation loss, or the
data mixing laws for simplicity, requires samples of numerous runs with different mixtures. Running
these experiments with the same model size and the amount of training data as the target model is
unreasonably expensive. Fortunately, fruitful research on scaling laws demonstrates impressive results
that fitting power laws with small models and small data effectively predicts the losses on larger
models and data over orders of magnitudes (Kaplan et al., 2020; Henighan et al., 2020; Hoffmann
et al., 2022; Alabdulmohsin et al., 2022; OpenAI, 2023; Muennighoff et al., 2024; Bi et al., 2024).
On this basis, we propose a pipeline to nested utilize the scaling laws of training steps, model sizes,
and our data mixing law, so that we can study the impact of mixture proportions for the target model
sizes and data amount with only experiments at the affordable scales, illustrated in Fig. 1.
Experimental results verify the reliability of our data mixing law and prediction pipeline. By
predicting the overall validation loss, we optimize the training mixture of RedPajama for a 1B model
trained on 100B tokens and achieve performance comparable to a model trained on default mixture
for 48% more steps. The prediction on domain-specific validation sets also offers plausible references
to the balance of model capabilities. Further applying our data mixing law to continual pretraining
can accurately find the proportion that avoids catastrophic forgetting (French, 1999; Kirkpatrick et al.,
2017; Luo et al., 2023), revealing the prospect of applying data mixing laws to guide a multi-stage
pertaining, and thus a dynamic data schedule.
Overall, our contributions and findings are as follows:
  • We discover the quantitative predictability of model performance regarding data mixture, and
    summarize this into a functional relationship, namely the data mixing laws.
  • We propose a pipeline to predict model performance of large-scale training on different mixture
    proportions but only experiments on small models with few training data through nested use of
    scaling laws of training steps, model sizes, and data mixing laws.
  • We experiment to verify the reliability of our data mixing laws and prediction pipeline, show-
    ing its effectiveness in optimizing model performance, balancing model capabilities, and the
    prospects of guiding the design of the data schedule.
2      BACKGROUND
We briefly review the pretraining process of large language models and summarize key findings from
neural scaling laws, then we formalize the problem we study. Further related works are in App. A.


                                                                        2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Pretraining large language models. We consider the task of pretraining an autoregressive language
model pθ via next-token predictions (Radford et al., 2018). The training dataset Dtrain = {Di }M
                                                                                               i=1
composes M domains with mixture proportions r ∈ ∆M −1 . In each training step, the task first
samples a batch of domain indices according to the mixture proportions and then sample sequences
of L tokens from the sampled domains. Using the sampled data, it learns to optimize the negative
log-likelihood of sampled data, i.e.,
                                                                          
                                                XL
                       Lθ = Ei∼r,x0...L ∼Di −       log Pθ (xj |x0...j−1 ) .                  (2)
                                                     j=1


To evaluate the learned model, we compute the loss on validation data Dval .
Scaling laws. For a wide range of factors x, scaling laws (Kaplan et al., 2020; Henighan et al., 2020;
Hoffmann et al., 2022) show that their effect on the losses L follows power laws
                                           L = c + kxα ,                                           (3)
where c, k, and α are parameters to fit and x can be model sizes, numbers of training data, training
steps, and the amount of computation. Previous experience (Alabdulmohsin et al., 2022; OpenAI,
2023; Bi et al., 2024; Su et al., 2024) highlights the impressive predictability of scaling laws.
Specifically, Eqn. 3 fitted on a collection of small models, training data, or computation can extrapolate
to precisely predict the test loss of larger cases over orders of magnitudes. This enables practitioners to
estimate the performance of a pretrained large language model without actually finishing the expensive
runs. Recent development further shows various functional relationships between the performance of
language models and a broader range of factors, including transfer learning (Hernandez et al., 2021),
sparse architectures (Frantar et al., 2023), and repeated data (Muennighoff et al., 2024), consolidating
the predictability of language model performance.
Problem formalization. We study optimizing the mixture proportions of pretraining data for large
language models. Motivated by the impressive predictability of existing scaling laws, we try to tackle
mixture optimization by establishing a quantitative framework that predicts the loss given any mixture
proportion. Formally, for a training dataset comprising M domains, we parameterize the function
                                               L = fθ (r),                                             (4)
under the fixed model sizes and number of training steps, where r = r1...M is the proportion of
the M domains. Harnessing this function, we seek a mixture that achieves the desired performance.
Without loss of generality, we search for the mixture that reaches minimum validation loss, i.e.,
                                         r ∗ = arg minr fθ (r).                                        (5)

3    T HE PROPORTIONS OF DATA MIXTURES INFLUENCE MODEL LOSSES IN A
     QUANTITATIVELY PREDICTABLE WAY

In this section, we present our findings on the predictability of model losses regarding data mixtures,
which boils down to functional relationships we refer to as the data mixing laws.
To discover the data mixing laws, we encounter two challenges posed by their characteristics.
  (i) Multi-variables. For a data mixing law for K domains, we should consider K − 1 degrees
      of freedom in the mixture proportions and, correspondingly, K − 1 variables in the target
      function. The increase of variables considerably enlarges the scope of potential functions
      thereby complicating the identification of the function form.
 (ii) Nonmonotonicity. A monotonic relationship between losses and the proportion of any domain
      indicates that a lopsided mixture can achieve minimum loss without endeavors to balance domain
      proportions, which contradicts the practice. Therefore, differing from existing scaling laws that
      loss monotonically decreases with the scale of concerning factors, the data mixing law we study
      should accommodate non-monotonic functions. This nonmonotonic nature adds another layer
      of complexity to our analysis.
To navigate these challenges, we initially simplify the problem by studying a scenario where the
relationship between loss and mixture proportions fits into a univariate monotonic function then
retracts the simplifications progressively. In specific, we begin our study on the case where we only
train on two domains thus avoiding multi-variables, and only consider the validation data coming


                                                    3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


from one of the training domains to circumvent the non-monotonicity (Sec. 3.1). Subsequently,
we broaden our framework to encompass training on multiple domains (Sec. 3.2) and explore the
predictability of losses on general validation data that also comprises various domains (Sec. 3.3).

3.1    P ILOT S TUDY ON D OMAIN L OSSES UNDER T WO - DOMAIN M IXTURES

We begin our exploration with the simplest case where we only learn on mixtures of two domains
and evaluate our model on the two domains respectively.
Setups We train 70M and 160M language mod-
els on the mixture of Github and Pile-CC subset
from the Pile dataset (Gao et al., 2020) with five
different mixture proportions, which are {0.25,
0.375, 0.5, 0.625, 0.75} for Github. We train all
models with a batch size of 1M tokens for 30k
steps, which is 30B tokens in total, and evaluate
checkpoints at different steps on the validation
set of GitHub and Pile-CC.
Findings Results in Fig. 2 reveal the quanti-
tative predictability of domain losses given the
domain proportions. We encouragingly find that, Figure 2: Quantitative predictability of domain
for checkpoints with the same size and trained losses on two domains, which are Github and Pile-
with the same number of steps, after subtracting CC. We train on the mixtures of these two domains
a shared constant2 , their domain losses in the and validate the outcome models on them sepa-
log scale demonstrate a linear relationship to the rately. We train 70M and 160M models on five
domain proportion. This holds for both domains different mixtures of Github and Pile-CC and ob-
in our experiments. The result indicates that tain the reducible losses by subtracting the original
with other factors fixed, the domain losses of a losses with a constant shared across models of the
pretrained language model regarding the domain same sizes and trained for the same number of
proportion precisely fit into an exponential law3 steps. The reducible losses in log scale show linear
            Li (ri ) = ci + ki exp (tii ri ),  (6) correlations to the domain proportions.
where Li and ri are validation loss and training mixture proportion of domain i, respectively, while
ci , ki , and tii are learnable parameters 4 .

3.2    E XTENSION TO D OMAIN L OSSES T RAINED ON M ULTI - DOMAIN M IXTURES

To accommodate real-world pretraining data that mostly contains more than two domains, we extend
our investigation into multiple domains. For simplicity and the ease of visual aids, we start with the
case of three domains.
Setups We train on the mixtures of GitHub, Pile-CC, and Books3 subset from the Pile for a total of
30B tokens and evaluate the model on the three domains, respectively. For specific mixtures, we grid
search from {0, 0.125, 0.25, . . . , 0.875, 1}3 and retain valid ones in which three proportions sum up
to 1 and do not use up all tokens in any of the domains, which results in 32 mixtures in total.
We utilize the losses on these experimented mixtures to identify the function forms between losses
and mixture proportions through conjecture and then verification. In specific, we base our conjecture
of possible forms on the following two principles.
   • Compatibility. The form can reduce to Eqn. 6 if the number of domains M = 2.
   • Symmetry. Any exchanging of variables should not change the functional form as we should not
     incorporate any domain-specific bias.
    2
      The constant term, known as irreducible loss, arises from finite training data and the entropy of the evaluation
data theoretically (Bishop, 2006; Henighan et al., 2020).
    3
      While power laws are more common in existing studies on scaling laws (Kaplan et al., 2020; Hoffmann
et al., 2022), we do not consider it for its ill-posed properties that the function value blows up when the variable,
mixture proportion in our case, approaches 0. This contradicts the observations that the losses remain low (e.g.,
no more than 10) with the generalization between domains.
    4
      Despite a simple case, our findings on two domains have practical applications to continue pretraining (Gu-
rurangan et al., 2020), where we aim to enhance a pretrained model on a given domain by training it on a mixture
of the original pretraining data and upcoming domain data. Please see Sec. 5 for details.


                                                         4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Table 1: Mean absolute errors (MAE) of different candidate functions for predicting the target domain
losses. We also include random guesses that randomly predict between the maximum and minimum
loss of the training samples for reference. In specific, we report the MAE of the expectation of this
random guess which predicts the median of the maximum and minimum loss. The training data
contain M = 3 domains and we fit each function with the same 24 mixtures and validate on 8 other
mixtures. The split is random. The lowest error for each target domain are in bold while the second
lowest are underlined.
                                   GitHub                  Books3               Pile-CC
     Method      # Coeff.     Train        Validation                 Train                Validation          Train                     Validation
     Random          -       0.8895         0.8758                 0.1291                    0.1331            0.0768                     0.1045
       M1          2M+1      0.0292         0.0312                 0.0082                    0.0121            0.0045                     0.0050
       M2          M+2       0.1558         0.3327                 0.0114                    0.0119            0.0072                     0.0083
       M3          M+2       0.3389         0.2177                 0.0914                    0.0465            0.0746                     0.0947
       M4           M+2      0.0298         0.0365                 0.0062                    0.0074            0.0036                     0.0078

Together, the two principles lead to candidate functions that replicate the exponential term in Eqn. 6
for each training domain and combine them through operations that adhere to commutative law.
According to the two principles, we experiment with the following candidate functions:
                             M
                             X                                                                                 M
                                                                                                               X
       M1: Li (r) =ci +            [kij exp (tij rj )] ,           M2: Li (r) =ci + ki                                       exp (tij rj ) ,
                             j=1                                                                               j=1
                                                                                                   
                                          M
                                          Y                                                 XM
       M3: Li (r) =ci + ki exp                 tij rj  ,         M4: Li (r) =ci + ki exp    tij rj  .
                                          j=1                                                                                      j=1

We summarize their fitting errors on three target domains in Tab. 1.
Findings The results in Tab. 1 suggests both                                                Pile-CC                                        Github
M1 and M4 gives reliable predictions while M4
has fewer coefficients. Therefore we adopt M4                                  3.3          fitting                          3.0                 fitting
                                                                                            validation                                           validation
                                                                 observation


                                                                                                               observation


                                         
                                M                                              3.2                                           2.5
                               X
  Li (r1...M ) = ci + ki exp      tij rj  (7)                                                                              2.0
                                                                               3.1
                                j=1                                                                                          1.5

as the function forms of our data mixing law,                                  3.0                                           1.0
                                                                                     3.0   3.1    3.2    3.3                       1         2          3
where Li is the validation loss on i-th validation                                         prediction                                     prediction
domain, rj is the proportion of the j-th training                                           Books3                                          Total
domain, and ci , ki , tij are learnable parameters.
                                                                                            fitting                          3.1                 fitting
The fitting results are in Fig. 5 and Fig. 3 demon-                            3.3
                                                                                            validation                                           validation
                                                                                                                             3.0
                                                                 observation


                                                                                                               observation


strates the prediction accuracy. The results indi-                             3.2                                           2.9
cate that Eqn. 7 fits the given samples well and                                                                             2.8
estimates the unseen ones accurately.                                          3.1
                                                                                                                             2.7
                                                      3.0
Meanings of the coefficients. To provide more                                   2.6
intuition, we discuss the meanings of the co-              3.0  3.1  3.2  3.3       2.6   2.8     3.0
efficients in Eqn. 7. In general, ki > 0, thus                 prediction               prediction
the exponential term is always positive and the Figure 3: Prediction results on the domain losses
prediction loss is strictly greater than the con- and overall losses in the three-domain experiment.
stant c. Hereby, ci represents losses that are The domain losses are fitted with Eqn. 7 and we
not reducible by adjusting the data mixture. tij , obtain the total losses through explicit domain ag-
depending on both training domain i and valida- gregation of Eqn. 8.
tion domain j, shows the interaction between them. A negative tij indicates that training data of
domain j helps reduce validation loss on domain i and vice versa.
Patterns of the coefficients. We visualize normalized tij of training and validating on the 5 domains
mixture of the Pile5 in Fig. 4. The relationship between domains can be categorized into 3 types.
   5
     The Pile contains 22 fine-grained domains which are collected into five coarse-grained domains, i.e.,
academic, internet, prose, dialogues, and misc, where misc include Github and the DeepMind Mathematics


                                                             5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


(A)                       Losses on Github                                  (B)               Losses on Books3                                (C)                    Losses on Pile-CC                                                                                (D)                               Total Losses


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Pr
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        op                                             min loss
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             or
 Pr
   op                                                                  3 Prop                                                             ub Prop                                                                                                                              tio
        ort                                                      o   ks       ort                                                   ith           o                                                                                                              ub                n
           i on                                               Bo                 i on                                             fG                  rtio                                                                                                 ith                         of
                                                          f                                                                  no                            n                                                                                             fG                                 Bo                                  Githu
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      b
                  of                                   no                               of                              io                                     of
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              i on
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     o                                           ok                        of
                       Pi l
                                               ort
                                                  io                                         Pi l                    ort                                            Bo
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ort                                                                       rtion
                              e-C
                                          op
                                                                                                    e-C         op                                                       ok
                                                                                                                                                                                                 op
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   s3        Propo
                                    C   Pr                                                                C   Pr                                                           s3                  Pr



Figure 5: Quantitative predictability of domain losses on three domain mixtures, Github, Books3,
and Pile-CC. We train on the mixture of these three domains and validate the outcome models on
them as well. The surfaces show the predicted losses on (A) Github; (B) Books3; (C) Pile-CC; and
(D) the overall validation set mixed with the three domains. ×: validation samples. ⋆: the predicted
minimum loss on the overall validation set.
Being unrelated: The figure shows a highly sparse pattern


                                                                                                                                                                                               Internet Symbolic Dialogue Prose Academic
where most of the domains have little relationship to each
other and the validation performance of a domain is domi-                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   1.0


                                                                                                                                                                                Validation Domain
nated by training data of the same domain, which supports                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   0.5
the intuitive progressive mixture tuning strategy that adds                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 0.0
data for underperforming capability during training (Team,                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      0.5
2023). Meanwhile, we also observe facilitation (e.g.,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                1.0
training dialogue for the internet) and conflict (e.g., train-
ing symbolic data for prose) between domains, which
indicates the room for leveraging domain interaction to                                                                                                                                                                                    Academic Prose Dialogue Symbolic Internet
enhance model performance.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Training Domain

3.3 P REDICTING L ANGUAGE M ODELING                             Figure 4: The interaction between dif-
P ERFORMANCE OF A NY VALIDATION M IXTURE                        ferent training and validation domains
                                                                on the Pile. Each boxes are fitted nor-
We further loosen constraints in Sec. 3.1 and Sec. 3.2 that malized tij from Eqn. 7. We normalize
the validation data are from one of the training domains. the value by tij with the maximum abso-
We first consider the validation set to be a known composi- lute value for each validation set i (i.e.,
tion of the training domains and then free this requirement tij /ti,arg maxj |tij | ), to compare the val-
for more general cases of arbitrary validation sets. These ues intuitively. A larger value (greener)
correspond to the two strategies we fit the data mixing indicates the training domain helps learn
laws, which we elaborate on as follows.                         the validation domain more.
Explicit domain aggregation. Considering a validation set made up of K domains with the propor-
tions as s1...K , the validation loss can be written into the weighted sum of domain losses. Thanks to
the discovery of Eqn. 7, we can apply the equation to predict domain losses herein given a training
mixture. Therefore, the functional relationship of the overall validation loss to the training mixture
proportions expands into
                                                                                    
                                XK                    K
                                                      X                    XM
                  L(r1...M ) =      si Li (r1...M ) =    si ci + ki exp      tij rj  .             (8)
                                                                               i=1                                                    i=1                                                                                                            j=1

Using Eqn. 8, we can fit the loss on each validation domain Li and sum them up to obtain the
prediction of overall loss.
Implicit domain aggregation. A remaining limitation is that we still need to acquire the components
of validation data s1...K in advance. This can be inconvenient if the validation set is collected
separately from the training ones. For instance, the validation data may come from real-world user
queries that cover unknown compositions of various domains. To remove the constraint on validation
components, we assume that we can decompose the validation data into K implicit domains whose
losses are predictable with Eqn. 7, and we treat their proportions in the validation data s1...K as
Dataset which are symbolic content. We do not experiment on fine-grained domains for their limited number of
tokens available.


                                                                                                                                          6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


learnable parameters, leading to the final form of our data mixing laws6 . With this perspective, we fit
a data mixing law with the overall losses end to end.
Introducing implicit domains may draw concerns about the number of fitting samples exploding with
the number of parameters to fit and questions on deciding the number of implicit domains without
knowing the oracle. We study and discuss their impact, respectively.
Do we need quadratic number of samples to fit
Eqn. 8 as the number of domain grows? No.                                                     3 domains


                                                       Mean Absolute Errors
The parameters in Eq.8 scale as O(M × K),             0.06                                    5 domains
                                                                                              7 domains
where M and K represent training and implicit
validation domains. Nevertheless, as shown in         0.04
Fig.6, the quadratic growth in the number of pa-
                                                      0.02
rameters does not translate to quadratic growth
in sample requirements. We attribute this to               8    10   12          14       16 18      20
                                                                        # fitting samples
the high sparsity in the parameters as fig.4 re- Figure 6: The mean absolute validation errors of
veals, which allows us to fit the equation with Eqn. 8 fitted with different numbers of samples for
substantially fewer samples when using appro- training mixtures containing different numbers of
priate regularization. While using more samples training domains. For each number, we resample
decreases prediction errors, the number of sam- and select the batch of fitting mixtures that reach
ples that reach a similar precision level does not lowest errors.
grow dramatically. This may pave the way for
applying implicit domain aggregations for cases with more training domains. Although concluding
the exact number of samples required can be challenging due to the differences among training data,
we can tune the fitting mixtures on the smallest experimented models, which is cheap and works well
in practice (see Sec. 4.2 and App. D.3).
How to choose the number of implicit do-
mains? Set it larger than the oracle one. Fig. 7
shows our experiments where we train language
models on the 5 coarse-grained domains of Pile
and evaluate a validation set mixed with these
5 domains. We compare the errors obtained by
implicit domain aggregation with different num-
bers of implicit domains to those obtained by
explicit domain aggregation. We find that apply-
ing implicit domain aggregation and setting the       Figure 7: Prediction errors of the five-domain data
number of implicit domains no smaller than the        mixing laws fitted with explicit and implicit do-
actual one (5 in the experimented case) results       main aggregation. Explicit domain aggregation:
in lower errors than explicit domain aggregation.     we fit Eqn. 7 for five domains respectively and
Moreover, the error remains low as we set the         sum them up according to their weight in the over-
number of implicit domains much larger. This          all validation sets. Implicit domain aggregation:
verifies the prediction accuracy of our implicit      we fit the losses on overall validation with Eqn. 8,
domain aggregation strategy for data mixing law       assuming different numbers of implicit domains
and the number of implicit domains K can be a         K and treating the proportion of different implicit
large number without careful tuning7 .                domains as learnable parameters.

4     N ESTED SCALING LAWS PREDICT LOSSES TRAINED ON VARIOUS MIXTURES
      USING ONLY SMALL - SCALE EXPERIMENTS

4.1   A P IPELINE FOR L OSS P REDICTIONS

While data mixing laws enable us to predict the performance of models trained on unseen mixtures,
fitting the laws directly on target scales is unaffordably expensive. Firstly, fitting the laws involves
training multiple models across diverse mixtures with model sizes and token counts identical to the

   6
     We note that the final forms of our data mixing law resemble a multilayer perception (see the computation
graph Fig. 14). We include further discussion and implementation details in Appendix E.
   7
     We set K = 30 if not stated in later experiments.


                                                      7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Algorithm 1 A pipeline to predict losses of different mixture proportions on large models trained on
massive data through small-scale training
    Input: Validation data Dval , training data of M domains {Dm }M       m=1 , target training steps Starget , target
    model size Ntarget , target mixture to predict rtarget , training steps to fit the step laws S0 , model sizes to fit
    the size laws {Nj }K                                N
                         j=1 , and N data mixtures {ri }i=1 to fit.
    Output: The validation loss of a Ntarget model trained for Starget steps on mixture rtarget , i.e.,
    L(Ntarget , Starget , rtarget ).
 1: for Each mixture ri do
 2:     for Each model size Nj do
 3:         Train model of size Nj on mixture ri for S0 steps to obtain L(Nj , S < S0 , ri )
 4:         Fit training step scaling law L(S) with L(Nj , S < S0 , ri )
 5:         Predict L(Nj , Starget , ri ) ← L(S = Starget )
 6:     end for
 7:     Fit model size scaling law L(N ) with L(N1...K , Starget , ri )
 8:     Predict L(Ntarget , Starget , ri ) ← L(N = Ntarget )
 9: end for
10: Fit the data mixing law L(r) with L(Ntarget , Starget , r1...N )
11: predict L(Ntarget , Starget , rtarget ) ← L(rtarget

target ones. Furthermore, we must repeat this process for each target model size and training dataset8 .
Such expensive costs hinder the practical value of our data mixing laws.
We thus wonder whether we can obtain the losses of different mixture proportions without training at
large scales. Fortunately, this idea gains endorsement from existing experiences that verify the im-
pressive extrapolation of scaling laws of training steps and model sizes. In particular, OpenAI (2023)
predicts the loss of the target model with merely 1, 000×–10, 000× less compute. Consequently, we
can train small models with few training steps on different mixtures, and fitting scaling laws on them
to estimate the losses of the target model size and the target number of training steps. We can then
use the predicted losses to fit a data mixing law and search for the optimal mixture.
We illustrate the proposed pipeline in Fig. 1 with details depicted in Alg. 1. Scaling laws in our
pipeline are largely based on the function forms of Chinchilla Scaling Laws (Hoffmann et al., 2022),
i.e., L(N, D) = E + NAα + DBβ , where N is the model size and D is the number of training data.
Under fixed batch sizes, we can treat the number of training data as the number of training steps S
as well. Notably, we do not directly fit the complete Chinchilla Scaling Law with two variables as
we find it practically unstable to fit such many parameters simultaneously in our preliminary study,
similar to the findings in Besiroglu et al. (2024). Instead, we decompose the law into two power laws
for training steps L(S) = E1 + B                                     A
                                  S and model sizes L(N ) = E2 + N , respectively. We first fit power
laws of training steps to predict model performance with more training data then fit power laws of
model sizes to predict the performance when scaling up models. We empirically find this routine
stable.9 .

4.2    E XPERIMENT

We verify the effect of our pipeline with an experiment to minimize the validation loss of a 1B model
trained on 100B tokens.
Setups. We train our models on the mixture of RedPajama and validate the validation set of the Pile
to mimic the scenario where validation data are collected separately from the training data. To fit the
scaling laws of training steps and model sizes, we train a series of 70M, 160M, 305M, and 410M
models for 30B tokens. For all the models, we set the batch size as 1M tokens thus translating into

    8
      An idea is to transfer the optimized training mixture on small models trained with few tokens to the training
of large models and large volumes of training data. Nevertheless, as recent studies (Goyal et al., 2024; Kang
et al., 2024; Covert et al.) highlight, the rankings of the data mixture vary as the model size and number of
trained tokens change (Appendix C). Therefore, the optimal mixture at experimented scales can be suboptimal at
the target scale.
    9
      See Appendix D.2 for our preliminary verification. We notice some recent efforts try to investigate
democratizing the implementation of predictions with scaling laws to facilitate applications (Su et al., 2024;
Porian et al., 2024). While we illustrate our pipeline with the nested use of scaling laws, other implementations
of scaling law predictions are also feasible and complementary to our method.


                                                           8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 8: The validation perplexity on the Pile validation set for 1B models trained on the default
mixture and the optimized mixture of RedPajama for 100B tokens. Our optimized mixture achieves
the performance of the default mixture only using 0.73 of the original number of training steps and
eventually achieves a performance comparable to a default mixture trained with 1.48 times more
tokens (estimated by the scaling law of training steps, shown as the dashed line). The specific mixture
proportions are in the right table.
100k steps for the 1B models and 30k steps for small models. We apply a cosine learning rate decay
with a warmup of 2k steps which decays to 0.1 of the maximum learning rate at the 100k-th steps.
To reach low prediction errors with a limited number of experiment runs, we select the mixtures for
experimentation by leveraging the fact that mixture proportion terms are represented as exponential
functions within our data mixing law. Specifically, we enumerate candidate mixtures by double-
diminishing the proportion for each training domain, starting from the maximum available one that
does not use up all the domain tokens. In this way, the losses of each (implicit) validation domain
are distributed evenly. We then sample 40 mixtures from all the candidates and train the smallest
70M models. We resample groups of 20 mixtures from them to fit the data mixing law and select the
group that reaches minimum prediction errors on all 40 samples as our final set of mixtures to run our
pipeline. For more details, please refer to Appendix D.3.
Results. Our pipeline optimizes language modeling performance effectively. Fig. 8 shows
the default mixture of RedPajama (Touvron et al.,
                                                         2.83
2023a) in and the optimized mixture obtained from
                                                             Loss


Alg. 1 with their performance on the validation data.    2.79
The model trained on the optimized mixture can
                                                         2.75
achieve a performance comparable to the one trained           Default DoGE       DoGE DoReMi DoReMi Ours
                                                                     (Universal) (OOD) (RedPajama) (Pile)
on the default mixture with only 73% steps. It even-
tually attains a performance that requires 48% more Figure 9: The language modeling perfor-
steps if trained using the default mixture. This in- mance of different data mixtures. All models
dicates the effectiveness of our pipeline in mixture are 1B models trained for 100B tokens with
optimization10 .                                      the same hyperparameters and validated on
We also compare our optimized data mixture to pre- the validation set of the Pile. Specific propor-
vious optimization algorithms, which provide qualita- tions are in Fig. 21.
tive optimization. Specifically, we compare our method to DoGE (Fan et al., 2024) and DoReMi (Xie
et al., 2024a). For DoGE, we compare both their universal generalization setting which assumes i.i.d.
between training and validation data, and the OOD setting which optimizes for a given validation set,
similar to ours. For DoReMi, which only works for universal optimization that ignores the validation
data, we experiment on both a mixture optimized exactly on RedPajama and a mixture adapted from
the one optimized on the Pile using the domain overlap between RedPajama and the Pile. More
specific details on obtaining these data mixtures are in Appendix F.4. As shown in Fig. 9, our method
finds the mixture that reaches the lowest losses for the same model sizes trained with the same data
budgets. This further verifies the effectiveness of our method.



  10
     The loss predictions are in Fig. 22, which shows the predictions are plausibly accurate and are consistent
with the rankings of actual runs.


                                                      9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 10: Loss predictions and the training curve of continual pretraining Pythia-70M on a mixture
of the Pile and python code. (A) Loss prediction on the Pile; (B) Loss prediction on python; (C)
training curves with losses on the Pile; (D) training curves with losses on python. We predict final
losses with Eqn. 6. The law accurately finds the critical mixture proportion that maintains model
performance on the original domain (i.e., the Pile).
5   DATA M IXING L AWS H ELP AVOID C ATASTROPHIC F ORGETTING IN
    C ONTINUAL P RETRAINING
We are also interested in applying our data mixing laws to continual pretraining, which shares the
same paradigm as pertaining but begins the model with pretrained parameters instead of random
initialization. Generally, continual pretraining is a common technique to enhance existing pre-
trained models. It injects up-to-date knowledge into the model, avoiding performance degradation
due to distribution shifts (Gururangan et al., 2020; Xiong et al., 2023). In addition, researchers
also apply continual pretraining to reuse existing model parameters to build models of a different
architecture (Komatsuzaki et al., 2022).
We experiment on a typical scenario of continual pretraining, where we train the model on the mixture
of original pretraining data and upcoming data of a target domain to enhance. For instance, we
continually pretrain Pythia-70M models with a mixture of the Pile and Python codes, where the
former is the original pretraining data of the base model. To verify whether our data mixing laws
apply to continual pretraining, we train the models for 10B tokens on 4 mixtures and fit the Eqn. 6
on losses of the Pile and python codes. Results in Fig. 10 confirm that Eqn. 6 fits into the losses of
continual pretraining.
During continual pretraining, a too-large proportion of the target data can hurt the performance of the
original data. A representative mixture optimization target is to maintain the general-purpose ability
(losses on the Pile) unchanged. To this end, using the fitted data mixing laws, we predict the critical
proportion leading to the same loss as before continual pretraining. Fig. 10 demonstrates the success
of our prediction where the proportion we find results in similar performance compared to the model
before continual pretraining while gaining improvement in the target domain.
Remarks. We suggest continual pretraining is significant for its connection to the design of data
schedules (Albalak et al., 2023; Chen et al., 2024b). Usually, continual pretraining applies to a
pretrained model, while it is natural to further continually pretrain the continual pretrained models,
i.e., multi-stage pretraining (Chen et al., 2024b). In each stage, the mixture proportions or even the
domain components of training data can be different. This becomes a dynamic data schedule as the
number of training stages approaches the infinite limit. Therefore, the successful application of our
data mixing laws on continual training signifies a promising prospect for using it to design dynamic
data schedules, a more comprehensive data curating paradigm.
6   D ISCUSSIONS
In this work, we discover the quantitative predictability of model losses regarding the mixture
proportions of training data, which boils down to the data mixing laws. Using data mixing laws
allows practitioners to quantitatively estimate the model performance on unseen mixture proportions
before the actual training, allowing low-cost tuning of data mixture together with scaling laws.
Given the burgeoning interest in data engineering, we hope that our study paves the way for further
quantitative inquiries and theoretical analyses in this research area.


                                                  10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


ACKOWLEDGEMENT
This work was supported by the National Key Research and Development Program of China
(No.2022ZD0160102). The computations in this research were performed using the CFFF plat-
form of Fudan University. We thank Botian Jiang, Shiduo Zhang, and anonymous reviewers for their
constructive feedback.

R EFERENCES
Ibrahim M Alabdulmohsin, Behnam Neyshabur, and Xiaohua Zhai. Revisiting neural scaling laws in
   language and vision. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 35:22300–22312, 2022.
Alon Albalak, Liangming Pan, Colin Raffel, and William Yang Wang. Efficient online data mixing
  for language model pre-training. arXiv preprint arXiv:2312.02406, 2023.
Shun-ichi Amari, Naotake Fujita, and Shigeru Shinomoto. Four types of learning curves. Neural
  Computation, 4(4):605–618, 1992.
Yasaman Bahri, Ethan Dyer, Jared Kaplan, Jaehoon Lee, and Utkarsh Sharma. Explaining neural
  scaling laws. arXiv preprint arXiv:2102.06701, 2021.
Jinze Bai, Shuai Bai, Yunfei Chu, Zeyu Cui, Kai Dang, Xiaodong Deng, Yang Fan, Wenbin Ge,
   Yu Han, Fei Huang, et al. Qwen technical report. arXiv preprint arXiv:2309.16609, 2023.
Tamay Besiroglu, Ege Erdil, Matthew Barnett, and Josh You. Chinchilla scaling: A replication
  attempt. arXiv preprint arXiv:2404.10102, 2024.
Xiao Bi, Deli Chen, Guanting Chen, Shanhuang Chen, Damai Dai, Chengqi Deng, Honghui Ding,
  Kai Dong, Qiushi Du, Zhe Fu, et al. Deepseek llm: Scaling open-source language models with
  longtermism. arXiv preprint arXiv:2401.02954, 2024.
Stella Biderman, Hailey Schoelkopf, Quentin Gregory Anthony, Herbie Bradley, Kyle O’Brien, Eric
  Hallahan, Mohammad Aflah Khan, Shivanshu Purohit, USVSN Sai Prashanth, Edward Raff, et al.
  Pythia: A suite for analyzing large language models across training and scaling. In International
  Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 2397–2430. PMLR, 2023.
Christopher Bishop. Pattern recognition and machine learning. Springer google schola, 2:5–43, 2006.
Tom Brown, Benjamin Mann, Nick Ryder, Melanie Subbiah, Jared D Kaplan, Prafulla Dhariwal,
  Arvind Neelakantan, Pranav Shyam, Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, et al. Language models are
  few-shot learners. Advances in neural information processing systems, 33:1877–1901, 2020.
Ethan Caballero, Kshitij Gupta, Irina Rish, and David Krueger. Broken neural scaling laws. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2210.14891, 2022.
Daoyuan Chen, Yilun Huang, Zhijian Ma, Hesen Chen, Xuchen Pan, Ce Ge, Dawei Gao, Yuexiang
  Xie, Zhaoyang Liu, Jinyang Gao, Yaliang Li, Bolin Ding, and Jingren Zhou. Data-juicer: A
  one-stop data processing system for large language models. In International Conference on
  Management of Data, 2024a.
Mayee Chen, Nicholas Roberts, Kush Bhatia, Jue Wang, Ce Zhang, Frederic Sala, and Christopher Ré.
 Skill-it! a data-driven skills framework for understanding and training language models. Advances
 in Neural Information Processing Systems, 36, 2024b.
Ian Connick Covert, Wenlong Ji, Tatsunori Hashimoto, and James Zou. Scaling laws for the value of
  individual data points in machine learning. In Forty-first International Conference on Machine
  Learning.
Sumanth Doddapaneni, Gowtham Ramesh, Mitesh M Khapra, Anoop Kunchukuttan, and Pratyush
  Kumar. A primer on pretrained multilingual language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2107.00676,
  2021.
Harris Drucker. Improving regressors using boosting techniques. In Icml, volume 97, pp. e115.
  Citeseer, 1997.


                                               11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Nan Du, Yanping Huang, Andrew M Dai, Simon Tong, Dmitry Lepikhin, Yuanzhong Xu, Maxim
  Krikun, Yanqi Zhou, Adams Wei Yu, Orhan Firat, et al. Glam: Efficient scaling of language
  models with mixture-of-experts. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 5547–5569.
  PMLR, 2022.
Simin Fan, Matteo Pagliardini, and Martin Jaggi. Doge: Domain reweighting with generalization
  estimation, 2024.
Elias Frantar, Carlos Riquelme, Neil Houlsby, Dan Alistarh, and Utku Evci. Scaling laws for
  sparsely-connected foundation models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2309.08520, 2023.
Robert M French. Catastrophic forgetting in connectionist networks. Trends in cognitive sciences, 3
  (4):128–135, 1999.
Paul Friedl. Dis/similarities in the design and development of legal and algorithmic normative
  systems: the case of perspective api. Law, Innovation and Technology, 15(1):25–59, 2023.
Leo Gao, Stella Biderman, Sid Black, Laurence Golding, Travis Hoppe, Charles Foster, Jason Phang,
  Horace He, Anish Thite, Noa Nabeshima, et al. The pile: An 800gb dataset of diverse text for
  language modeling. arXiv preprint arXiv:2101.00027, 2020.
Sachin Goyal, Pratyush Maini, Zachary C Lipton, Aditi Raghunathan, and J Zico Kolter. Scaling
  laws for data filtering–data curation cannot be compute agnostic. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF
  Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 22702–22711, 2024.
Yuxian Gu, Li Dong, Yaru Hao, Qingxiu Dong, Minlie Huang, and Furu Wei. Towards optimal
  learning of language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.17759, 2024.
Shangmin Guo, Yi Ren, Stefano V Albrecht, and Kenny Smith. Sample relationship from learning
  dynamics matters for generalisation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2401.08808, 2024.
Suchin Gururangan, Ana Marasović, Swabha Swayamdipta, Kyle Lo, Iz Beltagy, Doug Downey,
  and Noah A Smith. Don’t stop pretraining: Adapt language models to domains and tasks. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2004.10964, 2020.
Suchin Gururangan, Margaret Li, Mike Lewis, Weijia Shi, Tim Althoff, Noah A Smith, and Luke
  Zettlemoyer. Scaling expert language models with unsupervised domain discovery. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2303.14177, 2023.
Tatsunori Hashimoto. Model performance scaling with multiple data sources. In International
  Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 4107–4116. PMLR, 2021.
David Haussler. Quantifying inductive bias: Ai learning algorithms and valiant’s learning framework.
  Artificial intelligence, 36(2):177–221, 1988.
Tom Henighan, Jared Kaplan, Mor Katz, Mark Chen, Christopher Hesse, Jacob Jackson, Heewoo
  Jun, Tom B Brown, Prafulla Dhariwal, Scott Gray, et al. Scaling laws for autoregressive generative
  modeling. arXiv preprint arXiv:2010.14701, 2020.
Danny Hernandez, Jared Kaplan, Tom Henighan, and Sam McCandlish. Scaling laws for transfer.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2102.01293, 2021.
Joel Hestness, Sharan Narang, Newsha Ardalani, Gregory Diamos, Heewoo Jun, Hassan Kianinejad,
  Md Mostofa Ali Patwary, Yang Yang, and Yanqi Zhou. Deep learning scaling is predictable,
  empirically. arXiv preprint arXiv:1712.00409, 2017.
Jordan Hoffmann, Sebastian Borgeaud, Arthur Mensch, Elena Buchatskaya, Trevor Cai, Eliza
  Rutherford, Diego de Las Casas, Lisa Anne Hendricks, Johannes Welbl, Aidan Clark, et al.
  Training compute-optimal large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2203.15556, 2022.
Kurt Hornik, Maxwell Stinchcombe, and Halbert White. Multilayer feedforward networks are
  universal approximators. Neural networks, 2(5):359–366, 1989.
Marcus Hutter. Learning curve theory. arXiv preprint arXiv:2102.04074, 2021.


                                                12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Albert Q Jiang, Alexandre Sablayrolles, Arthur Mensch, Chris Bamford, Devendra Singh Chaplot,
  Diego de las Casas, Florian Bressand, Gianna Lengyel, Guillaume Lample, Lucile Saulnier, et al.
  Mistral 7b. arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.06825, 2023.
Feiyang Kang, Yifan Sun, Bingbing Wen, Si Chen, Dawn Song, Rafid Mahmood, and Ruoxi Jia.
  Autoscale: Automatic prediction of compute-optimal data composition for training llms. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2407.20177, 2024.
Jared Kaplan, Sam McCandlish, Tom Henighan, Tom B Brown, Benjamin Chess, Rewon Child, Scott
   Gray, Alec Radford, Jeffrey Wu, and Dario Amodei. Scaling laws for neural language models.
   arXiv preprint arXiv:2001.08361, 2020.
James Kirkpatrick, Razvan Pascanu, Neil Rabinowitz, Joel Veness, Guillaume Desjardins, Andrei A
  Rusu, Kieran Milan, John Quan, Tiago Ramalho, Agnieszka Grabska-Barwinska, et al. Overcoming
  catastrophic forgetting in neural networks. Proceedings of the national academy of sciences, 114
  (13):3521–3526, 2017.
Aran Komatsuzaki, Joan Puigcerver, James Lee-Thorp, Carlos Riquelme Ruiz, Basil Mustafa, Joshua
  Ainslie, Yi Tay, Mostafa Dehghani, and Neil Houlsby. Sparse upcycling: Training mixture-of-
  experts from dense checkpoints. arXiv preprint arXiv:2212.05055, 2022.
Raymond Li, Loubna Ben Allal, Yangtian Zi, Niklas Muennighoff, Denis Kocetkov, Chenghao Mou,
  Marc Marone, Christopher Akiki, Jia Li, Jenny Chim, et al. Starcoder: may the source be with
  you! arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.06161, 2023.
Qian Liu, Xiaosen Zheng, Niklas Muennighoff, Guangtao Zeng, Longxu Dou, Tianyu Pang, Jing
  Jiang, and Min Lin. Regmix: Data mixture as regression for language model pre-training. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2407.01492, 2024.
Xiaoran Liu, Hang Yan, Chenxin An, Xipeng Qiu, and Dahua Lin. Scaling laws of rope-based
  extrapolation. In The Twelfth International Conference on Learning Representations, 2023.
Shayne Longpre, Gregory Yauney, Emily Reif, Katherine Lee, Adam Roberts, Barret Zoph, Denny
  Zhou, Jason Wei, Kevin Robinson, David Mimno, et al. A pretrainer’s guide to training
  data: Measuring the effects of data age, domain coverage, quality, & toxicity. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2305.13169, 2023.
Yun Luo, Zhen Yang, Fandong Meng, Yafu Li, Jie Zhou, and Yue Zhang. An empirical study of
  catastrophic forgetting in large language models during continual fine-tuning. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2308.08747, 2023.
Roger Mead. The design of experiments: statistical principles for practical applications. Cambridge
  university press, 1990.
Eric Michaud, Ziming Liu, Uzay Girit, and Max Tegmark. The quantization model of neural scaling.
  Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 36, 2024.
Sören Mindermann, Jan M Brauner, Muhammed T Razzak, Mrinank Sharma, Andreas Kirsch, Winnie
  Xu, Benedikt Höltgen, Aidan N Gomez, Adrien Morisot, Sebastian Farquhar, et al. Prioritized
  training on points that are learnable, worth learning, and not yet learnt. In International Conference
  on Machine Learning, pp. 15630–15649. PMLR, 2022.
Niklas Muennighoff, Alexander Rush, Boaz Barak, Teven Le Scao, Nouamane Tazi, Aleksandra
  Piktus, Sampo Pyysalo, Thomas Wolf, and Colin A Raffel. Scaling data-constrained language
  models. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 36, 2024.
OpenAI. Gpt-4 technical report. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.08774, 2023.
Guilherme Penedo, Quentin Malartic, Daniel Hesslow, Ruxandra Cojocaru, Alessandro Cappelli,
  Hamza Alobeidli, Baptiste Pannier, Ebtesam Almazrouei, and Julien Launay. The refinedweb
  dataset for falcon llm: outperforming curated corpora with web data, and web data only. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2306.01116, 2023.


                                                  13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Tomer Porian, Mitchell Wortsman, Jenia Jitsev, Ludwig Schmidt, and Yair Carmon. Resolving
  discrepancies in compute-optimal scaling of language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.19146,
  2024.
Alec Radford, Karthik Narasimhan, Tim Salimans, and Ilya Sutskever. Improving language under-
  standing with unsupervised learning. 2018.
Jack W Rae, Sebastian Borgeaud, Trevor Cai, Katie Millican, Jordan Hoffmann, Francis Song, John
  Aslanides, Sarah Henderson, Roman Ring, Susannah Young, et al. Scaling language models:
  Methods, analysis & insights from training gopher. arXiv preprint arXiv:2112.11446, 2021.
Colin Raffel, Noam Shazeer, Adam Roberts, Katherine Lee, Sharan Narang, Michael Matena, Yanqi
  Zhou, Wei Li, and Peter J Liu. Exploring the limits of transfer learning with a unified text-to-text
  transformer. The Journal of Machine Learning Research, 21(1):5485–5551, 2020.
Yunfan Shao, Linyang Li, Zhaoye Fei, Hang Yan, Dahua Lin, and Xipeng Qiu. Balanced data
  sampling for language model training with clustering. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.14526, 2024.
Hui Su, Zhi Tian, Xiaoyu Shen, and Xunliang Cai. Unraveling the mystery of scaling laws: Part i.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.06563, 2024.
Tianxiang Sun, Xiaotian Zhang, Zhengfu He, Peng Li, Qinyuan Cheng, Xiangyang Liu, Hang Yan,
  Yunfan Shao, Qiong Tang, Shiduo Zhang, Xingjian Zhao, Ke Chen, Yining Zheng, Zhejian Zhou,
  Ruixiao Li, Jun Zhan, Yunhua Zhou, Linyang Li, Xiaogui Yang, Lingling Wu, Zhangyue Yin,
  Xuanjing Huang, Yu-Gang Jiang, and Xipeng Qiu. Moss: An open conversational large language
  model. Machine Intelligence Research, 2024. ISSN 2731-5398. doi: 10.1007/s11633-024-1502-8.
  URL https://github.com/OpenMOSS/MOSS.
Ross Taylor, Marcin Kardas, Guillem Cucurull, Thomas Scialom, Anthony Hartshorn, Elvis Saravia,
  Andrew Poulton, Viktor Kerkez, and Robert Stojnic. Galactica: A large language model for science.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2211.09085, 2022.
InternLM Team. Internlm: A multilingual language model with progressively enhanced capabilities,
   2023.
Hugo Touvron, Thibaut Lavril, Gautier Izacard, Xavier Martinet, Marie-Anne Lachaux, Timothée
  Lacroix, Baptiste Rozière, Naman Goyal, Eric Hambro, Faisal Azhar, et al. Llama: Open and
  efficient foundation language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.13971, 2023a.
Hugo Touvron, Louis Martin, Kevin Stone, Peter Albert, Amjad Almahairi, Yasmine Babaei, Nikolay
  Bashlykov, Soumya Batra, Prajjwal Bhargava, Shruti Bhosale, et al. Llama 2: Open foundation
  and fine-tuned chat models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.09288, 2023b.
Leslie G Valiant. A theory of the learnable. Communications of the ACM, 27(11):1134–1142, 1984.
VN Vapnik and A Ya Chervonenkis. On the uniform convergence of relative frequencies of events to
 their probabilities. Theory of Probability and its Applications, 16(2):264, 1971.
Ashish Vaswani, Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Jakob Uszkoreit, Llion Jones, Aidan N
  Gomez, Ł ukasz Kaiser, and Illia Polosukhin.     Attention is all you need.  In Ad-
  vances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 30. Curran Associates, Inc.,
  2017.   URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper_files/paper/2017/
  file/3f5ee243547dee91fbd053c1c4a845aa-Paper.pdf.
Pablo Villalobos. Scaling laws literature review, 2023. URL https://epochai.org/blog/
  scaling-laws-literature-review. Accessed: 2024-02-27.
Guillaume Wenzek, Marie-Anne Lachaux, Alexis Conneau, Vishrav Chaudhary, Francisco Guzmán,
 Armand Joulin, and Edouard Grave. Ccnet: Extracting high quality monolingual datasets from
 web crawl data. arXiv preprint arXiv:1911.00359, 2019.
Sang Michael Xie, Hieu Pham, Xuanyi Dong, Nan Du, Hanxiao Liu, Yifeng Lu, Percy S Liang,
  Quoc V Le, Tengyu Ma, and Adams Wei Yu. Doremi: Optimizing data mixtures speeds up
  language model pretraining. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 36, 2024a.


                                                 14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Sang Michael Xie, Shibani Santurkar, Tengyu Ma, and Percy S Liang. Data selection for language
  models via importance resampling. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 36,
  2024b.
Wenhan Xiong, Jingyu Liu, Igor Molybog, Hejia Zhang, Prajjwal Bhargava, Rui Hou, Louis Martin,
 Rashi Rungta, Karthik Abinav Sankararaman, Barlas Oguz, et al. Effective long-context scaling of
 foundation models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2309.16039, 2023.
Jun Zhan, Junqi Dai, Jiasheng Ye, Yunhua Zhou, Dong Zhang, Zhigeng Liu, Xin Zhang, Ruibin Yuan,
  Ge Zhang, Linyang Li, Hang Yan, Jie Fu, Tao Gui, Tianxiang Sun, Yugang Jiang, and Xipeng Qiu.
  Anygpt: Unified multimodal llm with discrete sequence modeling, 2024.
Chunting Zhou, Pengfei Liu, Puxin Xu, Srinivasan Iyer, Jiao Sun, Yuning Mao, Xuezhe Ma, Avia
  Efrat, Ping Yu, Lili Yu, et al. Lima: Less is more for alignment. Advances in Neural Information
  Processing Systems, 36, 2024.
Kun Zhou, Yutao Zhu, Zhipeng Chen, Wentong Chen, Wayne Xin Zhao, Xu Chen, Yankai Lin,
  Ji-Rong Wen, and Jiawei Han. Don’t make your llm an evaluation benchmark cheater. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2311.01964, 2023.


                                               15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A    R ELATED W ORK

Curating pretraining data for LLMs. Training massive transformer architecture on trillions of
tokens, a.k.a. pretraining, is the primary step to building modern large language models that exhibit
impressive human-like generalist abilities (Brown et al., 2020; OpenAI, 2023; Jiang et al., 2023;
Touvron et al., 2023b; Sun et al., 2024)). It takes up most of the computation resources for model
training and researchers believe it endows almost all the knowledge in LLMs (Zhou et al., 2024). Such
critical impact motivates the development of data curating strategies to reduce computation costs and
enhance knowledge (Longpre et al., 2023). The efforts can be categorized into two steps. The first
step focuses on obtaining a high-quality training dataset. A typical procedure includes selecting data
sources to constitute different domains, deduplication, and the most intricate filtering (Wenzek et al.,
2019; Penedo et al., 2023). A mass of endeavors in existing practice has involved multifarious filters,
scoring the documents with from superficial features on characters (Rae et al., 2021; Xie et al., 2024b;
Raffel et al., 2020) to semantics including similarity to the high-quality reference corpus (Wenzek
et al., 2019) and toxicity (Longpre et al., 2023; Friedl, 2023). With a dataset on hold, the second step
aims to make the best use of it. This includes tuning the data mixture (Du et al., 2022; Touvron et al.,
2023a; Xie et al., 2024a) and devising data schedules (Mindermann et al., 2022; Albalak et al., 2023;
Chen et al., 2024b; Fan et al., 2024). Our work is among those tune data mixtures and our extension
to continue pretraining signifies our prospect of guiding the schedule design. Different from existing
attempts that rely on intuition or qualitative targets, our study seeks a quantitative solution. As a
concurrent work, Liu et al. (2024) also proposes to predict optimal data mixtures through regression
but assuming rank invariance across training scales.
Scaling laws are functional relationships between the properties of interests (e.g., test loss or other
performance metrics) and the scales of controllable factors regarding the optimization process or
architecture (e.g., model sizes and numbers of training samples) (Villalobos, 2023). Along with
the development of machine learning, characterizing scaling behaviors has garnered great research
interest under the context of learning theories, bounding the generalization error given the number of
training samples in the form of power laws (Vapnik & Chervonenkis, 1971; Valiant, 1984; Haussler,
1988; Amari et al., 1992). Nevertheless, overly strict assumptions hinder their practical applications.
In recent years, statistical estimation on scaling gained fast progress for deep neural networks and
spawns the introduction of scaling laws. Hestness et al. (2017) pioneers the trend and demonstrates
power-law generalization error scaling across a breadth of factors but the power-law exponents differ
from previous theoretical analysis. Kaplan et al. (2020); Hoffmann et al. (2022); Henighan et al.
(2020) conduct more comprehensive investigations on Transformer architecture (Vaswani et al., 2017),
further highlighting the power-law relationship on test loss regarding model sizes, the amount of
training data and computation across orders of magnitudes. These findings foretell the performance
gain with scaling quantitatively and guide the trade-off between larger models and more training
data, directing to the later development of large language models (Brown et al., 2020; Hoffmann
et al., 2022; OpenAI, 2023). Lately, progressive investigations propose amendments to existing
scaling laws (Caballero et al., 2022; Alabdulmohsin et al., 2022), seeking theoretical explanations on
the empirical formulas Bahri et al. (2021); Hutter (2021); Michaud et al. (2024), and exploring the
functional relationships in broader scenarios (Hernandez et al., 2021; Frantar et al., 2023; Liu et al.,
2023). The most relevant study to ours is Hashimoto (2021) which explores performance prediction
under multiple data sources but is limited to small-scaled supervised learning tasks.


B    L IMITATIONS AND D ISCUSSIONS
How data mixtures affect model training is far from fully understood. Our study makes preliminary
attempts at a quantitative framework while leaving several limitations.
On the clarification of domains. The concept of domains is not well-defined. In this paper, similar
to related studies (Xie et al., 2024a; Chen et al., 2024b; Albalak et al., 2023; Fan et al., 2024), we
directly adopt the predefined domains in the open-source training data. Nevertheless, we suppose
that more operationally defined training domains, e.g., clustering (Gururangan et al., 2023; Shao
et al., 2024), could further benefit the performance of outcome models. For the validation domains,
our implicit domain aggregation method obviates the necessity of explicitly aligning validation data
with training domains. This requirement is often encountered, given that validation data typically
comprises trustworthy datasets rather than mere compilations from training domains. However, we


                                                  16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


acknowledge that implicit domain aggregation may be less interpretable compared to the explicit
approach and may raise concerns regarding its accuracy, as elaborated subsequently.
On the error analyses. Leveraging scaling laws requires experiments to provide samples to fit the
functions. Consequently, it requires careful design of experiments (Mead, 1990) to decide the number
of fitting samples to experiment with and how to distribute these samples to reduce prediction errors
to the greatest extent. In this study, we decide the number according to our affordable budget and
leverage the simple rule that evenly distributes the losses of the data samples but considering more
theoretically justified rules should be necessary. Additionally, our nested use of scaling laws can
introduce errors in each step. Therefore, further analyses to mitigate the error accumulation are also
demanding. In Fig. 22, we notice our predictions are smaller than the actual loss, which we attribute
to the underestimation from the step laws and model size laws we fit. Further practical experience
demystifies the technical details of scaling laws (Su et al., 2024) can help eliminate the errors.
On joint laws of multiple factors. We propose the nested use of scaling laws for circumventing the
difficulties in finding a joint law of training steps, model sizes, and mixture proportions. Although
we can predict the losses with our pipeline, a joint law unveils clear synergies of different factors. For
instance, previous studies indicate the power-law exponent in the scaling laws of model sizes and
training data are insensitive to training and validation data (Hestness et al., 2017; Kaplan et al., 2020;
Hashimoto, 2021; Hoffmann et al., 2022; Frantar et al., 2023). Figuring out their joint laws with data
mixture can further confirm this surmise. Moreover, a joint law also implements coefficient-sharing
of separate laws, reducing the number of required fitting samples.
On dynamic data curating. Our study presents a pipeline to decide on a group of fixed mixture pro-
portions for pretraining. More sophisticated data curating can include dynamic proportions (Albalak
et al., 2023) and even a curriculum that changes data domains (Chen et al., 2024b). The application of
our data mixing laws in continual pretraining (Sec. 5) implies the prospect of extending our findings
to these settings. On top of this, we believe that it is promising to incorporate further analysis to
pursue a dynamic data mixing law.
On theoretical understandings. Our data mixing laws, similar to most scaling laws, are empirical
findings. We believe a theoretical understanding of the training dynamics that form the laws provides
a more solid justification. A potential perspective is understanding the target of tuning mixture
proportion through gradient estimation (Guo et al., 2024; Gu et al., 2024). Specifically, the mixture
proportions weight data from different domains, whose effect boils down to the weight for the
linear combination of gradients from different domains during training. This perspective turns the
target of tuning mixture proportions into finding an ideal gradient direction (Gu et al., 2024) and the
relationship between data samples is formalized with their gradient directions (Guo et al., 2024).
We believe that further investigation into these issues could facilitate more sophisticated quantitative
methods for data engineering. We leave them as future work.


                                                   17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


C     T HE RANKING OF DATA MIXTURES DEPEND ON MODEL SIZES AND
      TRAINING STEPS .

One may wonder whether we can find the
optimal data mixtures on small models and
few numbers of steps, and then transfer the
found mixture proportions to large-scale
training. To answer this question, we com-
pare the relative performance of models in
different sizes and trained with different
numbers of steps in Fig. 11.
Results show that the relative performance
fluctuates despite a relatively consistent
trend across sizes and training steps. This
indicates that a mixture is better at small
scales but does not always perform better
at large scales, consistent with findings of
Goyal et al. (2024); Covert et al.; Kang et al.
(2024). The longest common sequence of
the partial orders among the 20 mixtures Figure 11: The rankings of the relative performance of
in Fig. 11(A) and Fig. 11(B) only reaches 20 sample mixtures trained on RedPajama and validate
lengths of 10 and 11, respectively.             on the Pile. (A) The rankings of models of different
                                                sizes all trained for 30k steps. (B) The rankings for 70M
                                                models trained for different steps.
D I MPLEMENTATION D ETAILS

D.1    M ODEL T RAINING

Throughout this study, we employ the Pythia Suit (Biderman et al., 2023) as our model architectures,
the specific configurations are in Tab. 2. The maximum sequence length is 4096 for pretraining from
scratch and 2048 for continual pretraining, where the latter aligns with the setting of the original
pretrained models. In all our experiments, we train the model with a batch size of 1M tokens and a
maximum learning rate of 1e-4. We warm up the learning rates for 2000 steps and decay it to 0.1
of the maximum at the last training step with a cosine decay schedule. For continual pretraining,
we initialize the models with the 20k-step checkpoint of the Pythia 70M model and do not apply a
learning rate warmup. For the costs of our experiments, it takes around 3.5/8/16/21 hours to train a
70M/160M/305M/410M model for 30B tokens on 8 A100 GPUs on our infrastructure.

                     Table 2: Model architectures for experiments in this paper.
                            70M          160M           305M            410M               1B
Vocabulary Size              50304          50304         50304            50304           50304
Non-embedding Params         18,915,328     85,056,000    201,541,632      302,311,424     805,736,448
Layers                       6              12            16               24              16
Model Dimension              512            768           1024             1024            2048
Heads                        8              12            16               16              8



For datasets, we mainly experiment with the Pile and RedPajama. For the Pile, we find duplicates in
the raw data, so deduplication is performed before training with it. The Pile contains 5 coarse-grained
domains, which are further decomposed into 22 fine-grained domains. Our experiment in Sec. 3.1
is on Github and Pile-CC domains while the experiment in Sec. 3.2 is on Github, Pile-CC, and the
Books. All these are fine-grained domains. For our experiments with 5 domains in Sec. 3.3 we adopt
the five coarse-grained domains, i.e., academic, internet, prose, dialogues, and misc, where misc
include Github and the DeepMind Mathematics Dataset which are symbolic content. We use the
coarse-grained domains because it is hard to find five fine-grained domains with sufficient tokens.
For the RedPajama, we download the version produced and shared by Chen et al. (2024a).


                                                   18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


D.2                                     P REDICTING L ANGUAGE M ODELING P ERFORMANCE WITH S CALING L AWS


In our prediction pipeline in Sec. 4, we adopt nested use scaling laws of training steps and model
sizes, which are both power laws, to predict language modeling performance at scale. To fit the laws,
we follow Hoffmann et al. (2022) to search over a set of initialized parameters and fit the samples by
minimizing the Huber errors between predictions and observations with LBFGS.
We present our results on verifying the feasibility of applying scaling laws to predict language
modeling performance. Our prediction pipeline (described in Sec. 4) employs two scaling laws:
one related to training steps and another to model sizes, to extrapolate performance with increased
training data and larger models. We evaluate the precision of predictions for each of these scaling
laws, respectively.
Scaling laws of training steps. Fig. 12 shows the training curve 70M models on three different data
mixtures. We fit power laws within 30k steps (marked with circles) and extrapolate to predict model
performance to as many as 100k steps (marked with stars). On all validation sets, the fitted curves
give descent prediction precision, with a low mean absolute error of 0.02.
                                        Academic                                                                        Prose                                                                      Dialogue                                              2.4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Symbolic                                                                       Internet                                                                       Total
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      4.4                                                                          3.7
                                                          Mixture 0                            4.2                                     Mixture 0                            3.4                                     Mixture 0                                                                    Mixture 0                                                                    Mixture 0                            3.6
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Mixture 0
                  3.4
                                                          Mixture 1                            4.1                                     Mixture 1                                                                    Mixture 1                            2.2                                     Mixture 1                            4.2                                     Mixture 1                                                                    Mixture 1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   3.5
                                                          Mixture 2                                                                    Mixture 2                                                                    Mixture 2                                                                    Mixture 2                                                                    Mixture 2                                                                    Mixture 2
Validation Loss


                                                                             Validation Loss


                                                                                                                                                          Validation Loss


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Validation Loss


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Validation Loss


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Validation Loss
                  3.2                                                                                                                                                       3.2
                                                                                               4.0                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    4.0                                                                          3.4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         2.0
                  3.0                                                                          3.9                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    3.8                                                                          3.3
                                                                                                                                                                            3.0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         1.8                                                                                                                                                       3.2
                  2.8                                                                          3.8                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    3.6
                                                                                                                                                                            2.8                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    3.1
                                                                                               3.7
                  2.6                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    1.6                                                                          3.4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   3.0
                                                                                               3.6
                                                                                                                                                                            2.6                                                                                                                                                       3.2                                                                          2.9
                  2.4                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    1.4
                            20000       40000     60000    80000   100000                                20000       40000     60000    80000   100000                                20000       40000     60000    80000   100000                                20000       40000     60000    80000   100000                                20000       40000     60000    80000   100000                                20000       40000     60000    80000   100000
                                                Step                                                                         Step                                                                         Step                                                                         Step                                                                         Step                                                                         Step


Figure 12: Verification on predicting language modeling performance with scaling laws of training
steps. We train 70M models on three different mixtures up to 100k steps and validate them on 5
validation domains as well as the overall validation mixture. All curves are fitted within 30k steps (•)
and and extrapolated to predict model performance to 100k steps (⋆)
Scaling laws of model sizes. Fig. 13 shows the results where we fit power laws on 70M, 160M, and
305M models (marked with circles) and extrapolate the curve to predict 410M model performance
(marked with stars) at different training steps and under different data mixtures. The results are
positive, showing that we can precisely predict the 410M model performance at different training
steps, with a mean absolute error of 0.003.
                            Academic at step 20000                                             4.0
                                                                                                           Prose at step 20000                                                        Dialogue at step 20000                                                       Symbolic at step 20000                                                        Internet at step 20000                                                         Total at step 20000
                                                           Mixture 0                                                                    Mixture 0                                                                    Mixture 0                           2.0                                      Mixture 0                           4.0                                      Mixture 0                           4.0                                      Mixture 0
                  3.0
                                                           Mixture 1                                                                    Mixture 1                           3.0                                      Mixture 1                                                                    Mixture 1                           3.8                                      Mixture 1                           3.8                                      Mixture 1
                                                                                               3.8
                                                           Mixture 2                                                                    Mixture 2                                                                    Mixture 2                           1.8                                      Mixture 2                                                                    Mixture 2                                                                    Mixture 2
Validation Loss


                                                                             Validation Loss


                                                                                                                                                          Validation Loss


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Validation Loss


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Validation Loss


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Validation Loss


                  2.8                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 3.6                                                                          3.6
                                                                                               3.6                                                                          2.8
                  2.6                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    1.6                                                                          3.4                                                                          3.4
                                                                                               3.4                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    3.2                                                                          3.2
                                                                                                                                                                            2.6
                  2.4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         1.4                                                                          3.0                                                                          3.0
                                                                                               3.2
                  2.2                                                                                                                                                       2.4                                                                                                                                                       2.8                                                                          2.8
                        0           1            2          3         4                              0           1            2          3         4                              0           1            2          3         4                              0           1            2          3         4                              0           1            2          3         4                              0           1            2          3         4
                                          Model Size                   1e8
                                                                                                                       Model Size                   1e8
                                                                                                                                                                                                    Model Size                   1e8
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Model Size                   1e8
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Model Size                   1e8
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Model Size                   1e8


                            Academic at step 30000                                                         Prose at step 30000                                                        Dialogue at step 30000                                                       Symbolic at step 30000                                                        Internet at step 30000                                                         Total at step 30000
                  3.0                                                                                                                                                       3.0
                                                           Mixture 0                                                                    Mixture 0                                                                    Mixture 0                                                                    Mixture 0                           3.8                                      Mixture 0                           3.8                                      Mixture 0
                                                           Mixture 1                           3.8                                      Mixture 1                                                                    Mixture 1                                                                    Mixture 1                                                                    Mixture 1                                                                    Mixture 1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         1.8
                  2.8                                      Mixture 2                                                                    Mixture 2                           2.8                                      Mixture 2                                                                    Mixture 2                           3.6                                      Mixture 2                           3.6                                      Mixture 2
Validation Loss


                                                                             Validation Loss


                                                                                                                                                          Validation Loss


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Validation Loss


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Validation Loss


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Validation Loss


                                                                                               3.6
                  2.6                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    1.6                                                                          3.4                                                                          3.4
                                                                                                                                                                            2.6
                                                                                               3.4                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    3.2                                                                          3.2
                  2.4                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    1.4
                                                                                               3.2                                                                          2.4                                                                                                                                                       3.0                                                                          3.0
                  2.2                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 2.8                                                                          2.8
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         1.2
                                                                                               3.0                                                                          2.2
                        0           1            2          3         4                              0           1            2          3         4                              0           1            2          3         4                              0           1            2          3         4                              0           1            2          3         4                              0           1            2          3         4
                                          Model Size                   1e8
                                                                                                                       Model Size                   1e8
                                                                                                                                                                                                    Model Size                   1e8
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Model Size                   1e8
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Model Size                   1e8
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Model Size                   1e8


Figure 13: Verification on predicting language modeling performance with scaling laws of model
sizes. We train models of 70M, 160M, and 406M on three different mixtures and validate them on
5 validation domains as well as the overall validation mixture. All curves are fitted with models of
70M, 160M, and 305M (•) and extrapolated to predict the performance of 410M models (⋆). We
verify the predictability at different numbers of training steps.
Overall, we consider fitting power laws to predict model performance for more training steps and
larger models are feasible. Therefore we adopt them to implement the scaling law predictions in our
pipeline (Sec. 4).


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Algorithm 2 Sampling mixture proportions for fitting mixture laws.
                                                                                                         Di
    Input: Maximum proportions of M domains rmax = [rmax,1 , . . . , rmax,M ], where rmax,i = Dtarget
    with Di and Dtarget being numbers of available tokens in i-th domain and target number of training tokens,
    respectively, sorted in descending orders (i.e., rmax,1 ≥ rmax,2 ≥ · · · ≥ rmax,M ), minimum proportion
    grid size δ, number of mixture to run experiment N .
    Output: A set of N mixtures to experiment {rn }N   n=1 .
 1: Candidate mixtures C ← G ETA LL C ANDIDATES(1, [])
 2: Split mixtures with 0 proportion in C into C0 and the others into C1
                     ⌊N/4⌋
 3: Samples {rn }n=1 from C0 and {rn }N     n=⌈N/4⌉ from C1
 4:
 5: procedure G ETA LL C ANDIDATES(domain index i, proportions of first i − 1 domains r1...i−1 )
 6:     Candidate mixtures C = ∅
 7:     if i = M then P
 8:          if 0 ≤ 1 − i−1 j=1 rj ≤ rmax,i then
                 r1...i ←S[r1...i−1 , 1 − i−1
                                         P
 9:                                       j=1 rj ]
10:               C ← C {r1...i }
11:          end if
12:     else
                         r
13:          Γ ← δ ∗ ⌊ max,i
                           δ
                                ⌋
14:          for s = 0 To ⌈log2 Γδ ⌉ do
                                  Γ
15:               ri ← max(0,
                         S       2s
                                    )
16:               C ← C G ETA LL C ANDIDATES(i + 1, [r1...i ])
17:          end for
18:     end if
19:     return C
20: end procedure

D.3    F ITTING DATA M IXING L AWS

Fitting the mixture law requires us to first experiment on a few mixtures and obtain their losses. The
sample mixture chosen for fitting could largely affect the prediction accuracy. Consider an extreme
case where all sample mixtures have proportions around a small region, it is hardly possible to fit a
law that reliably predicts the whole proportion space.
In this paper, we intuitively try evenly allocating the mixture proportions regarding their losses.
Specifically, we enumerate candidate mixtures by double-diminishing the proportion of each domain
so that the losses are distributed evenly among these mixtures. Then, according to the available
computation budget, we sample a certain number of mixtures from the candidates to run experiments.
During sampling, we find candidate mixtures with a 0 domain proportion in any of the training
domains take up a majority of the candidates. To avoid these candidates making up all our samples,
we specifically down-sample them. The concrete algorithms are in Alg. 2. Additionally, we employ
AdaBoost Regressor (Drucker, 1997) for fitting the mixture laws to stabilize the predictions and
improve their accuracy. We encourage future studies to dive into a more careful design of candidate
mixture selection with theoretical support.

E     C ONNECTIONS BETWEEN I MPLICIT D OMAIN AGGREGATION AND MLP
We first repeat our final mixture law (Eqn. 8) here for convenience:
                                                                               
                              K
                              X                     K
                                                    X                  XM
                L(r1...M ) =      si Li (r1...M ) =   si ci + ki exp    tij rj  ,
                               i=1                   i=1                     j=1

where r1...M are mixture proportions on M training domains, Li are validation loss on K implicit
domains with si as their weight in the overall validation set, and ci , tij are other parameters to fit.
The mixture law boils down to a computation graph in Fig. 14, which contains two layers.
The first layers predict the domain losses, while the second sums up the domain losses to ob-
tain the overall validation loss. In this way, the mixture law becomes a multilayer perception
(MLP) with an exponential activation function. In practice, we fit the mixture laws with implicit

                                                     20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


domain aggregation by fitting a multilayer per-
ception with exponential activation and applying
softmax to the output layer weights. Addition-
ally, considering the high variance of MLP, we
further employ AdaBoost Regressor (Drucker,
1997) for fitting the mixture laws to stabilize the
predictions and improve their accuracy.
Inspired by this perspective, we attribute the suc-
cessful fitting of data mixing laws to two aspects.
First, the MLP with a sufficiently large hidden
dimension is a universal approximator (Hornik         Figure 14: The computation graph of mixture law
et al., 1989) thus being able to fit the relation-    with implicit domain aggregation. We take an case
ships between losses and mixture proportions.         of 3 training domains and 4 implicit validation
Second, the mixture proportions are bounded           domains as example. The parameters correspond
between 0 and 1. For this reason, predicting          to the notations in Eqn. 8.
an unseen mixture is an interpolation problem,
which is usually easier than extrapolation.


                                                      21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


F     S UPPLEMENTED R ESULTS
F.1      P REDICTION R ESULTS ON M ORE D OMAINS

To further consolidate the efficacy of data mixing laws and show that they are general for different
data, we experiments on domains different from those in Sec. 3.2.
We train and validate on Wikipedia, ArXiv, and StackExchange of RedPajama, which are three
domains different from those in Sec. 3.2. All samples are from 70M models trained for 10k steps. The
prediction accuracy is in Fig. 15. The result shows the predicted and observed losses are consistent
for different mixtures. This confirms that our data mixing laws also work on domains besides those
in the main experiments.
                    6.0
                                Wikipedia                                                  ArXiv                                                                    StackExchange
                                                                             2.4
                    5.8          fitting                                     2.3
                                                                                         fitting                                                           2.6                     fitting
                    5.6          validation                                              validation                                                        2.5                     validation
      observation


                                                               observation


                                                                                                                                             observation
                    5.4                                                      2.2
                                                                                                                                                           2.4
                    5.2                                                      2.1                                                                           2.3
                    5.0                                                      2.0                                                                           2.2
                    4.8
                                                                             1.9                                                                           2.1
                    4.6
                                                                             1.8                                                                           2.0
                    4.4
                                                                                                                                                           1.9
                          4.50 4.75 5.00 5.25 5.50 5.75 6.00                       1.8     2.0                            2.2        2.4                          2.0                       2.2       2.4        2.6
                                 prediction                                              prediction                                                                                 prediction
Figure 15: Prediction results on domain losses with Eqn. 7. We train 70M models on mixtures of
Wikipedia, ArXiv, and StackExchange for 10k steps. We fit on 7 mixtures and validate on 3 other
mixtures.
F.2      DATA M IXING L AWS M AKE NO D OMAIN -I NDEPENDENT A SSUMPTIONS

Although our data mixing laws combine the terms with the proportion of different domains through
linear combination, we make no domain-independent assumption that different domain affects the
losses independently. This is because the linear combination serves as an exponent in Eqn. 6 and
Eqn. 7. Specifically, by Taylor expansion, we have
                                                                                               
                               M                           M              M XM
                              X                           X            1 X
 Li (r1...M ) = ci + ki exp      tij rj  = ci + ki 1 +     tij rj +         tij tik rj rk + o2  ,
                              j=1                         j=1
                                                                       2 j=1                                                                                                   k=1

where there exists interaction terms rj rk (j ̸= k) of different mixture proportions.
Empirically, we evaluate the effectiveness of                                                                                                                                                 2.2 × 100
                                                                                                 Wikipedia+CommomCrawl


our data mixing laws in modeling domain in-                                                                                4 × 100                                                          2.175 × 100
                                                                                                    Reducible Loss on


                                                                                                                                                                        Reducible Loss on
                                                                                                                                                                         Wikipedia+ArXiv


teractions by examining their ability to predict                                                                         3.9 × 100                                                           2.15 × 100
language modeling performance when mixing                                                                                                                                                   2.125 × 100
                                                                                                                         3.8 × 100
two correlated domains. Specifically, we con-                                                                                                                                                 2.1 × 100
struct two synthetic data domains with deliber-                                                                          3.7 × 100                                                          2.075 × 100
ate overlap. The first domain consists of 50%                                                                            3.6 × 100                                                           2.05 × 100
Wikipedia and 50% CommonCrawl data, while
                                                                                                                                           0.4              0.6                                                0.4     0.6
the other domain comprises 50% Wikipedia and                                                                                          Proportion of                                                          Proportion of
50% ArXiv content. In this case, increasing the                                                                                 Wikipedia+CommomCrawl                                                       Wikipedia+ArXiv
proportion of one domain necessarily increases                                               Figure 16: Data mixing laws can model the lan-
the shared Wikipedia component. Therefore,                                                   guage modeling performance of mixing correlated
the contribution of a training domain on target                                              domains with different proportions. We train 70M
losses is coupled with the proportion of the other                                           models on the mixtures of "Wikipedia+ Common-
domain given their joint contribution through                                                Crawl" and "Wikipedia+ArXiv" for 15k steps. We
Wikipedia. As demonstrated in Fig.16, our pro-                                               validate on the two domains separately and fit the
posed mixing law (Eqn.6) successfully models                                                 relationship between mixture proportions and vali-
the language modeling performance across var-                                                dation losses with Eqn. 6.
ious mixing ratios of these correlated domains.

F.3      E XTRA VALIDATION ON S CALING L AWS P REDICTION


                                                                                           22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


We discuss the computation that our prediction                    2.7                                     Fitting Samples
                                                                                                          Validation Samples


                                                           Loss
method with nested scaling laws requires. In                      2.6
particular, the cost primarily depends on how                     2.5
                                                                        0   50000   100000     150000   200000      250000
much scaling laws can accurately extrapolate.                                                Steps
Specifically, we need to train N different data         0.00


                                                     Error
mixtures on model sized N1 , N2 , . . . , NK for        0.01
S0 steps to predict the model performance of dif-
                                                             0    50000  100000     150000 200000 250000
ferent data mixtures trained with a model with                                  Step
Ntarget parameters for Starget steps. The to-
tal extra computational    overhead relative to di- Figure 17: The scaling law of training steps ac-
                      S0 K
                        P
                          i=1 Ni
                                                     curately extrapolates to 6.25x more steps. We fit
rect training is N Starget Ntarget , where the frac-
          PK                                         L(S) = E + B/S β with 40k training steps of a
       S0 i=1 Ni
tion Starget Ntarget represents computation saved    1B model and validate the prediction on language
through scaling law predictions. State-of-the-       modeling  performance up to 250k steps.
art scaling law prediction demonstrates that this
fraction can be 1/100 to 1/1000 (OpenAI, 2023; Bi et al., 2024). Together with the typical value of
N , which is 20 in our experiments, the overall method should require an extra 1/5 to 1/50 training
computation expectedly.
Given that achieving accurate scaling law pre-
dictions remains a developing area, we would                                  (4.183e+14/N)^0.073 + 0.00
                                                    4.0                       Fitting Samples
like to provide our preliminary investigation to                              Validation, N=1.51B
support 100x to 1000x scaling. Fig. 17 shows        3.5                       Validation, N=7.25B
                                                     Loss


the scaling prediction of training steps with the   3.0
scaling law of training steps L(S), where we fit
with the first 40k steps and predict the model      2.5
performance up to 250k steps. This shows that           106    107        108             109          1010
fitting with 40k steps accurately predicts the                      Model size (N)
language modeling performance on 250k steps, Figure 18: The scaling law of model sizes accu-
which is 6.25x scaling. Additionally, Fig. 18 rately extrapolates to 70x larger models. We fit
shows the scaling prediction of model sizes with language modeling performance at convergence
L(N), where we fit with models smaller than following (Kaplan et al., 2020) with L(N ) =
100M and find it accurately predicts model per- B/N α + E. The language modeling performance
formance up to 7.25B, which is 72.5x scaling. of 1.5B and 7.25B models are predicted with L(S).
Combining L(S) and L(N), we may achieve 450x scaling.


F.4   C OMPARISON TO OTHER DATA M IXING M ETHODS

We compare our method to representative data mixing methods, DoGE (Fan et al., 2024) and
DoReMi (Xie et al., 2024a). As our experiment in Sec. 4.2, we train on RedPajama and validation on
the Pile.
DoGE (Fan et al., 2024) contains a universal          0.5                                   CommonCrawl
                                                                                            Books
generalization setting, which assumes validat-        0.4                                   C4
                                                     Proportion


                                                                                            Github
                                                      0.3                                   StackExchange
ing on the same data as training, and an OOD          0.2
                                                                                            Wikipedia
                                                                                            ArXiv
setting which targets any validation data. We         0.1
experiment with both of them. For universal           0.0
generalization, we refer to the data mixture pro-         0      2000   4000
                                                                             Step
                                                                                  6000 8000          10000

vided by Fan et al. (2024). For the OOD setting,
we follow the original paper to train a small Figure 19: The evolution of mixture proportions
proxy model (160M) for 10k steps and apply when training the proxy model with the updating
their online updating rule to adjust the data mix- rule in the OOD setting of DoGE.
ture, shown in Fig. 19. We also follow Fan et al.
(2024) to calculate the average proportions along the training steps of the proxy model as the final
optimized mixture.
For DoReMi (Xie et al., 2024a), which is only designed for general optimization without awareness of
the validation data, we experiment on both its mixture proportion optimized with RedPajama and the
Pile. For the mixture optimized with RedPajama, we adopt the result of DoReMi10k from Fan et al.


                                                    23
  Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


  (2024). For the mixture optimized on the Pile, we refer to the optimized Pile mixture in the original pa-
  per (Xie et al., 2024a) and adapt the mixture to the one for RedPajama according to the domain overlap.
  Specifically, for ArXiv, Wikipedia,
  Github, and StackExchange, we di-             2.83
  rectly borrow the mixture proportion.


                                                                    Loss
  CommonCrawl and C4 equally share              2.79
  the proportion of Pile-CC. The propor-
  tion of Books is obtained as the sum          2.75
                                                        Default DoGE       DoGE DoReMi DoReMi Ours
  of Books3 and BookCorpus2 in the                             (Universal) (OOD) (RedPajama) (Pile)
  Pile. We renormalize the proportions
  of these domains to ensure they sum Figure 20: Comparisons of the language modeling perfor-
  up to 1.                                  mance of different data mixtures. All models are 1B models
                                            trained for 100B tokens with the same hyperparameters and
  Fig. 21 summarizes the final mixture validated on the validation set of the Pile. Default: original
  proportion we use for different setups. data mixture from Touvron et al. (2023a). DoGE (Univer-
  We train all models for 100B tokens at sal): DoGE for universal generalization, obtained from Fan
  the model size 1B. The outcome per- et al. (2024). DoGE (OOD): OOD generalization setting of
  formance is in Fig. 20 which shows DoGE optimized with validation set of the Pile. DoReMi
  the mixture provided by our data mix- (RedPajama): DoReMi mixture optimized by training proxy
  ing law indeed archives the lowest val- model on RedPajama. DoReMi (Pile): DoReMi mixture op-
  idation loss.                             timized by training proxy model on the Pile and adapted
                                            for our training on RedPajama through the domain overlaps
                                            between two dataset. Specific proportions are in Fig. 21.

                    Default                                      DoGE (Universal)                                        DoGE (OOD)
                                                               CC (26.90%)                                    CC (37.50%)
                                                                                     Books (4.50%)                                   Books (1.95%)
 CC (67.00%)
                                     Books (4.50%)                                     ArXiv (8.80%)                                    ArXiv (12.11%)
                                      ArXiv (2.50%)                                                                                      Wikipedia (0.39%)
                                     Wikipedia (4.50%)C4 (21.40%)
                                     StackExchange (2.00%)                             Wikipedia (14.80%)                               StackExchange (11.72%)
                                   Github (4.50%)
                              C4 (15.00%)               Github (7.00%)                                        C4 (29.30%)          Github (7.03%)
                                                                              StackExchange (16.60%)



        DoReMi (RedPajama)                                         DoReMi (Pile)                                            Ours
      CC (38.10%)                                                            CC (41.02%)
                                                                                                        Books (93.75%)
                                   Books (8.20%)                                                                                       ArXiv (25.00%)
                                     ArXiv (4.23%)                                       Books (3.91%)
                                                                                         ArXiv (0.39%)                                  Wikipedia (1.56%)
                                                                                        Wikipedia (9.38%)                               StackExchange (12.50%)
C4 (11.41%)
                                  Wikipedia (23.05%)                                  StackExchange
                                                                                     Github (2.34%) (1.95%)                           Github (14.06%)
   Github (6.54%)                                         C4 (41.02%)                                         CC (12.50%)
StackExchange (8.47%)                                                                                                          C4 (25.00%)


  Figure 21: Specific mixture proportions on Redpajama from different data mixture optimization
  methods.


                                                                                24
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


G    L OSS P REDICTION R ESULTS WITH N ESTED S CALING L AWS
Fig. 22 shows the prediction results of nested use of scaling laws in Sec. 4.2. The result demonstrates
plausible reference on the relative scale of losses on both the overall validation data and different
validation domains. The optimized mixtures perform better in most domains. While the overall
loss helps optimize the overall performance, losses on different domains show model capabilities in
various aspects. Our result indicates that, by tuning data mixtures, it is possible to improve specific
model capabilities without sacrificing others, consistent with the findings of Xie et al. (2024a).


Figure 22: Results of our loss prediction pipelines for the overall validation loss and domain losses.
Fitting data are from 70M to 410M models trained for 30B tokens, while the extrapolated points are
from the default and optimized mixture for 1B models and 100B tokens.


                                                  25
