Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


T ODDLER D IFFUSION : I NTERACTIVE S TRUCTURED I M -
AGE G ENERATION WITH C ASCADED S CHRÖDINGER
B RIDGE
                         Eslam Abdelrahman 1 , Liangbing Zhao 1 , Vincent Tao Hu 2 ,
                          Matthieu Cord 3 , Patrick Perez 4 , Mohamed Elhoseiny 1
                                1
                                  KAUST 2 LMU 3 Valeo AI 4 Kyutai



               Speed-Up                              Editing                             Real Image Editing
              Model Efficiency                                             Input       Inversion    Sketch   Edited Sketch Output


              Convergence Rate


                                                                                               Robustness
                                                                          Original   SE(K=3)   SE(K=8)   Original   SE(K=3)   SE(K=8)
                                 Interactivity


Figure 1: An overview of ToddlerDiffusion capabilities: 1) Speed-Up: Performing on the bar compared to LDM
while being 2× faster, using 3× smaller architecture. 2) Interactivity: Producing intermediate outputs, e.g.,
sketch and palette. 3) Editing: Offering free, robust editing capabilities even for real images. 4) Robustness: Our
method is robust against input condition perturbations, e.g., sketch sparsity.

                                                 A BSTRACT

          Diffusion models break down the challenging task of generating data from high-
          dimensional distributions into a series of easier denoising steps. Inspired by this
          paradigm, we propose a novel approach that extends the diffusion framework into
          modality space, decomposing the complex task of RGB image generation into
          simpler, interpretable stages. Our method, termed ToddlerDiffusion, cascades
          modality-specific models, each responsible for generating an intermediate represen-
          tation, such as contours, palettes, and detailed textures, ultimately culminating in a
          high-quality RGB image. Instead of relying on the naive LDM concatenation condi-
          tioning mechanism to connect the different stages together, we employ Schrödinger
          Bridge to determine the optimal transport between different modalities. Although
          employing a cascaded pipeline introduces more stages, which could lead to a more
          complex architecture, each stage is meticulously formulated for efficiency and
          accuracy, surpassing Stable-Diffusion (LDM) performance. Modality composition
          not only enhances overall performance but enables emerging proprieties such as
          consistent editing, interaction capabilities, high-level interpretability, and faster con-
          vergence and sampling rate. Extensive experiments on diverse datasets, including
          LSUN-Churches, ImageNet, CelebHQ, and LAION-Art, demonstrate the efficacy
          of our approach, consistently outperforming state-of-the-art methods. For instance,
          ToddlerDiffusion achieves notable efficiency, matching LDM performance on
          LSUN-Churches while operating 2× faster with a 3× smaller architecture. The
          project website is available at: https : //toddlerdif f usion.github.io/website/


                                                        1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                    P   S
                                                   𝑥T = 𝑥0                         S
                           rgb
                          𝑥T = 𝑥0
                                 P
                                                                                 𝑥T


    𝑥0
                                         𝑥t-1
                                                             𝑥t
                                                                                           𝑥T

Figure 2: Trajectory comparison. We compare our approach (Top) against LDM (bottom) in terms of trajectory.
Instead of starting from pure noise such as LDM, our approach, ToddlerDiffusion, leverages the intermediate
stages to achieve a more steady and shorter trajectory.

1    I NTRODUCTION

In recent years, diffusion models (Sohl-Dickstein et al., 2015; Ho et al., 2020; Song et al., 2020b)
have made significant strides across diverse domains, revolutionizing image synthesis and related
tasks by transforming noisy, unstructured data into coherent representations through incremental
diffusion steps (Ho et al., 2020; Preechakul et al., 2022; Dhariwal & Nichol, 2021; Nichol & Dhariwal,
2021). Their versatility extends beyond image generation to tasks such as image denoising (Gong
et al., 2023; Kulikov et al., 2023; Zhu et al., 2023), inpainting (Lugmayr et al., 2022; Alt et al.,
2022), super-resolution (Li et al., 2022; Gao et al., 2023), and applications in 3D content creation
(Anciukevičius et al., 2023; Qian et al., 2023; Poole et al., 2022), data augmentation (Carlini et al.,
2023; Li et al., 2023c; Voetman et al., 2023), medical imaging (Chung et al., 2022; Kazerouni
et al., 2022; Wu et al., 2022; Wolleb et al., 2022), anomaly detection, and more. Diffusion models,
such as Denoising Diffusion Probabilistic Models (DDPMs) (Ho et al., 2020), draw inspiration
from the diffusion process in physics, breaking down the intricate task of generating data from
high-dimensional distributions into a sequence of simpler denoising steps. In this framework, instead
of generating an image in a single step, the task is reformulated as a gradual denoising process, where
a noisy image is iteratively refined until the final, detailed image emerges. This step-by-step approach
leverages the power of decomposition: by solving a series of simpler tasks, we can ultimately solve
the original, more challenging problem.
Inspired by this philosophy, we propose ToddlerDiffusion, a novel method extending this decom-
position principle beyond just noise removal. Instead of tackling the image generation problem in
one go, we decompose it into modality-specific stages. Each stage focuses on generating a different
aspect or modality of the image, such as abstract contours or sketches, followed by color palettes, and
finally, the detailed RGB image. This approach mimics the learning process of a child developing
artistic skills (Stevens, 2012; Marr, 2010; 1974), where the child first learns to draw basic outlines,
then adds colors, and finally fills in the details. We use the term “ToddlerDiffusion” to reflect this
gradual, step-by-step learning and generation process.
Despite the intuitive appeal of task decomposition, it introduces significant challenges. More stages
mean more parameters, longer training times, and potentially slower sampling speeds. However, our
hypothesis is that by addressing simpler tasks at each stage, we can leverage smaller architectures
tailored to each modality, resulting in a more compact overall model compared to traditional single-
stage architectures. Moreover, multi-stage frameworks often suffer from error accumulation (Ho
et al., 2022; Huang et al., 2023), where inaccuracies in earlier stages can propagate and amplify
through subsequent stages. However, we showed that by using simple techniques such as condition
truncation dropout, we can significantly mitigate the error accumulation, Appendix A.7 Additionally,
learning these intermediate representations, e.g., counters, explicitly or implicitly is challenging,
where the first requires paired data and the latter requires special complicated designs (Singh et al.,
2019; Li et al., 2021). To tackle the guidance challenge, we leverage pseudo GT and show that this
noisy GT is enough to learn robust intermediate modalities.


                                                    2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


To implement this framework, we considered two approaches. The first is the standard Latent
Diffusion Model (LDM) (Rombach et al., 2022) conditioning mechanism, using techniques such as
cross-attention and concatenation to link stages. Given our focus on spatial modalities like sketches,
concatenation seemed more appropriate. However, this method proved insufficient for achieving our
hypothesis due to its weak conditioning, which results in poor information transfer between stages.
We instead adopt a more principled approach by employing the Schrödinger Bridge (Wang et al.,
2021; Li et al., 2023a), a method from stochastic optimal transport theory, to determine the optimal
path between modalities at each stage. Unlike simple concatenation, which starts each stage from a
state of pure noise, the Schrödinger Bridge enables us to begin each stage from a meaningful signal
with a higher Signal-to-Noise Ratio (SNR) (Kingma et al., 2021), as illustrated in Figure 2. This
leads to more effective and stable progression through the generation process, significantly reducing
the denoising steps required during training and testing.
This structured, multi-stage approach not only allows for a more efficient and stable generation process
but also enables a range of emerging capabilities. ToddlerDiffusion supports consistent editing of
both generated and real images and facilitates user interaction in both conditional and unconditional
settings, as shown in Figure 1. Moreover, while sampling efficiency was not our primary objective,
our approach yields faster sampling and training convergence due to the shorter trajectories between
stages (Figure 2), resulting in fewer denoising steps and less computational cost (Figure 1). For
instance, LDM is trained using 1k steps; in contrast, ToddlerDiffusion could be trained using only 10
steps with minimal impact on generation fidelity. To the best of our knowledge, ToddlerDiffusion is
the first work to successfully integrate and achieve advancements across multiple domains, including
controllability, consistent editing, sampling and training efficiency, and interactivity, within a unified
framework, as shown in Figure 1. Our extensive experiments on datasets such as LSUN-Churches
(Yu et al., 2015), ImageNet, and CelebA-HQ (Karras et al., 2017) demonstrate the effectiveness of
this approach, consistently outperforming existing methods. ToddlerDiffusion not only redefines the
image generation process but also paves the way for future research into more structured, interpretable,
and efficient generative models.
Our contributions can be succinctly summarized as follows:
       • We introduce a cascaded structured image generation pipeline, denoted as ToddlerDiffusion,
         that systematically generates a chain of interpretable stages leading to the final image.
       • Leveraging the Schrödinger Bridge enables us to train the model from scratch using a
         minimal number of steps: 10 steps only, in addition to, performing on the bar compared to
         LDM while being 2× faster, using 3× smaller architecture.
       • ToddlerDiffusion provides robust editing and interaction capabilities for free; without
         requiring any manual annotations.
       • Introduce a novel formulation for sketch generation that achieves better performance than
         LDM while using 41× smaller architecture.


2     T ODDLER D IFFUSION

We introduce ToddlerDiffusion, which strategically decomposes the RGB image generation task
into more straightforward and manageable subtasks, such as sketch/edge and palette modalities. In
Section 2.1, we detail the formulation of each stage. By breaking down the generation process into
simpler components, our model not only allows for a more compact architecture but also enables
dynamic user interaction with the system, as illustrated in Figure 1. Notably, these advancements are
achieved without relying on manual ground truth annotations, instead utilizing human-free guidance
for enhanced efficiency and practical applicability (Section 2.2). Lastly, we demonstrate how our
method facilitates robust, consistent edits across stages (Section 2.4).

2.1   T ODDLER G ROWTH

The development of our method is inspired by child’s growth, where the learning process in their
brains is decomposed into stages and developed step-by-step (Stevens, 2012; Marr, 2010; 1974).
By analogy, we decompose the 2D image synthesis into different, more straightforward stages.
We employ the sketch and palette as intermediate stages, resulting three cascaded stages approach.
However, our approach is generic and seamlessly we can add or remove intermediate steps, based


                                                    3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


on the application needs. Mainly, the pipeline can be clustered into two main modules: 1) The
unconditional module, that generates the first modality, e.g., sketches, based on pure noise. 2)
The conditional module, that condition on the previous modality to generate the next intermediate
modality, e.g., palette, or the final RGB image. Both modules can be implemented using Latent
Diffusion Models (LDM), where unconditional LDM will start from noise to generate sketches, then
by employing the concatenation conditioning mechanism we can condition on our spatial intermediate
modalities; sketches and palettes. We instead adopt a more principled approach by employing the
Schrödinger Bridge to determine the optimal path between modalities at each stage. Unlike simple
concatenation, which starts each stage from a state of pure noise, the Schrödinger Bridge enables us
to begin each stage from a meaningful signal with a higher Signal-to-Noise Ratio (SNR).
Schrödinger Bridge. The Schrödinger Bridge problem arises from an intriguing connection between
statistical physics and probability theory. At its core, it addresses the task of finding the most likely
stochastic process that evolves between two probability distributions over time, ρ0 and ρT , governed
by Brownian motion, while minimizing the control cost. Mathematically, it could be written as:
P ∗ = argmin KL(P || W ), where P is the probability path that minimizes the Kullback-Leibler (KL)
           P ∈P
divergence with respect to a reference Brownian motion W , and subject to marginal constrains;
P0 = ρ0 and PT = ρT . The process can be described as a stochastic differential equation (SDE):
                                             dXt = v(t, Xt ) dt + σ dWt ,                                            (1)

 where Xt represents the state at time t, v(t, Xt ) is the optimal drift that minimizes the KL divergence
and dWt is the Wiener process (Brownian motion).
Conditional Module. By analogy, the two probability distributions ρT and ρ0 represent the distribu-
tions of features from simpler (sketch) and more complex (RGB) modalities, respectively. In this
context, the goal of the Schrödinger Bridge is to find the optimal stochastic process that transforms
the simpler modality (e.g., sketch) into the more complex one (e.g., RGB image) while minimiz-
ing a divergence measure like KL divergence while respecting the boundaries. Given a condition
y ∈ RH×W ×3 , that could be sketch, palette, or any other modality, we define the forward process as
an image-to-image translation and formulate the problem using the discrete version of schrödinger
bridge as follows:
                             xt = (1 − αt )xi0 + αt y i + σt2 ϵt ,      : σt2 = αt − αt2 ,                           (2)
 where i is the stage number, x0 and y are the boundaries of the bridge, σt2 controls the noise term,
and αt blends the two domains. In the SDE, the term “v(t, Xt )” is the deterministic drift, while
“dWt ” represents the diffusion term. In contrast, we follow the DDPM formulation, which works in
the discrete space. Therefore, by analogy, the terms “αt x0 + (1 − αt )y” and “σt2 ϵt ” represent the
drift and diffusion terms, respectively. σt2 represents uncertainties, following a sphere formulation
that constructs a bridge between the two domains. Whereas, at the edge of the bridge, we are fully
confident we are in one of the distributions ρT and ρ0 , thus σt2 = 0. In contrast, the uncertainties
increase while moving away from the edges, reaching their maximum value in the middle between
the two domains, forming the bridge shape. Eq. 2 forms the skeleton for 2nd and 3rd stages, where:
             (                                                         (
       i      xp        rgb
               0 = Fp (x0 )    : ı̇ = 2   (Palette)              i      xs0 = Fs (xrgb
                                                                                   0 )   : ı̇ = 2 (Palette)
      x0 =                                                       y =                                                 (3)
              xrgb
               0               : ı̇ = 3   (Detailed Image)              xp         rgb
                                                                         0 = Fp (x0 )    : ı̇ = 3 (Detailed Image)

 where i is the stage number, Fp and Fs are palette and sketch functions that generate the pseudo-GT,
respectively, detailed in Section 2.2.
Unconditional Module: 1st Stage (Sketch). This
stage aims to generate abstract contours xs0 ∈ RH×W
starting from just pure noise or label/text conditions.     A)
In both cases, we name this module unconditional
as it does not condition on a previous modality be-
cause it will generate the first modality, the sketch.      B)

One possible solution is to utilize the original LDM,
which is not aligned with the sketch nature, as shown       C)
in Figure 3, case A. More specifically, we are starting
from a pure noise distribution xT and want to learn
                                                               3: Comparison between different formulations for the 1st
the inverse mapping q (xt−1 | xt ) to be able to sam- Figure
                                                        stage. This depicts the forward process for each formulation.
                s
ple real data x0 . The issue relies upon the vast gap
between the two domains: xT and x0 . Following (Kingma et al., 2021), this can be interpreted as


                                                             4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


signal-to-noise ratio (SNR), where SNR(t)= σα2t . Consequently, at the beginning (t = T ), αT yields to
                                               t
0, therefore SNR(T )=0. On the contrary, to fill this gap, we propose a unique formulation tailored
for sketch generation that adapts Eq. 2. Specifically, we introduced two changes to Eq. 2. First, we
replaced the Gaussian distribution ϵt with a discretized version, the Bernoulli distribution, as shown
in case B, Figure 3. However, this is not optimized enough for the sparsity nature of the sketch, where
more than 80% of the sketch is black pixels. Thus, we set our initial condition to y = Fd (xs0 ), where
Fd is a dropout function that takes the GT sketch xs0 and generates more sparse version. To align
our design with the sketch nature, as shown in Figure 3, part C, we changed σt2 to follow a linear
trend instead of the bridge shape by setting the variance peak at xT . We have to make sure to set the
variance peak to a small number due to the sparsity of the sketch. This could be interpreted as adding
brighter points on a black canvas to act as control points during the progressive steps (T → 0) while
converging to form the contours, as shown in Figure 3, part C. More details about the sparsity level
importance are shown in Section A.6.

2.2    T ODDLER G UIDANCE

A crucial factor for the success of our framework, ToddlerDiffusion, is obtaining accurate and
human-free guidance for the intermediate stages. Two modules, Fs and Fp , are employed to generate
contours/sketches and palettes, respectively.
Sketch. The first module, xs0 = Fs (xrgb 0 ), serves as a sketch or edge predictor, where x0
                                                                                                rgb
                                                                                                    ∈
RH×W ×3 is the ground-truth RGB image, and xs0 ∈ RH×W is the generated sketch. For instance, Fs
could be PidiNet (Su et al., 2021) or Edter (Pu et al., 2022) for sketch generation, or Canny (Canny,
1986) and Laplacian (Wang, 2007) edge detectors.
Palette. The palette can be obtained without human intervention by pixelating the ground-truth RGB
image xp0 = Fp (xrgb             p
                   0 ), where x0 ∈ R
                                         H×W ×3
                                                 is the palette image, and Fp will be the pixelation
function. However, we introduce a more realistic way to have high-quality palettes for free by first
generating the segments from the RGB image using FastSAM (Zhao et al., 2023b). Then, a simple
color detector module is utilized to get the dominant color, e.g., the median color per segment. This
design choice is further analyzed in Section A.6. More details are mentioned in the Appendix.

2.3    T RAINING O BJECTIVE & R EVERSE P ROCESS
Training Formulation. We adapt the conventional diffusion models’ learning objective (Ho et al.,
2020; Sohl-Dickstein et al., 2015), i.e., Variational Lower Bound (ELBO), to include our new
condition y, whereas, each marginal distribution has to be conditioned on y, as follows:
                                                           T
                                    i     i          i
                                                           X                        i    i                   i              i        i
LELBO = −Eq DKL (q(xT |x0 , y )||p(xT |y )) +                    DKL (q(xt−1 |xt , x0 , y )||pθ (xt−1 |xt , y )) − log pθ (x0 |x1 , y ) ,
                                                           t=2
                                                                                                                                      (4)
 where pθ is a function approximator intended to predict from xt . Using Bayes’rule, we can formulate
the reverse process as follows:

                                                       i     i                       i    i    2
                                        q xt−1 | xt , x0 , y     = N xt−1 ; µ̃ xt , x0 , y , σ̃t I                                    (5)

                              2                               2
                i   i        σt−1 1 − αt                     σt−1  (1 − αt )2    i
                                                                                                         2
                                                                                                 1 − αt σt−1 i
      µ̃t (xt , x0 , y ) =                xt + (1 − αt−1 (1 − 2               ))x0 + (αt−1 − αt              )y                       (6)
                             σt2 1 − αt−1                    σt (1 − αt−1 )2                    1 − αt−1 σt2

                                                                     4
                                                     2     2        σt−1    (1 − αt )2
                                                    σ̃t = σt−1 −                                                                      (7)
                                                                     σt2   (1 − αt−1 )2


The derivation for Eq. 6 and Eq. 7 is detailed in Appendix A.1. The overall training and sampling
pipelines are summarized in Appendix A.5 Algorithms 1 and 2, respectively.
Training Objectives. Previous work (Rombach et al., 2022) showed that learning directly the noise ϵ
enhances the performance compared to predicting the x0 directly. This is intuitive as predicting the
difference ϵt ∝ xt − x0 is easier than predicting the original complicated x0 . However, in our case,
this is not valid due to the conditioned domain y, which makes predicting the difference much harder,
as shown in Eq. 8
                                                   xt − x0 = αt (y − x0 ) + σt ϵt                                                     (8)
Accordingly, we directly predict the x0 . Please refer to Section A.6 for a detailed analysis.


                                                                     5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


2.4       T ODDLER C ONSISTENCY

Our novel framework, ToddlerDiffusion, inherently provides interactivity, allowing users to ob-
serve and engage with the intermediate outputs of various modalities. This interactivity is further
strengthened by ensuring consistency, a crucial element for effective control and editing capabilities.
Generated Images Editing. To ensure consistency during editing, we store the noise ϵt and the
intermediate modalities used in generating the initial reference image, creating a memory that will
help us achieve outstanding consistency. Throughout the editing session, the memory, that was
constructed while generating the reference image, remains fixed until the user resets it by generating
a new reference image. Figure 10 demonstrates our framework’s editing capabilities, highlighting the
strong consistency it achieves. Additional editing examples can be found in our demo.
Real Images Editing. Real image editing is much more challenging as we cannot access intermediate
modalities and noise. Therefore, given a real image xrgb                            rgb             rgb
                                                           0 , first, we run Fs (x0 ) and Fp (x0 ) to
get the corresponding sketch xs0 and palette xp0 , respectively. Then, we utilize the recent DDPM
inversion technique (Huberman-Spiegelglas et al., 2024) to store the noise ϵt . More specifically, to
get the noise, we have first to run our forward process, Eq. 2, using random noise ϵt and store the
corresponding intermediate states xt . Then, run our reverse process, Eq. 6, to try to recover the
original image. During the reverse process, the model will predict µ̃t (xt , xi0 , y i ) using Eq. 6. Then,
our goal is that given the predicted µ̃t , the predicted conditions y and the stored intermediate states
xt−1 , we want to estimate the noise ϵt Following these two steps, we construct our memory, which
will be used similarly to edit real images.


3       E XPERIMENTAL R ESULTS

To probe the effectiveness of our proposed framework, we first compare our approach against LDM
when trained from scratch on unconditional datasets, LSUN-Churches and CelebHQ, and conditional
ones, ImageNet. Then, we show that our approach can leverage from the high-quality SD-v1.5
weights, enabling the model to be conditional on new modalities seamlessly without adding additional
modules (Zhang et al., 2023; Zhao et al., 2024) or adapters (Mou et al., 2024).

3.1       T ODDLER D IFFUSION FROM S CRATCH

In this section, first we will holistically compare our method, ToddlerDiffusion, against LDM regard-
ing generation quality and efficiency, e.g., convergence rate and number of denoising steps. Then,
we will compare our conditioning ability with ControlNet and SDEdit. Generally, ToddlerDiffusion
consists of three cascaded stages: sketch, palette, and RGB generation. However, in the following
section, we will show the versatility of our method by omitting the 1st or the 2nd stages, enabling our
method to start from a reference sketch or palette, respectively, instead of generated ones.
Unconditional Generation. We evaluated our framework, ToddlerDiffusion, against LDM on two
unconditional datasets, i.e., LSUN-Churches (Yu et al., 2015) and Celeb datasets (Karras et al., 2017).
For a fair comparison, and as we notice challenges in replicating LDM results1 , we have reproduced
LDM results. As shown in Table 1, we boost the LDM performance by 1 FID point on the two
datasets, using 3x smaller architecture and 2x faster sampling, as shown in Table 2.
Efficient Architecture. While the primary focus of this paper is not on designing an efficient
architecture, our method inherently benefits from architectural efficiency due to the shorter trajectory
between stages, as illustrated in Figure 2. The key insight is that ToddlerDiffusion simplifies each
generation task by breaking it into modality-specific stages (e.g., from sketch to palette). This
approach allows us to leverage significantly smaller networks at each stage because solving the
problem is easier, where the distributions of the domains, such as sketches and palettes, are much
closer than the distribution between pure noise and RGB images. As a result, the neural network
at each stage can be more lightweight. Furthermore, as shown in Table 2, we operate directly in
the image space for the first two stages (i.e., noise to sketch and sketch to palette). This eliminates
the need for complex encoder-decoder architectures, such as VQGAN, typically used to generate

    1
        See issues 325, 262, 90, 142, 30, and 138 in the LDM GitHub repository.


                                                        6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Table 1: Benchmark results on three datasets; CelebHQ Karras      Table 2: A detailed analysis of our method complexities compared to LDM
et al. (2017), LSUN-Churches Yu et al. (2015) and ImageNet        on the CelebHQ dataset Karras et al. (2017). We report the training and
Deng et al. (2009).                                               sampling throughput per each stage. For efficiency, the first two stages are
                                                                  operating on the pixel space. Therefore, the VQGAN encoder and decoder
                                                                  are not used (N/A). The training time is reported till convergence, i.e, 600
  Dataset   Method    Epochs   FID ↓   KID ↓   Prec. ↑   Recall ↑ epochs, using 4 A100.
             LDM       600     8.15    0.013    0.52      0.41                                     VQGAN       UNet    Train   Samp.
 CelebHQ
             Ours      600     7.10    0.009    0.61      0.47                     Stage           # Param   # Param   Time    Time
             LDM       250     7.30    0.009    0.59      0.39               1) Noise → Sketch       N/A      1.9M      1 hr    85 fps
 Churches
             Ours      250     6.19    0.005    0.71      0.44               2) Sketch → Palette     N/A      1.9M      1 hr    85 fps
             LDM       350     8.55    0.015    0.51      0.32                3) Palette → RGB      55.3M     101M     24 hr    2.3 fps
 ImageNet                                                                      Ours (3 Stages)      55.3M    104.8M    26hr    2.27fps
             Ours      350      7.8    0.010    0.58      0.40
                                                                                    LDM             55.3M     263M     38 hr   1.21 fps


Figure 4: Training convergence comparison      Figure 5: Trimming denoising steps abla-             Figure 6: Training steps ablation study on
between ToddlerDiffusion and LDM.              tion study during training and sampling.             LSUN-Churches dataset.


detailed images from latent representations. Combining these factors, ToddlerDiffusion achieves a 3x
reduction in network size despite cascading across three stages.
Faster Convergence. In addition to outperforming LDM across multiple datasets and metrics, as
shown in Table 1, ToddlerDiffusion exhibits a significantly faster convergence rate. We analyzed the
convergence behavior by reporting the FID score every 50 epochs, as shown in Figure 4. Remarkably,
our method achieves the same performance after just 50 epochs as LDM does after 150 epochs.
Furthermore, after 150 epochs, ToddlerDiffusion matches the performance LDM achieves after 500
epochs. This substantial improvement in convergence speed highlights the strength of our approach in
efficiently navigating the feature space between stages. It’s important to note that faster convergence
was not an explicit target of our method but rather an emergent property of the pipeline’s design.
Other techniques tailored explicitly for improving convergence speed, e.g., (Hang et al., 2023), can
be considered orthogonal and complementary to our method.
Trimming Denoising Steps. Another unique characteristic of ToddlerDiffusion is its ability to reduce
the number of denoising steps during both training and sampling without significantly impacting
performance. As shown in Figure 5, our framework maintains consistent and robust results when
the number of steps is reduced from 1000 to 100. In contrast, the performance of LDM degrades
drastically under the same conditions. ToddlerDiffusion can trim denoising steps while maintaining a
good Signal-to-Noise Ratio (SNR), particularly for larger time steps, as further discussed in Section
2.1. Additionally, Figure 6 highlights another intriguing capability of our method: models trained with
fewer denoising steps outperform those trained with larger step counts when later using techniques
like DDIM (Song et al., 2020a) to reduce sampling steps. For example, as seen in Figure 6, the blue
curve (trained with 100 steps) achieves an FID score of around 60 when using only ten steps for
sampling. However, if we initially train the model with just ten steps, as represented by the purple
curve, the performance improves significantly, achieving an FID score of 15. This demonstrates the
efficiency and adaptability of ToddlerDiffusion, even when minimizing the denoising process.
Class-Label Conditional Generation. To holistically evaluate the performance of ToddlerDiffusion,
we tested it on the widely-used ImageNet dataset, where the condition type is a class label. Due to
limited resources, we conducted our experiments on ImageNet-100, a subset of ImageNet containing
100 classes instead of the full 1,000. As shown in Table 1, ToddlerDiffusion performs better than
LDM on key metrics such as FID, KID, Precision, and Recall.
Controllability. We evaluated our editing capabilities against two notable methods: SDEdit (Meng
et al., 2021) and ControlNet (Zhang et al., 2023). As illustrated in Figure 7, SDEdit struggles
when conditioned on binary sketches, which is expected given that it is a training-free approach
designed to operate with conditions closer to the target domain (i.e., RGB images). Consequently,
compared to ControlNet, a training-based method that adds copy of the encoder network, our approach


                                                                     7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


  Condition     SDEdit   ControlNet   Ours
                                                                               Sketch                                       Sketch + Palette
                                                         Original   SE (K=3)            SE (K=8)   SE (K=10 )   Original    SE (K=3)    SE (K=8)   SE (K=10 )


                                             Condition
                                             Ours
Figure 7: Comparison between our
editing capabilities and SDEdit (Meng
et al., 2021).                                                                           Figure 8: Sketch robustness analysis.

demonstrates superior faithfulness to the sketch condition, consistency across the generated images,
and overall realism. Starting from the converged model train on the CelebHQ dataset for 600 epochs,
we train our method and ControlNet for and additional 50 epochs with the sketch as a condition.
Despite ControlNet’s larger model size, our method achieves these improvements without adding
additional parameters. Quantitatively, we achieved an FID score of 7, outperforming SDEdit and
ControlNet, which achieved 15 and 9, respectively.


3.2           ROBUSTNESS A NALYSIS

Label Robustness. Beyond these quality comparisons, we also conducted a robustness
analysis to assess our model’s behavior when faced with inconsistencies between condi-
tions. Specifically, we deliberately provided incorrect class labels for the same sketch.
 This mismatched the sketch (geometry) and the desired
class label (style). Despite the inconsistent conditions,    Tarantula Ptarmigan
                                                                                   Spotted
                                                                                            Tree Frog
                                                                                 Salamander
as illustrated by the off-diagonal images in Figure 9,
our model consistently adheres to the geometry defined
by the sketch while attempting to match the style of the
misassigned category, demonstrating the robustness of
our approach. Successful cases are highlighted in yel-
low, and even in failure cases (highlighted in red), our
model avoids catastrophic errors, never hallucinating
by completely ignoring either the geometry or the style.
More examples can be seen in Appendix B.3.
Sketch Robustness. To further validate the robustness
of ToddlerDiffusion, we designed an aggressive robust-
ness test aimed at evaluating the model’s ability to
handle sketch perturbations. Specifically, we generated Figure    9: Our results on the ImageNet dataset. The first col-
                                                           umn depicts the input sketch. The diagonal (green) represents
three variants of the input sketches using the Structured the generated output that follows the sketch and the GT label.
Edge (SE) detector (Dollár & Zitnick, 2014), varying The off-diagonal images show the output given the sketch and
the kernel size K to introduce different detail and noise inconsistent label. These adversarial labels show our model’s
                                                           robustness, where the successful cases are in yellow, and the
levels. As shown in Figure 8, our model consistently failure ones are in red.
demonstrates strong robustness despite these perturbations being absent during training. The left part
of Figure 8 depicts our model’s output using the 2nd stage only (Sketch to RGB), while the right part
demonstrates the output when using both the 2nd and 3rd stages. Even with significant variations in
the sketches, ToddlerDiffusion maintains high fidelity to both the geometry and style, underscoring
its ability to adapt to unseen input distortions without compromising output quality.


3.3           E DITING C APABILITIES

Generated Images Editing. In Figure 10, we showcase the editing capabilities starting from a gener-
ated sketch and RGB image (A). Our method allows for the removal of artifacts or unwanted elements,
highlighted in red (B), the addition of new content, shown in yellow (C-D), and modifications to
existing content, marked in green (E-F), simply by manipulating the underlying sketch. These consis-
tent edits are supported in unconditional and conditional generation scenarios. While sketch-based
conditional generation naturally lends itself to such control, ToddlerDiffusion extends this capability
to unconditional settings and other conditional models like Text-to-Image. In these cases, we refer
to this property as "interactivity," allowing users to seamlessly edit through intermediate modalities
(sketch and palette) regardless of the original input format, whether class-label or text.


                                                                                    8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


              A      B          C          D          E          F                     A      B          C          D          E         F


  Sample 1


                                                                            Sample 2
              A      B          C          D          E          F                     A      B          C         D           E         F
  Sample 3


                                                                            Sample 4
Figure 10: Controllability ability of our framework, ToddlerDiffusion. Starting from the generated sketch and RGB image (A), we can remove
artifacts or undesired parts in red (B), add new content in yellow (C-D), and edit the existing content in green (E-F) by manipulating the sketch.

Real Images Editing. As explained in Section 2.4, we ensure consistent edits for real images by
storing the noise used during the generation process for later edits. The primary challenge with real
image editing is that we don’t have access to the noise values at each denoising step, as our model
didn’t generate the image. To address this, we employ DDPM-inversion (Huberman-Spiegelglas
et al., 2024) to reconstruct the intermediate noise. As illustrated in Figure 1, our model achieves
consistent edits on real reference images. In Appendix B.2, we compare against SEED-X (Ge et al.,
2024), and our model achieves more consistent edits, as shown.

3.4          I NCORPORATING T ODDLER D IFFUSION INTO S TABLE D IFFUSION

In this section, we will answer an important question: “Can our method be integrated seamlessly into
the existing powerful Stable-Diffusion architecture?” This question is crucial as follows: 1) Despite
our approach’s great capabilities and performance, leveraging the available powerful weights trained
on large-scale datasets such as SD is still important. 2) Our approach follows different forward and
reverse processes, Eq. 2 and Eq. 6, respectively, which could make it challenging to leverage weights
that are trained using different training objectives.
Integration Recipe. This section will detail the recipe for successfully integrating SD weights into
our approach. we initially adopted x0 as the training objective instead of the original SD objective,
ϵ, and employed Low-Rank Adaptation (LoRA) for fine-tuning. However, we observed that this
approach does not converge easily due to the significant disparity between the pre-trained SD model’s
training objective and the new objective. Consequently, we opted to fine-tune the entire model.
Remarkably, after just 10k iterations, the model generated meaningful images that aligned perfectly
with the input conditions, such as sketches or palettes. More qualitative results can be seen in Figure
24 in Appendix B.6
Controllability. We convert our method to a “sketch2RGB” by omitting the 1st stage to show
our controllability capabilities. By doing this, we can compare our model against the vast tailored
sketch-based models built on top of SD-v1.5. However, these methods have been trained for a long
time on large-scale datasets. Thus, for a fair comparison, we retrain them using CelebHQ datasets for
5 epochs starting from SD-v1.5 weights. As demonstrated in Appendix B.5, despite this is not our
main focus, our method outperforms conditioning conditioning methods without adding additional
modules (Zhang et al., 2023; Zhao et al., 2024) or adapters (Mou et al., 2024).

4            D ISCUSSION AND F UTURE W ORK
In this section, we will discuss some possible future work that shows the versatility of ToddlerDiffu-
sion and its potential to drive innovation across image, video, and 3D tasks. Detailed future work is
discussed in Appendix A.9.
Distill the knowledge from substage features for perception tasks. The intermediate outputs from
Toddler Diffusion (e.g., the sketch stage) can be reused as strong geometric priors for perception tasks
by distilling the knowledge into perception networks to enforce geometric or perceptual constraints,
making them structure-aware and geometry-guided aligned (Zhao et al., 2023a).


                                                                        9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Reusing Diffusion Features as High- and Low-Frequency Representations. Toddler Diffusion’s
staged outputs inherently capture distinct frequency information, with the sketch stage emphasizing
low-frequency global structures and geometry and the palette and RGB stages capturing high-
frequency details like textures. These features can be repurposed into a dual-branch network (Bi et al.;
Wei et al., 2024): one branch focusing on low-frequency representations for tasks requiring global
context (e.g., semantic segmentation, object localization) and the other specializing in high-frequency
details for tasks like texture classification, instance segmentation, or boundary refinement. Integrating
this knowledge into VLMs can improve performance and generalization for perception tasks.
Addressing Limitations in T2I Models. A significant challenge for text-to-image (T2I) models
lies in handling complex prompts involving counting or spatial relations (Bakr et al., 2023; Ghosh
et al., 2024). Fixing these issues in the sketch or abstract stage will be easier and simpler due to
its lightweight. In addition, the subsequent stages (e.g., sketch-to-RGB) will remain unaffected
and reusable. This approach allows targeted improvements without retraining/finetuning the entire
pipeline, significantly reducing computational costs.
Modular Prompt Handling for T2I Models. Toddler Diffusion can simplify complex text prompts
by decomposing them into modular components mapped to specific stages. For example, a detailed
prompt can be split into geometry-focused instructions for the sketch stage and color-specific details
for the sketch-to-palette stage. In addition, we can add more stages and specific prompts such as depth,
e.g., obj1 closer than obj2 . This enables a more focused and interpretable generation, particularly for
long, detailed prompts with intricate requirements.
For instance: Given a complex prompt: "A bustling city street during sunset with a red double-decker
bus on the right, a blue car parked on the left, people walking on the sidewalk, and sunlight casting
long shadows on the ground." will be split into:
       • Structure-Focused prompt: "A city street with a double-decker bus on the right, a car parked
         on the left, and people walking on the sidewalk."
       • Palette-Focused prompt: "The double-decker bus is red, the car is blue, the sky shows a
         sunset with shadows on the ground."
Video Generation in Abstract Domains. Generating videos directly in the RGB domain is com-
putationally expensive and prone to inconsistencies. Toddler Diffusion can split the problem into
geometry consistency and stylistic consistency. Specifically, it first generates videos in an abstract
domain (e.g., sketches), ensuring geometric consistency across frames. Then, these sketches can
be refined into RGB frames using another stage, Sketch-to-RGB, conditioned on a reference frame
for color and style consistency. This two-step process simplifies the complex task of maintaining
temporal and stylistic coherence in video generation.

5    C ONCLUSION
ToddlerDiffusion introduces a paradigm shift in image generation by breaking down the complex task
into more manageable, modality-specific stages. Inspired by the natural learning process of a child, our
framework elegantly mirrors how human artists progress from rough sketches to fully detailed images.
This structured approach allows us to simplify each stage of the generation process, enabling the use
of smaller architectures and achieving efficient, high-quality results. Despite the potential challenges
introduced by multi-stage frameworks, such as increased parameter counts and error accumulation,
ToddlerDiffusion overcomes these obstacles through the strategic use of the Schrödinger Bridge,
which ensures smooth transitions between modalities. By maintaining a high Signal-to-Noise Ratio
(SNR) at each stage, we enable stable, effective progression, minimizing the number of denoising steps
required during both training and sampling. This results in faster convergence, lower computational
cost, and enhanced sampling efficiency. Moreover, ToddlerDiffusion provides a level of control
and interaction that is unprecedented in current diffusion-based models, offering consistent editing
capabilities across both generated and real images. Through extensive experiments on multiple
datasets, we have shown that ToddlerDiffusion outperforms existing state-of-the-art models like LDM
in terms of quality, interactivity, and speed. The flexibility and versatility of our approach make
it applicable to a wide range of tasks, and its emergent properties, such as faster convergence and
improved editing control, further solidify its potential for real-world applications.



                                                  10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


R EFERENCES
Tobias Alt, Pascal Peter, and Joachim Weickert. Learning sparse masks for diffusion-based image
  inpainting. In Iberian Conference on Pattern Recognition and Image Analysis, pp. 528–539.
  Springer, 2022.

Titas Anciukevičius, Zexiang Xu, Matthew Fisher, Paul Henderson, Hakan Bilen, Niloy J Mitra, and
   Paul Guerrero. Renderdiffusion: Image diffusion for 3d reconstruction, inpainting and generation.
   In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp.
  12608–12618, 2023.

Eslam Mohamed Bakr, Pengzhan Sun, Xiaogian Shen, Faizan Farooq Khan, Li Erran Li, and
  Mohamed Elhoseiny. Hrs-bench: Holistic, reliable and scalable benchmark for text-to-image
  models. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision, pp.
  20041–20053, 2023.

Alberto Baldrati, Davide Morelli, Marcella Cornia, Marco Bertini, and Rita Cucchiara. Multimodal-
  conditioned latent diffusion models for fashion image editing. arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.14828,
  2024.

Qi Bi, Jingjun Yi, Hao Zheng, Haolan Zhan, Yawen Huang, Wei Ji, Yuexiang Li, and Yefeng
  Zheng. Learning frequency-adapted vision foundation model for domain generalized semantic
  segmentation. In The Thirty-eighth Annual Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems.

John Canny. A computational approach to edge detection. IEEE Transactions on pattern analysis
  and machine intelligence, (6):679–698, 1986.

Nicolas Carlini, Jamie Hayes, Milad Nasr, Matthew Jagielski, Vikash Sehwag, Florian Tramer, Borja
  Balle, Daphne Ippolito, and Eric Wallace. Extracting training data from diffusion models. In 32nd
  USENIX Security Symposium (USENIX Security 23), pp. 5253–5270, 2023.

Hyungjin Chung, Eun Sun Lee, and Jong Chul Ye. Mr image denoising and super-resolution using
  regularized reverse diffusion. IEEE Transactions on Medical Imaging, 42(4):922–934, 2022.

Jia Deng, Wei Dong, Richard Socher, Li-Jia Li, Kai Li, and Li Fei-Fei. Imagenet: A large-scale
   hierarchical image database. In 2009 IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition,
   pp. 248–255. Ieee, 2009.

Terrance DeVries and Graham W Taylor. Improved regularization of convolutional neural networks
  with cutout. arXiv preprint arXiv:1708.04552, 2017.

Prafulla Dhariwal and Alexander Nichol. Diffusion models beat gans on image synthesis. Advances
  in neural information processing systems, 34:8780–8794, 2021.

Piotr Dollár and C Lawrence Zitnick. Fast edge detection using structured forests. IEEE transactions
  on pattern analysis and machine intelligence, 37(8):1558–1570, 2014.

Sicheng Gao, Xuhui Liu, Bohan Zeng, Sheng Xu, Yanjing Li, Xiaoyan Luo, Jianzhuang Liu,
  Xiantong Zhen, and Baochang Zhang. Implicit diffusion models for continuous super-resolution.
  In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp.
  10021–10030, 2023.

Songwei Ge, Vedanuj Goswami, C Lawrence Zitnick, and Devi Parikh. Creative sketch generation.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2011.10039, 2020.

Yuying Ge, Sijie Zhao, Jinguo Zhu, Yixiao Ge, Kun Yi, Lin Song, Chen Li, Xiaohan Ding, and Ying
  Shan. Seed-x: Multimodal models with unified multi-granularity comprehension and generation.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2404.14396, 2024.

Dhruba Ghosh, Hannaneh Hajishirzi, and Ludwig Schmidt. Geneval: An object-focused framework
  for evaluating text-to-image alignment. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 36,
  2024.


                                                11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Kuang Gong, Keith Johnson, Georges El Fakhri, Quanzheng Li, and Tinsu Pan. Pet image denoising
  based on denoising diffusion probabilistic model. European Journal of Nuclear Medicine and
  Molecular Imaging, pp. 1–11, 2023.
Tiankai Hang, Shuyang Gu, Chen Li, Jianmin Bao, Dong Chen, Han Hu, Xin Geng, and Baining Guo.
  Efficient diffusion training via min-snr weighting strategy. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.09556, 2023.
Jonathan Ho, Ajay Jain, and Pieter Abbeel. Denoising diffusion probabilistic models. Advances in
  neural information processing systems, 33:6840–6851, 2020.
Jonathan Ho, Chitwan Saharia, William Chan, David J Fleet, Mohammad Norouzi, and Tim Salimans.
  Cascaded diffusion models for high fidelity image generation. The Journal of Machine Learning
  Research, 23(1):2249–2281, 2022.
Lianghua Huang, Di Chen, Yu Liu, Yujun Shen, Deli Zhao, and Jingren Zhou. Composer: Creative
  and controllable image synthesis with composable conditions. arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.09778,
  2023.
Inbar Huberman-Spiegelglas, Vladimir Kulikov, and Tomer Michaeli. An edit friendly ddpm noise
  space: Inversion and manipulations. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer
  Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 12469–12478, 2024.
Tero Karras, Timo Aila, Samuli Laine, and Jaakko Lehtinen. Progressive growing of gans for
  improved quality, stability, and variation. arXiv preprint arXiv:1710.10196, 2017.
Amirhossein Kazerouni, Ehsan Khodapanah Aghdam, Moein Heidari, Reza Azad, Mohsen Fayyaz,
 Ilker Hacihaliloglu, and Dorit Merhof. Diffusion models for medical image analysis: A compre-
 hensive survey. arXiv preprint arXiv:2211.07804, 2022.
Diederik Kingma, Tim Salimans, Ben Poole, and Jonathan Ho. Variational diffusion models. Advances
  in neural information processing systems, 34:21696–21707, 2021.
Juil Koo, Seungwoo Yoo, Minh Hieu Nguyen, and Minhyuk Sung. Salad: Part-level latent diffu-
  sion for 3d shape generation and manipulation. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International
  Conference on Computer Vision, pp. 14441–14451, 2023.
Vladimir Kulikov, Shahar Yadin, Matan Kleiner, and Tomer Michaeli. Sinddm: A single image
  denoising diffusion model. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 17920–17930.
  PMLR, 2023.
Bo Li, Kaitao Xue, Bin Liu, and Yu-Kun Lai. Bbdm: Image-to-image translation with brownian
  bridge diffusion models. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and
  Pattern Recognition, pp. 1952–1961, 2023a.
Haoying Li, Yifan Yang, Meng Chang, Shiqi Chen, Huajun Feng, Zhihai Xu, Qi Li, and Yueting
  Chen. Srdiff: Single image super-resolution with diffusion probabilistic models. Neurocomputing,
  479:47–59, 2022.
Yuheng Li, Krishna Kumar Singh, Yang Xue, and Yong Jae Lee. Partgan: Weakly-supervised part
  decomposition for image generation and segmentation. In British Machine Vision Conference
  (BMVC), 2021.
Yuheng Li, Haotian Liu, Qingyang Wu, Fangzhou Mu, Jianwei Yang, Jianfeng Gao, Chunyuan Li,
  and Yong Jae Lee. Gligen: Open-set grounded text-to-image generation. In Proceedings of the
  IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 22511–22521, 2023b.
Zheng Li, Yuxuan Li, Penghai Zhao, Renjie Song, Xiang Li, and Jian Yang. Is synthetic data from
  diffusion models ready for knowledge distillation? arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.12954, 2023c.
Andreas Lugmayr, Martin Danelljan, Andres Romero, Fisher Yu, Radu Timofte, and Luc Van Gool.
  Repaint: Inpainting using denoising diffusion probabilistic models. In Proceedings of the
  IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 11461–11471, 2022.
David Marr. On the purpose of low-level vision. 1974.


                                                12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


David Marr. Vision: A computational investigation into the human representation and processing of
  visual information. MIT press, 2010.
Chenlin Meng, Yutong He, Yang Song, Jiaming Song, Jiajun Wu, Jun-Yan Zhu, and Stefano Ermon.
  Sdedit: Guided image synthesis and editing with stochastic differential equations. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2108.01073, 2021.
Chong Mou, Xintao Wang, Liangbin Xie, Yanze Wu, Jian Zhang, Zhongang Qi, and Ying Shan. T2i-
  adapter: Learning adapters to dig out more controllable ability for text-to-image diffusion models.
  In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, volume 38, pp. 4296–4304, 2024.
Alexander Quinn Nichol and Prafulla Dhariwal. Improved denoising diffusion probabilistic models.
  In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 8162–8171. PMLR, 2021.
Gaurav Parmar, Krishna Kumar Singh, Richard Zhang, Yijun Li, Jingwan Lu, and Jun-Yan Zhu.
  Zero-shot image-to-image translation. In ACM SIGGRAPH 2023 Conference Proceedings, pp.
 1–11, 2023.
Ben Poole, Ajay Jain, Jonathan T Barron, and Ben Mildenhall. Dreamfusion: Text-to-3d using 2d
  diffusion. arXiv preprint arXiv:2209.14988, 2022.
Konpat Preechakul, Nattanat Chatthee, Suttisak Wizadwongsa, and Supasorn Suwajanakorn. Dif-
  fusion autoencoders: Toward a meaningful and decodable representation. In Proceedings of the
  IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 10619–10629, 2022.
Mengyang Pu, Yaping Huang, Yuming Liu, Qingji Guan, and Haibin Ling. Edter: Edge detection
 with transformer. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern
 recognition, pp. 1402–1412, 2022.
Guocheng Qian, Jinjie Mai, Abdullah Hamdi, Jian Ren, Aliaksandr Siarohin, Bing Li, Hsin-Ying Lee,
  Ivan Skorokhodov, Peter Wonka, Sergey Tulyakov, et al. Magic123: One image to high-quality 3d
  object generation using both 2d and 3d diffusion priors. arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.17843, 2023.
Robin Rombach, Andreas Blattmann, Dominik Lorenz, Patrick Esser, and Björn Ommer. High-
  resolution image synthesis with latent diffusion models. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF confer-
  ence on computer vision and pattern recognition, pp. 10684–10695, 2022.
Krishna Kumar Singh, Utkarsh Ojha, and Yong Jae Lee. Finegan: Unsupervised hierarchical
  disentanglement for fine-grained object generation and discovery. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF
  conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, pp. 6490–6499, 2019.
Jascha Sohl-Dickstein, Eric Weiss, Niru Maheswaranathan, and Surya Ganguli. Deep unsupervised
  learning using nonequilibrium thermodynamics. In International conference on machine learning,
  pp. 2256–2265. PMLR, 2015.
Jiaming Song, Chenlin Meng, and Stefano Ermon. Denoising diffusion implicit models. arXiv
   preprint arXiv:2010.02502, 2020a.
Yang Song, Jascha Sohl-Dickstein, Diederik P Kingma, Abhishek Kumar, Stefano Ermon, and Ben
  Poole. Score-based generative modeling through stochastic differential equations. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2011.13456, 2020b.
Kent A Stevens. The vision of david marr. Perception, 41(9):1061–1072, 2012.
Zhuo Su, Wenzhe Liu, Zitong Yu, Dewen Hu, Qing Liao, Qi Tian, Matti Pietikäinen, and Li Liu. Pixel
  difference networks for efficient edge detection. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF international
  conference on computer vision, pp. 5117–5127, 2021.
Christian Szegedy, Wei Liu, Yangqing Jia, Pierre Sermanet, Scott Reed, Dragomir Anguelov, Du-
  mitru Erhan, Vincent Vanhoucke, and Andrew Rabinovich. Going deeper with convolutions. In
  Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, pp. 1–9, 2015.
Narek Tumanyan, Michal Geyer, Shai Bagon, and Tali Dekel. Plug-and-play diffusion features for
  text-driven image-to-image translation. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer
 Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 1921–1930, 2023.


                                                13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Roy Voetman, Maya Aghaei, and Klaas Dijkstra. The big data myth: Using diffusion models for
  dataset generation to train deep detection models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.09762, 2023.
Gefei Wang, Yuling Jiao, Qian Xu, Yang Wang, and Can Yang. Deep generative learning via
  schrödinger bridge. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 10794–10804. PMLR,
  2021.
Xin Wang. Laplacian operator-based edge detectors. IEEE transactions on pattern analysis and
  machine intelligence, 29(5):886–890, 2007.
Zhixiang Wei, Lin Chen, Yi Jin, Xiaoxiao Ma, Tianle Liu, Pengyang Ling, Ben Wang, Huaian Chen,
  and Jinjin Zheng. Stronger fewer & superior: Harnessing vision foundation models for domain
  generalized semantic segmentation. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer
  Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 28619–28630, 2024.
Julia Wolleb, Florentin Bieder, Robin Sandkühler, and Philippe C Cattin. Diffusion models for
  medical anomaly detection. In International Conference on Medical image computing and
  computer-assisted intervention, pp. 35–45. Springer, 2022.
Junde Wu, Huihui Fang, Yu Zhang, Yehui Yang, and Yanwu Xu. Medsegdiff: Medical image
  segmentation with diffusion probabilistic model. arXiv preprint arXiv:2211.00611, 2022.
Fisher Yu, Ari Seff, Yinda Zhang, Shuran Song, Thomas Funkhouser, and Jianxiong Xiao. Lsun:
  Construction of a large-scale image dataset using deep learning with humans in the loop. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:1506.03365, 2015.
Lvmin Zhang, Anyi Rao, and Maneesh Agrawala. Adding conditional control to text-to-image
  diffusion models. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision,
  pp. 3836–3847, 2023.
Shihao Zhao, Dongdong Chen, Yen-Chun Chen, Jianmin Bao, Shaozhe Hao, Lu Yuan, and Kwan-
  Yee K Wong. Uni-controlnet: All-in-one control to text-to-image diffusion models. Advances in
  Neural Information Processing Systems, 36, 2024.
Wenliang Zhao, Yongming Rao, Zuyan Liu, Benlin Liu, Jie Zhou, and Jiwen Lu. Unleashing text-
 to-image diffusion models for visual perception. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International
 Conference on Computer Vision, pp. 5729–5739, 2023a.
Xu Zhao, Wenchao Ding, Yongqi An, Yinglong Du, Tao Yu, Min Li, Ming Tang, and Jinqiao Wang.
  Fast segment anything, 2023b.
Minfeng Zhu, Pingbo Pan, Wei Chen, and Yi Yang. Dm-gan: Dynamic memory generative adversarial
 networks for text-to-image synthesis. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer
 vision and pattern recognition, pp. 5802–5810, 2019.
Yuanzhi Zhu, Kai Zhang, Jingyun Liang, Jiezhang Cao, Bihan Wen, Radu Timofte, and Luc Van Gool.
  Denoising diffusion models for plug-and-play image restoration. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF
  Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 1219–1229, 2023.


                                               14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A     T ODDLER D IFFUSION M ETHOD (M ORE D ETAILS )
A.1     D ERIVATIONS



    From the forward process, we have:
                              xt = (1 − αt )x0 + αt y + σt ϵt                                     (9)
                              xt−1 = (1 − αt−1 )x0 + αt−1 y + σt−1 ϵt−1                          (10)
    From equation 10, we get:
                                    1             αt−1        σt−1
                         x0 =            xt−1 −          y−          ϵt−1                        (11)
                                1 − αt−1        1 − αt−1    1 − αt−1
    Inserting equation 11 into equation 9, we get:
                                                1 − αt          (1 − αt )αt−1
                         q(xt | xt−1 , x0 ) =           xt−1 −                 y
                                               1 − αt−1           1 − αt−1
                                                      (1 − αt )σt−1
                                              +αt y −               ϵt−1 + σt ϵt                 (12)
                                                        1 − αt−1
    The reverse process follows:
                          q (xt−1 | xt , x0 , y) = N xt−1 ; µ̃ (xt , x0 , y) , σ̃t2 I

                                                                                                 (13)
    Using Bayes’ rule:
                                                                       q(xt−1 | x0 )
                         q (xt−1 | xt , x0 , y) = q(xt | xt−1 , x0 )                             (14)
                                                                        q(xt | x0 )
    Plugging equation 9, equation 10, and equation 12 into equation 14, yields:
                               σ2                                  2
                                                                         (1 − αt )2

                                     1 − αt                       σt−1
            µ̃t (xt , x0 , y) = t−1          x t + (1 − αt−1  1 −                      )x0
                                σt2 1 − αt−1                       σt2 (1 − αt−1 )2
                                                                                    2
                                                                       (1 − αt ) σt−1
                                                          +(αt−1 − αt                   )y       (15)
                                                                      (1 − αt−1 ) σt2
                                                      4
                                                    σt−1  (1 − αt )2
                                    σ̃t2 = σt−1
                                            2
                                                −                                                (16)
                                                     σt2 (1 − αt−1 )2
    Finally, we can apply the DDIM non-Markovian forward processes.
    In return, only the x0 coefficient will be affected.



A.2     A RCHITECTURE D ETAILS

Figure 11 depicts the details of our architecture. We adopt the LDM architecture, which consists of
two main blocks: 1) VQGAN Encoder-Decoder to convert the image into low-cost latent space. 2)
Unet that responsible for predicting xt−1 . Figure 11 shows that the condition y is encoded into xt .
However, it could be optionally concatenated to xt . In addition, shown in orange and green are the σ 2
and α, respectively. Consequently, Figure 12 depicts an abstract flow for the sampling mode, where
we show how our approach works starting from random noise till generating the final RGB image.

A.3     1st S TAGE : A BSTRACT S TRUCTURE

Sketch FID. A discrepancy exists between the reported conventional FID (RGB-FID), trained on
ImageNet (Deng et al., 2009), and qualitative results, as illustrated in Figure 13. This discrepancy (Ge
et al., 2020) may arise from differences between the training data (RGB images) and the evaluation


                                                      15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


               𝑥$                            Forward Process                                                                               𝑥$                           Forward Process                                        𝑥"
                                                                                                       𝑥"

                                  𝑥! = (1 − 𝛼) ∗ 𝑥" + 𝛼 ∗ 𝑦 + 𝜎 # ∗ 𝜖                                                                                         𝑥! = (1 − 𝛼) ∗ 𝑥"        + 𝛼 ∗ 𝑦 + 𝜎# ∗ 𝜖
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    𝛼
                                                                                                             𝛼
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    𝜎#
                                                                                                             𝜎#


                                                                                                                  Latent Space
 Image Space


                                              Reverse Process
                                                                                                                                           𝑦                             Reverse Process
                                                                                                                                                     (𝑂𝑝𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛𝑎𝑙)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    𝑥"
                    𝑥!                                                                      𝑥"                                                         F
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   D


                    t                                                                                                                            E                 t
                                                                                   t                                                                                                        Concat   E Encoder D Decoder   F    Flatten
                                                                  Unet         Time Step   y (Black Image)                       𝑥!                                             Unet


Figure 11: An overview of proposed architecture, dubbed ToddlerDiffusion. The left block demon-
strates the first stage, which generates a sketch unconditionally. Due to our efficient formulation, this
stage operates in the image space on 64 × 64 resolution. The right module depicts the third stage,
which generates an RGB image given a sketch only or both sketch and palette.

                                                                                                                                                                                                        [256, 256, 3]
        [64, 64, 1]                                  [64, 64, 1]                                                            [64, 64, 3]
                                                                                           Sketch to                                                         Palette to


                                                                                                                                                                                        Decoder
                                                                                                                                                                                        VQ-GAN
                                     Sketch
                                                                                            Palette                                                            RGB
                                      Unet
                                                                                             Unet                                                              Unet
                              S                                                                                                   P        rgb
               yS =𝑥T                                     P
                                                       𝑥T = 𝑥0
                                                                           S
                                                                                                                                 𝑥0=𝑥T                                                                           𝑥0
Figure 12: An abstract flow for the sampling mode, where we show how our approach works starting
from random noise till generating the final RGB image.

                        LDM            Ours-Bridge              Ours-Log                   Ours-Linear
                                                                                                                                                                        Training       Sampling
                                                                                                                                                           Unet                                        Noise      Sketch       RGB
                                                                                                                                           Method                        Time            Time
                                                                                                                                                        Parameters                                   Scheduler    FID ↓        FID ↓
                                                                                                                                                                       (Min:Sec)↓       (FPS)↑
                                                                                                                                      a)       LDM         187 M         4:05             2.2         Linear       126.4        23.5
                                                                                                                                      b)       Ours        1.9 M         0:18             53          Bridge       110.5        35.2
                                                                                                                                      c)       Ours        1.9 M         0:18             53           Log          61.2        15.6
                                                                                                                                      d)       Ours        1.9 M         0:18             53          Linear       58.8         15.1



Figure 13: Benchmarking results for the 1st stage on the CelebA-HQ dataset (Karras et al., 2017).
The training time is calculated per epoch using 4 NVIDIA RTX A6000. The sampling time is
calculated per frame using one NVIDIA RTX A6000 with a batch size equals 32.

data (binary images). To bridge this gap, we introduce Sketch-FID by re-training the inception
model (Szegedy et al., 2015) on a sketch version of the ImageNet dataset. We generate sketches
for ImageNet RGB images using PidiNet (Su et al., 2021) and train the inception model on the
conventional classification task.
Noise Scheduler. In the 1st stage, where our starting point y is a black image (Section 2.1), designing
an appropriate noise scheduler is crucial. The bridge noise scheduler is intuitively unsuitable, as it
eliminates randomness by adding no noise at both edges, fixing the starting point to a black image.
This hypothesis is supported by empirical results in Figure 13, row b, where the model outputs
random patterns. We explored linear and logarithmic schedulers, finding the linear schedule superior,
yielding Sketch-FID scores of 15.19 and 18.47, respectively (Figure 13, rows c-d).
Ours vs. LDM. In Section 2.1, we propose an alternative way to generate sketches by leveraging
LDM (Rombach et al., 2022), as shown in Figure 3, row A. However, this approach deviates from
the nature of sketching. Our proposed formulation, aligned with the topology of sketches (Figure 3,
row C), resulted in significant improvements over LDM in both model complexity and performance,
as depicted in Figure 13. Our formulation (Section 2.1) allows direct operation on the image space
(64 × 64) and compression of the Unet to a tiny variant without sacrificing performance. Despite
the aggressive compression, our performance is significantly better than LDM, with respective
Sketch-FID scores of 15.19 and 49, using a 41x smaller network.
Sketch Intensity. Controlling the intensity is crucial. Thus, we conducted further analysis, as shown
in Table 3, that probes for best performance, the intensity should follow the data distribution. We refer
to the intensity as the ratio between the white pixels to the black ones in the sketch. The reported FID


                                                                                                                          16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                                                                                                                               Color
                                                                                                                                         FastSAM
                                                                                                                                                             Extractor
                                   Table 3: Sketch Intensity Analysis.
                                                                                                                                                               Color
                                                                                                                                         FastSAM             Extractor
                 Dataset/Intensity                  19%          24%     31%        37%       43%
                    CelebHQ                           7.4        7.9      9.2       10.5      12.7
                  Lsun-Churches                       7.8        6.9      8.3        8.9      10.1                      Figure 14: Palette generation pipeline. First, we employ
                                                                                                                        FastSAM (Zhao et al., 2023b) to segment the image. Then,
                                                                                                                        we get the dominant color for each segment.


Figure 15: Ablation study for different input’s types for the 2nd                                    Table 4: Comparison of the         Table 5: Training objective ablation
stage on LSUN-Churches dataset (Yu et al., 2015).                                                    LDM concatenation mecha-           study on CelebHQ dataset (Karras et al.,
                                                                                                     nism against the schrödinger       2017).
       RGB              Sketch         Edge         SAM-Sketch
                                                                                                     bridge (SB) using CelebHQ
                                                                          Input Type        FID ↓
                                                                                                     dataset.
                                                                  a)        Edges            9.5                                                          LDM                 Ours
                                                                  b)   Edges + Palette-2     8.4                                          Epochs
                                                                                                                                                      ϵ      x0          (xt − x0 ) x0
     Palette-1         Palette-2   Sketch+Palette      SAM
                                                                  c)        Sketch           8.6            2nd Stage     FID ↓
                                                                  d)   Sketch + Palette-1    8.3                                              50    12.7    15.7           8.5     8.1
                                                                  e)   Sketch + Palette-2    7.1             Concat       10.04
                                                                                                               SB          9.45
                                                                                                                                             100    10.0    14.6           8.4     7.8
                                                                  f)    SAM (Colored)       13.1
                                                                  g)     SAM (Edges)         8.1           SB + Concat     8.10              200     8.7    15.1           8.2     7.7

scores in Table 3 are the overall FID using all stages, and the intensity numbers are the initial intensity
at t = T . The GT intensity for CelebHQ and Lsun-Churches are 19.2% and 23.5%, respectively.

A.4              2nd S TAGE : PALETTE

As depicted in Figure 14, we introduce a more realistic way to have high-quality palettes for free
by first generating the segments from the RGB image using FastSAM (Zhao et al., 2023b). Then, a
simple color detector module is utilized to get the dominant color, e.g., the median color per segment.

A.5              T RAINING AND S AMPLING A LGORITHMS


                 Algorithm 1 Training Pipeline
                  1: for i = 1, . . . , N do                                                                                               ▷ Train each stage separately
                  2:     for j = 1, . . . , E do                                                                                                    ▷ Train for E epochs
                  3:         for (xi0 , y i ) ∈ D do                                                                                           ▷ Loop on the dataset D
                  4:             ϵ ∈ N (0, I)                                                                                                      ▷ Sampling the noise
                  5:             t ∈ U(1, . . . , T )                                                                                             ▷ Sampling time-step
                  6:                          Get xi0 by applying Eq. 3                                                                         ▷ x̃0 based on the stage
                  7:                          xt = αt xi0 + (1 − αt )y i + σt2 ϵt                                                                     ▷ Forward process
                                                                            2
                  8:                          ∇θ x̃i0 − pθ (xi0 |xt , y i )                                                                       ▷ Simplified objective



                 Algorithm 2 Sampling Pipeline
                  1: xinter = []                                                                          ▷ Initialize the list to save intermediate output for each stage
                       1
                  2: y = Zeros((H, W, 1))                                                                                     ▷ Initialize 1st condition as a black image
                  3: ϵ ∈ N (0, I)                                                                                                              ▷ Sampling the noise once
                  4: for i = 1, . . . , N do                                                                                                       ▷ Sequential Sampling
                  5:     xT = y i + σT   2
                                            ϵT                                                                                                ▷ Run forward process once
                  6:     for t = T, . . . , 1 do                                                                                                  ▷ Progressive Sampling
                  7:         Get xt−1 by applying Eq. 6 :xi0 = pθ (x0 |xt )                                                                            ▷ Reverse process
                  8:     y i+1 = xi0                                                                                             ▷ Update the condition for the next stage
                  9:     xinter .append(xi0 )                                                                            ▷ Store the intermediate outputs for each stage
                 10: return xinter


A.6              A BLATIONS

1st Stage Representation. In Section 2.2, we explore the versatility of the 3rd stage (detailed
image) by examining six input modalities, detailed in Figure 15. Comparing different contours
representations, namely Edges (using Laplacian edge detector (Wang, 2007)), Sketch (utilizing
PidiNet (Su et al., 2021)), and SAM-Edges (generated by SAM followed by Laplacian edge detector),
we find that Sketch outperforms Edges, as edges tend to be noisier. However, SAM-Edges provides
more detailed contours, yielding superior results. Notably, feeding SAM-Colored leads to significant
performance degradation, likely due to color discrepancies, as observed in SAM in Figure 15. While
SAM-Edges achieves optimal results, its computational intensity renders it impractical. In contrast,
Sketch and Edges are computationally inexpensive. Furthermore, Sketch’s sparse and user-friendly


                                                                                                     17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


nature makes it more suitable for editing, facilitating interpretation and modification than dense, noisy
edges. Consequently, we adopt Sketch as the input modality for subsequent experiments.
Palette Effect. Adding more guidance will offer more editing abilities to the pipeline and enhance
the performance. As shown in Figure 15, rows b and d, when we incorporate the palette into the
contours, i.e., edges and sketch, the performance improved by almost 1 and 1.5, respectively. In
addition, Palette-2 outperforms Palette-1 by 1 FID score. A more detailed analysis of fusing the
stages together and how to mitigate the error accumulation can be found in Appendix A.7.
Concatenation v.s. Schrödinger Bridge. We formulate the generation problem as image-to-image
translation. For instance, generating a palette given sketch or generating the final RGB image given
overlaid palette and sketch. One possible approach is to utilize the conditioning mechanisms offered
by LDM (Rombach et al., 2022), e.g., cross-attention and concatenation. However, these mechanisms
are inefficient as their SNR tends to 0 as t → T . In contrast, our formulation follows the Schrödinger
bridge, which directly incorporates the condition y into xt during the forward process. Accordingly,
the SNR≫ 0 at t = T , which allows reducing training steps from 1K to 50 (Figure 5) and achieving
faster convergence (Figure. 4). Additionally, Table 4 demonstrates a quantitative comparison between
Schrödinger Bridge and concatenation. As shown in Table, 4, the schrödinger bridge (SB) combined
with the concatenation mechanism achieves the best results; however, SB alone is better than using
the naive concatenation.
Training Objectives. Previous work (Rombach et al., 2022) showed that learning the noise ϵ directly
enhances the performance compared to predicting the x0 . As, intuitively, predicting the difference
ϵt ∝ xt − x0 is easier than predicting the original complicated x0 . However, this is not valid in
our case due to the new term y, which makes predicting the difference much harder, as discussed in
Section 2.1. Table 5 shows the same conclusion reported in (Rombach et al., 2022), that predicting the
difference ϵ leads to better performance than x0 , where the FID score is 8.7 and 15.1, respectively. On
the contrary, our method achieves almost the same performance regardless of the training objective,
which is expected, as predicting the difference involves predicting x0 , Eq. 8.

A.7       H OW TO F USE DIFFERENT S TAGES E FFICIENTLY ?

                                                                             Table 7: Ablation study of the sketch augmentation effect on the overall
                                                                             performance after fusing the abstract and the detailed stages.
Table 6: Systematic search for the best stopping step s for the
condition truncation.
                                                                                      Cutout (DeVries & Taylor, 2017)    Dropout     2nd Stage   Overall
                                                                                                Percentage              Percentage     FID ↓     FID ↓
  Metric/Steps (s)    0     10     20    40     80     120    160    200         a)                  0                      0          8.6       16.10
   2nd stage FID ↓   6.1    7.4    7.9   8.6    9.9    10.4   10.8   11.2        b)                5-10                    5-20       9.89       13.94
    Overall FID ↓    11.6   10.7   9.5   10.9   11.2   13.5   15.7   18.9        c)               10-20                   20-40        9.77      13.98
                                                                                 d)               20-30                   50-70       9.80       13.76
                                                                                 e)               30-40                   70-90       11.68      17.99


The reported FID scores for the 1st and the 2nd stages, in Figure 13 and Figure 15, respectively, are
for each stage separately. In other words, in Figure 15, row c, the 2nd stage achieves an 8.6 FID
score when a GT sketch is fed, which is obtained from PidiNet (Su et al., 2021). However, when we
fed the generated sketch from the 1st stage, the performance drastically dropped from 8.6 to 16.1
(almost doubled), as shown in Table 7, row a, due to the domain gap between the generated and
the GT sketches. To fill this gap, we explored two types of augmentations: 1) Cutout and Dropout
augmentation. 2) Condition truncation augmentation.
Cutout and Dropout Augmentation. First, we explored the straightforward augmentation types,
such as Cutout (DeVries & Taylor, 2017) and Dropout augmentations. For the Cutout, we apply a
kernel to randomly blackout patches in the sketch. Additionally, regarding the dropout augmentation,
we randomly convert white pixels to black pixels, interpreted as dropping some white points from the
sketch. As shown in Table 7, generally, augmentation leads to a drop in the 2nd stage performance
while helping fill the gap in the overall performance, as the FID score decreased from 16 to almost
14. However, as shown in rows b-d, gradually increasing the amount of the applied augmentation
does not help much, as the performance remains almost the same. However, the overall accuracy, i.e.,
FID, drops significantly from 14 to 18 when an aggressive augmentation is applied.
Condition Truncation Augmentation. As shown in Table 7, the conventional augmentation tech-
niques do not help much. Accordingly, we explored another augmentation variant tailored for the


                                                                            18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


diffusion models, i.e., condition truncation (Ho et al., 2022). During training the 2nd stage, we apply
a random Gaussian noise to the fed condition, i.e., the sketch. So now the 2nd stage is trained on
noisy sketches instead of pure ones, which makes it more robust to the variations between the real
sketches and the generated ones from the 1st stage. Typically, we progressively generate the sketch
in T time steps; T → 0. However, This added noise could be interpreted as we stop the sketch
generation (1st stage) at a particular step s; T → s. Consequently, we search for it during sampling to
determine which step s works best for the overall performance, as shown in Table 6. In other words,
the 2nd stage is trained on a wide range of perturbed sketches, e.g., pure sketch (s = 0), noisy one
(0 < s < T ), and even pure noise (s = T ). The 1st stage is trained for 200 steps, so s = 200 means
we omit the sketch and feed pure noise. In contrast, s = 0 indicates that we feed the generated sketch
as it is to the 2n d stage. As shown in Table 6, following this truncation mechanism, the fusion of the
two stages is performed more efficiently, where the overall performance drops from 16.1 to 10.6.

A.8      C ONDITIONING M ECHANISM E RROR V ULNERABILITY

In this section, we will compare the two conditioning mechanisms, Concatenation (Concat) and
Schrödinger Bridge (SB), in terms of the error vulnerability.
While SB+Concat shows superior performance in Table 4 for conditional generation—when the input
condition y is the ground truth (GT)—its performance diminishes in the unconditional setup.
In the unconditional setup, y is generated from the previous stage rather than being a perfect GT. This
introduces errors into the generated y, leading to error accumulation, as discussed in Appendix A.7.
Consequently, the model’s performance suffers when relying on concatenation for conditioning. This
is intuitive as y is fed to the network in each denoising step t. Thus, the network emphasizes the y a
lot, making it more vulnerable to error accumulation.
To address this, we use only the Schrödinger Bridge (SB) as the conditioning mechanism for
unconditional generation because of its demonstrated robustness against accumulated errors.
To this end, we tested a compromise approach by applying concatenation for 50% of the steps and
then dropping the condition from concatenation by feeding zeros. The experiment is conducted
on the LSUN-Churches dataset. Table 9 shows that this trick improves performance compared to
concatenation in all steps. However, it still performs worse than using SB alone on generated sketches.
Accordingly, the choice of y-feeding strategy depends on the setup:
          • Unconditional generation: Use only the Schrödinger Bridge, as it exhibits superior robust-
            ness against noise in the input condition.
          • Conditional generation: Use a combination of Concatenation and Schrödinger Bridge, as
            shown in Table 3, for optimal results.

Table 8: Human evaluation for the real image editing capabilities        Table 9: Comparison between different conditioning mechanisms
between our method and SEED-X on 100 randomly sampled                    regarding error vulnerability on the LSUN dataset.
images from CelebHQ dataset.
                                                                                               Method               FID
                       Method        FID
                                                                                             SB                     6.6
                       SEED-X        2.6                                             SB+Concat (100% steps)         10.1
                        Ours         4.3                                             SB+Concat (50% steps)          8.9



A.9      F UTURE W ORK

In this section, we will discuss some possible future work that shows the versatility of ToddlerDiffu-
sion and its potential to drive innovation across image, video, and 3D tasks.
Distill the knowledge from substage features for perception tasks. The intermediate outputs from
Toddler Diffusion (e.g., the sketch stage) can be reused as strong geometric priors for perception tasks
by distilling the knowledge into perception networks to enforce geometric or perceptual constraints,
making them structure-aware and geometry-guided aligned (Zhao et al., 2023a).
Reusing Diffusion Features as High- and Low-Frequency Representations. Toddler Diffusion’s
staged outputs inherently capture distinct frequency information, with the sketch stage emphasizing


                                                                    19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


low-frequency global structures and geometry and the palette and RGB stages capturing high-
frequency details like textures. These features can be repurposed into a dual-branch network (Bi et al.;
Wei et al., 2024): one branch focusing on low-frequency representations for tasks requiring global
context (e.g., semantic segmentation, object localization) and the other specializing in high-frequency
details for tasks like texture classification, instance segmentation, or boundary refinement. Integrating
this knowledge into VLMs can improve performance and generalization for perception tasks.
Addressing Limitations in T2I Models. A significant challenge for text-to-image (T2I) models
lies in handling complex prompts involving counting or spatial relations (Bakr et al., 2023; Ghosh
et al., 2024). Fixing these issues in the sketch or abstract stage will be easier and simpler due to
its lightweight. In addition, the subsequent stages (e.g., sketch-to-RGB) will remain unaffected
and reusable. This approach allows targeted improvements without retraining/finetuning the entire
pipeline, significantly reducing computational costs.
Modular Prompt Handling for T2I Models. Toddler Diffusion can simplify complex text prompts
by decomposing them into modular components mapped to specific stages. For example, a detailed
prompt can be split into geometry-focused instructions for the sketch stage and color-specific details
for the sketch-to-palette stage. In addition, we can add more stages and specific prompts such as depth,
e.g., obj1 closer than obj2 . This enables a more focused and interpretable generation, particularly for
long, detailed prompts with intricate requirements.
For instance: Given a complex prompt: "A bustling city street during sunset with a red double-decker
bus on the right, a blue car parked on the left, people walking on the sidewalk, and sunlight casting
long shadows on the ground." will be split into:
       • Structure-Focused prompt: "A city street with a double-decker bus on the right, a car parked
         on the left, and people walking on the sidewalk."
       • Palette-Focused prompt: "The double-decker bus is red, the car is blue, the sky shows a
         sunset with shadows on the ground."
Video Generation in Abstract Domains. Generating videos directly in the RGB domain is com-
putationally expensive and prone to inconsistencies. Toddler Diffusion can split the problem into
geometry consistency and stylistic consistency. Specifically, it first generates videos in an abstract
domain (e.g., sketches), ensuring geometric consistency across frames. Then, these sketches can
be refined into RGB frames using another stage, Sketch-to-RGB, conditioned on a reference frame
for color and style consistency. This two-step process simplifies the complex task of maintaining
temporal and stylistic coherence in video generation.
Spatial Decompositionality. An intriguing future direction is to adapt Toddler Diffusion to cascade
generation across spatial dimensions instead of modalities:
       • Object-Level Cascading: Generate foreground objects first, followed by backgrounds,
         enabling fine-grained control for game development or storyboarding applications.
       • Part-Level Cascading: Decompose objects into parts (e.g., car wheels, body, interior) for
         industries like automotive design and industrial manufacturing, where precise control at the
         component level is critical.
Enhancing 3D Generation. Toddler Diffusion can streamline 3D generation by reusing the sketch
stage for geometry, followed by a depth estimation stage, and finally, lifting 2D geometry into full 3D
representations. This staged approach is particularly valuable for AR/VR scene creation, autonomous
driving simulations, etc. Additionally, we can first generate the layout, followed by another stage that
generates the meshes (Koo et al., 2023).
Integration with NeRFs. The sketch stage can provide strong structural priors for Neural Radiance
Fields (NeRFs), improving 3D scene reconstruction from sparse views. This integration could
accelerate NeRF optimization and enhance generalization in applications like scene editing and
AR/VR reconstruction, where structural integrity is critical.
Intrinsic Image Decomposition. Toddler Diffusion’s staged approach can be extended to tasks like
intrinsic image decomposition, where images are disentangled into reflectance, illumination, and
shading components. This decomposition enables applications like relighting, material editing, and
realistic AR/VR rendering, where physically consistent outputs are crucial.



                                                   20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


B     M ORE QUALITATIVE RESULTS


B.1   D EMO


Please refer to our demo, which probes our controllability capabilities in performing consistent edits.
Our demo demonstrates a lot of use cases, including:
       • (0:00 –> 0:20) [1st stage] Starting from noise generates a sketch by running only the 1st
         stage, which is unconditional generation.
       • (0:20 –> 0:24) [2nd stage] Starting from a generated sketch generates a palette. This one is
         considered an unconditional generation as noise generates the sketch unconditionally.
       • (0:24 –> 0:32) [3rd stage] Starting from a generated palette generates an RGB image. This
         one is also considered an unconditional generation.
       • (0:32 –> 0:44) [Conditional Generation] Starting from the GT sketch, we generate an RGB
         image.
       • (0:44 –> 1:15) [Editing] We show our sketch-based editing capabilities.
       • (1:15 –> 1:46) [Editing] We show our palette-based editing capabilities.


B.2   R EAL I MAGE E DITING


As explained in Section 2.4, we ensure consistent edits for real images by storing the noise used
during the generation process for later edits. The primary challenge with real image editing is that we
don’t have access to the noise values at each denoising step, as our model didn’t generate the image.
To address this, we employ DDPM-inversion (Huberman-Spiegelglas et al., 2024) to reconstruct the
intermediate noise. As illustrated in Figure 16, we compare our model against SEED-X (Ge et al.,
2024), and our model achieves consistent edits on real reference images better than SEED-X, despite
being trained on much fewer data compared to SEED-X and using smaller architecture. Additionally,
SEED-X fails to perform the edits correctly and keeps the rest of the image unedited, such as the rest
of the face or the background. On the contrary, our method shows great faithfulness to the original
image while performing the edits depicted in the sketch. We have created a small test-set for editing
where we manually designed 100 edits on CelebHQ and generated the corresponding edits for both
our method and SEED-X. Then, we asked annotators (4 annotators) to give a score based on the
aestheticism of the generated image and the adherence to the edit command. As shown in Table 8, the
annotators scores show great preferences to our method over SEED-X where our score is 4.3 while
SEED-X is only 2.6


                                                  21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


              Input          Inversion           Sketch       Edited Sketch Output

 Ours


              Input                          Text Condition                        Output


                                 Close the man’s mouse
 SEED-X


                                      Put wrinkles on his
                                           forehead

                                    Remove the bangs
                                  from the woman's hair


Figure 16: Comparison between our approach, ToddlerDiffusion and SEED-X (Ge et al., 2024) in
terms of the real images capabilities.



B.3   C LASS -L ABEL ROBUSTNESS

Beyond these quality comparisons, we also conducted a robustness analysis to assess our model’s
behavior when faced with inconsistencies between conditions. Specifically, we deliberately provided
incorrect class labels for the same sketch. This mismatched the sketch (geometry) and the desired
class label (style). Despite the inconsistent conditions, as illustrated by the off-diagonal images in
Figure 17, our model consistently adheres to the geometry defined by the sketch while attempting to
match the style of the misassigned category, demonstrating the robustness of our approach. Successful


                                                 22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


cases are highlighted in yellow, and even in failure cases (highlighted in red), our model avoids
catastrophic errors, never hallucinating by completely ignoring either the geometry or the style.


                                           Spotted                              Cacatua
                Tarantula   Ptarmigan                      Macaw   Kite Bird                Tree Frog
                                         Salamander                             Galerita


Figure 17: Our results on the ImageNet dataset. The first column depicts the input sketch. The
diagonal (green) represents the generated output that follows the sketch and the GT label. The
off-diagonal images show the output given the sketch and inconsistent label. These adversarial labels
show our model’s robustness, where the successful cases are in yellow, and the failure ones are in red.


B.4   E DITING C APABILITIES


Our approach introduces an interpretable generation pipeline by decomposing the complex RGB
generation task into a series of interpretable stages, inspired by the human generation system (Stevens,
2012; Marr, 2010; 1974). Unlike traditional models that generate the complete image in one complex
stage, we break it into N simpler stages, starting with abstract contours, then an abstract palette, and
concluding with the detailed RGB image. This decomposition not only enhances interpretability but
also facilitates dynamic user interaction, offering unprecedented editing capabilities for unconditional
generation, as shown in Figure 18, Figure 19, Figure 20, and Figure 21.


                                                      23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


             A              B               C              D              E               F

   Sketch
  Sample 1
  Sample 2
  Sample 3
  Sample 4


Figure 18: Controllability ability of our framework, ToddlerDiffusion. Starting from generated sketch
and RGB image (A), we can remove artifacts or undesired parts, in red, (B), add a new content, in
yellow, (C-D), and edit the existing content, in green, (E-F) by manipulating the sketch.


                                                 24
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


              A             B              C              D               E             F

   Sketch
   Sample 1
   Sample 2
   Sample 3
   Sample 4
  Sample 5


Figure 19: Controllability ability of our framework, ToddlerDiffusion. Starting from generated sketch
and RGB image (A), we can remove artifacts or undesired parts, in red, (B), add a new content, in
yellow, (C-D), and edit the existing content, in green, (E-F) by manipulating the sketch.


                                                 25
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


              A             B              C               D              E              F

   Sketch
   Sample 1
   Sample 2
   Sample 3
   Sample 4
  Sample 5


Figure 20: Controllability ability of our framework, ToddlerDiffusion. Starting from generated sketch
and RGB image (A), we can remove artifacts or undesired parts, in red, (B), add a new content, in
yellow, (C-D), and edit the existing content, in green, (E-F) by manipulating the sketch.


                                                 26
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                   A            B            C              D              E              F

   Sketch
   Sample 1
   Sample 2
   Sample 3
   Sample 4
   Sample 5


Figure 21: Controllability ability of our framework, ToddlerDiffusion. Starting from generated sketch
and RGB image (A), we can remove artifacts or undesired parts, in red, (B), add a new content, in
yellow, (C-D), and edit the existing content, in green, (E-F) by manipulating the sketch.



B.5           S KETCH C ONDITIONING (SD- V 1.5)

We convert our method to a “sketch2RGB” by omitting the 1st stage to show our controllability
capabilities. By doing this, we can compare our model against the vast tailored sketch-based models
built on top of SD-v1.5. However, these methods have been trained for a long time on large-scale
datasets. Thus, for a fair comparison, we retrain them using CelebHQ datasets for 5 epochs starting
from SD-v1.5 weights. As demonstrated in Figure 22, despite this is not our main focus, our method
outperforms conditioning methods without adding additional modules (Zhang et al., 2023; Zhao
et al., 2024) or adapters (Mou et al., 2024). We compare training-free (Tumanyan et al., 2023; Parmar
et al., 2023) and training-based (Li et al., 2023b; Zhang et al., 2023; Zhao et al., 2024) methods. The
performance is worse than expected for the trained-based methods due to two reasons: 1) We train
all the models for only 5 epochs; thus, some of this method, in contrast to us, needs more epochs to
converge. 2) We apply augmentations to the input sketch, which shows that some of these methods
are vulnerable to sketch perturbations.


                                                  27
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


  Condition



       PnP



   Pix2Pix-
   Zeroshot



      Control
       Net



        Uni
      Control


      GLiGEN


       Ours


Figure 22: Comparison between our approach, ToddlerDiffusion and training-free (Tumanyan et al.,
2023; Parmar et al., 2023) and training-based (Li et al., 2023b; Zhang et al., 2023; Zhao et al., 2024)
sketch conditioning methods.


B.6      T EXT + S KETCH C ONDITIONING (SD- V 1.5)

CelebHQ: We conducted another experiments to condition the model on both text and sketch. To
this end, we have extended the CelebHQ dataset by adding a detailed text description for each image
using Llava-Next v1.6. As Llava generates too long descriptions, we ask GPT-4o to summarize them.
We train the model starting from the SDv1.5 weights for only five epochs. As shown in Figure 23, we
feed the same sketch with different prompts, where the only difference between them is the gender,
then the model generates the RGB images that follow both the sketch and the text conditioning.


                                                           Toddler
                                                           Diffusion
                       The image shows a close-up of a
                        human face, who is a male. He
                         has short, dark hair and is
                         wearing a black hat and his
                           eyes are a light color.


                                                            Gender
                                                           Editing


                                                           Toddler
                                                           Diffusion
                        The image shows a close-up of a
                        human face, who is a female. She
                          has short, dark hair and is
                        wearing a black hat and her eyes
                               are a light color.


                Figure 23: Text and Sketch conditioning capabilities of our proposed method.


                                                           28
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


LionArt: Furthermore, we conducted a more challenging experiment to condition the model on
both text and sketch on a more challenging and diverse dataset, LionArt. To this end, we randomly
sample 1 M images from LionArt and train our model for only 1 epoch starting from SDv1.5 weights.
As shown in Figure 24, our model generates RGB images that adheres to both conditions; the text
prompt and the input sketch.


                   Maqui Pluot Raspberry
                          Smoothie


                  2021 Indian Scout Scout
                    Bobber – ABS at Ford
                         Lauderdale



                  Beautiful nature Norway
                 natural landscape aerial
                footage lovatnet lake Live
                          Acti on



                   Rainier Cherries with
                  White Bowel, 5x7 oil on
                linen panel. Original fine
                 art by Carolina Elizabeth



                   Picture of 1959 MG MGA
                 Offered by E&R Classics -
                            PGST


                 A French press and a mug
                    filled with coffee


                   Hand Painted Pitcher,
                  Pastel Flowers, Made in
                 Portugal, Short and Wide



                 A man wearing a black cap
                 with white patterns and a
                 light gray shirt, looking
                    slightly to the side


       Figure 24: Qualitative results for our Text-conditional generation on LionArt dataset.


                                                29
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


B.7      T EXT C ONDITIONING


To show the versatility of our approach, we conducted experiments to show our capabilities in
generating sketches from text on two different datasets: CUB200 and Dress Code dataset. The
Caltech-UCSD Birds-200-2011 (CUB-200-2011) dataset is the most widely-used dataset for fine-
grained visual categorization task. It contains 11,788 images of 200 subcategories belonging to birds.
Due to its importance, DM-GAN extends the dataset to include a text description for each image.
There is no GT paired sketches for each image, thus, we run PidiNet to generate sketch for each RGB
image. Additionally, we show our capabilities on the Dress Code dataset, which is more than 3x
larger than publicly available datasets for image-based virtual try-on and features high-resolution
paired images (1024x768) with front-view, full-body reference models. Like CUB200, the Dress
Code data is an unimodal dataset that only contains RGB images. Fortunately, Ti-MGD extends the
dataset to be a multi-modal dataset by having image-text pairs.
In this setup we have two conditioning mechanisms: 1) The sketch y, which is handled by the forward
process (Eq.2). 2) Cross-attention layer to handle the text condition.
We have trained the 1st stage for 1K epochs as it is very small, only 5 M parameters, and the dataset
scale is very small, thus the 1k epochs takes less than 12 hours using a single A100 GPU. Then, we
train the 2nd stage, 141 Million parameters, for only 200 epochs. In contrast, LDM takes longer to
converges as shown in Figure 4, thus we train it for 400 epochs.
As shown in Table 10 and Table 11, we have achieved better accuracies on both datasets compared to
LDM despite being training for half the epochs. For qualitative results, please refer to Figures 25 and
26.


Table 10: Comparison between our approach and LDM using
                                                                           Table 11: Comparison between our approach and LDM using text
text conditioning multi-modal dataset, Dress Code (Baldrati et al.,
                                                                           conditioning multi-modal dataset, CUB200 (Zhu et al., 2019).
2024).


                       Method        FID                                                       Method        FID

                        LDM          10.7                                                        LDM        12.2
                        Ours         9.1                                                         Ours       10.8



                                                                      30
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


   A-line print, long                                  Long floral print
       print dress,                                    dress, red floral
      printed brown                                     print, v-necked
           dress                                      printed wrap dress


                                                      Black one-shoulder
    Pink pleat-front
                                                        flounce, black
   pants, Pink pull-
                                                      ruffle dress, cold
     on pants, Pink
                                                        shoulder black
         shorts
                                                             dress


    Blue and has long
                                                        Beige stripes,
      sleeves, blue
                                                      cream dress, long
   stripe shirtdress,
                                                         striped dress
       knee length


                                                        Black zip dress,
    Long solid black
                                                         black zip mock
       sleeveless,
                                                          neck sweater
     spaghetti strap
                                                      dress, long sleeve
    black maxi dress
                                                       short black dress

    Gray dress lace,                                    Body con tube
   silver grey short                                  dress, long brown
      dress, white                                      halter dress,
    embellished mesh                                  sleeveless ribbed
          shift                                             dress


    Red knee lenght                                       Asymmetric
    shorts, red mid                                    neckline, black
    rise, red pleat                                     and white long
     front trouser                                           dress


   Blue sheer flounce
                                                      Knee length dress,
      dress, flared
                                                      long sleeved black
      sleeves, long
                                                        and white dress
    loose blue dress


    Blue and has long
       sleeves, blue                                  One shoulder, red
     long-sleeve midi                                 maxi dress, solid
        dress, long                                     red long dress
   sleeved blue dress


Figure 25: Qualitative results for our Text-conditional generation on Dress Code dataset (Baldrati
et al., 2024). The first column is the input text prompt, second column is the generated sketch, last
column is the generated RGB image.


                                                 31
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


         This blue and                                 A small, dark-
       black bird has a                                feathered bird
      blue breast and a                              perched on a tree
           small bill                                       trunk


        A dark-colored
                                                     A light gray gull
      bird perched on a
                                                      with an orange
      thin branch, with
                                                           beak
       a clear blue sky


                                                      Black bird with a
                                                        glossy, sleek
      A small bird with
                                                       plumage, with a
       gray and white
                                                        pointed beak,
           plumage
                                                     slightly open, and
                                                     long tail feathers

                                                     A small bird with
    A small blue bird
                                                     dark gray, white,
   with a sharp beak,
                                                      and red plumage,
      standing on a
                                                      featuring a dark
     natural surface
                                                            cap.

         A bird with a                                A small Ovenbird
      slightly downward                               with olive-green
      curved bill which                              upperparts, and a
      has a white point                               distinctive eye-
       coming off of it                                     ring

   The bird submerges
                                                     A white gull with
     in water and is
                                                       a yellow beak,
   large with an even
                                                      black legs, and
      greyish black
                                                       grayish wings
         coloring

                                                       A striking red-
   A brown water bird                                 headed woodpecker
   with a sleek body,                                with a white belly,
   floating on water.                                  black-and-white
                                                       patterned wings

                                                     A glossy blackbird
        A dark-colored
                                                      with iridescent
       bird in flight,
                                                          feathers
       captured over a
                                                     reflecting shades
          gray water
                                                     of green and blue


Figure 26: Qualitative results for our Text-conditional generation on CUB200 dataset (Zhu et al.,
2019). The first column is the input text prompt, second column is the generated sketch, last column
is the generated RGB image.


B.8     F REE -H AND S KETCH C ONDITIONAL G ENERATION S AMPLES


Figure 27 depicts more qualitative results for our conditional generation pipeline, where we first
generate the sketch using drawing tools and then use the generated sketch to generate the RGB image.
Despite the sketch being too bad and sparse, our model still generates high-quality images.


                                                32
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


             Successful                     Successful
                                                                          Failure Cases
               Cases                          Cases


                 Figure 27: Qualitative results for our unconditional generation.


                                               33
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


B.9   Q UALITATIVE RESULTS FOR OUR SKETCH - CONDITIONAL GENERATION

In addition to our unconditional generation, our framework can be used as a conditional generation
pipeline, where the user can omit the first stage and directly fed a reference sketch. As shown
in Figure 28, given the reference sketch, we run only the second stage, which is responsible for
generating the RGB image given a sketch. Compared to the generated images in Figure 27, the
generated images in Figure 28 are much better as the reference sketches are much better than the
generated ones. This observation is aliened with our discussion regarding the gap between the two
stages. Therefore, improving the quality of the generated sketches will directly reflect on the overall
images quality.


              Successful                      Successful
                                                                             Failure Cases
                Cases                           Cases


                Figure 28: Qualitative results for our sketch-conditional generation.


                                                  34
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


C    FAILURE CASES
The last column of Figure 27 and Figure 28 depicts failure cases, where the generated RGB is
following the sketch but generates unrealistic image. Intuitively, the failure cases are more apparent
in the unconditional generation due to the generated sketches quality.


                                                 35
