Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


S CALING L ARGE L ANGUAGE M ODEL - BASED
M ULTI -AGENT C OLLABORATION
 Chen Qian⋆† , Zihao Xie⋆† , YiFei Wang⋆ , Wei Liu⋆ , Kunlun Zhu⋆ , Hanchen Xia⋆ ,
 Yufan Dang⋆ , Zhuoyun Du⋆ , Weize Chen⋆ , Cheng Yang♣ , Zhiyuan Liu⋆ , Maosong Sun⋆B
 ⋆
   Tsinghua University ♣ Peng Cheng Laboratory
 qianc62@gmail.com xie-zh22@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn sms@tsinghua.edu.cn



                                            A BSTRACT
         Recent breakthroughs in large language model-driven autonomous agents have
         revealed that multi-agent collaboration often surpasses each individual through col-
         lective reasoning. Inspired by the neural scaling law—increasing neurons enhances
         performance, this study explores whether the continuous addition of collaborative
         agents can yield similar benefits. Technically, we utilize directed acyclic graphs to
         organize agents into a multi-agent
                                 :
                                             collaboration network
                                                             ::
                                                                     (M AC N ET), upon which
         their interactive reasoning is topologically orchestrated for autonomous task solv-
         ing. Extensive evaluations reveal that it effectively supports collaboration among
         over a thousand agents, with irregular topologies outperforming regular ones. We
         also identify a collaborative scaling law—the overall performance follows a logis-
         tic growth pattern as agents scale, with collaborative emergence occurring earlier
         than traditional neural emergence. We speculate this may be because scaling agents
         catalyzes their multidimensional considerations during interactive reflection and
         refinement, thereby producing more comprehensive artifacts. The code is available
         at https://github.com/OpenBMB/ChatDev/tree/macnet.


Figure 1: Multi-agent collaboration network (M AC N ET) uses directed acyclic graphs to arrange agents
for collaborative interactions, facilitating autonomous task-solving through collective reasoning.


1   I NTRODUCTION
In the rapidly advancing field of artificial intelligence, large language models (LLMs) have driven
transformative shifts across numerous domains due to their remarkable linguistic capacity to seam-
lessly integrate extensive world knowledge (Vaswani et al., 2017; Brown et al., 2020). Central to this
breakthrough is the neural scaling law, where well-trained neural networks often exhibit power-law
scaling relations primarily with the number of neurons, alongside factors such as dataset size and
training time (Kaplan et al., 2020; Muennighoff et al., 2024). Despite this, LLMs have inherent
limitations in their enclosed reasoning, particularly when addressing complex situations that extend
beyond textual boundaries (Schick et al., 2023). To this end, during the inference phase, pioneering
    †: Equal Contributions.   B: Corresponding Authors.


                                                   1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


studies transform foundational LLMs into versatile autonomous agents (Richards, 2023; Shen et al.,
2023) by encapsulating external capabilities like context-aware memory (Park et al., 2023), tool
use (Qin et al., 2024a), and procedural planning (Zhao et al., 2023). In this context, multi-agent
collaboration, within an interactive environment, prompts agents to engage in iterative reflection and
refinement, explicitly facilitating a process of "slow thinking" (Daniel, 2017; OpenAI, 2024). This
paradigm effectively unites the distinct expertise of diverse agents (Qian et al., 2024c), ultimately
leading to artifacts1 derived from their dialogues.
Although numerous studies have confirmed that task-oriented multi-agent collaboration, facilitated
by interactive behaviors, often surpasses standalone intelligence (Chen et al., 2024d;a), the potential
for continuously increasing agents remains largely overlooked—with most research involving fewer
than ten agents and only a limited number extending to several dozen (Li et al., 2023a; Park et al.,
2023; Zhang et al., 2024a). Inspired by the neural scaling law, a thought-provoking question
arises: how does the continuous addition of collaborative agents impact performance? Exploring
the collaborative scaling law is essential for linking performance trends with inference resources,
revealing underlying phenomena in agent networking, and promoting the development of scalable
and predictable LLM systems. However, technically, effective collaboration should not depend
on simple majority voting (Brown et al., 2024; Chen et al., 2024b); instead, it should incorporate
strategic mechanisms for scalable networking, cooperative interaction, and progressive decision-
making (Hopfield, 1982; Almaatouq et al., 2021; Du et al., 2024a). Toward this end, as depicted in
Figure 1, we organize multiple agents into a multi-agent
                                                :
                                                            collaboration network
                                                            :             ::
                                                                                   (M AC N ET), upon
which their interactive reasoning is topologically orchestrated for autonomous task solving.

• For network construction, agents’ topology is constructed as a directed acyclic graph, with each
  edge managed by a supervisory critic issuing commands, and each node by a compliant actor
  providing tailored artifacts. This establishes a functional bipartition of labor among agents,
  promoting role specialization while inherently preventing backflow in information propagation.
• For interactive reasoning, agents interact in a topological order, where each round involves two
  adjacent agents refining a previous artifact, and only the refined artifact, rather than the entire
  dialogue, is propagated to the next rounds. This prevents global broadcasting and suppresses
  context explosion, thereby enhancing collaboration scalability for much larger networks.

We performed extensive evaluations across different downstream scenarios, employing three types of
representative topologies—chain, tree, and graph—further divided into six representative variants.
The results show that M AC N ET surpasses all baselines on average and supports effective collaboration
among over a thousand agents. Counterintuitively, collaborating within irregular topologies unexpect-
edly outperforms that within regular ones. Notably, we reveal a collaborative scaling law, indicating
that the overall performance exhibits a logistic growth pattern as the process of scaling agents, with
collaborative emergence occurring earlier than previous instances of neural emergence. We speculate
this may be because scaling agents catalyzes their multidimensional considerations during interactive
reflection and refinement, thereby producing more comprehensive artifacts. Longer term, we aim for
this research to extrapolate the traditional scaling from training to inference, circumventing the need
for resource-intensive retraining through inference-time procedural thinking.


2     M ULTI -AGENT C OLLABORATION N ETWORK

To create a scalable environment for effective collaboration, as depicted in Figure 1, we organize
multiple agents into a ::
                       multi-:agent collaboration
                                    :
                                                  network (M AC N ET), upon which their interactive
                                                  :::
reasoning is topologically orchestrated for autonomous task solving.

2.1   N ETWORK C ONSTRUCTION

Although training-time neuron collaboration has been well-established with Transformer architec-
tures (Vaswani et al., 2017), the suitable architectures for inference-time agent collaboration remain
unclear and lack consensus. Toward this end, we draw on the concept of graphs—a data structure
  1
    Artifacts can vary from multiple-choice answers to repository-level code or coherent narratives, among
many other possibilities.


                                                    2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


that describes entities and their interrelations—and extend from previous efforts to propose a more
general topology as a directed acyclic graph (DAG) (Nilsson et al., 2020):
                    G = (V, E) V = {vi |i ∈ I} E = {⟨vi , vj ⟩|i, j ∈ I ∧ i ̸= j}                  (1)
where V denotes the set of nodes indexed by the index set I, and E denotes the set of edges, with
each edge directed from one node to another and no cycles exist. A graph will orchestrate agent
interactions, akin to social networks where information propagates through directed edges. Intuitively,
the acyclic nature prevents information backflow, eliminating the need for additional designs like
task-specific cycle-breaking, thereby enhancing generalizability and adaptability across contexts.

CHAIN      TREE                                            ARTIFACT            INSTRUCTION   ARTIFACT

                                                           O
                                                               O       X
                                                                   O           “Add GUI”
                                                               X       O
                                                                   X       O



 Chain            Star              Tree

GRAPH

                                                                                 CRITIC
                                                            ACTOR                             ACTOR

                                                            NODE                 EDGE         NODE
      Mesh               Layer        Random
                                                         Figure 3: Assign functionally bipartite agents
         Figure 2: Representative topologies.            on nodes and edges, respectively.

Given the impracticality of enumerating all possible topologies, we focus on three prevalent
types—chain, tree, and graph—further divided into six representative sub-topologies, as depicted in
Figure 2. Chain topologies, resembling the waterfall model (Petersen et al., 2009), linearly structuring
interactions along agents (Wei et al., 2022b; Hong et al., 2024). Tree topologies enable agents to
branch out, interacting in independent directions (Yao et al., 2023; Zhuang et al., 2024); further
categorized into "wider" star-shaped and "deeper" tree-shaped topologies. Graph topologies support
arbitrary interaction dependencies, with nodes having multiple children and parents, forming either
divergent or convergent interactions (Besta et al., 2024a; Chen et al., 2024d; Zhuge et al., 2024; Liu
et al., 2023); further classified into fully-connected mesh topologies, MLP-shaped layered topologies,
and irregular random topologies. These representative topologies are extensively studied in complex
network (Dodds et al., 2003; Newman, 2001; Ma et al., 2024) and procedural reasoning (Zhang
et al., 2024b; Yin et al., 2023; Besta et al., 2024b), ensuring a comprehensive coverage of the most
widespread and practical topologies in multi-agent networking.
Since a functional bipartition—consisting of supervisory critics who issue directional instructions and
compliant actors who provide tailored artifacts—can effectively establish division of labor, activate
functional behaviors, and facilitate progressive task-solving (Li et al., 2023a), as depicted in Figure 3,
we strategically assign a critic to each edge and an actor to each node:
                      ai = ρ(vi ), ∀vi ∈ V aij = ρ(⟨vi , vj ⟩), ∀⟨vi , vj ⟩ ∈ E                       (2)
where ρ(x) represents the agentization operation on an element x, achieved by equipping a foundation
model with context-aware memory, external tools, and professional roles; ai and aij denote an actor
assigned to node vi and a critic assigned to edge vij , respectively.

2.2      I NTERACTIVE R EASONING

In procedural task-solving, interactive reasoning among agents within a static network requires
strategical traversal to establish an orderly interaction criterion (Liu et al., 2024b; Chen et al., 2024e).
In a directed acyclic setting, our graph traversal strategy adheres to the principles of topological
ordering (Kahn, 1962), which ensures that each node is visited only after all its dependencies have
been traversed. Formally, for a network G, its topological order is a linear arrangement of agents ai
and aij such that for every directed edge ⟨vi , vj ⟩ ∈ E, the ordering satisfies:
                                 ∀⟨vi , vj ⟩ ∈ E, I(ai ) < I(aij ) < I(aj )                             (3)
where I(x) denotes the index of agent x in a topological sequence. This arrangement ensures that
each node-occupied agent ai precedes its corresponding edge-occupied agent aij , and aij precedes
aj , thereby ensuring orderly information propogation along the network.


                                                     3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                                                                       Interaction

                                                                                                       Topological
                                                                                                        Sequence

                                                                                                      Information
                                                                                                      Propagation


Figure 4: Orchestrating the agents’ reasoning process involves a series of dual-agent interactions.
The topological order serves as the control flow, while the original connectivity governs the data flow.


After establishing the global order, as illustrated in Figure 4, we enable each pair of edge-connected
adjacent agents to interact for artifact refinement, which results in a total assignment of |V| + |E|
agents and require at least 2 × |E| interaction rounds. Specifically, within each edge, the interactions
between critics and actors follows a dual-agent multi-turn pattern:

                               τ (ai , aij , aj ) = τ (ai , aij ), τ (aij , aj )
                                                                                                      (4)
          τ (ai , aij ) = (ai →aij , aij ; ai )⟲ τ (aij , aj ) = (aij → aj , aj ; aij )⟲
where τ (·) represents the interaction between agents, → signifies an act of requesting, ; indicates a
corresponding reply—within which the critic provides an instruction and the actor offers an artifact,
and ⟲ denotes an iterative process. That is, ai requests feedback, aij offers reflected suggestions
and requests further refinement, and aj provides a refined artifact. Thus, the agents associated with a
single edge can engage in iterative reflection and refinement, effectively implementing an refinement
of a previous artifact (Madaan et al., 2023; Renze & Guven, 2024).2

2.3    M EMORY C ONTROL

Note that unrestrained information exchange among agents inevitably leads to context explosion (Liu
et al., 2024b; Xu et al., 2024), ultimately hindering scalability by limiting support for additional
entities. To address this, we adopt both short- and long-term memory to manage the context visibility
for each agent (Sumers et al., 2023). Short-term memory captures the working memory within
each interaction, ensuring context-aware decision-making (Li et al., 2023a). Long-term memory
maintains context continuity by retaining only the final artifact derived from current dialogue, rather
than the entire conversational history, ensuring that non-artifact contexts (e.g., the detailed analysis
process preceding an artifact) remain inaccessible3 to subsequent agents (Qian et al., 2024c). This
mechanism ensures that only the artifact propagates through the network, which explicitly minimizes
context explosion risk while maintaining continuity. Artifacts propagate by branching at divergent
nodes, or merging at convergent nodes requiring effective aggregation; technically, before refinement,
convergent agents integrate the strengths of incoming artifacts through hierarchical aggregation (Du
et al., 2024b) to yield a "non-linearly" strength-aggregated artifact.
Theoretically, in a mesh structure characterized by the highest interaction density, the total token
consumption for the sink4 agent who experiences maximum context pressure, with and without this
mechanism, is derived as follows:
                                                                                        n≫1
         O(n)w/o = t + p + s + (2m − 1)(i + s)(n(n − 1)/2 + 2(n − 2)) ≈ Cn2 ∝ n2
                                                                          n≫1                                        (5)
          O(n)w/ = t + p + s + m(i + s)((n − 1) + 2(n − 2)) ≈ C̄n ∝ n
            where C ≡ (2m − 1)(i + s)/2              C̄ ≡ 3m(i + s)
where n is the network scale (i.e., |V|), t the task length, p the profile length, i the average instruction
length, s the average artifact length, and m the maximum interaction rounds between adjacent agents.
   2
     Note that although the interaction order is unfolded as a sequence for visualization purposes only, certain
sub-topologies (e.g., star) inherently support parallel processing.
   3
     Inaccessibility doesn’t mean abandonment; when agents incorporate previous contexts into an artifact, these
contexts are implicitly embedded and carried forward with the artifact.
   4
     The "sink agent" refers to the agent assigned to the sink node. In a multi-sink structure, a final sink node is
automatically appended to form a structure with only one sink.


                                                         4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


This token complexity analysis implies that, without memory control, context length grows with
n2 , causing squared increases in time and cost as the network scales. Conversely, our mechanism
decouples context length from quadratic to linear growth, effectively suppressing context explosion
and enabling better scalability for larger networks.

3     E VALUATION
Baselines We select a diverse set of representative methods to facilitate a comprehensive multidi-
mensional comparison:

• C OT (Wei et al., 2022b) is a technically general and empirically powerful approach that endows
  LLMs with the ability to generate a coherent series of intermediate reasoning steps, naturally
  leading to the final artifact through process-aware thoughtful thinking.
• AUTO GPT (Richards, 2023) is a versatile agent that employs multi-step planning and tool-
  augmented reasoning to decompose complex tasks into chained subtasks and leverages external
  tools within an environment-feedback cycle to progressively develop effective artifacts.
• GPTS WARM (Zhuge et al., 2024) formalizes a swarm of autonomous agents as computational
  graphs, with nodes as manually-customized functions and edges facilitating information flow,
  adaptively optimizing node prompts and modifying graph connectivity during collective reasoning.
• AGENT V ERSE (Chen et al., 2024d) dynamically assembles and coordinates a team of expert agents
  in chained or hierarchical structures, employing multi-agent linguistic interaction to autonomously
  reflect and refine artifacts while displaying emergent social behaviors.

Datasets and Metrics We adopt publicly available and logically challenging benchmarks to evaluate
performance across heterogeneous downstream scenarios.

• MMLU (Hendrycks et al., 2021) provides a comprehensive set of logical reasoning assessments
  across diverse subjects and difficulties, utilizing multiple-option questions to measure general
  world knowledge and logical inference capabilities. We assess the quality of generated artifacts via
  accuracy, which reflects the correctness of responses to multiple-choice questions.
• HumanEval (Chen et al., 2021), a widely recognized benchmark for function-level code generation,
  designed for measuring basic programming skills. We assess via pass@k, which reflects function
  correctness across multiple standard test cases.
• SRDD (Qian et al., 2024c) integrates complex textual software requirements from major real-world
  application platforms, tailored for repository-level software development, involving requirement
  comprehension, system design, code generation and testing. We assess using the official compre-
  hensive metric encompassing completeness, executability, and consistency.
• CommonGen-Hard (Madaan et al., 2023) tests the ability to generate coherent sentences with
  discrete concepts, assessing contextual understanding, commonsense reasoning, and creative
  writing skills. We assess using a comprehensive metric that integrates crucial factors including
  grammar, fluency, context relevance, and logic consistency (Li et al., 2018).

Implementation Details We construct non-deterministic topologies such as trees and graphs
utilizing fundamental structures, including binary trees, layered structures balanced in both width and
depth, and random structures crafted by removing edges from a mesh while maintaining connectivity.
By default, we employ a topology consisting of approximately four nodes, aligning with multi-agent
baselines. GPT-3.5 is employed for interactive reasoning due to its optimal balance of efficacy and
efficiency, with each iterative interaction limited to three exchange rounds.

3.1   D OES O UR M ETHOD L EAD TO I MPROVED P ERFORMANCE ?

We employ the simplest topology—chain—as the default setting for comparative analysis. As
demonstrated in Table 1, the chain-structured method consistently surpasses all baselines across most
metrics, showing a significant margin of improvement. The primary advantage of M AC N ET-C HAIN,
over a single agent who provides artifacts directly, lies in its facilitation of a procedural thinking
in which artifacts are continually reflected and refined. This process effectively mitigates previous
inaccuracies or unexpected hallucinations, aligning with previous findings (Cohen et al., 2023; Du


                                                  5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


  Method                     Paradigm     MMLU       HumanEval        SRDD      CommonGen      Quality
                                                 †             †            †           †
  C OT                                    0.3544        0.6098       0.7222       0.6165       0.5757†
  AUTO GPT                                0.4485†       0.4809†      0.7353†      0.5972       0.5655†
  GPTS WARM                               0.2368†       0.4969†      0.7096†      0.6222†      0.5163†
  AGENT V ERSE                            0.2977†       0.7256†      0.7587†      0.5399†      0.5805
  M AC N ET-C HAIN                        0.6632        0.3720       0.8056       0.5903       0.6078
  M AC N ET-S TAR                         0.4456†       0.5549†      0.7679†      0.7382†      0.6267
  M AC N ET-T REE                         0.3421†       0.4878†      0.8044       0.7718†      0.6015
  M AC N ET-M ESH                         0.6825        0.5122†      0.7792†      0.5525†      0.6316†
  M AC N ET-L AYER                        0.2780†       0.4939†      0.7623†      0.7176†      0.5629†
  M AC N ET-R ANDOM                       0.6877        0.5244†      0.8054       0.5912       0.6522†

Table 1: The overall performance of LLM-driven methods across various datasets, including both
single-agent ( ) and multi-agent (        ) paradigms. Quality represents the average performance over
all tasks. For each dataset, the highest scores are highlighted in bold, while the second-highest scores
are underlined. A dagger (†) denotes statistically significant differences (p ≤ 0.05) between a method
and our chain-structured setting.


et al., 2024a; Qian et al., 2024b). Moreover, we observe that C OT exhibits strong performance on
certain datasets, which is largely because the underlying knowledge of widely-researched benchmarks
is already embedded in foundational models, giving single agents a notable capability in these
relatively "simple" tasks. While GPTS WARM self-organizes agents through dynamic optimization
of nodes and edges, it necessitates extensive task-specific customization for all nodes and edges,
complicating usage and thus hindering seamless generalization to heterogeneous downstream tasks.
Given the growing need for highly performant and automatic real-world systems, it is impractical to
expect that all preparatory knowledge can be fully pre-encoded in foundation models, nor can specific
adaptations be pre-made for all unforeseen complex tasks. Fortunately, M AC N ET bridges this gap by
automatically generating various networks through simple hyperparameters (e.g., topology type and
scale), enabling agents to engage in cooperative interactions without needing specific adjustments5 ,
which represents a promising pathway to achieving both autonomy and generalizability. Furthermore,
we simulate a regression to graph-of-thought reasoning (Besta et al., 2024a) with a simplified agent
by ablating agents’ profiles, which led to an average performance drop of 3.67% across all topologies.
This result underscores the effectiveness of collective intelligence over singular-aspect reasoning, as
the latter represents a variant of dimensionality reduction within multi-agent environments, inevitably
blocking its potential to extrapolate potential opportunities.

3.2      H OW D O D IFFERENT T OPOLOGIES P ERFORM AGAINST E ACH OTHER ?

To gain a deeper understanding of the impact on organizational structures within multi-agent collabo-
ration, we examine M AC N ET’s topologies across six representative topologies. The analysis focuses
on three key perspectives: density, shape, and direction.

Density Perspective Table 1 illustrates that different types of topologies vary significantly in
effectiveness for specific tasks; no single topology consistently excels across all tasks. For instance, a
chain topology is more suitable for software development, while a tree topology is ideal for creative
writing. This phenomenon may arise from the inherent suitability of software engineering to a
linear process, which is accomplished through sequential steps such as analysis, coding, review, and
testing; in contrast, tasks requiring high creativity necessitate more divergent structures to foster
agent interactions from various aspects. Additionally, higher interaction density, associated with
edge density (see Figure 5), correlates with improved average performance across the three primary
topological types. Specifically, the densely connected mesh topology outperforms the moderately
dense tree topology, which in turn outperforms the sparsely connected chain topology. This can be

   5
       Experiments with open-source models demonstrate a similar pattern.


                                                       6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


          0.50                             0.50
                         | |=50                                                0.63   0.6267        Divergent
          0.30                                             0.26                                     Convergent
                                                  0.16                         0.62
          0.10
Density


                                                                     Quality
                 0.02        0.02   0.02                                       0.61
                                                                                                    0.6015
          0.50                             0.50                                0.60
                         | |=10                            0.35                            0.5902
          0.30                                    0.30                         0.59
                 0.20        0.20   0.20                                                                  0.5821
                                                                               0.58
          0.10
                                                                               0.57
                 Chain       Star   Tree   Mesh   Layer   Random                          Star          Tree

Figure 5: Density of different topologies at different             Figure 6: Comparison between topologies
scales.                                                            and their reversed counterparts.


attributed to the fact that increased density natually prolongs the reasoning process among collective
agents, potentially enhancing opportunities for optimizing artifacts from various aspects.

Shape Perspective Despite the intuitive appeal of densest interactions (i.e., mesh), they do not
always yield optimal performance. In contrast, irregular topologies often demonstrate statistically
significant advantages. We hypothesize that this phenomenon is because overly dense interactions
can overwhelm agents with information overload, impeding effective reflection and refinement.
Conversely, network randomization frequently induces small-world properties (Watts & Strogatz,
1998), characterized by a shorter average path length6 or a higher clustering coefficient7 . These
random edge connections, akin to residual connections, can link "unacquainted" agents via direct
shortcuts, transforming them into "acquaintances" and implicitly reducing the average path length,
which naturally decreases the likelihood of long-distance artifact invisibility. This phenomenon,
seemingly counterintuitive when compared to well-established regular organizational structures in the
real world, suggests that collaboration patterns in an agent’s world need not precisely mirror those in
human society. Additionally, random topologies consume approximately 51.92% less time than mesh
topologies, striking an optimal balance between reduced density and enhanced efficiency, thus serving
as a more practical choice. It has also been noticed that, with the same density, star-shaped topologies
that are "wider" tend to perform better than "deeper" tree-shaped ones. This is primarily due to
the memory control mechanism; while it efficiently manages the spread of overly lengthy contexts
across the network, it may cause deeper topologies to lose track of distant agents, occasionally
resulting in artifact version rollbacks (Qian et al., 2024a). This points to an empirical search strategy
that manages network scale and clustering coefficients, whether through automated searching or
manual design, to find an optimal balance between effectiveness and efficiency. Delving deeper, an
in-depth inductive bias analysis reveals that in closed-domain scenarios (e.g., logical choices), a chain
structure significantly aids in facilitating step-by-step reasoning. Conversely, a proliferation of parallel
branches (e.g., stars) can lead to convoluted brainstorming, which may not always be advantageous.
In open-domain scenarios, topologies characterized by more convergent nodes are shown to revise
artifacts more frequently and produce longer artifacts8 . This occurs because more convergent nodes,
with increased input diversity, increase the likelihood of refining artifacts, benefiting length-sensitive
metrics as longer artifacts are more likely to meet rich requirements. Ultimately, no task is confined to
a particular topology; the optimal configuration should be chosen based on the openness of scenarios,
available computing resources, and associated reasoning costs.

Direction Perspective Beyond density and shape perspectives, the inherent asymmetry in certain
topologies—where reversing the edges results in a topologically distinct configuration—has interested
us in exploring the effects of reversed topologies. As shown in Figure 6, merely reversing the
directions of specific topologies can lead to significant performance degradation. Typically, divergent
topologies, characterized by having more child nodes than parent nodes, substantially outperform
their convergent counterparts. Intuitively, artifact propagation diverges smoothly, enabling each agent
    6
      Average path length (Albert & Barabasi, 2002) is the average number of steps along the shortest paths for
all possible pairs of network nodes, which is a measure of the efficiency of information transport on a network.
    7
      The clustering coefficient measures the connectivity density among a node’s neighbors (Strogatz, 2001).
    8
      The layer topologies exhibit a 92.16% modification probability and an average artifact length of 586.57,
compared to 68.48% and 308.26 for chain topologies


                                                           7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


to discuss artifacts from varied aspects. In contrast, aggregating multiple artifacts at a convergent
node is more challenging, highlighting the complexity of integrating diverse aspects into a cohesive
artifact. Therefore, to minimize potential degradation during artifact aggregation, it is recommended
to employ topologies that maximize divergence while minimizing convergence.

3.3             C OULD A C OLLABORATIVE S CALING L AW B E O BSERVED ?

80                          Chain                  80                       Star                   80                       Tree

70                                                 70                                              70
      Quality


                                                        Quality


                                                                                                        Quality
60                                                 60                                              60

50                          Scale                  50                       Scale                  50                       Scale
       20         21   22    23     24   25   26          20      21   22    23     24   25   26          20      21   22   23      24   25   26
80                          Mesh                   80                       Layer                  80                   Random

70                                                 70                                              70
      Quality


                                                        Quality


                                                                                                        Quality
60                                                 60                                              60

50                          Scale                  50                       Scale                  50                       Scale
       20         21   22    23     24   25   26          20      21   22    23     24   25   26          20      21   22   23      24   25   26

Figure 7: Scaling performance of multi-agent collaboration under different topologies. Quality
represents the average performance over all tasks.


Trend Perspective Recall the neural scaling law, which posits that increasing neurons leads to an
continual performance improvement (Kaplan et al., 2020). To investigate the collaborative scaling
law, which excavates the relationship between agent scale and performance, we initiated an attempt
by exponentially increasing the number of nodes (|V|) from 20 (regressing to a single-agent variant)
to 26 (equating to over a thousand agents in a mesh network). As depicted in Figure 7, scaling our
networks initially grows slowly in the quality of artifacts generated by various multi-agent systems,
then leads to a rapid improvement before reaching a saturation point. This pattern resembles a
sigmoid-variant function:
                                                      γ
                                  f (|V|) =        −β(log |V|−α)
                                                                 +δ                               (6)
                                             1+e
where {α, β, γ, δ} are real numbers specific to a particular topology. Roughly speaking, a node
magnitude of 24 appears to be a reasonable choice. However, considering the efficiency of sparse
topologies and the superior performance of dense ones, we advocate balancing shape and scale
through multidimensional trade-offs when applying this trend to various downstream applications.
This finding suggests that many existing agent systems may be operating below their full potential,
which underscores a promising path for enhancing performance by increasing the number of agents,
provided they collaborate effectively, rather than solely focusing on scaling foundational models.9
Besides, the validation of baseline scaling reveals that equalizing the number of LLM calls—whether
through majority voting in closed-domain tasks (Chen et al., 2024b) or best-of-N in open-domain
tasks (Sessa et al., 2024)—consistently highlights a lack of effective scalability across all baselines.
Majority voting enhances performance by merely 0.9%, even when augmented with C OT or AUTO -
GPT, plateauing at approximately eight agents. AGENT V ERSE implicitly reduces to a star topology
and frequently encounters context explosion issues when scaling beyond thirty agents, thus hindering
scalability. The energy-intensive setup of GPTS WARM necessitates manual, task-specific structuring
and prompting, which restricts both multitasking capabilities and overall scalability.

Timing Perspective The neural scaling law requires models with at least a billion parameters and
over 1022 training FLOPs to show emergent trends (Schaeffer et al., 2024). In contrast, collaborative
emergence in M AC N ET manifests at much smaller scales, with most topologies reaching performance
    9
      Looking further, this fitting only reflects a general pattern from the perspective of network scales; future
research should aim for a more precise characterization by incorporating additional factors like profiles, tools
and communication protocols, or social routing.


                                                                            8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


saturation with approximately a hundred agents. The fundamental reason is that neuron coordina-
tion (during training) relies on numeric matrix operations, requiring all neurons to precisely and
simultaneously learn from scratch to assimilate extensive world knowledge. Conversely, individual
agents (during inference) already possess certain knowledge from the foundational models, and their
coordination through interdependent interactions utilizes existing reasoning skills to disseminate
knowledge from diverse aspects; the most critical aspects for artifact refinement in agents’ interactions
typically do not require such a large scale to be thoroughly reflected and refined. Thus, alongside
neuron collaboration, agent collaboration may serve as a “shortcut” to enhance intelligence levels,
especially when large-scale retraining resources such as data and hardware are constrained.

3.4             W HAT FACTORS M IGHT C ONTRIBUTE TO C OLLABORATIVE E MERGENCE ?

 60                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          3000
 50                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              2904                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        2500
                     # Interacted Aspects                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     54
 40                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 2359                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     2000
                     # Tokens of Generated Artifacts                                                                                    1983                                                                                                                                          41
 30                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          1500
 20                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          1000
 10                                                                                                            17                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            500
                     11                           314
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           | |
           20                                                                                       23                                                                                                                                                24                                         Mis
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ImportError Co sing
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 mment
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           25                             Class
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Incorrect Missing
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Logic
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            26
                         Missing


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              r
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Files
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Faulty


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           rro
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       s                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Missing Not Used


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Use Not
                                                                                                    Missing Comments        Class Not


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         bE


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         cs ng
                        Comments Class Not                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Exception


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    s
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Comments


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 ng
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Ta
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  d
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 ss


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Do issi
                                                                                                                              Used


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      al ng
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  ic


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               n
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             tri
                                                                                                                                                          r


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            io
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Handling


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                og
                                                                                                                                          ly e


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   y


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   iti si
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Cla


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          M


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        izat
                                          Used             n                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     nl
                                                                                                                                        On hold


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 In Mis
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 n


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              tL
                                                       tio                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    tio                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              rO                  r
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Faulty


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            c
                                                    ep                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  iza                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  de               ro
  Needs to Be                                                                                                                                                            ion


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        rre
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                itial
                                                                                                                                         ce


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ol                  Er
                                                 Exc lin
                                                         g                                                                                                             pt                                                                                 No Further                                                                       In                          nly                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Exception                                                                       eh                  nd             es


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      co
                                                                                                                                     Pla


                                              lty and           er                                                                                                   ce                                                                                                                                                               ng                         rO                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              ac                ou            iliti
   Reviewed                                                                                                                                                        Ex ing                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       tF            rab            n


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    In
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Pl
                                                             rth                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               issi                      olde                   gs                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        No               lne           atio
                                           Fau H           Fu tions                                                                                           ulty andl        rro
                                                                                                                                                                                     r                                                                   Suggestions                                                          M                   eh                      cstrin
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Handling                                                                           File         rity
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Vu           ent
                                                     No es                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     cum                nts
                                                                                                                                                         Fa       H
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Plac
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               cu                             me
                                                           gg           ly                                                                                                 rtE                                                                                                                                                                                       Do               Iss
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         ues                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Se
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       k of
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Do
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       e Seg           es
                                                      Su                                                                                                              po                                                                                                                                                                            ssing                       ing                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Cod            g Issu
                                                                  er On                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         rror                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Lac
                                                                                                                                                                    Im               Issues                                                                                                                                                     Mi                   Ha
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          ndl               ndE                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             sing           dlin
                                                              old                                                                                                              ing                                                                                                                                                                                            Fou                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Mis
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  e Han


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ors
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               se                        ents                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ite Loop s
                                                        Pla
                                                           ceh
                                                                                                           Non-erroneous                                                  Handl                                                                                                Non-erroneous                                                             Ca           File
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Not
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  e Segm                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Cas           Infin
                 Non-erroneous                                          lization                                                                                   Case                             on                                                                                                                                                                    ing Cod Infinite Loop ilities                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         UI Issue        g


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Err
                                                                                                                                                                                           lizati                                                                                                                                                                    Miss                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Namin
                                                              ing Initia                                      Topics                                                       ing Initia                                                                                             Topics                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Poor            ion
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Needs to Be
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Vulnerab
                                                                                                                                                                       Miss                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Security       UI Issues
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Non-erroneous                                                                                                         Code Duplicat Called


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          e
                    Topics                                Miss
                                                                                      Needs to Be                                                                                        r Sugge
                                                                                                                                                                                                    stions                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Not


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        m
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Code Duplication ion                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Methods
                                                                             Called                                                                                                                                                                                                                               rs                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Visualization
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Reviewed
                                                                                                                                                                                                             s
                                                                                                                                                                          No Furthe
                                                                    ds Not                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               rors
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Not-Good

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Erro
                                                                                                                                                                                              Docstring                                                                                                                                                                                                       Documentat
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Topics


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      nti
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Unoptimized
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Lack of                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Algorithm
                                                              Metho                                                                                                              Missing              Not Called                                                                                                                                                                                                  Algorithm Unoptimized                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Loop Logic Flaws


                                                                                       Reviewed                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      d Er
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Poor Naming

                                                                            Issues                                                                                                        Methods
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         e                                                                                                                                       ValueError
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Lack of Unit Tests


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Ru
                                                                                                                                                                                                Incorrect Logic
                                                              Case Handling
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Called
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Methods Not


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ntim                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      man
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Class Defined Twice                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ValueError
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Not-Good Visualization                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Oﬀ-by-one Error

                                                                                                                                                                                                    Missing Code Segments
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Missing Files
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Loop Logic Flaws
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  NameError



                                                                                                                              Runtime Errors                                                                                                                                                    Ru
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Class Defined Twice



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          De
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Oﬀ-by-one Error



                                                                        NameError                                                                                                                            Security Vulnerabilities
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Syntax Errors
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Scalability Issues                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       IndentationError
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Performance Bottlenecks
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Performance Bottlenecks
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Missing Files                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Faulty Arguments
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Faulty Arguments


                                 Runtime Errors
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Syntax Errors
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             KeyError
                                                                                                                                        Demand Errors                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   NameError                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Ineﬀective Logging
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  KeyError
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Unoptimized Algorithms
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    TabError


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Needs to Be
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             TypeError
                                                                                                                                         Syntax Errors                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Lack of Unit Tests
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Concurrency Issues                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ZeroDivisionError


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Demand Errors                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              PermissionError
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ZeroDivisionError
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               IndexError
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            TypeError
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        IndentationError
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Poor Test Coverage
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Resource Exhaustion
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        PermissionError
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          AttributeError
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           SyntaxError
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Hard-Coded Values
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Network Latency Issues
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Not Configure Layout
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Deprecated Code Usage
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Scalability Issues
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          IndexError
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Unexpected Token
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Class Not Used   Dependency Conflicts
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  TimeoutError
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 MemoryError


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Reviewed

                Logical Errors                                                                             Logical Errors                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  ImportError
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Logical Errors                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Logical Errors

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Syntax Errors                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Logical Errors
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    No Further
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  First-Level Aspects                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Suggestions                                                                                                                                 Runtime Errors                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Demand Errors
                  Incomplete                                                                                Incomplete                                                                                                                                                           Incomplete                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Incomplete
                Implementation                                                                            Implementation                                                                                                                                                       Implementation
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Second-Level Aspects                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Implementation
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Non-erroneous Aspects



Figure 8: The number and distribution of aspects in agent interactions, along with the length of
artifacts. The pie chart features primary aspects in the inner circle and secondary aspects in the outer
circle, with a long-tail layout to visualize tail aspects. Zoom in for more detailed information.

To delve deeper into the underlying mechanisms, we selected the moderately-dense layer typology
employed in software development, which serves as a representative case, with similar phenomena
consistently occurring in other topologies and scenarios. Specifically, we classified the aspects
discussed in agents’ interactions into five main categories (Oh & Oh, 2022; Kohn, 2019): four levels
of errors (syntax, runtime, logic, and unmet requirements) and a non-error category; each category
contains multiple subcategories. Figure 8 displays the total number of interaction aspects, along
with their detailed distribution. Within smaller topologies (20 ≤ |V| ≤ 23 ), the limited interaction
density confines aspects to approximately a dozen secondary aspects. However, as the network
expands (24 ≤ |V| ≤ 26 ), the interaction density increases quadratically, resulting in a sudden
increase to dozens of aspects, followed by a more gradual rise. This progression closely parallels
the trend observed in emergent capabilities, which may partially attribute the emergence to the
sharp rise in detailed interacted aspects among agents. This phenomenon occurs because the token
distribution from underlying models typically follows a long-tail pattern, necessitating larger-scale
sampling to likely capture these tail tokens. Consequently, this encourages the emergence of more
infrequent "tail aspects", allowing the collaborative process to extend beyond the most common
aspects. Theoretically, the probability of a long-tail token t appearing at least once in n samples is:
                                                                                                                                                                                 n                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               |V|2
                        pn (t) = 1 − (1 − p(t)) ∝ 1 − (1 − 1/r(t))                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          lim pn (t) = lim pn (t) = 1                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           (7)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               |V|→∞                                                                                                                                                                   n→∞

where p(t) ∝ 1/r(t) represents a standard Zipf’s law characterizing a long-tailed distribution (New-
man, 2005); the sampling size n is proportional to the interaction density, i.e., n ∝ |V|2 . It can be
inferred that increasing the network size significantly enhances the probability of tail token occur-
rences, gradually approaching an asymptote. This probability becomes an inevitable event once the
sample size is sufficiently large. Statistically, when a critic suggests a particular aspect, there is a
93.10% statistical likelihood that an actor will implement the recommended refinement rather than
disregard it. The scaling up enables critics to pinpoint finer issues within artifacts, guiding actors to
initiate corresponding refinements. Consequently, each round of dialogue in the collaborative process
refines artifacts from different aspects, naturally elevating the probability of producing more nuanced
artifacts (Liang et al., 2024; Du et al., 2024a; Cohen et al., 2023).
In response to multidimensional considerations, scaling agents accordingly prolongs the overall
length of artifacts. For instance, the token length increased by 7.51 times when scaling from 20 to


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


24 . This characteristic, over small-scale networks, facilitates the integration of detailed requirements,
performance optimization, and other advanced factors, potentially encompassing abilities that shorter
artifacts cannot. This is mainly due to the graph’s naturally divergent and convergent topologies,
which enable artifacts to porpagate for strength-aggregated refinement. Therefore, unlike majority
voting, this paradigm fosters interdependent interaction and length-extended regeneration among
diversified artifacts, thereby producing more comprehensive ones.


4    R ELATED W ORK

Large Language Models Trained on vast datasets through next token prediction (Vaswani et al.,
2017) and capable of manipulating billions of parameters (Muennighoff et al., 2024), LLMs have
become pivotal in natural language processing due to their seamless integration of extensive knowl-
edge (Brown et al., 2020; Bubeck et al., 2023; Radford et al., 2019; Touvron et al., 2023; Wei et al.,
2022a; Shanahan et al., 2023; Chen et al., 2021; Brants et al., 2007; Chen et al., 2021; Ouyang et al.,
2022; Yang et al., 2024; Qin et al., 2024b). Central to this breakthrough is the neural scaling law,
which posits that loss descends as a power law with model size, dataset size, and the amount of
compute used for training (Kaplan et al., 2020; Smith et al., 2022; Ruan et al., 2024). The principle
underscores that scaling up language models can lead to emergent abilities—where performance
experiences a sudden leap as the model scales (Wei et al., 2022a; Schaeffer et al., 2024).

Autonomous Agents Despite these advancements, LLMs possess inherent limitations in enclosed
reasoning, driving further research to integrate advanced capabilities such as context-aware mem-
ory (Park et al., 2023; Hua et al., 2023), tool use (Schick et al., 2023; Qin et al., 2024a), procedural
planning (Wang et al., 2023a; Zelikman et al., 2024), and role playing (Chan et al., 2024; Wang
et al., 2024c; Liu et al., 2024a), thereby transforming fundamental LLMs into versatile autonomous
agents (Richards, 2023; Shinn et al., 2024; Zhao et al., 2024; Lin et al., 2023; Mei et al., 2024;
Chu et al., 2024). Along this line, multi-agent collaboration has proven beneficial in uniting the
expertise of diverse agents for autonomous task-solving (Khan et al., 2024; Liang et al., 2024; Qian
et al., 2024c; Wang et al., 2024b;a; Zhou et al., 2024; Talebirad & Nadiri, 2023; Chen et al., 2024c;
Li et al., 2023b), which has widely propelled progress across various domains such as software
development (Hong et al., 2024; Qian et al., 2024a), game playing (Vinyals et al., 2019), personalized
recommendation (Wang et al., 2023b; Zhang et al., 2023), medical treatment (Tang et al., 2023; Li
et al., 2024a), financial marketing (Gao et al., 2024; Li et al., 2024c), educational teaching (Zhang
et al., 2024c; Yu et al., 2024), scientific research (Zeng et al., 2024; Baek et al., 2024; Ghafarollahi
& Buehler, 2024) and embodied control (Guo et al., 2024; Chen et al., 2024f; Mandi et al., 2023).
Technically, in contrast to straightforward majority voting where individuals act independently (Chen
et al., 2024b), collective emergence (Woolley et al., 2010; Hopfield, 1982; Watts & Strogatz, 1998)
posits that effective collaboration should evolve into an integrated system that promotes interdepen-
dent interactions and thoughtful decision-making (Li et al., 2024b; Piatti et al., 2024). As such, recent
studies differentiate agents into distinct expertise and encourage task-oriented interactions, forming a
chained workflow to sequentially reach final artifacts (Qian et al., 2024c). Subsequent research seeks
to organize expert agents in a tree structure for hierarchical information propagation (Chen et al.,
2024d) or in a graph with predefined node and edge functions (Zhuge et al., 2024).


5    C ONCLUSION

This study explores the impact of scaling multi-agent collaboration by introducing M AC N ET, a
scalable framework that utilizes graphs to organize agents and orchestrate their reasoning for au-
tonomous task solving. Extensive evaluations reveal that it effectively supports collaboration among
over a thousand agents, with irregular topologies outperforming regular ones. We also identify a
collaborative scaling law—the overall performance follows a logistic growth pattern as agents scale,
with collaborative emergence occurring earlier than previously observed neural emergence. We
speculate this may be because scaling agents catalyzes their multidimensional considerations during
interactive reflection and refinement, thereby producing more comprehensive artifacts. However,
our research also indicates that there are limits on the scaling horizon. By extrapolating traditional
scaling from training to inference, we posit that agent collaboration could serve as a "shortcut" to
bypass the need for resource-intensive retraining by employing inference-time procedural thinking.


                                                   10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

The work was supported by the Tencent Rhino-Bird Focused Research Program and the Postdoctoral
Fellowship Program of CPSF under Grant Number GZB20230348.

R EFERENCES
Reka Albert and Albert-Laszlo Barabasi. Statistical Mechanics of Complex Networks. In Reviews of
  Modern Physics, 2002. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/cond-mat/0106096.

Abdullah Almaatouq, Mohammed Alsobay, Ming Yin, and Duncan J. Watts. Task Complexity
  Moderates Group Synergy. In National Academy Of Sciences (PNAS), 2021. URL https:
 //www.pnas.org/doi/full/10.1073/pnas.2101062118.

Jinheon Baek, Sujay Kumar Jauhar, Silviu Cucerzan, and Sung Ju Hwang. ResearchAgent: Iterative
   Research Idea Generation over Scientific Literature with Large Language Models. In arXiv preprint
   arXiv:2404.07738, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/pdf/2404.07738.

Maciej Besta, Nils Blach, Ales Kubicek, Robert Gerstenberger, Michal Podstawski, Lukas Gianinazzi,
 Joanna Gajda, Tomasz Lehmann, Hubert Niewiadomski, Piotr Nyczyk, et al. Graph of Thoughts:
 Solving Elaborate Problems with Large Language Models. In AAAI Conference on Artificial
 Intelligence (AAAI), 2024a. URL https://arxiv.org/pdf/2308.09687.

Maciej Besta, Florim Memedi, Zhenyu Zhang, Robert Gerstenberger, Guangyuan Piao, Nils Blach,
 Piotr Nyczyk, Marcin Copik, Grzegorz Kwaśniewski, Jürgen Müller, Lukas Gianinazzi, Ales
 Kubicek, Hubert Niewiadomski, Aidan O’Mahony, Onur Mutlu, and Torsten Hoefler. Demystifying
 Chains, Trees, and Graphs of Thoughts. In arXiv preprint arXiv:2401.14295, 2024b. URL
 https://arxiv.org/pdf/2401.14295.

Thorsten Brants, Ashok C. Popat, Peng Xu, Franz J. Och, and Jeffrey Dean. Large Language Models
  in Machine Translation. In Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP), 2007.
  URL https://aclanthology.org/D07-1090/.

Bradley Brown, Jordan Juravsky, Ryan Ehrlich, Ronald Clark, Quoc V. Le, Christopher Ré, and
  Azalia Mirhoseini. Large Language Monkeys: Scaling Inference Compute with Repeated Sampling.
  In arXiv preprint arXiv:2407.21787, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2407.21787.

Tom Brown, Benjamin Mann, Nick Ryder, Melanie Subbiah, Jared D Kaplan, Prafulla Dhariwal,
  Arvind Neelakantan, Pranav Shyam, Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, Sandhini Agarwal, Ariel
  Herbert-Voss, Gretchen Krueger, Tom Henighan, Rewon Child, Aditya Ramesh, Daniel Ziegler,
  Jeffrey Wu, Clemens Winter, Chris Hesse, Mark Chen, Eric Sigler, Mateusz Litwin, Scott Gray,
  Benjamin Chess, Jack Clark, Christopher Berner, Sam McCandlish, Alec Radford, Ilya Sutskever,
  and Dario Amodei. Language Models are Few-Shot Learners. In Advances in Neural Information
  Processing Systems (NeurIPS), 2020. URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper_files/
  paper/2020/file/1457c0d6bfcb4967418bfb8ac142f64a-Paper.pdf.

Sébastien Bubeck, Varun Chandrasekaran, Ronen Eldan, Johannes Gehrke, Eric Horvitz, Ece Kamar,
  Peter Lee, Yin Tat Lee, Yuanzhi Li, Scott Lundberg, et al. Sparks of Artificial General Intelligence:
  Early Experiments with GPT-4. In arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.12712, 2023. URL https://doi.
  org/10.48550/arXiv.2303.12712.

Chi-Min Chan, Weize Chen, Yusheng Su, Jianxuan Yu, Wei Xue, Shanghang Zhang, Jie Fu, and
  Zhiyuan Liu. ChatEval: Towards Better LLM-based Evaluators through Multi-agent Debate. In
  International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR), 2024. URL https://iclr.cc/
  virtual/2024/poster/19065.

Justin Chen, Swarnadeep Saha, and Mohit Bansal. ReConcile: Round-Table Conference Improves
  Reasoning via Consensus among Diverse LLMs. In Annual Meeting of the Association for
  Computational Linguistics (ACL), 2024a. URL https://aclanthology.org/2024.acl-long.
  381/.


                                                 11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Lingjiao Chen, Jared Quincy Davis, Boris Hanin, Peter Bailis, Ion Stoica, Matei Zaharia, and James
  Zou. Are More LLM Calls All You Need? Towards Scaling Laws of Compound Inference Systems.
  In arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.02419, 2024b. URL https://arxiv.org/pdf/2403.02419.
Mark Chen, Jerry Tworek, Heewoo Jun, Qiming Yuan, Henrique Ponde de Oliveira Pinto, Jared
 Kaplan, Harri Edwards, Yuri Burda, Nicholas Joseph, Greg Brockman, et al. Evaluating Large
 Language Models Trained on Code. In arXiv preprint arXiv:2107.03374, 2021. URL https:
 //arxiv.org/pdf/2107.03374.
Pei Chen, Shuai Zhang, and Boran Han. CoMM: Collaborative Multi-Agent, Multi-Reasoning-
  Path Prompting for Complex Problem Solving. In North American Chapter of the Associa-
  tion for Computational Linguistics (NAACL), 2024c. URL https://aclanthology.org/2024.
  findings-naacl.112/.
Weize Chen, Yusheng Su, Jingwei Zuo, Cheng Yang, Chenfei Yuan, Chen Qian, Chi-Min Chan, Yujia
 Qin, Yaxi Lu, Ruobing Xie, et al. AgentVerse: Facilitating Multi-agent Collaboration and Exploring
 Emergent Behaviors in Agents. In International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR),
 2024d. URL https://iclr.cc/virtual/2024/poster/19109.
Weize Chen, Ziming You, Ran Li, Yitong Guan, Chen Qian, Chenyang Zhao, Cheng Yang, Ruobing
 Xie, Zhiyuan Liu, and Maosong Sun. Internet of Agents: Weaving a Web of Heterogeneous
 Agents for Collaborative Intelligence. In arXiv preprint arXiv:2407.07061, 2024e. URL https:
 //arxiv.org/pdf/2407.07061.
Yongchao Chen, Jacob Arkin, Yang Zhang, Nicholas Roy, and Chuchu Fan. Scalable Multi-Robot
  Collaboration with Large Language Models: Centralized or Decentralized Systems? In arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2309.15943, 2024f. URL https://arxiv.org/pdf/2309.15943.
Zhixuan Chu, Yan Wang, Feng Zhu, Lu Yu, Longfei Li, and Jinjie Gu. Professional Agents – Evolving
  Large Language Models into Autonomous Experts with Human-Level Competencies. In arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2402.03628, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/pdf/2402.03628.
Roi Cohen, May Hamri, Mor Geva, and Amir Globerson. LM vs LM: Detecting Factual Errors via
  Cross Examination. In Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP), 2023. URL
  https://aclanthology.org/2023.emnlp-main.778/.
Kahneman Daniel.     Thinking, Fast and Slow.      In Farrar, Straus and Giroux,
  2017.   URL https://www.pdcnet.org//collection/fshow?id=inquiryct_2012_0027_
  0002_0054_0057&pdfname=inquiryct_2012_0027_0002_0055_0058.pdf&file_type=pdf.
Peter Sheridan Dodds, Duncan J. Watts, and Charles F. Sabel. Information Exchange and the
  Robustness of Organizational Networks. In National Academy Of Sciences (PNAS), 2003. URL
  https://www.pnas.org/doi/abs/10.1073/pnas.1534702100.
Yilun Du, Shuang Li, Antonio Torralba, Joshua B. Tenenbaum, and Igor Mordatch. Improving
  Factuality and Reasoning in Language Models through Multiagent Debate. In International
  Conference on Machine Learning (ICML), 2024a. URL https://openreview.net/pdf?id=
  zj7YuTE4t8.
Zhuoyun Du, Chen Qian, Wei Liu, Zihao Xie, Yifei Wang, Yufan Dang, Weize Chen, and Cheng
  Yang. Multi-Agent Software Development through Cross-Team Collaboration. In arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2406.08979, 2024b. URL https://arxiv.org/pdf/2406.08979.
Shen Gao, Yuntao Wen, Minghang Zhu, Jianing Wei, Yuhan Cheng, Qunzi Zhang, and Shuo
  Shang. Simulating Financial Market via Large Language Model based Agents. In arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2406.19966, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/pdf/2406.19966.
Alireza Ghafarollahi and Markus J. Buehler. SciAgents: Automating Scientific Discovery through
  Multi-Agent Intelligent Graph Reasoning. In arXiv preprint arXiv:2409.05556, 2024. URL
  https://arxiv.org/pdf/2409.05556.
Xudong Guo, Kaixuan Huang, Jiale Liu, Wenhui Fan, Natalia Vélez, Qingyun Wu, Huazheng Wang,
  Thomas L. Griffiths, and Mengdi Wang. Embodied LLM Agents Learn to Cooperate in Organized
  Teams. In arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.12482, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/pdf/2403.12482.


                                                12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Dan Hendrycks, Collin Burns, Steven Basart, Andy Zou, Mantas Mazeika, Dawn Xiaodong Song,
  and Jacob Steinhardt. Measuring Massive Multitask Language Understanding. In International
  Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR), 2021. URL https://api.semanticscholar.
  org/CorpusID:221516475.

Sirui Hong, Mingchen Zhuge, Jonathan Chen, Xiawu Zheng, Yuheng Cheng, Ceyao Zhang, Jinlin
  Wang, Zili Wang, Steven Ka Shing Yau, Zijuan Lin, Liyang Zhou, Chenyu Ran, Lingfeng Xiao,
  Chenglin Wu, and Jürgen Schmidhuber. MetaGPT: Meta Programming for A Multi-Agent Collab-
  orative Framework. In International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR), 2024. URL
  https://iclr.cc/virtual/2024/poster/18491.

J J Hopfield. Neural Networks and Physical Systems with Emergent Collective Computational
   Abilities. In National Academy Of Sciences (PNAS), 1982. URL https://doi.org/10.1073/
   pnas.79.8.2554.

Wenyue Hua, Lizhou Fan, Lingyao Li, Kai Mei, Jianchao Ji, Yingqiang Ge, Libby Hemphill,
 and Yongfeng Zhang. War and Peace (WarAgent): Large Language Model-based Multi-Agent
 Simulation of World Wars. In arXiv preprint arXiv:2311.17227, 2023. URL https://arxiv.
 org/pdf/2311.17227.

A. B. Kahn. Topological Sorting of Large Networks. In Communications of the ACM, 1962. URL
  https://dl.acm.org/doi/10.1145/368996.369025.

Jared Kaplan, Sam McCandlish, Tom Henighan, Tom B. Brown, Benjamin Chess, Rewon Child, Scott
   Gray, Alec Radford, Jeffrey Wu, and Dario Amodei. Scaling Laws for Neural Language Models. In
   arXiv preprint arXiv:2001.08361, 2020. URL https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2001.08361.

Akbir Khan, John Hughes, Dan Valentine, Laura Ruis, Kshitij Sachan, Ansh Radhakrishnan, Edward
  Grefenstette, Samuel R. Bowman, Tim Rocktäschel, and Ethan Perez. Debating with More
  Persuasive LLMs Leads to More Truthful Answers. In International Conference on Machine
  Learning (ICML), 2024. URL https://icml.cc/virtual/2024/poster/33360.

Tobias Kohn. The Error Behind The Message: Finding the Cause of Error Messages in Python.
  In ACM Technical Symposium on Computer Science Education (SIGCSE), 2019. URL https:
  //doi.org/10.1145/3287324.3287381.

Guohao Li, Hasan Abed Al Kader Hammoud, Hani Itani, Dmitrii Khizbullin, and Bernard Ghanem.
  CAMEL: Communicative Agents for “Mind” Exploration of Large Language Model Society. In
 Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS), 2023a. URL https://arxiv.
  org/abs/2303.17760.

Junkai Li, Siyu Wang, Meng Zhang, Weitao Li, Yunghwei Lai, Xinhui Kang, Weizhi Ma, and Yang
  Liu. Agent Hospital: A Simulacrum of Hospital with Evolvable Medical Agents. In arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2405.02957, 2024a. URL https://arxiv.org/pdf/2405.02957.

Junyou Li, Qin Zhang, Yangbin Yu, Qiang Fu, and Deheng Ye. More Agents is All You Need. In
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.05120, 2024b. URL https://arxiv.org/pdf/2402.05120.

Nian Li, Chen Gao, Mingyu Li, Yong Li, and Qingmin Liao. EconAgent: Large Language Model-
  Empowered Agents for Simulating Macroeconomic Activities. In Annual Meeting of the Asso-
  ciation for Computational Linguistics (ACL), 2024c. URL https://aclanthology.org/2024.
  acl-long.829/.

Yuan Li, Yixuan Zhang, and Lichao Sun. MetaAgents: Simulating Interactions of Human Behaviors
  for LLM-based Task-oriented Coordination via Collaborative Generative Agents. In arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2310.06500, 2023b. URL https://arxiv.org/pdf/2310.06500.

Zhongyang Li, Xiao Ding, and Ting Liu. Generating Reasonable and Diversified Story Ending
  using Sequence to Sequence Model with Adversarial Training. In International Conference on
  Computational Linguistics (COLING), 2018. URL https://aclanthology.org/C18-1088/.


                                               13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Tian Liang, Zhiwei He, Wenxiang Jiao, Xing Wang, Rui Wang, Yujiu Yang, Zhaopeng Tu, and
  Shuming Shi. Encouraging Divergent Thinking in Large Language Models through Multi-Agent
  Debate. In Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP), 2024. URL https:
  //arxiv.org/pdf/2305.19118.
Bill Yuchen Lin, Yicheng Fu, Karina Yang, Faeze Brahman, Shiyu Huang, Chandra Bhagavatula,
  Prithviraj Ammanabrolu, Yejin Choi, and Xiang Ren. SwiftSage: A Generative Agent with Fast
  and Slow Thinking for Complex Interactive Tasks. In Advances in Neural Information Processing
  Systems (NeurIPS), 2023. URL https://arxiv.org/pdf/2305.17390.
Ruibo Liu, Ruixin Yang, Chenyan Jia, Ge Zhang, Diyi Yang, and Soroush Vosoughi. Training
  Socially Aligned Language Models on Simulated Social Interactions. In International Conference
  on Learning Representations (ICLR), 2024a. URL https://arxiv.org/pdf/2305.16960.
Wei Liu, Chenxi Wang, Yifei Wang, Zihao Xie, Rennai Qiu, Yufan Dang, Zhuoyun Du, Weize Chen,
 Cheng Yang, and Chen Qian. Autonomous Agents for Collaborative Task under Information
 Asymmetry. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS), 2024b. URL
 https://arxiv.org/pdf/2406.14928.
Zijun Liu, Yanzhe Zhang, Peng Li, Yang Liu, and Diyi Yang. Dynamic LLM-Agent Network:
  An LLM-agent Collaboration Framework with Agent Team Optimization. In arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2310.02170, 2023. URL https://arxiv.org/pdf/2310.02170.
Chengdong Ma, Aming Li, Yali Du, Hao Dong, and Yaodong Yang. Efficient and Scalable Reinforce-
  ment Learning for Large-scale Network Control. In Nature Machine Intelligence (NMI), 2024.
  URL https://doi.org/10.1038/s42256-024-00879-7.
Aman Madaan, Niket Tandon, Prakhar Gupta, Skyler Hallinan, Luyu Gao, Sarah Wiegreffe, Uri
 Alon, Nouha Dziri, Shrimai Prabhumoye, Yiming Yang, Shashank Gupta, Bodhisattwa Prasad
 Majumder, Katherine Hermann, Sean Welleck, Amir Yazdanbakhsh, and Peter Clark. Self-Refine:
 Iterative Refinement with Self-Feedback. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems
 (NeurIPS), 2023. URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/file/
 91edff07232fb1b55a505a9e9f6c0ff3-Paper-Conference.pdf.
Zhao Mandi, Shreeya Jain, and Shuran Song. RoCo: Dialectic Multi-Robot Collaboration with Large
  Language Models. In arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.04738, 2023. URL https://arxiv.org/pdf/
  2307.04738.
Kai Mei, Zelong Li, Shuyuan Xu, Ruosong Ye, Yingqiang Ge, and Yongfeng Zhang. AIOS: LLM
  Agent Operating System. In arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.16971, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/
  pdf/2403.16971.
Niklas Muennighoff, Alexander Rush, Boaz Barak, Teven Le Scao, Nouamane Tazi,
  Aleksandra Piktus, Sampo Pyysalo, Thomas Wolf, and Colin Raffel.    Scaling Data-
  Constrained Language Models. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems
  (NeurIPS), 2024. URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/
  9d89448b63ce1e2e8dc7af72c984c196-Abstract-Conference.html.
M. E. J. Newman. The Structure of Scientific Collaboration Networks. In National Academy Of
 Sciences (PNAS), 2001. URL https://www.pnas.org/doi/full/10.1073/pnas.98.2.404.
MEJ Newman. Power laws, Pareto distributions and Zipf’s law. In Contemporary Physics, 2005.
 URL https://www.tandfonline.com/doi/abs/10.1080/00107510500052444.
Anton Nilsson, Carl Bonander, Ulf Strömberg, and Jonas Björk. A Directed Acyclic Graph for
  Interactions. In International Journal of Epidemiology, 2020. URL https://doi.org/10.1093/
  ije/dyaa211.
Wonseok Oh and Hakjoo Oh. PyTER: Effective Program Repair for Python Type Errors. In ACM
 Joint European Software Engineering Conference and Symposium on the Foundations of Software
 Engineering (ESEC/FSE), 2022. URL https://dl.acm.org/doi/10.1145/3540250.3549130.
OpenAI. Learning to Reason with LLMs. In https://openai.com/index/learning-to-reason-with-llms,
  2024. URL https://openai.com/index/learning-to-reason-with-llms/.


                                               14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Long Ouyang, Jeffrey Wu, Xu Jiang, Diogo Almeida, Carroll Wainwright, Pamela Mishkin,
  Chong Zhang, Sandhini Agarwal, Katarina Slama, Alex Ray, John Schulman, Jacob Hilton,
  Fraser Kelton, Luke Miller, Maddie Simens, Amanda Askell, Peter Welinder, Paul F
  Christiano, Jan Leike, and Ryan Lowe. Training Language Models to Follow Instruc-
  tions with Human Feedback. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems
  (NeurIPS), 2022. URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper_files/paper/2022/file/
  b1efde53be364a73914f58805a001731-Paper-Conference.pdf.
Joon Sung Park, Joseph O’Brien, Carrie Jun Cai, Meredith Ringel Morris, Percy Liang, and Michael S
  Bernstein. Generative Agents: Interactive Simulacra of Human Behavior. In Annual ACM
  Symposium on User Interface Software and Technology (UIST), 2023. URL https://doi.org/
  10.1145/3586183.3606763.
Kai Petersen, Claes Wohlin, and Dejan Baca. The Waterfall Model in Large-Scale Development.
  In Product-Focused Software Process Improvement, 2009. URL https://doi.org/10.1007/
  978-3-642-02152-7_29.
Giorgio Piatti, Zhijing Jin, Max Kleiman-Weiner, Bernhard Schölkopf, Mrinmaya Sachan, and Rada
  Mihalcea. Cooperate or Collapse: Emergence of Sustainability Behaviors in a Society of LLM
  Agents. In arXiv preprint arXiv:2404.16698, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/pdf/2404.16698.
Chen Qian, Yufan Dang, Jiahao Li, Wei Liu, Zihao Xie, Yifei Wang, Weize Chen, Cheng Yang,
  Xin Cong, Xiaoyin Che, Zhiyuan Liu, and Maosong Sun. Experiential Co-Learning of Software-
  Developing Agents. In Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (ACL),
  2024a. URL https://aclanthology.org/2024.acl-long.305/.
Chen Qian, Jiahao Li, Yufan Dang, Wei Liu, YiFei Wang, Zihao Xie, Weize Chen, Cheng Yang,
  Yingli Zhang, Zhiyuan Liu, and Maosong Sun. Iterative Experience Refinement of Software-
  Developing Agents. In arXiv preprint arXiv:2405.04219, 2024b. URL https://arxiv.org/pdf/
  2405.04219.
Chen Qian, Wei Liu, Hongzhang Liu, Nuo Chen, Yufan Dang, Jiahao Li, Cheng Yang, Weize
  Chen, Yusheng Su, Xin Cong, Juyuan Xu, Dahai Li, Zhiyuan Liu, and Maosong Sun. ChatDev:
  Communicative Agents for Software Development. In Annual Meeting of the Association for
  Computational Linguistics (ACL), 2024c. URL https://aclanthology.org/2024.acl-long.
  810/.
Yujia Qin, Shihao Liang, Yining Ye, Kunlun Zhu, Lan Yan, Yaxi Lu, Yankai Lin, Xin Cong, Xiangru
  Tang, Bill Qian, et al. ToolLLM: Facilitating Large Language Models to Master 16000+ Real-
  World APIs. In International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR), 2024a. URL
  https://iclr.cc/virtual/2024/poster/18267.
Zhen Qin, Rolf Jagerman, Kai Hui, Honglei Zhuang, Junru Wu, Jiaming Shen, Tianqi Liu, Jialu
  Liu, Donald Metzler, Xuanhui Wang, and Michael Bendersky. Large Language Models are
  Effective Text Rankers with Pairwise Ranking Prompting. In North American Chapter of the
  Association for Computational Linguistics (NAACL), 2024b. URL https://aclanthology.org/
  2024.findings-naacl.97/.
Alec Radford, Jeffrey Wu, Rewon Child, David Luan, Dario Amodei, Ilya Sutskever,
  et al.   Language Models are Unsupervised Multitask Learners. In OpenAI Blog,
  2019. URL https://cdn.openai.com/better-language-models/language_models_are_
  unsupervised_multitask_learners.pdf.
Matthew Renze and Erhan Guven. Self-Reflection in LLM Agents: Effects on Problem-Solving
 Performance. In arXiv preprint arXiv:2405.06682, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2405.
 06682.
Toran Bruce Richards. AutoGPT. In https://github.com/Significant-Gravitas/AutoGPT, 2023. URL
  https://github.com/Significant-Gravitas/AutoGPT.
Yangjun Ruan, Chris J. Maddison, and Tatsunori Hashimoto. Observational Scaling Laws and the
  Predictability of Language Model Performance. In arXiv preprint arXiv:2405.10938, 2024. URL
  https://arxiv.org/pdf/2405.10938.


                                               15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Rylan Schaeffer, Brando Miranda, and Sanmi Koyejo. Are Emergent Abilities of Large
  Language Models a Mirage?        In Advances in Neural Information Processing Sys-
  tems (NeurIPS), 2024. URL https://papers.neurips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/file/
  adc98a266f45005c403b8311ca7e8bd7-Paper-Conference.pdf.
Timo Schick, Jane Dwivedi-Yu, Roberto Dessì, Roberta Raileanu, Maria Lomeli, Luke Zettlemoyer,
  Nicola Cancedda, and Thomas Scialom. ToolFormer: Language Models Can Teach Themselves
  to Use Tools. In arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.04761, 2023. URL https://arxiv.org/pdf/2302.
  04761.
Pier Giuseppe Sessa, Robert Dadashi, Léonard Hussenot, Johan Ferret, Nino Vieillard, Alexandre
  Ramé, Bobak Shariari, Sarah Perrin, Abe Friesen, Geoffrey Cideron, Sertan Girgin, Piotr Stanczyk,
  Andrea Michi, Danila Sinopalnikov, Sabela Ramos, Amélie Héliou, Aliaksei Severyn, Matt Hoff-
  man, Nikola Momchev, and Olivier Bachem. BOND: Aligning LLMs with Best-of-N Distillation.
  In arXiv preprint arXiv:2407.14622, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2407.14622.
Murray Shanahan, Kyle McDonell, and Laria Reynolds. Role Play with Large Language Models. In
 Nature, 2023. URL https://www.nature.com/articles/s41586-023-06647-8.
Yongliang Shen, Kaitao Song, Xu Tan, Dongsheng Li, Weiming Lu, and Yueting Zhuang. Hugging-
  GPT: Solving AI Tasks with ChatGPT and its Friends in Hugging Face. In Advances in Neural Infor-
  mation Processing Systems (NeurIPS), 2023. URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper_
  files/paper/2023/file/77c33e6a367922d003ff102ffb92b658-Paper-Conference.pdf.
Noah Shinn, Federico Cassano, Ashwin Gopinath, Karthik Narasimhan, and Shunyu Yao. Reflexion:
  Language Agents with Verbal Reinforcement Learning. In Advances in Neural Information
  Processing Systems (NeurIPS), 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2303.11366.
Shaden Smith, Mostofa Patwary, Brandon Norick, Patrick LeGresley, Samyam Rajbhandari, Jared
  Casper, Zhun Liu, Shrimai Prabhumoye, George Zerveas, Vijay Korthikanti, Elton Zhang, Rewon
  Child, Reza Yazdani Aminabadi, Julie Bernauer, Xia Song, Mohammad Shoeybi, Yuxiong He,
  Michael Houston, Saurabh Tiwary, and Bryan Catanzaro. Using DeepSpeed and Megatron to
  Train Megatron-Turing NLG 530B, A Large-Scale Generative Language Model. In arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2201.11990, 2022. URL https://arxiv.org/pdf/2201.11990.
Steven H. Strogatz. Exploring Complex Networks. In Nature, 2001. URL https://www.nature.
  com/inproceedingss/35065725.
Theodore R. Sumers, Shunyu Yao, Karthik Narasimhan, and Thomas L. Griffiths. Cogni-
  tive Architectures for Language Agents. In arXiv preprint arXiv:2309.02427, 2023. URL
  https://arxiv.org/pdf/2309.02427.
Yashar Talebirad and Amirhossein Nadiri. Multi-Agent Collaboration: Harnessing the Power of
  Intelligent LLM Agents. In arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.03314, 2023. URL https://arxiv.org/
  abs/2306.03314.
Xiangru Tang, Anni Zou, Zhuosheng Zhang, Ziming Li, Yilun Zhao, Xingyao Zhang, Arman Cohan,
  and Mark Gerstein. MedAgents: Large Language Models as Collaborators for Zero-shot Medical
  Reasoning. In arXiv preprint arXiv:2311.10537, 2023. URL https://arxiv.org/pdf/2311.
  10537.
Hugo Touvron, Thibaut Lavril, Gautier Izacard, Xavier Martinet, Marie-Anne Lachaux, Timothée
  Lacroix, Baptiste Rozière, Naman Goyal, Eric Hambro, Faisal Azhar, et al. Llama: Open
  and Efficient Foundation Language Models. In arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.13971, 2023. URL
  https://arxiv.org/pdf/2302.13971.
Ashish Vaswani, Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Jakob Uszkoreit, Llion Jones, Aidan N Gomez, Ł ukasz
  Kaiser, and Illia Polosukhin. Attention is All You Need. In Advances in Neural Information
  Processing Systems (NeurIPS), 2017. URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper_files/
  paper/2017/file/3f5ee243547dee91fbd053c1c4a845aa-Paper.pdf.
Oriol Vinyals, Igor Babuschkin, Wojciech M. Czarnecki, and et al. Grandmaster Level in StarCraft II
  using Multi-agent Reinforcement Learning. In Nature, 2019. URL https://doi.org/10.1038/
  s41586-019-1724-z.


                                                16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Haotian Wang, Xiyuan Du, Weijiang Yu, Qianglong Chen, Kun Zhu, Zheng Chu, Lian Yan, and
 Yi Guan. Learning to Break: Knowledge-Enhanced Reasoning in Multi-Agent Debate System. In
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2312.04854, 2024a. URL https://arxiv.org/pdf/2312.04854.

Lei Wang, Wanyu Xu, Yihuai Lan, Zhiqiang Hu, Yunshi Lan, Roy Ka-Wei Lee, and Ee-Peng Lim.
  Plan-and-Solve Prompting: Improving Zero-Shot Chain-of-Thought Reasoning by Large Language
  Models. In Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (ACL), 2023a. URL
  https://aclanthology.org/2023.acl-long.147.pdf.

Lei Wang, Jingsen Zhang, Xu Chen, Yankai Lin, Ruihua Song, Wayne Xin Zhao, and Ji-Rong
  Wen. RecAgent: A Novel Simulation Paradigm for Recommender Systems. In arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2306.02552, 2023b. URL https://arxiv.org/pdf/2306.02552.

Qineng Wang, Zihao Wang, Ying Su, Hanghang Tong, and Yangqiu Song. Rethinking the Bounds of
  LLM Reasoning: Are Multi-Agent Discussions the Key? In Annual Meeting of the Association for
  Computational Linguistics (ACL), 2024b. URL https://aclanthology.org/2024.acl-long.
  331/.

Zhenhailong Wang, Shaoguang Mao, Wenshan Wu, Tao Ge, Furu Wei, and Heng Ji. Unleashing the
  Emergent Cognitive Synergy in Large Language Models: A Task-Solving Agent through Multi-
  Persona Self-Collaboration. In North American Chapter of the Association for Computational
  Linguistics (NAACL), 2024c. URL https://aclanthology.org/2024.naacl-long.15/.

Duncan J. Watts and Steven H. Strogatz. Collective Dynamics of Small-World Networks. In Nature,
 1998. URL https://www.nature.com/inproceedingss/30918#citeas.

Jason Wei, Yi Tay, Rishi Bommasani, Colin Raffel, Barret Zoph, Sebastian Borgeaud, Dani Yogatama,
  Maarten Bosma, Denny Zhou, Donald Metzler, Ed H. Chi, Tatsunori Hashimoto, Oriol Vinyals,
  Percy Liang, Jeff Dean, and William Fedus. Emergent Abilities of Large Language Models.
  In Transactions on Machine Learning Research, 2022a. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2206.
  07682.

Jason Wei, Xuezhi Wang, Dale Schuurmans, Maarten Bosma, brian ichter, Fei Xia,
  Ed Chi, Quoc V Le, and Denny Zhou.      Chain-of-thought Prompting Elicits Reason-
  ing in Large Language Models. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems
  (NeurIPS), 2022b. URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper_files/paper/2022/
  file/9d5609613524ecf4f15af0f7b31abca4-Paper-Conference.pdf.

Anita Williams Woolley, Christopher F Chabris, Alex Pentland, Nada Hashmi, and Thomas W
  Malone. Evidence for a Collective Intelligence Factor in the Performance of Human Groups. In
 Science, 2010. URL https://www.science.org/doi/10.1126/science.1193147.

Peng Xu, Wei Ping, Xianchao Wu, Lawrence McAfee, Chen Zhu, Zihan Liu, Sandeep Subramanian,
  Evelina Bakhturina, Mohammad Shoeybi, and Bryan Catanzaro. Retrieval Meets Long Context
  Large Language Models. In International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR), 2024.
  URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2310.03025.

Chengrun Yang, Xuezhi Wang, Yifeng Lu, Hanxiao Liu, Quoc V. Le, Denny Zhou, and Xinyun Chen.
  Large Language Models as Optimizers. In International Conference on Learning Representations
  (ICLR), 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2309.03409.

Shunyu Yao, Dian Yu, Jeffrey Zhao, Izhak Shafran, Tom Griffiths, Yuan Cao, and
  Karthik Narasimhan. Tree of Thoughts: Deliberate Problem Solving with Large Lan-
  guage Models.     In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS),
  2023.        URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/file/
  271db9922b8d1f4dd7aaef84ed5ac703-Paper-Conference.pdf.

Zhangyue Yin, Qiushi Sun, Cheng Chang, Qipeng Guo, Junqi Dai, Xuanjing Huang, and Xipeng
  Qiu. Exchange-of-Thought: Enhancing Large Language Model Capabilities through Cross-Model
  Communication. In Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP), 2023. URL
  https://aclanthology.org/2023.emnlp-main.936/.


                                               17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Jifan Yu, Zheyuan Zhang, Daniel Zhang-li, Shangqing Tu, Zhanxin Hao, Rui Miao Li, Haoxuan
   Li, Yuanchun Wang, Hanming Li, Linlu Gong, Jie Cao, Jiayin Lin, Jinchang Zhou, Fei Qin,
   Haohua Wang, Jianxiao Jiang, Lijun Deng, Yisi Zhan, Chaojun Xiao, Xusheng Dai, Xuan Yan,
   Nianyi Lin, Nan Zhang, Ruixin Ni, Yang Dang, Lei Hou, Yu Zhang, Xu Han, Manli Li, Juanzi Li,
   Zhiyuan Liu, Huiqin Liu, and Maosong Sun. From MOOC to MAIC: Reshaping Online Teaching
   and Learning through LLM-driven Agents. In arXiv preprint arXiv:2409.03512, 2024. URL
   https://arxiv.org/pdf/2409.03512.
Eric Zelikman, Georges Harik, Yijia Shao, Varuna Jayasiri, Nick Haber, and Noah D. Goodman.
  Quiet-STaR: Language Models Can Teach Themselves to Think Before Speaking. In arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2403.09629, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2403.09629.
Zheni Zeng, Bangchen Yin, Shipeng Wang, Jiarui Liu, Cheng Yang, Haishen Yao, Xingzhi Sun,
  Maosong Sun, Guotong Xie, and Zhiyuan Liu. ChatMol: Interactive Molecular Discovery with
  Natural Language. In Bioinformatics, 2024. URL https://doi.org/10.1093/bioinformatics/
  btae534.
An Zhang, Leheng Sheng, Yuxin Chen, Hao Li, Yang Deng, Xiang Wang, and Tat-Seng Chua.
  On Generative Agents in Recommendation. In arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.10108, 2023. URL
  https://arxiv.org/pdf/2310.10108.
Bin Zhang, Hangyu Mao, Jingqing Ruan, Ying Wen, Yang Li, Shao Zhang, Zhiwei Xu, Dapeng Li,
  Ziyue Li, Rui Zhao, Lijuan Li, and Guoliang Fan. Controlling Large Language Model-based Agents
  for Large-Scale Decision-Making: An Actor-Critic Approach. In arXiv preprint arXiv:2311.13884,
  2024a. URL https://arxiv.org/pdf/2311.13884.
Yifan Zhang, Yang Yuan, and Andrew Chi-Chih Yao. On the Diagram of Thought. In arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2409.10038, 2024b. URL https://arxiv.org/pdf/2409.10038.
Zheyuan Zhang, Daniel Zhang-Li, Jifan Yu, Linlu Gong, Jinchang Zhou, Zhiyuan Liu, Lei Hou, and
  Juanzi Li. Simulating Classroom Education with LLM-Empowered Agents. In arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2406.19226, 2024c. URL https://arxiv.org/pdf/2406.19226.
Andrew Zhao, Daniel Huang, Quentin Xu, Matthieu Lin, Yong-Jin Liu, and Gao Huang. Expel: LLM
  Agents are Experiential Learners. In AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI), 2024.
  URL https://doi.org/10.1609/aaai.v38i17.29936.
Zirui Zhao, Wee Sun Lee, and David Hsu. Large Language Models as Commonsense Knowl-
  edge for Large-Scale Task Planning. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems
  (NeurIPS), 2023. URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/file/
  65a39213d7d0e1eb5d192aa77e77eeb7-Paper-Conference.pdf.
Wangchunshu Zhou, Yixin Ou, Shengwei Ding, Long Li, Jialong Wu, Tiannan Wang, Jiamin Chen,
 Shuai Wang, Xiaohua Xu, Ningyu Zhang, Huajun Chen, and Yuchen Eleanor Jiang. Symbolic
 Learning Enables Self-Evolving Agents. In arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.18532, 2024. URL https:
 //arxiv.org/abs/2406.18532.
Yuchen Zhuang, Xiang Chen, Tong Yu, Saayan Mitra, Victor Bursztyn, Ryan A. Rossi, Somdeb
  Sarkhel, and Chao Zhang. ToolChain*: Efficient Action Space Navigation in Large Language
  Models with A* Search. In arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.13227, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/
  pdf/2310.13227.
Mingchen Zhuge, Wenyi Wang, Louis Kirsch, Francesco Faccio, Dmitrii Khizbullin, and Jurgen
 Schmidhuber. Language Agents as Optimizable Graphs. In International Conference on Machine
 Learning (ICML), 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/pdf/2402.16823.


                                               18
