Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


D IVERGENCE -R EGULARIZED D ISCOUNTED AGGREGA -
TION : E QUILIBRIUM F INDING IN M ULTIPLAYER PAR -
TIALLY O BSERVABLE S TOCHASTIC G AMES

 Runyu Lu1,2 , Yuanheng Zhu2,1 , Dongbin Zhao2,1
 1
   School of Artificial Intelligence, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
 2
   Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences
 lurunyu17@mails.ucas.ac.cn
 {yuanheng.zhu,dongbin.zhao}@ia.ac.cn



                                            A BSTRACT

         This paper presents Divergence-Regularized Discounted Aggregation (DRDA),
         a multi-round learning system for solving partially observable stochastic games
         (POSGs). DRDA is based on action values and applicable to multiplayer POSGs,
         which can unify normal-form games (NFGs), extensive-form games (EFGs) with
         perfect recall, and Markov games (MGs). In each single round, DRDA can be
         viewed as a discounted variant of Follow the Regularized Leader (FTRL) under a
         general value function for POSGs. While previous studies on discounted FTRL
         have demonstrated its last-iterate convergence towards quantal response equilib-
         rium (QRE) in NFGs, this paper extends the theoretical results to POSGs under
         divergence regularization and generalizes the QRE concept of Nash distribution.
         The linear last-iterate convergence of single-round DRDA to its rest point is proved
         under the assumption on the hypomonotonicity of the game. When the rest point is
         unique, it induces the unique Nash distribution defined in the POSG, which has a
         bounded deviation from Nash equilibrium (NE). Under multiple learning rounds,
         DRDA keeps replacing the base policy for divergence regularization with the policy
         at the rest point in the previous round. It is further proved that the limit point of
         multi-round DRDA must be an exact NE (rather than a QRE). In experiments,
         discrete-time DRDA can converge to NE at a near-exponential rate in (multiplayer)
         NFGs and outperform the existing baselines for EFGs, MGs, and typical POSGs.



1    I NTRODUCTION

While a wide range of game-theoretic learning dynamics, including no-regret dynamics and best-
response dynamics, are primarily analyzed in static normal-form games (NFGs), many real-world
games are dynamic and usually considered under a different game representation. For example,
simultaneous games like pursuit-evasion games (Li et al., 2024) and fighting video games (Tang
et al., 2023) can be formulated as Markov games (MGs), especially when there is an infinite horizon.
Imperfect-information sequential games like Texas Hold’em are commonly formulated as extensive-
form games (EFGs) with perfect recall. In view of this requirement, many of the recent studies
have tried to extend the theoretical results established in NFGs to dynamic games (Kroer et al.,
2020; Farina et al., 2021b). Counterfactual regret minimization (CFR) (Zinkevich et al., 2007),
as a well-known example, decomposes global regrets into local ones under counterfactual value
and enables regret minimization within a time complexity polynomial in the size of the game tree.
However, when it comes to infinite-horizon games like MGs, such generalizations are not feasible.
Instead, another line of algorithms based on best-response computations, including Fictitious Play
(FP) (Brown, 1951), Policy Space Response Oracle (PSRO) (Lanctot et al., 2017), and Exploitability
Descent (ED) (Lockhart et al., 2019), are known to be applicable. As an extension of MG, partially
observable stochastic game (POSG) introduces imperfect information and is capable of unifying NFG,
(perfect-recall) EFG, and MG. However, it is not clear if a basic learning dynamic under general
action value can be directly applied to POSGs without sacrificing its convergence properties in NFGs.


                                                  1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


In recent years, last-iterate convergence has become an increasingly interesting research target (Wei
et al., 2021; Lee et al., 2021). Compared to the well-examined concept of average-iterate convergence,
which CFR and FP are based upon, last-iterate convergence means that there is no need to preserve
policies in time average. This is an ideal property for further extension to deep reinforcement learning
(DRL), as it is intractable to time-average function approximators like neural networks. Much of
the existing research on last-iterate convergence is related to Follow the Regularized Leader (FTRL)
(Shalev-Shwartz & Singer, 2006)), which is a basic learning framework that has a close relationship
with various learning dynamics in game theory. The widely studied replicator dynamics (Taylor
& Jonker, 1978) as well as Hedge, multiplicative weights, and gradient methods can be captured
as special cases of FTRL (Cesa-Bianchi & Lugosi, 2006; Arora et al., 2012; Hazan et al., 2016).
While it is proved that vanilla FTRL can cycle in NFGs and EFGs (Mertikopoulos et al., 2018;
Perolat et al., 2021), some of its variants exhibit last-iterate convergence. For example, Daskalakis
& Panageas (2019) prove that the optimistic variant of FTRL exhibits last-iterate convergence to
Nash equilibrium (NE) in the two-player zero-sum games with the unique equilibrium. To avoid the
uniqueness assumption, some recent works also focus on solving the “regularized” game and directly
establishing last-iterate convergence to the quantal response equilibrium (QRE, which can be viewed
as an approximation to NE) (McKelvey & Palfrey, 1995) of the original game. These results are
applicable to EFGs (Liu et al., 2023; Sokota et al., 2023) or MGs (Cen et al., 2021; 2023), but they
are generally restricted to two-player zero-sum games. To deal with multiplayer games, we also focus
on some “discounted” variants besides the works on reward regularization.
A discounted variant of FTRL, first examined in Leslie & Collins (2005), is proved to approximate
Nash equilibrium under a shrinking temperature parameter in two-player zero-sum MGs (Sayin
et al., 2021). Even for multiplayer games, existing theory suggests that it can converge to the
solution concept of Nash distribution, a specific form of QRE defined in NFGs, under a range of
distinct assumptions (Coucheney et al., 2015; Gao & Pavel, 2021). While discounted FTRL exhibits
strong convergence properties, it is still at the price of applying a “perturbation” to the equilibrium
point. Actually, it is completely unknown whether discounted FTRL can approximate exact Nash
equilibrium in multiplayer POSGs. Recently, a series of works on two-player zero-sum or monotone
games (Perolat et al., 2021; Abe et al., 2022; 2023) have shown that the perturbation arising from
divergence-regularized rewards can be mitigated using a technique of multi-round learning, which
repeatedly replaces the base policy (or “anchor” policy; see Jacob et al. (2022); Bakhtin et al. (2023))
with the policy at the rest point in each round. Inspired by these results, we introduce a multi-round
equilibrium-learning system named Divergence-Regularized Discounted Aggregation (DRDA), based
on the continuous-time dynamic of discounted FTRL. We further examine the last-iterate convergence
of DRDA in the POSGs with certain hypomonotonicity (a property more extensively examined in
optimization; see Alomar & Chavdarova (2024)), as well as its relationship to Nash equilibrium.
Specifically, the contribution of this paper includes:

       • Employing the advantage value (a type of action value) at each decision point in POSGs,
         we propose single-round DRDA as an extension of (NFG-based or MG-based) discounted
         FTRL. By defining a generalized Nash distribution (GND) that extends Nash distribution to
         POSGs, we first prove the relationship between the rest point of a learning dynamic and a
         QRE concept in POSGs: every GND induces a DRDA rest point in POSGs (Theorem 1).
       • By assuming local hypomonotonicity, which is a relaxation of the widely used concept of
         global monotonicity (Gorbunov et al., 2022b; Cai et al., 2022), we prove that single-round
         DRDA converges to its rest point in any local λ-hypomonotone region at a linear rate
         when the regularization (temperature) parameter ϵ in DRDA is greater than λ (Theorem
         2). Compared to the existing works (Perolat et al., 2021; Sokota et al., 2023; Abe et al.,
         2024), our convergence result is directly based on the action value for POSGs (possibly with
         imperfect information and an infinite horizon), while requiring a less stringent assumption.
       • By assuming
                  P the uniqueness of DRDA rest point, we establish an explicit NashConv bound
         ϵn log K t γ t for the rest point of single-round DRDA (Theorem 3). By showing that this
         gap can vanish as the rest-point sequence of DRDA converges in multiple rounds, we further
         prove that the limit point of multi-round DRDA is an exact Nash equilibrium (Theorem 4).
       • Through experiments, we show that a discrete-time implementation of multi-round DRDA
         converges to Nash equilibria in various finite-action games under the POSG formulation. For
         NFGs, DRDA can converge at a near-exponential rate. For multiplayer EFGs, DRDA can


                                                   2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


          outperform the baselines including extragradient CFR+ (Farina et al., 2024), moving-magnet
          magnetic mirror decent (Sokota et al., 2023), and regularized Nash dynamics (Perolat et al.,
          2022). Besides, DRDA significantly outperforms the general methods in an infinite-horizon
          Markov game and the existing baselines in typical POSG environments.

2     P RELIMINARIES
2.1    PARTIALLY O BSERVABLE S TOCHASTIC G AME

We use the formulation of partially observable stochastic games (POSGs) as a general framework to
describe a class of finite-action games possibly with imperfect information and an infinite horizon.

Definition 1. A partially observable stochastic game is a tuple N, S, O, A, P, Z, Ri , ρ, γ, T :
N = {1, 2, · · · , n} is the set of all players. S is the set of all global states s ∈ S. O is the set of
all joint observations ⃗o = (oi )i∈N ∈ O. A is the set of all players’ actions, with the joint action
expressed as ⃗a = (ai )i∈N ∈ An . P is the state transition distributions, with a subsequent state
generated by st+1 ∼ P(st , ⃗at ). Z is the observation distributions, with a joint observation generated
by ⃗ot+1 ∼ Z(st , ⃗at , st+1 ). Ri is the reward function for player i, with an instant reward generated
     i
by rt+1   = Ri (st , ⃗at , st+1 ). ρ is the initial state distribution, assigning each s ∈ S a probability
ρ(s) to be the initial state s0 . γ ∈ (0, 1] is the discount factor, and T is the termination time. For
finite-horizon games, γ = 1, and T is finite. For infinite-horizon games, γ < 1, and T → ∞.
Inherently, POSG is capable of describing simultaneous games like NFGs and MGs. Furthermore,
since sequential moves can be regarded as simultaneous moves with empty actions for the waiting
players, sequential games like EFGs can also be converted to equivalent POSGs.

2.2    BASIC C ONCEPTS & N OTATIONS

The following concepts and notations will be frequently used in this paper.
History. As POSG contains imperfect information, the true state of the game at time step t ≤ T
should be expressed as a history ht = (s0 , ⃗o0 , ⃗a0 , s1 , ⃗o1 , ⃗a1 , · · · , st , ⃗ot ) ∈ H rather than a single
current state st . As a comparable concept, the trajectory used in the field of reinforcement learning
(RL) can be viewed as a history with rewards: τt = (s0 , ⃗o0 , ⃗a0 , s1 , ⃗r1 , ⃗o1 , ⃗a1 , · · · , st , ⃗rt , ⃗ot ).
Decision point. In a POSG, player i makes                 his/her decisions based on his/her past observations
and actions xit = oi0 , ai0 , oi1 , ai1 , · · · , oit . In the case of imperfect-information games, each xit
can be viewed as an information set and corresponds to multiple true histories ht . In the case of
infinite-horizon games, some xit (even with different t) are equivalent under the optimal strategy and
can be regarded as the same decision point, which we use any one of the xit (or xi ) to denote. For
example, in a Markov game, player i is at the same decision point when the current observation (the
last term in xi ) is the same. We use X i to denote the set of all decision points and require the number
of distinct decision points |X i | to be finite throughout this paper.
We borrow the notation from the literature of EFGs and write ht ∈ xit (viewing xit as an information
set) if ht is not contradictory to the existing terms in xit . For k ≥ t, we write hk ⊐ ht to express hk
as a successor of ht in the game tree. Similarly, we write xik ⊐ xit to express xik as a successor of xit .
In the special case of perfect-information games, the xit of any player i can uniquely determine ht .
Furthermore, we can simply use st to represent both ht and xit in this case, as the POSG is reduced
to an MG. The expression of NFG, EFG, and MG under the POSG formulation is shown in Table 1.


              Table 1: Conversion of NFG, EFG, and MG under the framework of POSG
                                          NFG                          EFG                       MG
          Termination Time                T =1            T = depth of game tree               T →∞
           Discount Factor                  −                         γ=1                       γ<1
                                                                                 i(s )
         Dynamics Reduction           |S| = |O| = 1       P(st , ⃗at ) = P(st , at t )      xit = ht = st
                 • For EFGs, we use i(st ) to denote the current player under global state st .



                                                         3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


 Policy. At each decision point xi , player i’s policy π i (xi ) is a probability distribution over A.
 Player i’s complete policy is a combination of the policies at all xi ∈ X i . We use the joint policy
⃗π = (π i )i∈N ∈ Π to denote the combination of all players’ complete policies and use ⃗π −i to denote
 the combination of all players’ policies except player i’s. By Definition 1, the probability of visiting
 history ht = (s0 , ⃗o0 , ⃗a0 , s1 , ⃗o1 , ⃗a1 , · · · , st , ⃗ot ) under a joint policy ⃗π is computed as follows:
                                            t−1 Y      n
                                                                        !
                                            X
                                                             i i      i
   Pr (ht |⃗π ) = ρ(s0 )Z (s0 , ⃗o0 )                     π (xk , ak ) P ((sk , ⃗ak ), sk+1 ) Z ((sk , ⃗ak , sk+1 ), ⃗ok+1 )
                                       k=0    i=1

Value functions & Advantage.
                           hP      In POSGs, the ivalue function of history ht under a joint policy ⃗π is
              i               T −1 k−t i
defined as V⃗π (ht ) = E          γ rk+1 |ht , ⃗π . The corresponding state-action value function is
                              k=t
defined as Q⃗π (ht , at ) = E rt+1 + γV⃗πi (ht+1 ) ht , ait , ⃗π . Borrowing the notation from RL literature
             i        i         i

(Sutton & Barto, 2018), define history-based advantage as A⃗πi (ht , ait ) = Q⃗πi (ht , ait ) − V⃗πi (ht ).
Utility & Nash equilibrium.  The individual         utility in POSGs is defined as the expected value over
the initial states: ui (⃗π ) = Eh0 V⃗πi (h0 ) , where h0 = (s0 , ⃗o0 ), with s0 ∼ ρ and ⃗o ∼ Z(s0 ).
As a commonly used solution concept in game theory, Nash equilibrium (NE) is a joint policy ⃗πnash
where no player can increase his/her own utility by unilaterally deviating from his/her own policy.
Specifically, for any player i ∈ N and any individual policy π i ∈ Πi , it holds that ui (⃗πnash ) ≥
            −i
ui (π i , ⃗πnash ). Based on the Nikaido-Isoda function (Nikaidô & Isoda, 1955), define NashConv(⃗π ) =
Pn                            i
   i=1   max             i
                                π −i ) − ui (⃗π )}. NashConv measures the deviation of ⃗π with respect to
               π†i ∈Πi {u (π† , ⃗
Nash equilibrium. Clearly, NashConv(⃗πnash ) = 0.

2.3    F OLLOW THE R EGULARIZED L EADER & D ISCOUNTED FTRL

Follow the Regularized Leader. Follow the Regularized Leader (FTRL) is a widely examined
equilibrium-learning dynamic. In NFGs, the continuous-time FTRL (Mertikopoulos et al., 2018) can
be expressed as an ODE of the score ⃗y with a non-negative continuous time variable t (different from
the discrete time step t used in the formulation of POSG):
                                           (
                                               ẏti = wi (⃗πt )
                                                                                                   (1)
                                               πti = σ i (yti )

where wi (⃗πt )(a) = ui (πai , ⃗πt−i ) is player i’s expected utility under a pure strategy πai (·) with
πai (a) = 1, and σ i (yti ) = arg maxπi ∈∆(A) { π i , yti − ϕi (π i )} is the policy selection that maps the
current score function yti (·) into the policy space ∆(A).
The penalty function ϕi (π i ) guarantees that the σ i (·) in (1) is well-defined
                                                                           P in the sense that the argmax
results in a singleton. Under entropic regularization (i.e., ϕi (π i ) = ϵ ai ∈A π i (ai ) log π i (ai )), FTRL
is equivalent to multiplicative weights (Hedge) (Cesa-Bianchi & Lugosi, 2006; Arora et al., 2012) as
well as replicator dynamics in evolutionary game theory (Taylor & Jonker, 1978).
Discounted FTRL. While FTRL exhibits average-iterate convergence, the last iterate of FTRL may
not converge. Actually, it features a cycling behavior that is robust to the choice of regularization, util-
ity transformations, and game restrictions (see Mertikopoulos et al. (2018)). To avoid the recurrence
behavior, a “discounted” variant of FTRL can be used instead (Leslie & Collins, 2005):
                                         (
                                              ẏti = wi (⃗πt ) − yti
                                                                                                        (2)
                                             πti = σ i (yti )

Discounted FTRL uses wi (⃗πt ) − yti instead of wi (⃗πt ) as the derivative of the score ⃗yt . Consequently,
the past aggregation of utility will be discounted as t increases. This guarantees last-iterate conver-
gence towards the solution concept of Nash distribution in NFGs (Gao & Pavel, 2021; Coucheney
et al., 2015). Nash distribution is defined as the NE policy underP          a utility function perturbed by
entropic regularization ũi (⃗π ) = ui (⃗π ) − ϕi (π i ), where ϕi (π i ) = ϵ ai ∈A π i (ai ) log π i (ai ). It is a
specific form of quantal response equilibrium (QRE) (McKelvey & Palfrey, 1995) and can be viewed
as a relaxation of the original NE concept.


                                                            4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Rest point. To formally examine the last-iterate convergence of a continuous-time dynamic, we need
to use the concept of rest point. For discounted FTRL (2), (⃗yr , ⃗πr ) is a rest point if both yri = wi (⃗πr )
and πri ∈ σ i (yri ) are satisfied for all i ∈ N . Intuitively, it means that ⃗yt ≡ ⃗yr , ⃗πt ≡ ⃗πr (t ≥ 0) is a
solution to the ODE. Under entropic regularization, it can be proved that the policy at the rest point of
discounted FTRL is equivalent to the concept of Nash distribution in NFGs (see Gao & Pavel (2021)).

3     D IVERGENCE -R EGULARIZED D ISCOUNTED AGGREGATION
As we have mentioned, while the last-iterate convergence property of discounted FTRL is desirable,
it is restricted to NFGs and comes at the price of perturbing the equilibrium point. In view of this,
we further employ a general action value and combine the idea of multi-round learning to construct
Divergence-Regularized Discounted Aggregation (DRDA), a learning system for solving POSGs.

3.1   S INGLE -ROUND DRDA

As POSG concerns imperfect information, define advantage value v i (⃗π ) as a kind of action value
that averages all histories’ advantages at a decision point based on the visitation probability Pr (h|⃗π ):
                                                       Pr (h|⃗π ) A⃗πi (h, ai )
                                                   P
                                 i       i i      h∈xi
                                v (⃗π )(x , a ) =       P                                              (3)
                                                            Pr (h|⃗π )
                                                            h∈xi

With the definition of v i (⃗π ), we analyze the following decision-point-level ODE in a POSG.
Definition 2. A single-round DRDA under regularization parameter ϵ > 0 and base policy ⃗πbase is
a continuous-time dynamic expressed as the following ODE with a non-negative time variable t:
                                           (
                                               ẏti = v i (⃗πt ) − yti
                                                                                               (4)
                                               πti = σ i (yti )
where yti (xi , ·) is the score function at the decision point xi ∈ X i , v i (⃗πt )(xi , ·) is the advantage
value defined by (3), and σ i (yti )(xi ) is a policy choice map under divergence regularization:
             σ i (yti )(xi ) = arg max
                                              i i i i
                                               π (x ), yt (x ) − ϵDKL π i (xi )||πbase
                                                                                     i
                                                                                          (xi )

                                                                                                           (5)
                             π i (xi )∈∆(A)


Note that the advantage value v i (⃗πt ) in the single-round DRDA (4) is comparable to wi (⃗πt ) in the
discounted FTRL (2). When T = |S| = |O| = 1, the POSG is reduced to an NFG, and we have
v i (⃗πt )(xi0 , a) = wi (⃗πt )(a) − ui (⃗πt ). From the integral form of the score function, we can see that a
single-round DRDA is a discounted aggregation of the past v i (⃗πt ) under a factor of e−(t−τ ) :
                                                                 Z t
                           yti (xi , ai ) = e−t y0i (xi , ai ) +     e−(t−τ ) v i (⃗πτ )(xi , ai )dτ        (6)
                                                            0

Different from vanilla FTRL, the introduction of the exponentially decaying factor suggests the
boundedness of the score function:
Lemma 1. In single-round DRDA, the score ⃗y is bounded.
                                                                                            i   i i
                                                        (xi ) = ai ∈A π i (xi , ai ) log πiπ (x(x,ai ,a)i ) as the
                                                               P
Besides, we use KL-divergence DKL π i (xi )||πbase  i
                                                                                          base
regularizer (penalty) function in (5) and requires ⃗πbase to be of full support. Correspondingly, we
have an equivalent expression for σ i (yti ), which is in a form similar to the well-known softmax:
Lemma 2. In single-round DRDA, σ i (yti ) has a closed-form expression:
                                               π i (xi , ai ) exp 1ϵ yti (xi , ai )

                        σ i (yti )(xi , ai ) = Pbasei                                                          (7)
                                                  πbase (xi , b) exp 1ϵ yti (xi , b)

                                               b∈A

It is direct to verify that the advantage value ⃗v (·) is continuous. With the continuity of ⃗σ (·) (7), we
know that ⃗v (⃗σ (·)) is also continuous. By Brouwer’s fixed-point theorem (Florenzano, 2003), a fixed
point of ⃗v (⃗σ (·)) exists. The existence of the rest point of single-round DRDA is directly proved.


                                                        5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


3.2   M ULTI -ROUND DRDA & D ISCOUNTED AGGREGATION

 Based on Definition 2, we further construct multi-round DRDA to extend the learning process to
 multiple rounds, using an idea of repeatedly replacing the base policy ⃗πbase (see Perolat et al. (2021);
Abe et al. (2022; 2023)). This technique can help the overall learning process to approach Nash
 equilibrium rather than QRE. Specifically, a round corresponds to a time-evolving process of (4) until
 reaching its rest point (equilibrium point). The ODEs in different rounds differ in the base policy
⃗πbase for divergence regularization.
 Definition 3. A multi-round DRDA under regularization parameter ϵ > 0 and initial point p0 is an
 iterative process of calling an oracle M. In the l-th round (l ≥ 1), M takes (⃗y0 , ⃗π0 ) = pl−1 as an
 input and outputs pl = (⃗yr , ⃗πr ), where (⃗yr , ⃗πr ) is the rest point of the single-round DRDA starting
 from (⃗y0 , ⃗π0 ) under the specified ϵ and ⃗πbase = ⃗π0 .

To examine if multi-round DRDA can find the exact Nash equilibrium rather than QRE, we also need
to define the counterpart of single-round DRDA under ϵ = 0. We call it Discounted Aggregation
(DA), which corresponds to the problem of ẏti = v i (⃗πt ) − yti under the restriction:
                       πti (xi ) ∈ arg max
                                                i i i i
                                                π (x ), yt (x ) , ∀xi ∈ X i                   (8)
                                            π i (xi )∈∆(A)


Note that the hardmax policy selection above implies that πti is a satisfactory policy when only the
actions with the highest score yti are assigned non-zero probability. In Section 4, we will see that
every NE in the POSG actually corresponds to a solution of DA. Furthermore, when the solution (rest
point) of DA is unique, the POSG has a unique NE corresponding to the unique rest point.

4     T HEORETICAL A NALYSIS
In this section, we examine the convergence properties of DRDA. We will characterize the rest point
of single-round DRDA with a QRE concept in POSGs and prove a hypomonotinicity-based condition
for single-round DRDA to converge to the rest point at a linear rate. Furthermore, we will show that
under the uniqueness assumption on DA rest point, the limit point of multi-round DRDA is actually
an exact Nash equilibrium rather than a QRE. All omitted proofs are provided in Appendix C.

4.1   G ENERALIZED NASH D ISTRIBUTION

As a type of quantal response equilibrium (QRE) (McKelvey & Palfrey, 1995), Nash distribution
(Leslie & Collins, 2005) in NFGs corresponds to a solution concept close to Nash equilibrium but
under certain utility perturbation. Here, we first generalize this concept in the context of POSGs.
Definition 4. A generalized Nash distribution (GND) under regularization parameter ϵ ≥ 0 and
base policy ⃗πbase is a joint policy ⃗π∗ . For any player i ∈ N and any individual policy π i ∈ Πi :
                                                                                    
                            T
                            X −1    X                                 X
              ui (⃗π∗ ) − ϵ      γt    DKL π∗i (xit )||πbase
                                                          i
                                                              (xit )

                                                                        Pr (ht |⃗π∗ ) ≥
                            t=0         xit                                   ht ∈xit
                                                                                                    
                                     T
                                     X −1        X                                    X
             ui (π i , ⃗π∗−i ) − ϵ          γt         DKL π i (xit )||πbase
                                                                         i
                                                                              (xit )

                                                                                        Pr (ht |⃗π∗ )
                                     t=0         xit                                ht ∈xit


Note that the GND introduces a utility perturbation based on the KL-divergence under ⃗πbase and the
visitation probability Pr (ht |⃗π∗ ) under ⃗π∗ . When ϵ = 0, the GND becomes a Nash equilibrium. Also
note that when T = |S| = |O| = 1, the POSG is reduced to an NFG, and the GND is equivalent to
the concept of Nash distribution defined in NFGs if ⃗πbase is set to be a uniform policy. However,
please note that the GND defined in POSGs is not the same as the Nash distribution defined in the
(exponentially large) NFG representation of the POSG.
Now we use the following lemma to show an important inequality for GND. This inequality connects
the solution concept of GND with the rest point of single-round DRDA. Its proof involves applying
some existing results about action values to POSGs (see Appendices B.1 and C.3).


                                                                6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Lemma 3. Given a GND ⃗π∗ under ϵ and ⃗πbase , it holds for any player i ∈ N , any individual policy
π i ∈ Πi , and any individual decision point xit ∈ X i :
                                                                                                      
            X                    X
                                   π∗i (xit , ait )A⃗πi ∗ (ht , ait ) − ϵDKL π∗i (xit )||πbase
                                                                                          i
                                                                                               (xit )  ≥

                 Pr (ht |⃗π∗ ) 
           ht ∈xit               ait
                                                                                                
            X                X
                               π i (xit , ait )A⃗πi (ht , ait ) − ϵDKL π i (xit )||πbase
                                                                                    i
                                                                                         (xit ) 

              Pr (ht |⃗π∗ )                        ∗
           ht ∈xit               ait


The inequality above is further used to prove the following theorem, which claims that every GND
must correspond to a rest point of our learning dynamic. This theorem will be subsequently used to
relate the rest point back to the solution concept of Nash equilibrium.
Theorem 1. In a POSG, every GND ⃗π∗ under ϵ > 0 induces a rest point (⃗v (⃗π∗ ), ⃗π∗ ) in single-round
DRDA, and every GND ⃗π∗ under ϵ = 0 (i.e., Nash equilibrium) induces a DA rest point (⃗v (⃗π∗ ), ⃗π∗ ).

4.2   C ONVERGENCE OF S INGLE -ROUND DRDA

Now we analyze the conditions for single-round DRDA to converge to its rest point in POSGs. Our
analysis primarily relies on two properties: the strong convexity of the penalty function and the local
hypomonotonicity of the game. First, we need to show that, similar to other forms of regularization
used in FTRL, the divergence regularization used in single-round DRDA (5) is 1-strongly convex.
Definition 5. A function f (·) on a compact convex set C is K-strongly convex if for any z, z ′ ∈ C
                                                                                             2
and any β ∈ [0, 1], f (αz + (1 − α)z ′ ) ≤ αf (z) + (1 − α)f (z ′ ) − 12 Kα(1 − α)∥z − z ′ ∥ .
Lemma 4. DKL (π||µ) = a π(a) log π(a)
                            P
                                          µ(a) is 1-strongly with respect to π under ℓ1 norm.

Second, we need to examine the hypomonotonicity of the game. This property is a bit different
from cocoercivity, which is also used, e.g., in analyzing the convergence of the extragradient method
(Gorbunov et al., 2022a). The concept of hypomonotonicity relaxes monotonicity, a more strict but
widely used concept in the existing convergence analyses (Gorbunov et al., 2022b; Cai et al., 2022).
Definition 6. An operator F : Rd → Rd is called λ-hypomonotone (λ ≥ 0) if for any x, x′ ∈ Rd :
                                                                              2
                                ⟨x − x′ , F (x) − F (x′ )⟩ ≥ −λ∥x − x′ ∥2                                (9)

Note that being 0-hypomonotone means being monotone. With the hypomonotonicity of a proper
value operator, we can define the hypomonotonicity of a POSG on a local policy set.
Definition 7. A POSG is locally λ-hypomonotone (λ ≥ 0) on a policy set Πlocal ⊂ Π if the negative
advantage value −⃗v (·) is λ-hypomonotone (λ ≥ 0) on Πlocal . I.e., for any ⃗π1 , ⃗π2 ∈ Πlocal :
                       X                                             X           2
                             π1i − π2i , v i (⃗π1 ) − v i (⃗π2 ) ≤ λ   π1i − π2i 2               (10)
                         i∈N                                        i∈N

where the inner product sums over all (k, hk , aik ) triples.

 Using the strong convexity of the penalty function, we can now derive a general condition for the
 linear convergence of single-round DRDA towards its rest point under local hypomonotonicity.
Theorem 2. Assume that a rest point (⃗yϵ , ⃗πϵ ) of single-round DRDA under ϵ > 0 is contained in a
 positively invariant compact set Ω that induces a local policy set Πlocal = {⃗σ (⃗y ) | ⃗y ∈ Ω }, where
 λ-hypomonotonicity is satisfied. If ϵ > λ, then the policy of the DRDA starting from an arbitrary
⃗y0 ∈ Ω will converge
                    .
                           to ⃗πϵ at a linear rate. Specifically, there exists a non-negative energy function
 V(⃗yt ) satisfying V (⃗yt ) ≤ −2(1 − λϵ )V(⃗yt ), with ⃗π = ⃗σ (⃗y ) = ⃗πϵ when V(⃗y ) = 0.

The energy function V(⃗yt ) is constructed based on a concept called Fenchel coupling (Mertikopoulos
& Zhou, 2019), which has a lower bound under a strongly convex penalty function (e.g., KL-
divergence). We decompose the derivative of the energy function into one term that can be upper-
bounded using the assumption of hypomonotonicity and two negative Fenchel coupling terms. Under


                                                        7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


ϵ > λ, the derivative is non-positive and the energy function approaches zero exponentially fast. We
complete the proof by showing that the policy at the points with zero energy is exactly ⃗πϵ .
Note that local hypomonotonicity only requires the inequality (10) to hold in a local region of policies
Πlocal ⊂ Π. When Πlocal = Π, we say the game is globally hypomonotone. Actually, the following
proposition guarantees that global hypomonotonicity is a common property for at least all NFGs.
Proposition 1. Every NFG is globally λ-hypomonotone under a sufficiently large λ.

To further demonstrate that hypomonotonicity can still be a realistic assumption when the game is
dynamic, we also  numerically estimate the order of magnitude of the global hypomonotonicity value
                 i∈N ⟨π1 −π2 ,v (⃗           π 2 )⟩
                       i   i    i
                                   π1 )−v i (⃗
              P
λ by sampling                        i 2
                                                    . We provide the numerical results in Appendix D.
                           ∥    i
                                       ∥
                     P
                       i∈N    π 1 −π 2 2



4.3   R ELATIONSHIP TO NASH E QUILIBRIUM

Recall that, under ϵ = 0, Theorem 1 implies that every Nash equilibrium induces a rest point of DA
(8). Thus, the existence of the DA rest point can be guaranteed by the existence of NE. Furthermore,
if the rest point is unique, then the policy at the rest point must be the unique Nash equilibrium of the
game. Under this uniqueness assumption, the problem of finding Nash equilibrium can be reduced to
finding the rest point of DA. Formally, we have the following theorem:
Theorem 3. If the rest point (⃗yr , ⃗πr ) in DA is unique, then ⃗πr corresponds to an exact Nash
equilibrium. Under ϵ > 0 and ⃗πbase , if the rest point (⃗yr , ⃗πr ) in single-round DRDA is unique,
and therePexists a generalized Nash distribution in the POSG, then the NashConv of ⃗πr is at most
                                                 1
ϵn log K t γ t , where K =       max
                                 i    i      πi  (xi ,a)
                                                         .
                             i∈N,x ∈X ,a∈A     base



Theorem 3 relates the DRDA rest point to Nash equilibrium under the assumption of its uniqueness.
To find an approximate Nash equilibrium, we theoretically require the regularization parameter ϵ to
be close to zero. If the POSG is (strictly) monotone, then by Theorem 2, we can use an infinitesimal
ϵ in DRDA while still guaranteeing its convergence since we have λ = 0. In this case, a single round
of DRDA is sufficient to find an arbitrarily precise approximate Nash equilibrium.
On the other hand, we can establish a more general guarantee for multi-round DRDA (Definition 3).
Note that when the rest-point sequence (pl )l≥0 converges, the regularization terms approach zero at
the rest points. Using Theorem 3, we further prove that the limit point of multi-round DRDA is an
NE rather than a QRE under the uniqueness assumption.
Theorem 4. If the policies in the rest-point sequence (pl )l≥0 generated by multi-round DRDA
converge (under a properly selected ϵ > 0 and p0 ), and the rest point of DA is unique, then the
corresponding policy sequence must converge to a Nash equilibrium.

While Theorem 4 does not provide an exact condition for multi-round DRDA to converge, it suggests
that an arbitrarily precise approximate NE can always be found as long as the overall learning process
converges. In Appendix B.2, we also provide some evidence to show that the uniqueness assumption
could be removed, e.g., when the game is individually concave. In Section 5, we will further show
that multi-round DRDA actually converges to Nash equilibrium at a fast rate in a variety of games.

5     E XPERIMENTS
Considering the representation capability of the POSG framework, DRDA can be applied to a broad
class of finite-action games. We implement DRDA in a range of games commonly formulated as
NFGs, EFGs, MGs, and POSGs to verify the single-round/multi-round convergence and equilibrium-
finding capability of DRDA. The implementation details, parameter settings, and game descriptions
are placed in Appendices E.1, E.3, and F, respectively. Since the per-iteration time complexity
of discrete-time DRDA (SDRDA; see Algorithm 1) is a standard O(|H|) when we use dynamic
programming to compute the advantage value, it is fair to compare its multi-round version (simply
referred to as DRDA in the experiment) with other algorithms under the same total iterations.
Among the comparative algorithms, magnetic mirror descent (MMD), which exhibits last-iterate
convergence to QREs in two-player zero-sum or (strictly) monotone games (Sokota et al., 2023),


                                                      8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                        2-action matrix game                                                                       3-action bimatrix game                                                                     3-action 3-player game
                                                                                                                                                                                                     104
                                                                 FTRL (average iterate)                                                                      FTRL (average iterate)                                                                     FTRL (average iterate)
             10
                  2
                                                                 FTRL (last iterate)                      102                                                FTRL (last iterate)                                                                        FTRL (last iterate)
                                                                 OFTRL (last iterate)                                                                        OFTRL (last iterate)                                                                       OFTRL (last iterate)
                                                                 ERM+ (last iterate)                                                                         ERM+ (last iterate)                                                                        ERM+ (last iterate)
             100                                                 MMD (last iterate)                       100                                                MMD (last iterate)                      102                                                MMD (last iterate)
                                                                 DRDA (last iterate)                                                                         DRDA (last iterate)                                                                        DRDA (last iterate)


            10-2                                                                                         10-2


                                                                                              NashConv


                                                                                                                                                                                          NashConv
 NashConv


                                                                                                                                                                                                     100
            10
                  -4
                                                                                                         10-4


                                                                                                               -6
            10-6                                                                                         10
                                                                                                                                                                                                     10-2


            10-8                                                                                         10-8

                                                                                                                                                                                                          -4
                                                                                                                                                                                                     10
                 -10                                                                                          -10
            10                                                                                           10

                       0    0.5   1   1.5   2      2.5       3      3.5    4     4.5      5                         0   0.5   1   1.5   2      2.5       3      3.5    4     4.5      5                        0   0.5   1   1.5   2      2.5       3      3.5    4     4.5      5
                                                Iterations                             104                                                  Iterations                             104                                                 Iterations                             104


                                                                             Figure 1: NashConv learning curves in NFG


has an intrinsic relationship with single-round DRDA if we consider another way of discretization
(see Appendix E.2). Besides, an extended version of MMD uses the idea of moving magnets to find
exact Nash equilibrium, while DRDA employs the idea of multi-round learning to achieve the same
goal. Since MMD shares certain similarities with DRDA, we use its moving-magnet version (simply
referred to as MMD in the experiment) as a common baseline for NFGs and EFGs.

5.1                        N ORMAL -F ORM G AME (NFG)

NFGs are games where each of the players makes one decision simultaneously. As single-round
DRDA can be viewed as a discounted variant of FTRL in NFGs, we compare it with vanilla FTRL and
the FTRL variant under the optimistic gradient method (OFTRL for short; see Boone & Mertikopoulos
(2024)). We also compare the variant of regret matching under the extragradient method (ERM+ for
short; see Farina et al. (2024)) and use NashConv as the performance metric for all algorithms. The
payoff settings for three NFG scenarios (i.e., 2-action matrix game, 3-action bimatrix game, and
3-action 3-player game) are provided in Appendix F.1, and the learning curves are shown in Figure 1.
In the 2-action matrix game and 3-action bimatrix game, while the average iterates of FTRL can
converge to Nash equilibrium, its last iterates cannot. OFTRL as well as ERM+ and MMD, however,
exhibit last-iterate convergence to NE at an exponential rate. For DRDA, the last iterates converge to a
rest point in each single round separated by the vertical lines. This aligns with the linear convergence
result in Theorem 2. Moreover, the rest-point policy sequence converges and approaches NE under
multiple learning rounds. This is consistent with the statement in Theorem 4. Besides, the overall
convergence rate is near-exponential since the curve drawn by the stationary policies is roughly linear.
In the 3-player NFG (with 33 = 27 joint actions), MMD still converges, and ERM+ converges after an
oscillation. However, the average iterate of FTRL and the last iterate of OFTRL no longer converge to
NE. Actually, there is no theoretical guarantee for them to work in multiplayer games. In comparison,
the single-round/multi-round convergence of DRDA is still guaranteed in this scenario.

5.2                        E XTENSIVE -F ORM G AME (EFG), M ARKOV G AME (MG) & T YPICAL POSG

EFGs are games where each of the players makes multiple sequential decisions based on imperfect
information about the global history. Since each player in an EFG may have multiple decision points,
the size of the action space in the equivalent NFG representation can be exponential in the size
of the game tree. Therefore, it is computationally impractical to directly apply some of the NFG-
based methods to EFGs without considering the game-tree structure. Extending the idea of regret
matching, counterfactual regret minimization (CFR) (Zinkevich et al., 2007) is the most commonly
used equilibrium-learning algorithm in EFGs. Empirically, CFR+ (see (Bowling et al., 2015)) has an
improved average-iterate/last-iterate performance. Regularized Nash dynamics (R-NaD for short;
see Perolat et al. (2021; 2022)) is a multi-round learning algorithm that also exhibits last-iterate
convergence in EFGs. Here, we compare CFR+ , (stable) predictive CFR+ (PCFR+ for short; see
Farina et al. (2021a; 2024)), extragradient CFR+ (ECFR+ for short), and R-NaD in multiplayer Kuhn
poker scenarios. The game details are provided in Appendix F.2.


                                                                                                                                         9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                        3-player Kuhn poker                                                                       4-player Kuhn poker                                                            soccer game
             105                                                                                      103                                                                                        104
                                                             CFR+ (average iterate)                                                                    CFR+ (average iterate)                                                   FP (average iterate)
                                                                 +                                                                                                                                                              PSRO (meta strategy)
                                                             CFR (last iterate)                                                                        CFR+ (last iterate)
                                                                                                      102                                                                                        102
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                ED (last iterate)
                                                             PCFR + (last iterate)                                                                     PCFR + (last iterate)                                                    DRDA (last iterate)
                                                             ECFR + (last iterate)                                                                     ECFR + (last iterate)
                                                             MMD (last iterate)
                                                                                                      101                                              MMD (last iterate)
                                                             R-NaD (last iterate)                                                                      R-NaD (last iterate)                      100
                                                             DRDA (last iterate)                                                                       DRDA (last iterate)
             100                                                                                      100
                                                                                                                                                                                                10-2
 NashConv


                                                                                           NashConv


                                                                                                                                                                                     NashConv
                                                                                                           -1
                                                                                                      10
                                                                                                                                                                                                10-4
                                                                                                           -2
                                                                                                      10

                                                                                                                                                                                                10-6
                 -5                                                                                        -3
            10                                                                                        10

                                                                                                                                                                                                10-8
                                                                                                           -4
                                                                                                      10

                                                                                                                                                                                                10-10
                                                                                                      10-5


            10-10                                                                                     10-6                                                                                      10-12
                      0   0.2   0.4   0.6   0.8   1    1.2      1.4    1.6    1.8      2                        0   0.2   0.4   0.6   0.8   1    1.2      1.4    1.6    1.8      2                      0   20   40        60           80             100
                                              Iterations                             106                                                Iterations                             106                                Iterations



                          Figure 2: NashConv learning curves in (multiplayer) EFG and (infinite-horizon) MG


As is shown in Figure 2 (left & mid), while the average iterates of CFR+ can converge, its last iterates
oscillate. R-NaD has a multi-round learning pattern close to DRDA, but the process is much slower
and suffers from an oscillation in the 4-player scenario. While ECFR+ and MMD have impressive
performance in NFGs, they do not work when it comes to multiplayer EFGs. PCFR+ exhibits certain
last-iterate convergence in the 3-player case but oscillates when it comes to 4 players. The 20-round
DRDA clearly outperforms the other algorithms in 3-player/4-player Kuhn poker.
Markov games can be regarded as a special case of POSGs, where each player has full observation
of the global state. The Markovian property guarantees that it is sufficient to use current states to
represent histories and decision points. Since there are finite distinct decision points, tabular DRDA
can solve infinite-horizon MGs like the soccer game (see Appendix F.3), where we compare DRDA
with three other general methods of equilibrium learning: FP (Brown, 1951), PSRO (Lanctot et al.,
2017), and ED (Lockhart et al., 2019). While both FP and PSRO require preserving history policies,
ED only uses last-iterate policies like DRDA. Since the evaluation of value functions requires repeated
dynamic programming in each iteration, we only run a total of 100 iterations (5 rounds for DRDA) to
save time. As is shown in Figure 2 (right), while the 5-round DRDA has not converged in each single
round of 20 iterations, the overall convergence is significantly faster than the comparative algorithms.
Besides EFG and MG, we also run multi-round DRDA in typical POSGs like the tiger games (see
Wiggers (2015)) and find that it consistently outperforms the existing methods like heuristic search
value iteration (HSVI) and sequence form linear program (SFLP). The comparison details are placed
in Appendix F.4. Figure 5 provides the NashConv learning curves of 10-round DRDA under different
regularization parameters ϵ ∈ {0.05, 0.1, 0.15} in Adversarial Tiger with time horizon H ∈ {2, 3, 4}.

6                 C ONCLUSION
In this paper, a multi-round equilibrium-learning system, based on discounted FTRL and named
DRDA, is introduced under the framework of POSG. We define a generalized Nash distribution in
POSGs and further show that the rest point of single-round DRDA can be characterized by this QRE
concept (Theorem 1). We prove linear last-iterate convergence of DRDA to its rest point in a single
round under the assumption of game hypomonotonicity (Theorem 2). We further prove that the limit
point of multi-round DRDA must be a Nash equilibrium under the uniqueness assumption (Theorem
3 and Theorem 4). In our experiments, the discrete-time implementation of multi-round DRDA
manages to approach Nash equilibrium in various games represented by POSGs. The last-iterate
convergence of single-round/multi-round DRDA is consistent with theory. Besides, like magnetic
mirror descent and extragradient regret matching, multi-round DRDA achieves a near-exponential rate
in NFGs. For EFG, MG, and typical POSG, DRDA can outperform the existing baseline algorithms.
Limitation & Future work. One limitation of this work is that we have not theoretically examined
the condition for the policy sequence of multi-round DRDA to converge despite the simulation results.
It is also left for future work to examine whether the requirement of a unique equilibrium point can
be removed in establishing the relationship to Nash equilibrium in multiplayer games.


                                                                                                                                        10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This work was supported in part by the National Natural Science Foundation of China under Grant
62293541 and Grant 62136008, in part by Beijing Natural Science Foundation under Grant 4232056,
and in part by Beijing Nova Program under Grant 20240484514.

R EFERENCES
Kenshi Abe, Mitsuki Sakamoto, and Atsushi Iwasaki. Mutation-driven follow the regularized leader
  for last-iterate convergence in zero-sum games. In Uncertainty in Artificial Intelligence, pp. 1–10.
  PMLR, 2022.
Kenshi Abe, Kaito Ariu, Mitsuki Sakamoto, Kentaro Toyoshima, and Atsushi Iwasaki. Last-iterate
  convergence with full and noisy feedback in two-player zero-sum games. In International Confer-
  ence on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics, pp. 7999–8028. PMLR, 2023.
Kenshi Abe, Kaito Ariu, Mitsuki Sakamoto, and Atsushi Iwasaki. Adaptively perturbed mirror
  descent for learning in games. In International Conference on Machine Learning, 2024.
Khaled Alomar and Tatjana Chavdarova. On the hypomonotone class of variational inequalities. In
 OPT 2024: Optimization for Machine Learning, 2024.
Sanjeev Arora, Elad Hazan, and Satyen Kale. The multiplicative weights update method: A meta-
  algorithm and applications. Theory of computing, 8(1):121–164, 2012.
Anton Bakhtin, David J Wu, Adam Lerer, Jonathan Gray, Athul Paul Jacob, Gabriele Farina, Alexan-
  der H Miller, and Noam Brown. Mastering the game of no-press Diplomacy via human-regularized
  reinforcement learning and planning. In International Conference on Learning Representations,
  2023.
Victor Boone and Panayotis Mertikopoulos. The equivalence of dynamic and strategic stability under
  regularized learning in games. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 36, 2024.
Michael Bowling, Neil Burch, Michael Johanson, and Oskari Tammelin. Heads-up limit hold’em
 poker is solved. Science, 347(6218):145–149, 2015.
Mario Bravo, David Leslie, and Panayotis Mertikopoulos. Bandit learning in concave N-person
 games. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 31, 2018.
George W Brown. Iterative solution of games by fictitious play. Act. Anal. Prod Allocation, 13(1):
  374, 1951.
Yang Cai, Argyris Oikonomou, and Weiqiang Zheng. Finite-time last-iterate convergence for learning
  in multi-player games. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 35:33904–33919,
  2022.
Shicong Cen, Yuting Wei, and Yuejie Chi. Fast policy extragradient methods for competitive games
  with entropy regularization. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 34:27952–27964,
  2021.
Shicong Cen, Yuejie Chi, Simon S Du, and Lin Xiao. Faster last-iterate convergence of policy
  optimization in zero-sum Markov games. In International Conference on Learning Representations,
  2023.
Nicolo Cesa-Bianchi and Gábor Lugosi. Prediction, learning, and games. Cambridge university
  press, 2006.
Pierre Coucheney, Bruno Gaujal, and Panayotis Mertikopoulos. Penalty-regulated dynamics and
  robust learning procedures in games. Mathematics of Operations Research, 40(3):611–633, 2015.
Constantinos Daskalakis and Ioannis Panageas. Last-iterate convergence: Zero-sum games and
  constrained min-max optimization. 10th Innovations in Theoretical Computer Science, 2019.


                                                 11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Constantinos Daskalakis, Maxwell Fishelson, and Noah Golowich. Near-optimal no-regret learning
  in general games. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 34:27604–27616, 2021.
Aurélien Delage, Olivier Buffet, Jilles S Dibangoye, and Abdallah Saffidine. HSVI can solve zero-
  sum partially observable stochastic games. Dynamic Games and Applications, 14(4):751–805,
  2024.
Gabriele Farina, Christian Kroer, and Tuomas Sandholm. Faster game solving via predictive blackwell
  approachability: Connecting regret matching and mirror descent. In Proceedings of the AAAI
  Conference on Artificial Intelligence, volume 35, pp. 5363–5371, 2021a.
Gabriele Farina, Christian Kroer, et al. Better regularization for sequential decision spaces fast
  convergence rates for Nash, correlated, and team equilibria. In EC’21: Proceedings of the 22nd
 ACM Conference on Economics and Computation, 2021b.
Gabriele Farina, Julien Grand-Clément, Christian Kroer, Chung-Wei Lee, and Haipeng Luo. Regret
  matching+: (In)stability and fast convergence in games. Advances in Neural Information Processing
  Systems, 36, 2024.
Monique Florenzano. General equilibrium analysis: Existence and optimality properties of equilibria.
 Springer Science & Business Media, 2003.
Dian Gadjov and Lacra Pavel. On the exact convergence to Nash equilibrium in hypomonotone
  regimes under full and partial-decision information. IEEE Transactions on Automatic Control, 68
  (8):4539–4553, 2023.
Bolin Gao and Lacra Pavel. On passivity, reinforcement learning, and higher order learning in
  multiagent finite games. IEEE Transactions on Automatic Control, 66(1):121–136, 2021.
Eduard Gorbunov, Nicolas Loizou, and Gauthier Gidel. Extragradient method: O(1/K) last-
  iterate convergence for monotone variational inequalities and connections with cocoercivity. In
  International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics, pp. 366–402. PMLR, 2022a.
Eduard Gorbunov, Adrien Taylor, and Gauthier Gidel. Last-iterate convergence of optimistic gradient
  method for monotone variational inequalities. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
  35:21858–21870, 2022b.
Elad Hazan et al. Introduction to online convex optimization. Foundations and Trends® in Optimiza-
  tion, 2(3-4):157–325, 2016.
Athul Paul Jacob, David J Wu, Gabriele Farina, Adam Lerer, Hengyuan Hu, Anton Bakhtin, Jacob
  Andreas, and Noam Brown. Modeling strong and human-like gameplay with KL-regularized
  search. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 9695–9728. PMLR, 2022.
Daphne Koller, Nimrod Megiddo, and Bernhard Von Stengel. Fast algorithms for finding randomized
  strategies in game trees. In Proceedings of the twenty-sixth annual ACM symposium on Theory of
  computing, pp. 750–759, 1994.
Christian Kroer, Kevin Waugh, Fatma Kılınç-Karzan, and Tuomas Sandholm. Faster algorithms for
  extensive-form game solving via improved smoothing functions. Mathematical Programming, 179
  (1-2):385–417, 2020.
Harold W Kuhn. A simplified two-person poker. Contributions to the Theory of Games, 1:97–103,
 1950.
Marc Lanctot, Vinicius Zambaldi, Audrunas Gruslys, Angeliki Lazaridou, Karl Tuyls, Julien Pérolat,
 David Silver, and Thore Graepel. A unified game-theoretic approach to multiagent reinforcement
 learning. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 30, 2017.
Chung-Wei Lee, Christian Kroer, and Haipeng Luo. Last-iterate convergence in extensive-form
  games. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 34:14293–14305, 2021.
David S Leslie and Edmund J Collins. Individual Q-learning in normal form games. SIAM Journal
  on Control and Optimization, 44(2):495–514, 2005.


                                                12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Pengdeng Li, Shuxin Li, Xinrun Wang, Jakub Cernỳ, Youzhi Zhang, Stephen McAleer, Hau Chan,
  and Bo An. Grasper: A generalist pursuer for pursuit-evasion problems. In Proceedings of the 23rd
  International Conference on Autonomous Agents and Multiagent Systems, pp. 1147–1155, 2024.
Mingyang Liu, Asuman Ozdaglar, Tiancheng Yu, and Kaiqing Zhang. The power of regularization in
 solving extensive-form games. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2023.
Edward Lockhart, Marc Lanctot, Julien Pérolat, Jean-Baptiste Lespiau, Dustin Morrill, Finbarr
  Timbers, and Karl Tuyls. Computing approximate equilibria in sequential adversarial games by
  exploitability descent. In Proceedings of the 28th International Joint Conference on Artificial
  Intelligence, pp. 464–470, 2019.
Runyu Lu, Yuanheng Zhu, Dongbin Zhao, Yu Liu, and You He. Last-iterate convergence to approxi-
  mate Nash equilibria in multiplayer imperfect information games. IEEE Transactions on Neural
  Networks and Learning Systems, pp. 1–15, 2024. doi:10.1109/TNNLS.2024.3516693.
Richard D McKelvey and Thomas R Palfrey. Quantal response equilibria for normal form games.
  Games and economic behavior, 10(1):6–38, 1995.
Panayotis Mertikopoulos and Zhengyuan Zhou. Learning in games with continuous action sets and
  unknown payoff functions. Mathematical Programming, 173:465–507, 2019.
Panayotis Mertikopoulos, Christos Papadimitriou, and Georgios Piliouras. Cycles in adversarial
  regularized learning. In Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth Annual ACM-SIAM Symposium on
  Discrete Algorithms, pp. 2703–2717. SIAM, 2018.
Hukukane Nikaidô and Kazuo Isoda. Note on non-cooperative convex games. 1955.
Julien Perolat, Remi Munos, Jean-Baptiste Lespiau, Shayegan Omidshafiei, Mark Rowland, Pedro
  Ortega, Neil Burch, Thomas Anthony, David Balduzzi, Bart De Vylder, et al. From Poincaré
  recurrence to convergence in imperfect information games: Finding equilibrium via regularization.
  In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 8525–8535. PMLR, 2021.
Julien Perolat, Bart De Vylder, Daniel Hennes, Eugene Tarassov, Florian Strub, Vincent de Boer, Paul
  Muller, Jerome T Connor, Neil Burch, Thomas Anthony, et al. Mastering the game of Stratego
  with model-free multiagent reinforcement learning. Science, 378(6623):990–996, 2022.
Muhammed Sayin, Kaiqing Zhang, David Leslie, Tamer Basar, and Asuman Ozdaglar. Decentralized
 Q-learning in zero-sum Markov games. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 34:
 18320–18334, 2021.
Shai Shalev-Shwartz and Yoram Singer. Convex repeated games and fenchel duality. Advances in
  Neural Information Processing Systems, 19, 2006.
Samuel Sokota, Ryan D’Orazio, J Zico Kolter, Nicolas Loizou, Marc Lanctot, Ioannis Mitliagkas,
  Noam Brown, and Christian Kroer. A unified approach to reinforcement learning, quantal re-
  sponse equilibria, and two-player zero-sum games. In International Conference on Learning
  Representations, 2023.
Richard S Sutton and Andrew G Barto. Reinforcement learning: An introduction. MIT press, 2018.
Akira Takayama and Takayama Akira. Mathematical economics. Cambridge University Press, 1985.
Zhentao Tang, Yuanheng Zhu, Dongbin Zhao, and Simon M. Lucas. Enhanced rolling horizon
  evolution algorithm with opponent model learning. IEEE Transactions on Games, 15(1):5–15,
  2023. doi:10.1109/TG.2020.3022698.
Peter D Taylor and Leo B Jonker. Evolutionary stable strategies and game dynamics. Mathematical
  Biosciences, 40(1-2):145–156, 1978.
Chen-Yu Wei, Chung-Wei Lee, Mengxiao Zhang, and Haipeng Luo. Linear last-iterate convergence
  in constrained saddle-point optimization. In International Conference on Learning Representations,
  2021.


                                                13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Auke Wiggers. Structure in the value function of two-player zero-sum games of incomplete informa-
  tion. Master’s Thesis, University of Amsterdam, 2015.
Yuanheng Zhu and Dongbin Zhao. Online minimax Q network learning for two-player zero-sum
  Markov games. IEEE Transactions on Neural Networks and Learning Systems, 33(3):1228–1241,
  2022. doi:10.1109/TNNLS.2020.3041469.
Yuanheng Zhu, Weifan Li, Mengchen Zhao, Jianye Hao, and Dongbin Zhao. Empirical policy
  optimization for n-player Markov games. IEEE Transactions on Cybernetics, 53(10):6443–6455,
  2023. doi:10.1109/TCYB.2022.3179775.
Martin Zinkevich, Michael Johanson, Michael Bowling, and Carmelo Piccione. Regret minimization
 in games with incomplete information. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 20,
 2007.


                                               14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A     L AST-I TERATE C ONVERGENCE OF M ORE FTRL VARIANTS
Besides discounted updates, the ideas of optimistic gradient methods and extragradient methods can
also be employed to mitigate the recurrence behavior of FTRL and facilitate last-iterate convergence.
Note that the rest point of (1) is a (⃗yr , ⃗πr ) pair, where ⃗yr is a solution to the variational inequality
problem (VIP) of F (⃗y ) = 0 under F (⃗y ) = −w(⃗   ⃗ σ (⃗y )), and the discrete-time counterpart of (1) can
be written as ⃗yt+1 = ⃗yt − ηF (⃗yt ).
Optimistic gradient method. Instead of using the current gradient F (⃗yt ) to update, the optimistic
gradient method uses (2F (⃗yt ) − F (⃗yt−1 )). The update formula then becomes ⃗yt+1 = ⃗yt − 2ηF (⃗yt ) +
ηF (⃗yt−1 ). This method turns the original FTRL into the optimistic FTRL (OFTRL).
 Extragradient method. Instead of using F (⃗yt ), the extragradient method uses the gradient at
 the point after one update attempt: F (⃗yt − ηF (⃗yt )). The update formula then becomes ⃗yt+1 =
⃗yt − ηF (⃗yt − ηF (⃗yt )). This turns the original FTRL into what we call extragradient FTRL (EFTRL).
In the field of optimization, both the optimistic gradient method and the extragradient method
guarantee O(1/I) last-iterate convergence to the solution to the VIP under monotonicity assumptions
(Gorbunov et al., 2022b;a), where I denotes iterations. For OFTRL, a near-optimal Õ(1) regret
bound that corresponds to a Õ(1/I) convergence rate is also proved (Daskalakis et al., 2021), and
last-iterate convergence to Nash equilibrium is guaranteed in two-player zero-sum games under the
unique equilibrium assumption (Daskalakis & Panageas, 2019). For EFTRL, we find that it exhibits a
learning behavior similar to OFTRL in various game scenarios.
Reward regularization. Besides the gradient methods, Perolat et al. (2021; 2022) demonstrate that
                                              π i (xit ,ait )
divergence regularization − Pr(htη|π−i ) log πi (x      i ,ai ) on rewards can lead to last-iterate convergence
                                              base      t t
for FTRL. With this idea, a multi-round learning algorithm, regularized Nash dynamics (R-NaD),
is also proposed to solve two-player zero-sum or monotone EFGs. As DRDA is also a multi-round
learning system that is capable of dealing with EFGs, R-NaD is directly compared with multi-round
DRDA in our experiment section.


                                                     15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


B     AUXILIARY R ESULTS

B.1   R ELATED TO ACTION VALUES

The existing research on reinforcement learning has established a series of theoretical results when
analyzing Markov decision processes (MDPs). As POSGs generalize MDPs by introducing multiple
players and partial observations, some existing results related to action values in MDPs/POMDPs can
also be generalized to POSGs. The following two lemmas will be used in our subsequent proofs.
First, the advantage function has a well-known property:
Lemma 5 (Property of Advantage).
                                              X
                                                     π i (xit , ait )A⃗πi (ht , ait ) = 0
                                               ait


Proof. By definition of the history-based advantage:

                                         A⃗πi (ht , ait ) = Q⃗πi (ht , ait ) − V⃗πi (ht )

Therefore, we have:

                                X
                                       π i (xit , ait )A⃗πi (ht , ait )
                                 ait
                                X
                                       π i (xit , ait ) Q⃗πi (ht , ait ) − V⃗πi (ht )

                            =
                                 ait
                                X                                                          X
                            =          π i (xit , ait )Q⃗πi (ht , ait ) − V⃗πi (ht )              π i (xit , ait )
                                 ait                                                        ait

                            = V⃗πi (ht ) − V⃗πi (ht ) = 0


Second, the well-known lemma of policy difference also holds in POSGs:
Lemma 6 (Policy Difference).
                                                              "T −1                                                       #
                                                               X
                 Vπii ,⃗π−i (ht ) − V⃗πi (ht ) = E                        γ   k−t
                                                                                    A⃗πi (hk , aik )   ht , π†i , ⃗π −i
                    †
                                                                 k=t


Proof. First, we have:
                     X
                            π†i (xik , aik )A⃗πi (hk , aik )
                      aik
                     X
                 =          π†i (xik , aik )Q⃗πi (hk , aik ) − V⃗πi (hk )
                      aik
                                                                                           !
                        X                                             Ri (sk , ⃗ak , sk+1 )
                 =                Pr      hk+1 |hk , π†i , ⃗π −i                                            − V⃗πi (hk )
                     hk+1 ⊐hk
                                                                              + γV⃗πi (hk+1 )


                                                                   16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Now we can expand the RHS expectation:
                   "T −1                                         #
                    X
                E        γ k−t A⃗πi (hk , aik ) ht , π†i , ⃗π −i
                               k=t
                       T
                       X −1
                               γ k−t E A⃗πi (hk , aik ) ht , π†i , ⃗π −i

                   =
                       k=t
                       T
                       X −1             X                                  X
                   =           γ k−t            Pr hk |ht , π†i , ⃗π −i          π†i (xik , aik )A⃗πi (hk , aik )
                       k=t             hk ⊐ht                              aik
                       T
                       X −1               X
                               γ k−t              Pr hk+1 |ht , π†i , ⃗π −i Ri (sk , ⃗ak , sk+1 )

                   =
                       k=t             hk+1 ⊐ht
                     T −1                                                
                       X           X
                              k−t                     i      −i
                                                                  i
                           γ            Pr hk |ht , π† , ⃗π     V⃗π (hk )
                     k=t+1       hk ⊐ht
                                                                          
                   +
                                                                         
                         −1
                                                                          
                     TX           X                                      
                              k−t                     i      −i
                    −                                            i
                            γ            Pr hk |ht , π† , ⃗π     V⃗π (hk )
                                k=t         hk ⊐ht

                   = Vπii ,⃗π−i (ht ) − V⃗πi (ht )
                        †


which derives the LHS value difference in the equality.

B.2    R ELATED TO I NDIVIDUAL C ONCAVITY

Definition 8. A finite-action game is individually concave if for any i ∈ N , any ⃗π −i ∈ Π−i , any
π1i , π2i ∈ Πi , and any α ∈ [0, 1]:
                  ui ((1 − α)π1i + απ2i , ⃗π −i ) ≥ (1 − α)ui (π1i , ⃗π −i ) + αui (π2i , ⃗π −i )

Note that the individual concavity defined here follows the common definitions in games with a
continuous action space (Bravo et al., 2018; Cai et al., 2022). In the finite-action setting that we
consider, the policy space corresponds to the continuous action space. In the context of POSGs,
π i = (1 − α)π1i + απ2i means that π i (xi , ·) = (1 − α)π1i (xi , ·) + απ2i (xi , ·) at each decision point
xi ∈ X i . The individual concavity is well-defined in the sense that π1i , π2i ∈ Πi ⇒ π i ∈ Πi . Also
note that when T = |S| = |O| = 1, the POSG is reduced to an NFG, and the individual concavity
always holds since ui (π i , ⃗π −i ) is linear in the individual policy π i in NFGs.
Under the assumption of individual concavity, it is direct to prove the same NashConv bound as the
one in Theorem 3 for the rest point of DA or single-round DRDA without relying on the uniqueness of
the rest point (see Theorem 5). It is therefore mathematically correct as well to replace the uniqueness
assumption in Theorem 4 with individual concavity. This further suggests the feasibility of applying
single-round/multi-round DRDA to a broader class of games with multiple Nash equilibria.
Theorem 5. If the POSG is individually concave, then every rest point (⃗yr , ⃗πr ) in DA induces a Nash
equilibrium ⃗πr , and every rest point (⃗yr , ⃗πr ) in single-round DA (under ϵ > 0 and ⃗πbase ) induces a
                                                                                             1
joint policy ⃗πr with NashConv at most ϵn log K t γ t , where K =
                                                       P
                                                                              max
                                                                              i   i     πi   (xi ,a)
                                                                                                     .
                                                                                           i∈N,x ∈X ,a∈A            base


Proof. For any i ∈ N, π i ∈ Πi , and α ∈ (0, 1], define:
                                      ⃗π† = (π†i , ⃗πr−i ) = ((1 − α)πri + απ i , ⃗πr−i )

Using Lemma 6, we have:
                                                           "T −1                                                #
                                                            X
                   Vπii ,⃗π−i (ht ) − V⃗πir (ht ) = E               γ k−t A⃗πi r (hk , aik ) ht , π†i , ⃗πr−i
                       †   r
                                                              k=t



                                                               17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Therefore:
                                                           h                i
                                ui (⃗π† ) − ui (⃗πr ) = Eh0 Vπii ,⃗π−i (h0 ) − Eh0 V⃗πir (h0 )

                                                                †    r
                                        "T −1                             #
                                          X
                                                 k i        i      i   −i
                                = E           γ A⃗πr (hk , ak ) π† , ⃗πr
                                         k=0
                                     T
                                     X −1        X                              X
                                 =          γk          Pr hk |π†i , ⃗πr−i               π†i (xik , aik )A⃗πi r (hk , aik )
                                     k=0         hk                                aik


By assumption on the individual concavity:
                                             ui (⃗π† ) ≥ (1 − α)ui (⃗πr ) + αui (π i , ⃗πr−i )

Combining the two formulas above, we have:
         T
         X −1        X                                 X
                γk             Pr hk |π†i , ⃗πr−i                π†i (xik , aik )A⃗πi r (hk , aik ) ≥ α ui (π i , ⃗πr−i ) − ui (⃗πr )


         k=0           hk                                aik


Using Lemma 5, we have:
             X                                          X
                 π†i (xik , aik )A⃗πi r (hk , aik ) = α   (π i − πri )(xik , aik )A⃗πi r (hk , aik )
                         aik                                                 aik


Therefore:
     T
     X −1    X                     X i
          γk   Pr hk |π†i , ⃗πr−i   (π − πri )(xik , aik )A⃗πi r (hk , aik ) ≥ ui (π i , ⃗πr−i ) − ui (⃗πr )
       k=0          hk                                 aik


Letting α → 0+ , we have:
           T
           X −1        X                         X
                  γk            Pr (hk |⃗πr )           (π i − πri )(xik , aik )A⃗πi r (hk , aik ) ≥ ui (π i , ⃗πr−i ) − ui (⃗πr )          (11)
           k=0           hk                      aik


 Since (⃗yr , ⃗πr ) is a rest point of DA (ϵ = 0) or single-round DRDA (ϵ > 0), we have:
⃗yr = ⃗v (⃗πr ) ⇒ πri (xi ) ∈ arg max
                                              i i i
                                              π (x ), v (⃗πr )(xi ) − ϵDKL π i (xi )||πbase
                                                                                       i
                                                                                            (xi )                                        (∀i ∈ N, xi ∈ X i )

                                      π i (xi )∈∆(A)


By definition of ⃗v (·) (3), it holds for any i ∈ N, xi ∈ X i :
                                                                                                                                     !
                     X                           X
                                                       πri (xi , ai )A⃗πi r (h, ai ) − ϵDKL             πri (xi )||πbase
                                                                                                                    i
                                                                                                                         (xi )

                               Pr (h|⃗πr )
                    h∈xi                         ai
                                                                                                                                     !
                     X                           X
                                                        π (x , a )A⃗πi r (h, ai ) − ϵDKL
                                                             i   i    i                                   i    i i
                                                                                                                      (xi )

                ≥              Pr (h|⃗πr )                                                              π (x )||πbase
                     h∈xi                        ai

With inequality (11), it is clear:
                                       T
                                       X −1        X
ui (π i , ⃗πr−i ) − ui (⃗πr ) ≤ ϵ             γk             Pr (hk |⃗πr ) DKL π i (xi )||πbase
                                                                                           i
                                                                                                (xi ) − DKL π i (xi )||πbase
                                                                                                                        i
                                                                                                                             (xi )


                                       k=0             hk
                                       T
                                       X −1        X                                                  T
                                                                                                      X −1
                                  ≤ϵ          γk             Pr (hk |⃗πr ) log K ≤ ϵ log K                    γk
                                       k=0             hk                                             k=0


When ϵ = 0, the joint policy ⃗πr is clearly a Nash equilibrium.


                                                                            18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


C     O MITTED P ROOFS
C.1    P ROOF OF L EMMA 1

Proof. Recall that the score ⃗y in single-round DRDA (4) has the following integral form:
                                                   Z t
                                     −t i
                      i i i                 i i
                     yt (x , a ) = e y0 (x , a ) +     e−(t−τ ) v i (⃗πτ )(xi , ai )dτ
                                                               0

When the POSG has a finite horizon, the value V⃗πi is bounded since the reward functions Ri
                                                                      i
are bounded. When   P∞ thekPOSG1 has an infinite horizon, the value V⃗π is still bounded since we have
0 < γ < 1 and k=0 γ = 1−γ . Therefore, in either case, the advantage A⃗πi and advantage value
v i (⃗π ) are also bounded.
                       Rt                    t
On the other hand, 0 e−(t−τ ) dτ = eτ −t |0 = 1 − e−t ∈ [0, 1). Since v i (⃗πτ ) is always bounded,
with the basic property of integrals, we directly prove the boundedness of the score ⃗y .

C.2    P ROOF OF L EMMA 2

Proof. First, we prove:
                                         (                                     )
                                             X
                    µ = arg max                  µ(a) (r(a) − log µ(a))            ⇒ µ(a) ∝ er(a)
                             µ∈∆(A)        a∈A

Write the corresponding optimization problem:
                                         X
                            
                            
                              maximize       µ(a) (r(a) − log µ(a))
                                         a∈A
                            
                            
                                    X
                              s.t.      µ(a) = 1
                            
                                    a∈A
                            
                            
                                    µ(a) ≥ 0, ∀a ∈ A
                            

Using the Lagrange multiplier, we have:
                                                                                             !
                          X                                                   X
                    L=         µ(a) (r(a) − log µ(a)) − λ                           µ(a) − 1
                                   a∈A                                        a∈A

                          ∂L                           µ(a)
                               = 0 ⇒ r(a) − log µ(a) +        −λ=0
                         ∂µ(a)                         µ(a)
                                          ⇒ µ(a) = er(a)−λ−1 ⇒ µ(a) ∝ er(a)

By definition of σ i (·) (5), we have:
                                                             X                                          
                                                            
                                                               π i (xi , ai )yti (xi , ai )             
                                                                                                         
               πti (xi ) = σ i (yti )(xi ) = arg max               ai ∈A
                                               π i (xi )∈∆(A) 
                                                              − ϵDKL π i (xi )||πbase i
                                                                                           (xi ) 
                                                                                                 
                                (                                                                 )
                                                                                    i i i

                                   X                    1                        π   (x , a  )
                = arg max              π i (xi , ai )     y i (xi , ai ) − log i
                 π i (xi )∈∆(A)    i
                                                        ϵ t                     πbase (xi , ai )
                                  a ∈A
                                                        1 i i i
                                                                                               
                                                                                  i       i i
                                X                        y    (x  , a  ) + log π      (x  , a )  
                = arg max              π i (xi , ai )  ϵ t                       base           
                 π i (xi )∈∆(A)  i                      − log π i (xi , ai )
                                                                                                  
                                  a ∈A

Therefore:
                                 1 i i i                                                                1 i i i
      πti (xi , ai ) ∝ exp                          i
                                  y (x , a ) + log πbase (xi , ai )           i
                                                                           = πbase (xi , ai ) exp        y (x , a )
                                 ϵ t                                                                    ϵ t


                                                          19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


C.3        P ROOF OF L EMMA 3

Proof. For any i ∈ N and any own information set xit , define ⃗π† = (π†i , π∗−i ). Let ⃗π‡ be a joint
policy that equals ⃗π∗ initially and switches to ⃗π† after player i reaches xit . By definition of GND:
                                                                                                
                                  T
                                  X −1    X                                   X
                  i
                                       γk   DKL π∗i (xik )||πbasei
                                                                      (xik )

            Eh0 V⃗π (h0 ) − ϵ     ∗
                                                                                    Pr (hk |⃗π∗ )
                                                    k=0         xik                                                hk ∈xik
                                                                                                                   
                           h              i         T
                                                    X −1        X                                    X
             ≥ Eh0 V⃗πi‡ (h0 ) − ϵ                         γk         DKL π‡i (xik )||πbase
                                                                                        i
                                                                                             (xik )

                                                                                                       Pr (hk |⃗π∗ )
                                                    k=0         xik                                                hk ∈xik


For both sides, eliminate the terms related to the histories outside of the subtrees whose roots belong
to xit , we have:
                                                                                                    
       X                                 T
                                         X −1       X                                X
            Pr (ht |⃗π∗ ) V⃗πi (ht ) − ϵ      γ k−t   DKL π∗i (xik )||πbase
                                                                         i
                                                                             (xik )

                                      ∗
                                                                                        Pr (hk |⃗π∗ )
      ht ∈xit                                          k=t             xik ⊐xit                                              hk ∈xik
                                                                                                                               
       X                                              T
                                                      X −1                X                                      X
                Pr (ht |⃗π∗ ) V⃗πi† (ht ) − ϵ                γ k−t                DKL π†i (xik )||πbase
                                                                                                    i
                                                                                                         (xik )

  ≥                                                                                                                Pr (hk |⃗π∗ )
      ht ∈xit                                          k=t             xik ⊐xit                                              hk ∈xik


For any π i ∈ Πi and α ∈ [0, 1], we let π†i = (1 − α)π∗i + απ i and define:
                                                                                                       
            X                                 T
                                              X −1       X                                X
                Pr (ht |⃗π∗ ) V⃗πi† (ht ) − ϵ      γ k−t   DKL π†i (xik )||πbase
                                                                             i
                                                                                  (xik )

g(α) =                                                                                     Pr (hk |⃗π∗ )
                  ht ∈xit                                          k=t            xik ⊐xit                                              hk ∈xik
                                                                                                                                         
                  X                                                T
                                                                   X −1             X                                       X
                            Pr (ht |⃗π∗ ) V⃗πi∗ (ht ) − ϵ                 γ k−t              DKL π∗i (xik )||πbase
                                                                                                               i
                                                                                                                    (xik )

       −                                                                                                                     Pr (hk |⃗π∗ )
                 ht ∈xit                                           k=t            xik ⊐xit                                              hk ∈xik


Clearly, g(0) = 0 and ∀α ∈ (0, 1], g(α) ≤ 0, which yields:
                                                                   ∇g(α) |α→0+ ≤ 0                                                                  (12)

Using Lemma 6, we have:
                                                    T
                                                    X −1              X                              X
             V⃗πi† (ht ) − V⃗πi∗ (ht ) =                   γ k−t            Pr (ht → hk |⃗π† )                 π†i (xik , aik )A⃗πi ∗ (hk , aik )
                                                    k=t            hk ⊐ht                                aik


Therefore:
                                                                                                                                            
                 X                        T
                                          X −1               X                                    X
 g(α) =                   Pr (ht |⃗π∗ )             γ k−t             Pr (ht → hk |⃗π† )                 π†i (xik , aik )A⃗πi ∗ (hk , aik )−
                ht ∈xit                       k=t           hk ⊐ht                                 aik
                                                                                                             
     T
     X −1            X                                                                         X
            γ k−t               DKL π†i (xik )||πbase
                                                  i
                                                       (xik ) − DKL π∗i (xik )||πbase
                                                                                 i
                                                                                      (xik )

 ϵ                                                                                               Pr (hk |⃗π∗ )
     k=t            xik ⊐xit                                                                                                  hk ∈xik


Using Lemma 5, we have:
             X                                          X
                 π†i (xik , aik )A⃗πi ∗ (hk , aik ) = α   (π i − π∗i )(xik , aik )A⃗πi ∗ (hk , aik )
                            aik                                                   aik



                                                                              20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Then, we compute the derivative:
                                                                                                  X
                                                                                                       π†i (xik , aik )A⃗πi ∗ (hk , aik )+
                                                                                                                                                
                                                                      ∇ Pr (ht → hk |⃗π† )
                                          T −1            X                      aik
              X                           X                                                                    
∇g(α) =                Pr (ht |⃗π∗ )             γ k−t
                                                                                                              
                                                                                X                             
                                                             Pr (ht → hk |⃗π† )      i   i   i   i  i       i
             ht ∈xit                      k=t            hk ⊐ht                     (π − π )(x , a )A (hk , a )
                                                                                                               ∗        k   k    ⃗
                                                                                                                                 π∗          k
                                                                                                aik
                                                                                                                        
     T
     X −1            X          X                                                                         X
            γ k−t                 (π i − π∗i )(xik , aik ) log π†i (xik , aik ) − log πbase
                                                                                       i
                                                                                            (xik , aik )

−ϵ                                                                                                         Pr (hk |⃗π∗ )
      k=t           xik ⊐xit      aik                                                                                       hk ∈xik


Let α → 0+ and simplify the equality:
                                       −1
                                    X TX                     X                       X
        ∇g(α)|α→0+ =                                γ k−t            Pr (ht |⃗π∗ )         (π i − π∗i )(xik , aik )A⃗πi ∗ (hk , aik )
                                  ht ∈xit k=t               hk ⊐ht                   aik
                                                                                                                                       
             −1
           T
                                                                                                          !
           X          X X                                                        log π∗i (xik , aik )−         X
        −ϵ      γ k−t    (π i − π∗i )(xik , aik )                                    i
                                                                                                                        Pr (hk |⃗π∗ )
              k=t              xik ⊐xit     aik
                                                                                 log πbase (xik , aik )       hk ∈xik


Note that the following inequality always holds:
                   X                                           X
                       π i (xik , aik ) log π∗i (xik , aik ) ≤   π i (xik , aik ) log π i (xik , aik )
                           aik                                                 aik


Therefore, with the inequality (12), we have:
                          T
                          X −1               X                          X
                                   γ k−t                Pr (hk |⃗π∗ )         (π i − π∗i )(xik , aik )A⃗πi ∗ (hk , aik )
                           k=t              xk ⊐xt                      aik
                                            hk ∈xk
                            −1
                          T                                        i i         i       i
                                                                                            !
                          X                  X               DKL π   (x k )||π base (x k )   −
                        ≤     γ k−t        Pr (hk |⃗π∗ ) · ϵ       i    i      i       i

                          k=t       xk ⊐xt                   DKL π∗ (xk )||πbase (xk )
                                            hk ∈xk


Let π i (xik ) = π∗i (xik ) for all xik under k ≥ t + 1 and simplify the inequality:
                                                                                                              
                X                      X
                                           π∗i (xit , ait )A⃗πi ∗ (ht , ait ) − ϵDKL π∗i (xit )||πbase
                                                                                                  i
                                                                                                       (xit ) 

                      Pr (ht |⃗π∗ ) 
               ht ∈xit                            ait
                                                                                                     
               X                X
                                  π i (xit , ait )A⃗πi ∗ (ht , ait ) − ϵDKL π i (xit )||πbase
                                                                                         i
                                                                                              (xit ) 

             ≥   Pr (ht |⃗π∗ ) 
                ht ∈xit                           ait


                                                                         21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


C.4     P ROOF OF T HEOREM 1

Proof. Let ⃗yt = ⃗v (⃗π∗ ) and ⃗πt = ⃗π∗ . Compute (5) using the definition of ⃗v (·) (3):
                     i i i i
                       π (x ), yt (x ) − ϵDKL π i (xi )||πbase
                                                            i
                                                                (xi )

       arg max
       π i (xi )∈∆(A)
                                                                                                                
                                                       Pr (h|⃗π∗ ) A⃗πi ∗ (h, ai )
                                                  P
                        
                        X                                                                                       
                                                  h∈xi                                                           
    = arg max                      π i (xi , ai )       P                          − ϵDKL π i (xi )||πbase
                                                                                                      i
                                                                                                           (xi )
       π i (xi )∈∆(A) 
                      ai ∈A                                Pr (h|⃗π∗ )                                          
                                                                                                                 
                                                        h∈xi
                        (                                                                                                             !)
                            X                       X
                                                            π (x , a )A⃗πi ∗ (h, ai ) − ϵDKL
                                                             i    i       i                                 i   i   i
                                                                                                                         (xi )

    = arg max                      Pr (h|⃗π∗ )                                                             π (x )||πbase
       π i (xi )∈∆(A)
                            h∈xi                   ai ∈A


By Lemma 3, for any i ∈ N, π i ∈ Πi , xi ∈ X i :
                                                                                                                              !
                 X                       X
                                                 π∗i (xi , ai )A⃗πi ∗ (ht , ai ) − ϵDKL          π∗i (xi )||πbase
                                                                                                             i
                                                                                                                  (xi )

                        Pr (h|⃗π∗ )
                 h∈xi                    ai ∈A
                                                                                                                              !
                 X                        X
                                                  π (x , a )A⃗πi ∗ (ht , ai ) − ϵDKL
                                                    i   i    i                                     i   i   i
                                                                                                                (xi )

             ≥          Pr (h|⃗π∗ )                                                               π (x )||πbase
                 h∈xi                    ai ∈A


For ϵ > 0, it is clear that ⃗πt = ⃗π∗ = ⃗σ (⃗yt ).

For ϵ = 0, it is clear that πti (xi ) ∈ arg max                           π i (xi ), yti (xi )   , ∀xi ∈ X i .
                                                 π i (xi )∈∆(A)

Since ⃗y˙ t = ⃗v (⃗πt ) − ⃗yt = ⃗v (⃗π∗ ) −⃗v (⃗π∗ ) = 0, we prove that (⃗v (⃗π∗ ), ⃗π∗ ) is a rest point of single-round
DRDA when ϵ > 0 and is a rest point of DA when ϵ = 0.

C.5     P ROOF OF L EMMA 4

Proof. With respect to ℓ1 norm ∥·∥1 , we show that DKL (π||µ) = a π(a) log π(a)
                                                                  P
                                                                                µ(a) is a 1-strongly
convex function
        P       of π under a fixed µ, using the widely known result that the negative Gibbs entropy
H(π) = a π(a) log π(a) is 1-strongly convex (Example 2 in Shalev-Shwartz & Singer (2006)).
By definition of strong convexity:
                                                         1                  2
           H(απ + (1 − α)π ′ ) ≤ αH(π) + (1 − α)H(π ′ ) − α(1 − α)∥π − π ′ ∥1
                                                         2
                         P
Since H(π) = DKL (π||µ) + π(a) log µ(a), we have:
                                         a
                                                                     X
                        DKL (απ + (1 − α)π ′ ||µ) +                           (απ + (1 − α)π ′ )(a) log µ(a)
                                                                      a
                                                                 X
                               ≤ αDKL (π||µ) + α                      π(a) log µ(a)
                                                                 a
                                                                                    X
                               + (1 − α)DKL (π ′ ||µ) + (1 − α)                           π ′ (a) log µ(a)
                                                                                      a
                                1                  2
                               − α(1 − α)∥π − π ′ ∥1
                                2

Simplifying the inequality, we have:
                                                                      1                  2
      DKL (απ + (1 − α)π ′ ||µ) ≤ αDKL (π||µ) + (1 − α)DKL (π ′ ||µ) − α(1 − α)∥π − π ′ ∥1
                                                                      2
which means that DKL (π||µ) is also 1-strongly convex with respect to ℓ1 norm ∥·∥1 .


                                                                      22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


C.6    P ROOF OF T HEOREM 2

Proof. Construct a Fenchel coupling:
                             T
                             X −1 X
        F i (π i , y i ) =                                    π†i (xik ), y i (xik ) − ϵDKL π†i (xik )||πbase
                                                                                                         i
                                                                                                              (xik )

                                            max
                                        π†i (xik )∈∆(A)
                             k=0 hk
                             T
                             X −1 X
                                           π i (xik ), y i (xik ) − ϵDKL π i (xik )||πbase
                                                                                      i
                                                                                           (xik )

                       −
                             k=0 hk


By Lemma 4, ϵDKL π i (xik )||πbase
                                 i
                                     (xik ) is an ϵ-strongly convex function of π i (xik ) with respect to
ℓ1 norm. Besides, it is continuous on ∆(A). Therefore, we have the following inequality (Proposition
4.3 in Mertikopoulos & Zhou (2019)):
                                  i i
                                   π† (xk ), y i (xik ) − ϵDKL π†i (xik )||πbase
                                                                            i
                                                                                 (xik )

                    i
                       max
                        i
                       π† (xk )∈∆(A)

                                               π i (xik ), y i (xik ) − ϵDKL π i (xik )||πbase
                                                                                          i
                                                                                               (xik )

                                       −
                                        1                                2
                                       ≥ ϵ σ i (y i )(xik ) − π i (xik ) 1
                                        2
                                        1                                2
                                       ≥ ϵ σ i (y i )(xik ) − π i (xik ) 2
                                        2

Enumerating all (k, hk ) pairs and summing up the corresponding terms for both sides, we have:
                                                                    1                    2
                                               F i (π i , y i ) ≥     ϵ σ i (y i ) − π i 2                                 (13)
                                                                    2

Recall that σ i (·) has an equivalent expression (7). Therefore, the corresponding max function is
continuously differentiable with respect to y i . Applying the envelope theorem (Theorem 1.F.1 in
Takayama & Akira (1985)), we have:
                                                                                       !
                               i i
                                π† (xk ), y i (xik ) − ϵDKL π†i (xik )||πbase
                                                                         i
                                                                              (xik )     = σ i (y i )(xik )

    ∇yi (xik )    i
                     max
                     i
                   π† (xk )∈∆(A)


On the other hand, we have the derivative result:
                                     π i (xik ), y i (xik ) − ϵDKL π i (xik )||πbase
                                                                                i
                                                                                     (xik )        = π i (xik )

                    ∇yi (xik )

Therefore, we have:
                                                ∇yi F i (π i , y i ) = σ i (y i ) − π i

For single-round DRDA (4), define a continuously differentiable energy function:
                                              X
                                    V(⃗yt ) =    F i (πϵi , yti )
                                                                    i∈N


Compute its time derivative:
                                 .             X
                                 V (⃗yt ) =            ∇yi F i (πϵi , yti ), ẏti
                                               i∈N
                                               X
                                           =           σ i (yti ) − πϵi , v i (⃗πt ) − yti
                                               i∈N
                                               X
                                                        πti − πϵi , v i (⃗πt ) − πti − πϵi , yti

                                           =
                                               i∈N

where ⃗πt = ⃗σ (⃗yt ).


                                                                     23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Since ⃗πϵ = ⃗σ (⃗yϵ ), by definition of ⃗σ (·) (5) and the Fenchel coupling, we have:
                                            T
                                            X −1 X
  πti − πϵi , yti = F i (πϵi , yti ) + ϵ                 DKL πti (xik )||πbase
                                                                          i
                                                                               (xik ) − DKL πϵi (xik )||πbase
                                                                                                         i
                                                                                                              (xik )


                                            k=0 hk
                                            T
                                            X −1 X
  πϵi − πti , yϵi = F i (πti , yϵi ) + ϵ                 DKL πϵi (xik )||πbase
                                                                          i
                                                                               (xik ) − DKL πti (xik )||πbase
                                                                                                         i
                                                                                                              (xik )


                                            k=0 hk


Summing up the two equations above, we have:
                               πti − πϵi , yti + πϵi − πti , yϵi = F i (πϵi , yti ) + F i (πti , yϵi )
which implies:
                     .             X
                                            πti − πϵi , v i (⃗πt ) − yϵi − F i (πϵi , yti ) − F i (πti , yϵi )

                     V (⃗yt ) =
                                   i∈N


Since (⃗yϵ , ⃗πϵ ) is a rest point of single-round DRDA, we have:
                .          X                                          X                    X
               V (⃗yt ) =       πti − πϵi , v i (⃗πt ) − v i (⃗πϵ ) −   F i (πϵi , yti ) −   F i (πti , yϵi )
                          i∈N                                             i∈N                     i∈N


Using the assumption on the local hypomonotonicity (10) and the inequality (13), it holds in Ω:
        .           X            2      1 X i           2            X               2
       V (⃗yt ) ≤ λ    πti − πϵi 2 − 2 · ϵ    πt − πϵi 2 = (λ − ϵ)         πti − πϵi 2 ≤ 0
                                        2
                         i∈N                               i∈N                                 i∈N


Using inequality (13), we further have:
                                    .              2(ϵ − λ)                 λ
                                    V (⃗yt ) ≤ −            V(⃗yt ) = −2(1 − )V(⃗yt )
                                                       ϵ                    ϵ

Note that V(⃗yt ) is non-negative. Therefore, with ϵ > λ, we have:

                                                               λ
                                 V(⃗yt ) ≤ V(⃗y0 ) exp −2(1 − )t
                                                               ϵ
which means V(⃗yt ) approaches zero exponentially fast.
                                                         2
                                        σ i (y i ) − πϵi 2 = 0 ⇒ ⃗π = ⃗σ (⃗y ) = ⃗πϵ .
                                     P
Also note that by (13), V(⃗y ) = 0 ⇒
                                                 i∈N

As Ω is a compact set positively invariant with respect to (4), we prove that for a single-round DRDA
starting from an arbitrary ⃗y0 ∈ Ω, the policy always converges to ⃗πϵ at a linear rate.


                                                                 24
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


C.7     P ROOF OF P ROPOSITION 1

Proof. Consider two joint policies (π 1 , · · · , π j , · · · , π n ) and (π 1 , · · · , π†j , · · · , π n ) that differ only
in player j’s policy. We hypothesize that there always exists a constant Lij such that:

                  v i (π 1 , · · · , π j , · · · , π n ) − v i (π 1 , · · · , π†j , · · · , π n )       ≤ Lij π j − π†j                   (14)
                                                                                                    2                      2


Now we verify this hypothesis under T = |S| = |O| = 1. In this case, the POSG is equivalent to an
NFG, with v i (⃗π )(xi0 , a) = wi (⃗π )(a) − ui (⃗π ) for the unique decision point xi0 , where wi (⃗π )(a) =
ui (πai , ⃗π −i ) is player i’s expected utility under a pure strategy πai (·) with πai (a) = 1.
Let ⃗π = (π 1 , · · · , π j , · · · , π n ), ⃗π† = (π 1 , · · · , π†j , · · · , π n ), L = max ui (⃗π ) , and we have:
                                                                                                    π ∈Π
                                                                                                    ⃗

                  v (⃗π ) − v (⃗π† ) 2 ≤ v (⃗π ) − v (⃗π† ) 1 = v (⃗π )(xi0 ) − v i (⃗π† )(xi0 ) 1
                    i            i                     i            i                    i

                                               ≤ wi (⃗π ) − wi (⃗π† ) 1 + |A| · ui (⃗π ) − ui (⃗π† )

When i = j:
                 wi (⃗π ) − wi (⃗π† ) 1 = 0
                                                 X
                 ui (⃗π ) − ui (⃗π† ) =                uj (πaj , ⃗π −j ) π j (a) − π†j (a) ≤ L π j − π†j
                                                                                                                            1
                                                a∈A


When i ̸= j:
                                X
 wi (⃗π ) − wi (⃗π† ) 1 =               ui (πai , ⃗π −i ) − ui (πai , ⃗π†−i ) ≤ |A| max ui (πai , ⃗π −i ) − ui (πai , ⃗π†−i )
                                                                                              a∈A
                                a∈A
                             X
 ui (⃗π ) − ui (⃗π† ) =              π i (a) ui (πai , ⃗π −i ) − ui (πai , ⃗π†−i ) ≤ max ui (πai , ⃗π −i ) − ui (πai , ⃗π†−i )
                                                                                                    a∈A
                             a∈A


Let ⃗π1 = (πai , ⃗π −i ), ⃗π2 = (πai , ⃗π†−i ), and we have:

                                                                                       ui (πbj , ⃗π1−j ) π1j (b) − π2j (b) ≤ L π j − π†j
                                                                                 X
 ui (πai , ⃗π −i ) − ui (πai , ⃗π†−i ) = ui (⃗π1 ) − ui (⃗π2 ) =
                                                                                                                                                 1
                                                                                 b∈A


Therefore, it always holds:
                                                                                                                      3
      wi (⃗π ) − wi (⃗π† ) 1 + |A| · ui (⃗π ) − ui (⃗π† ) ≤ 2 |A| L π j − π†j                                  ≤ 2|A| 2 L π j − π†j
                                                                                                           1                          2

where the last step follows Cauchy-Schwarz inequality.
                         3                 3
Setting Lij = 2|A| 2 L = 2|A| 2 max ui (⃗π ) , we can see that the inequality (14) holds. With this
                                               π ∈Π
                                               ⃗
inequality, we can decompose the inner product π1i − π2i , v i (⃗π1 ) − v i (⃗π2 ) for two arbitrary joint
policies ⃗π1 = (π1i )i∈N and ⃗π2 = (π2i )i∈N . Specifically, we have:
                                π1i − π2i , v i (⃗π1 ) − v i (⃗π2 )
                          = π1i − π2i , v i (π11 , · · · , π1n ) − v i (π21 , π12 , · · · , π1n )
                          + π1i − π2i , v i (π21 , π12 , · · · , π1n ) − v i (π21 , π22 , π13 , · · · , π1n )
                          + ··· ···
                          + π1i − π2i , v i (π21 , · · · , π2n−1 , π1n ) − v i (π21 , · · · , π2n )
                            X
                          ≤      π1i − π2i 2 Lij π1j − π2j
                                                                             2
                              j∈N



                                                                        25
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


where the last step follows Cauchy-Schwarz inequality and (14).
                   (                  )
                      P 1 i        j
Setting λ = max           2 (Lj + Li ) , we have:
            i∈N    j∈N
                             X
                                   π1i − π2i , v i (⃗π1 ) − v i (⃗π2 )
                             i∈N
                             XX
                         ≤              Lij π1i − π2i 2 π1j − π2j
                                                                              2
                             i∈N j∈N

                             XX1                                   2                  2
                         ≤                  Lij       π1i − π2i 2 + π1j − π2j
                                        2                                             2
                             i∈N j∈N
                                                              
                             X         X1                                         2
                         =                     (Lij + Lji ) π1i − π2i 2
                                            2
                             i∈N    j∈N
                              X                       2
                         ≤λ            π1i − π2i 2
                              i∈N


Thus, we prove that every NFG is globally λ-hypomonotone, where:
                                                                       
                               X                                       
                                         3
                     λ = max         |A| 2 max ui (⃗π ) + max uj (⃗π )
                          i∈N               π ∈Π
                                             ⃗            π ∈Π
                                                          ⃗             
                                 j∈N

                             3 X
                       = |A| 2        max ui (⃗π ) + max uj (⃗π )
                                            π ∈Π
                                        i∈N,⃗                          π ∈Π
                                                                       ⃗
                               j∈N


                                                          26
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


C.8    P ROOF OF T HEOREM 3

 Proof. By Theorem 1, every generalized Nash distribution under ϵ > 0 or ϵ = 0 induces a rest point
 in single-round DRDA or DA, respectively. If there exists a GND ⃗πr that induces the unique rest
 point (⃗yr , ⃗πr ) in single-round DRDA, then ⃗πr must be the unique GND under the corresponding
 ϵ > 0 and ⃗πbase . Since Nash equilibrium always exists, if (⃗yr , ⃗πr ) is the unique DA rest point, then
⃗πr must be the unique GND under ϵ = 0 (i.e., the unique NE).
Therefore, by Definition 4, for any i ∈ N and π i ∈ Πi :
      ui (π i , ⃗πr−i ) − ui (⃗πr ) ≤
                                                                                                      
        T
        X −1       X                                                                    X
              γt         DKL π i (xit )||πbase
                                           i
                                                (xit ) − DKL π∗i (xit )||πbase
                                                                          i
                                                                               (xit )

      ϵ                                                                                   Pr (ht |⃗π∗ )
        t=0           xit                                                                                       ht ∈xit


                                                                                                                1
For the non-negative KL-divergence terms, we let K =                                       max              i         i         and further have:
                                                                                    i∈N,xi ∈X i ,a∈A πbase (x ,a)
                                         X i i                           X
           DKL π i (xit )||πbase
                            i
                                 (xit ) = π (xt , a) log π i (xit , a) −   π i (xit , a) log πbase
                                                                                              i
                                                                                                   (xit , a) ≤
                                                      a∈A                                         a∈A
     X                                                X                                  1         X
 −         π (xit , a) log πbase
            i               i
                                 (xit , a) =                π (xit , a) log
                                                             i
                                                                                    i      i
                                                                                                 ≤    π i (xit , a) log K = log K
     a∈A                                              a∈A
                                                                                   πbase (xt , a) a∈A

Therefore:
                                                                                                                         
                                                                 T
                                                                 X −1        X                  X
                            ui (π i , ⃗πr−i ) − ui (⃗πr ) ≤ ϵ           γt         log K                Pr (ht |⃗π∗ )
                                                                 t=0         xit               ht ∈xit
                                                                         T
                                                                         X −1           X X
                                                         = ϵ log K                 γt                 Pr (ht |⃗π∗ )
                                                                         t=0            xit ht ∈xit

             P P                                P
Note that                     Pr (ht |⃗π∗ ) =        Pr (ht |⃗π∗ ) = 1, ∀t ≥ 0. Therefore, we have:
                xit ht ∈xit                     ht

                                             n
                                             X                                                T
                                                                                              X −1
                                                            i i −i         i
                      NashConv(⃗πr )=                max
                                                     i  i
                                                           u (π , ⃗πr ) − u (⃗πr ) ≤ ϵn log K      γt
                                                     π ∈Π
                                             i=1                                                                          t=0


Clearly, when (⃗yr , ⃗πr ) is the unique rest point of DA, it corresponds to the case of ϵ = 0, which
implies that ⃗πr is an exact Nash equilibrium.

C.9    P ROOF OF T HEOREM 4

Proof. By Definition 3, the rest points pl = (⃗yl , ⃗πl ) under different l in multi-round DRDA corre-
spond to the solutions to ⃗y = ⃗v (⃗π ) under different policy selections.
Let ⃗πϵ be the limit of the policy sequence (⃗πl )l≥0 when l → ∞. Then, we have:
                      lim DKL πli (xi )||πl−1
                                           i
                                               (xi ) = DKL πϵi (xi )||πϵi (xi ) = 0

                               l→∞


Therefore, as the policy sequence converges, the regularization term −ϵDKL π i (xi )||πbase            i
                                                                                                            (xi ) in
(5) approaches zero at the rest point (⃗v (⃗π ), ⃗π ). As a result, (⃗v (⃗πϵ ), ⃗πϵ ) corresponds to a rest point of
DA. By Theorem 3, the limit policy ⃗πϵ is a Nash equilibrium when DA has a unique rest point.


                                                                        27
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


D            G AME H YPOMONOTONICITY
Since hypomonotonicity (see Gao & Pavel (2021); Gadjov & Pavel (2023)) is less commonly used in
the existing literature of game theory than in the field of optimization, here we provide numerical
simulations to show that it can be practically used to characterize multiplayer dynamic games.
The original Kuhn poker has two players with three ranks. Here we numerically test the global
hypomonotonicity of its multiplayer variants, 3-player Kuhn poker with 5 ranks and 4-player Kuhn
poker with 6 ranks. Both games are also used as test environments in our experiment section.

             10 4          3-player Kuhn poker                                10 4              4-player Kuhn poker
         5                                                                5


         4                                                                4


         3                                                                3
Number


                                                                 Number
         2                                                                2


         1                                                                1


         0                                                                0
         -0.6       -0.4   -0.2    0      0.2    0.4      0.6             -0.4             -0.2               0           0.2        0.4
                                  Value                                                                  Value

                                                        ⟨π1i −π2i ,vi (⃗π1 )−vi (⃗π2 )⟩
                                                   P
                                                  i∈N
                Figure 3: Histograms of sampled                                      2          in multiplayer Kuhn poker
                                                                 ∥π1i −π2i ∥2
                                                            P
                                                           i∈N



                                                                                     ⟨π1i −π2i ,vi (⃗π1 )−vi (⃗π2 )⟩
                                                                                 P
                                                                              i∈N
By Definition 7, the supremum of the computed value                                                      2             can be an estimate
                                                                                               ∥π1i −π2i ∥2
                                                                                         P
                                                                                         i∈N
of a global hypomonotonicity value λ and thus reflect its order of magnitude when the sampling is
sufficient. Therefore, we compute the value by randomly sampling 106 joint policy pairs (⃗π1 , ⃗π2 ).
The histograms of the sampled value are shown in Figure 3.
For 3-player Kuhn poker (with 5 ranks), the computed value is in the range of [−0.505869, 0.472063].
For 4-player Kuhn poker (with 6 ranks), the computed value is in the range of [−0.295345, 0.349964].
Note that the maximum value is at the level of 0.1, which implies that the order of magnitude of a
global λ should not be too large. Therefore, it is safe to say the local hypomonotonicity assumption
used in our convergence analysis is realistic in multiplayer Kuhn poker. For more game scenarios, we
show the results of the maximum and minimum values under the same number of samples in Table 2.


                      Table 2: Maximum and minimum sampled values in more game scenarios
                               Game Scenario                                     Maximum Value                    Minimum Value
                      2-player Kuhn poker with 3 ranks                             1.872479                        −1.260188
                      2-player Kuhn poker with 4 ranks                             0.861661                        −0.824744
                      3-player Kuhn poker with 4 ranks                             0.679113                        −0.575718
                2-player Leduc poker with 2 suits and 3 ranks                      0.022138                        −0.019163
                3-player Leduc poker with 2 suits and 3 ranks                      0.002436                        −0.003294
                3-player Leduc poker with 3 suits and 3 ranks                      0.068833                        −0.060182

The maximum values provide estimations for the order of magnitude of the global λ. By Theorem 2,
as long as λ is a finite quantity, we can always guarantee the convergence of single-round DRDA by
setting a sufficiently large ϵ. On the other hand, Theorems 3 and 5 suggest that a larger ϵ leads to a
larger NE gap for the rest-point policy. This can be viewed as a trade-off in the selection of ϵ.


                                                              28
     Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


     E     I MPLEMENTATION D ETAILS
     E.1   D ISCRETE -T IME A LGORITHMS

     We use the discrete-time counterpart of (4) as a practical implementation of single-round DRDA. An
     iteration variable m is in place of the continuous time variable t. With the introduction of a step size
     η, the single-round algorithm can be viewed as an Euler method that solves the original ODE, and an
     iteration is exactly one step. The pseudocode for single-round DRDA is shown in Algorithm 1.

  Algorithm 1: Single-round DRDA (SDRDA)
  Input: Initial score ⃗y0 , initial policy ⃗π0 , iteration number M , and regularization parameter ϵ
1 Set ⃗
      πbase = ⃗π0
2 for m ∈ {0, 1, · · · , M − 1} do
3     Compute all Pr (h|⃗πm ) and A⃗πi m (h, ai ) for all i ∈ N (using dynamic programming)
4     for i ∈ N do
5         for xi ∈ X i do
6             for ai ∈ A do                           P                   i      i
                                                                Pr(h|⃗    πm (h,a )
                                                                     πm )A⃗
                                 i         i   i         h∈xi
 7                   Compute v (⃗πm )(x , a ) =                  P
                                                                       Pr(h|⃗
                                                                            πm )
                                                                h∈xi
                             i

 8                   Update ym+1 (xi , ai ) = ym
                                               i
                                                 (xi , ai ) + η v i (⃗πm )(xi , ai ) − ym
                                                                                        i
                                                                                          (xi , ai )
 9               end
10               for ai ∈ A do
                             i                 πi   (xi ,ai ) exp( 1ϵ ym+1
                                                                       i
                                                                           (xi ,ai ))
11                   Update πm+1 (xi , ai ) = Pbasei
                                                  πbase (xi ,b) exp( 1ϵ ym+1
                                                                         i   (xi ,b))
                                                   b∈A

12           end
13       end
14    end
15 end
   Output: Last-iterate (⃗yM , ⃗πM )

     For the multi-round algorithm, we use SDRDA (Algorithm 1) as the oracle M in Definition 3. The
     pseudocode for multi-round DRDA is shown in Algorithm 2.

  Algorithm 2: Multi-round DRDA (MDRDA)
  Input: Round number L, iteration number M , and regularization parameter ϵ
1 Initialize ⃗y0 and ⃗π0
2 for l ∈ {0, 1, · · · , L − 1} do
3      (⃗yl+1 , ⃗πl+1 ) = SDRDA (⃗yl , ⃗πl , M, ϵ)
4 end
  Output: Last-iterate policy ⃗πL


     E.2   R ELATIONSHIP WITH M AGNETIC M IRROR D ESCENT

     Magnetic mirror descent (MMD) (Sokota et al., 2023) is a discrete-time learning dynamic based on
     mirror descent. Like single-round DRDA, MMD exhibits last-iterate convergence to QRE. Since
     mirror descent itself can be converted to a special form of FTRL by introducing a score y, here we try
     to mathematically compare MMD with DRDA.
     For MMD, if we set the mirror map to be negative entropy and the step size to be 1, it has the
                                                      1
     closed-form update formula πt+1 ∝ (πt ρα eqt ) 1+α , where πt is the policy at discrete time t, ρ is
     the magnet policy, qt is the Q-value, and α is the regularization temperature. Note that ρ and qt
     in MMD are analogous to the base policy πbase and the advantage value v in DRDA, respectively.
                                                                     1
     When ρ is set to be a uniform policy, we have πt+1 ∝ (πt eqt ) 1+α . Through recursion, we can write
                                     t      1
     πt+1 ∝ eyt+1 , where yt+1 = k=1 ( 1+α    )t+1−k qt .
                                  P


                                                                29
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


For DRDA, if we also set πbase to be uniform, it can be generally written as πt+1 ∝ eyt+1 in discrete
time. If we further consider a form of discretization based on the integralP
                                                                           formula (6) rather than the
                                                                             t
original ODE (4) and use qt to replace v(πt ), we directly have yt+1 = k=1 ( 1e )t+1−k qt . Clearly,
this score is the same as that of MMD when we enforce 1 + α = e. Thus, DRDA can be related to
MMD through a specific discretization if we ignore the base policy or the magnet.
Now we use a common notation ρ to indicate the base policy in DRDA. When ρ moves along time t
and is not kept as a fixed uniform policy, however, the update formula πt+1 ∝ ρt eyt+1 for DRDA
                                                     α             1
is quite different from the update formula πt+1 ∝ ρt1+α (πt eqt ) 1+α for moving-magnet MMD. The
above-mentioned relationship can no longer be established. That is to say, when employing a moving
magnet, the behavior of DRDA will be completely different from MMD.
From a theoretical perspective, DRDA guarantees last-iterate convergence to QRE in all games with
certain hypomonotonicity, while MMD is restricted to two-player zero-sum or (strictly) monotone
games. When considering finding an exact Nash equilibrium, multi-round DRDA theoretically
requires the base policy ρ = πbase to be a fixed rest-point policy in each round. In comparison,
moving-magnet MMD (see Appendix H.5 of Sokota et al. (2023)) directly learns in a single round
under a changing ρ = ρt , and the related paper does not provide theoretical guarantees for this choice.

E.3    PARAMETER S ETTINGS

In Table 3, we show the parameter settings in our experiments on the discrete-time DRDA from
Appendix E.1. Under the parameter settings, each single run of DRDA can be finished within one
hour using a single Intel Core i7-12700F CPU.


                                Table 3: Parameter settings of DRDA
          matrix game     bimatrix game      3-player game     Kuhn-3      Kuhn-4       soccer game
   L           10              10                  10             20         20               5
   M         5000             5000                5000         1 × 105     1 × 105           20
   ϵ          0.1              0.1                 0.3           0.02       0.015           0.1
   η         0.005           0.005               0.005          0.001       0.001          0.002

In principle, an arbitrary regularization parameter ϵ can be used as long as it is greater than a
hypomonotonicity threshold λ for the game (see Theorem 2). However, our experimental results show
that a smaller gap for the rest point of single-round DRDA generally guarantees better performance
of multi-round DRDA. Therefore, ϵ should not be too large as well (see Theorem 3). The setting
above provides a moderate choice for ϵ and guarantees the performance of DRDA when the step size
η is sufficiently small (no greater than the level of 0.01).
In Table 4, we compare the NashConv of DRDA under different η. When η is too large, DRDA will
no longer converge (marked as “−”). Also note that when η is overly small, the result can be not
as good since DRDA has not reached its rest point in each single round under the same number of
iterations. In each game scenario, a range of η can guarantee good performance of DRDA.


                     Table 4: Last-iterate NashConv of DRDA under different η

   η          matrix         bimatrix       3-player        Kuhn-3           Kuhn-4          soccer
 0.001     1.4 × 10−9      1.9 × 10−9         0.014       1.1 × 10−10      1.3 × 10−6     6.9 × 10−8
 0.002     2.0 × 10−11     1.6 × 10−12     2.0 × 10−4     1.1 × 10−10      1.3 × 10−6     5.7 × 10−13
 0.005     2.1 × 10−11     1.2 × 10−12     3.5 × 10−5     6.0 × 10−9            −         9.8 × 10−15
 0.01      2.1 × 10−11          −          3.5 × 10−5          −                −         1.6 × 10−15
  0.1           −               −               −              −                −              −


                                                  30
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


F     E XPERIMENT D ETAILS
F.1   N ORMAL -F ORM G AME (NFG)

The payoff matrices of the 2-action matrix game (zero-sum) and the 3-action bimatrix game are
shown in Tables 5 and 6, respectively.


                            Table 5: Payoff matrix of 2-action matrix game
                                            Player 2, Action 1       Player 2, Action 2
                     Player 1, Action 1          (1, −1)                   (0, 0)
                     Player 1, Action 2          (−2, 2)                  (3, −3)



                           Table 6: Payoff matrix of 3-action bimatrix game
                                 Player 2, Action 1        Player 2, Action 2   Player 2, Action 3
         Player 1, Action 1            (9, 6)                    (3, 7)               (6, 0)
         Player 1, Action 2            (7, 0)                    (8, 2)               (4, 4)
         Player 1, Action 3            (2, 4)                    (1, 6)               (3, 7)

The payoff tensor of the 3-action 3-player game is shown in Table 7.


                           Table 7: Payoff matrix of 3-action 3-player game
                                    Player 3, Action 1        Player 3, Action 2   Player 3, Action 3
      Player 1&2, Action (1,1)           (9, 5, 5)                 (8, 3, 8)            (3, 5, 9)
      Player 1&2, Action (1,2)           (9, 6, 4)                 (3, 5, 7)           (4, 10, 6)
      Player 1&2, Action (1,3)          (10, 6, 4)                 (6, 3, 0)            (8, 0, 1)
      Player 1&2, Action (2,1)           (1, 4, 1)                 (0, 1, 1)            (1, 2, 8)
      Player 1&2, Action (2,2)           (8, 3, 6)                 (5, 5, 6)            (6, 0, 9)
      Player 1&2, Action (2,3)           (4, 2, 0)                 (1, 5, 8)            (9, 5, 0)
      Player 1&2, Action (3,1)           (4, 9, 9)                 (9, 9, 7)            (5, 1, 8)
      Player 1&2, Action (3,2)           (6, 5, 9)                (10, 10, 0)           (8, 3, 9)
      Player 1&2, Action (3,3)           (6, 3, 9)                 (1, 2, 2)            (9, 4, 5)


F.2   E XTENSIVE -F ORM G AME (EFG)

Since Kuhn poker (Kuhn, 1950) is a benchmark game from the extensive-form game literature, we
use its multiplayer variants as EFG test environments. For 3-player Kuhn poker, we increase the
number of ranks from 3 to 5. For 4-player Kuhn poker, we further increase the number of ranks to 6.

F.3   M ARKOV G AME (MG)

We use a two-player zero-sum soccer game as the test environment for infinite-horizon MG. Figure 4
is an illustration of the game. The two players are marked with A and B. The player who keeps the
ball is marked with a cycle. Each player can choose an action from “up”, “down”, “left”, “right”,
and “stay” at each time step. If the two players collide after the simultaneous move, then the ball
possession exchanges. When the ball carrier moves into the opponent’s goal, the game terminates.
The winning player receives a reward of +100 and the opponent receives a reward of −100. The
initial state distribution ρ is set to be a uniform distribution, and the discount factor γ is set to be 0.95.

F.4   T IGER G AME (T YPICAL POSG)

Adversarial Tiger and Competitive Tiger are two typical POSGs introduced by Wiggers (2015). We
further test multi-round DRDA in the two games. For comparison purposes, we run a 5-round DRDA


                                                      31
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                                                           goal


                                                                                                                                                   goal
                                                                                                                B A


                                                                              Figure 4: Illustration of soccer game
                           DRDA learning curves in Adversarial Tiger (H=2)                             DRDA learning curves in Adversarial Tiger (H=3)                               DRDA learning curves in Adversarial Tiger (H=4)

             100                                                      =0.1                  100                                                   =0.1                                                                          =0.1
                                                                      =0.15                                                                       =0.15                100                                                      =0.15
                                                                      =0.05                                                                       =0.05                                                                         =0.05


                                                                                                                                                                            -2
                                                                                                                                                                       10
            10-5


                                                                                                                                                            NashConv
                                                                                NashConv
 NashConv


                                                                                           10-5


                                                                                                                                                                       10-4
                 -10
            10

                                                                                           10-10
                                                                                                                                                                            -6
                                                                                                                                                                       10


                 -15
            10
                       0   1000 2000 3000 4000 5000 6000 7000 8000 9000 10000                      0   1000 2000 3000 4000 5000 6000 7000 8000 9000 10000                        0   1000 2000 3000 4000 5000 6000 7000 8000 9000 10000
                                             Iterations                                                                  Iterations                                                                    Iterations


                                                          Figure 5: NashConv learning curves in Adversarial Tiger


(103 iterations per round) under different time horizons H ∈ {2, 3, 4} (using a fixed parameter setting
ϵ = 0.1, η = 0.01 for each game) and record the last-iterate NashConv as well as the time consumed.
According to the existing results (reported in Table 2 of Delage et al. (2024)), among heuristic search
value iteration (HSVI), random search, informed search, sequence form linear program (SFLP), and
CFR+ algorithms, SFLP (Koller et al., 1994) demonstrates the best performance in the tiger games
under H ∈ {2, 3, 4}. However, DRDA clearly outperforms SFLP when we use NashConv as an
aligned metric to describe the reported results.


                                     Table 8: Performance comparison between SFLP and DRDA in tiger games
                                                                                SFLP (the best reported)                                                  DRDA (tested)
                                      Game Scenario
                                                                                NashConv        Time                                                   NashConv      Time
                                   Adv Tiger H = 2                                0.16         < 1 sec                                                 < 10−4       < 1 sec
                                   Adv Tiger H = 3                                0.24         < 1 sec                                                 < 10−4       < 1 sec
                                   Adv Tiger H = 4                                0.32           8 sec                                               0.017(0.010) 8(10) sec
                                  Comp Tiger H = 2                                0.24         < 1 sec                                                 < 10−4       < 1 sec
                                  Comp Tiger H = 3                                0.36          48 sec                                                  0.028        3 sec
                                  Comp Tiger H = 4                                0.48         14 min                                                   0.024        5 min

Note that in Adversarial Tiger with H = 4, the 5-round DRDA actually terminates using 10 seconds,
but we also show the NashConv achieved in 8 seconds (without parentheses) for comparison purposes.


                                                                                                                         32
