Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A DDRESSING L ABEL S HIFT IN D ISTRIBUTED L EARN -
ING VIA E NTROPY R EGULARIZATION

 Zhiyuan Wu∗                                                       Changkyu Choi∗
 University of Oslo                                                UiT The Arctic University of Norway
 zhiyuanw@ifi.uio.no                                               changkyu.choi@uit.no

 Xiangcheng Cao                                                    Volkan Cevher
 EPFL                                                              LIONS, EPFL
 xiangcheng.cao.epfl@gmail.com                                     volkan.cevher@epfl.ch

                                        Ali Ramezani-Kebrya
                             Department of Informatics, University of Oslo
                  Norwegian Centre for Knowledge-driven Machine Learning (Integreat)
                                            ali@uio.no



                                                 A BSTRACT
             We address the challenge of minimizing true risk in multi-node distributed learn-
             ing.1 These systems are frequently exposed to both inter-node and intra-node label
             shifts, which present a critical obstacle to effectively optimizing model performance
             while ensuring that data remains confined to each node. To tackle this, we propose
             the Versatile Robust Label Shift (VRLS) method, which enhances the maximum
             likelihood estimation of the test-to-train label importance ratio. VRLS incorporates
             Shannon entropy-based regularization and adjusts the importance ratio during
             training to better handle label shifts at the test time. In multi-node learning environ-
             ments, VRLS further extends its capabilities by learning and adapting importance
             ratios across nodes, effectively mitigating label shifts and improving overall model
             performance. Experiments conducted on MNIST, Fashion MNIST, and CIFAR-10
             demonstrate the effectiveness of VRLS, outperforming baselines by up to 20% in
             imbalanced settings. These results highlight the significant improvements VRLS
             offers in addressing label shifts. Our theoretical analysis further supports this by
             establishing high-probability bounds on estimation errors. The code is available at
             https://github.com/zhiyuan-11/VRLS_main/tree/main.


1       I NTRODUCTION
The classical learning theory relies on the assumption that data samples, during training and testing,
are independently and identically distributed (i.i.d.) drawn from an unknown distribution. However,
this i.i.d. assumption is often overly idealistic in real-world settings, where the distributions of training
and testing samples can differ significantly and change dynamically as the operational environment
evolves. In distributed learning (Kim et al., 2022; Wen et al., 2023; Ye et al., 2023; Luo et al., 2023),
where nodes retain their own data without sharing, these discrepancies across nodes become more
pronounced, further intensifying the learning challenge (Rahman et al., 2023; Wang et al., 2023).
Label shifts (Lipton et al., 2018; Garg et al., 2022; Mani et al., 2022; Zhou et al., 2023) represent a
form of distributional discrepancy that arises when the marginal distribution of labels in the training set
differs from that in the test set, i.e., pte (y) ̸= ptr (y), while the conditional distribution of features given
labels, p(x|y), remains largely stable across both datasets. Label shifts commonly manifest both inter-
node and intra-node, complicating the learning process in real-world distributed learning scenarios.
However, a commonly used learning principle in this distributed setting, empirical risk minimization
    ∗
        These authors contributed equally to this work.
    1
        We use the term node to refer to a client, FPGA, APU, CPU, GPU, or worker.


                                                        1
  Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


  (ERM) (Kur et al., 2024), operates under the assumption that the training and test distributions are
  identical on each node and across nodes. This overlooks these shifts, failing to account for the
  statistical heterogeneity across decentralized data sources. While the current literature (Yin et al.,
  2024) addresses statistical heterogeneity across nodes, it often neglects distribution shifts at test or
  operation time, which has been a significant challenge in the entire data science over decades.
  The primary technical challenge in addressing label shifts lies in the efficient and accurate estimation
  of the test-to-train importance ratios, expressed as pte (y)/ptr (y) for all labels. A widely popular
  solution is Maximum Likelihood Label Shift Estimation (MLLS) (Garg et al., 2020), which frames
  this estimation as a convex optimization problem, akin to the Expectation-Maximization (EM)
  algorithm (Saerens et al., 2002). Model calibration refers to the process of ensuring that predicted
  probabilities reflect the true likelihood of correctness, which is crucial for improving the accuracy
  of importance ratio estimation (Guo et al., 2017a; Garg et al., 2020). Bias-Corrected Calibration
  (BCT) (Alexandari et al., 2020) serves as an efficient calibration method that enhances the EM
  algorithm within MLLS.
  While BCT and other post-hoc calibration techniques (Guo et al., 2017c; Kull et al., 2019; Wang
  et al., 2021; Sun et al., 2024) contribute to improved calibration and may potentially improve
  model performance, their primary focus remains on refining classification outcomes rather than on
  accurately approximating the true conditional distribution ptr (y|x). The “predictor” in these literature
  captures the relationship between the input features x and the corresponding output probabilities
  across the labels in the discrete label space Y, with |Y| = m, which should approximate the true
  distribution of ptr (y|x). Despite this goal, training with conventional cross-entropy loss often leads
  to models that produce predictions that are either highly over-confident or under-confident, resulting
  in poorly calibrated outputs (Guo et al., 2017a). Consequently, the predictor fails to capture the
  underlying uncertainty inherent in ptr (y|x), which limits its effectiveness in estimating importance
  ratios (Alexandari et al., 2020; Garg et al., 2020; Guo et al., 2020; 2017b; Pereyra et al., 2017;
  McMahan et al., 2017).
  To address this limitation, we propose a novel Versatile Robust Label Shift (VRLS) method, specifi-
  cally designed to improve importance ratio estimation for tackling the label shift problem. A key idea
  of our VRLS method is to approximate ptr (y|x) in a way that accounts for the inherent uncertainty
  over the label space Y for each input x. Accordingly, we propose a new objective function incorpo-
  rating regularization to penalize predictions that lack proper uncertainty calibration. We show that
  training the predictor in this manner significantly reduces estimation error under various label shift
  conditions.
  Building upon our VRLS method, we extend its application to multi-node settings by proposing
  an Importance Weighted-ERM (IW-ERM) framework (Fang et al., 2023). Within the multi-node
  distributed environment, our IW-ERM aims to find an unbiased estimate of the overall true risk
  minimizer across multiple nodes with varying label distributions. By effectively addressing both intra-
  node and inter-node label shifts with generalization guarantees, our framework handles the statistical
  heterogeneity inherent in decentralized data sources. Our extensive experiments demonstrate that the
  IW-ERM framework, which trains predictors exclusively on local node data, significantly improves
  overall test error. Moreover, it maintains convergence rates and privacy levels comparable to standard
  ERM methods while achieving minimal communication and computational overhead compared to
  existing baselines. Our main contributions are as follows:

• We propose VRLS, which enhances the approximation of the probability distribution ptr (y|x) by
  incorporating a novel regularization term based on Shannon entropy (Neo et al., 2024). This
  regularization leads to more accurate estimation of the test-to-train label importance ratio, resulting
  in improved predictive performance under various label shift conditions.

• By integrating our VRLS ratio estimation into multi-node distributed learning environment, we
  achieve performance close to an upper bound that uses true ratios on Fashion MNIST and CIFAR-10
  datasets with 5, 100, and 200 nodes. Our IW-ERM framework effectively manages both inter-node
  and intra-node label shifts while remaining data confined within each node, resulting in up to 20%
  improvements in average test error over current baselines.

• We establish high-probability estimation error bounds for VRLS, as well as high-probability conver-
  gence bounds for IW-ERM with VRLS in nonconvex optimization settings (Section 5, Appendices E,


                                                     2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Table 1: Details of the label shift scenarios. Their IW-ERM formulas are presented in Appendix C.

 Scenario                      #Nodes Assumptions on Distributions                     Ratio Node i Needs
 No-LS in Equation (17)          2    ptr1 (y) = pte1 (y), ptr1 (y) ̸= ptr2 (y)              ptr1 (y)/ptr2 (y)
 LS on single in Equation (18)   2     tr            te
                                      p1 (y) ̸= p1 (y), p2 (y) = p2 (y) p1 (y)/ptr1 (y), pte1 (y)/ptr2 (y)
                                                               tr        te       te

 LS on both in Equation (18)     2    ptr1 (y) ̸= pte1 (y), ptr2 (y) ̸= pte2 (y) pte1 (y)/ptr1 (y), pte1 (y)/ptr2 (y)
 LS on multi in Equation (19)    K          ptrk (y) ̸= pte1 (y) for all k            pte1 (y)/ptrk (y) for all k


F). Additionally, we demonstrate that incorporating importance weighting does not negatively impact
convergence rates or communication guarantees across various optimization settings.

2    I MPORTANCE RATIO ESTIMATION AND I MPORTANCE W EIGHTED -ERM
Importance ratio estimation Importance ratio estimation for label shifts has been addressed by
methods such as solving linear systems (Lipton et al., 2018; Azizzadenesheli et al., 2019) and mini-
mizing distribution divergences (Garg et al., 2020), primarily in the context of a single node. Lipton
et al. (2018); Azizzadenesheli et al. (2019); Garg et al. (2020) assumed the conditional distribution
p(x|y) remains fixed between the training and test datasets, while the label distribution p(y) changes.
Black Box Shift Estimation (BBSE) (Lipton et al., 2018; Rabanser et al., 2019) and Regularized
Learning under Label Shift (RLLS) (Azizzadenesheli et al., 2019) are confusion matrix-based meth-
ods for estimating importance ratios in label shift problems. While BBSE has been shown consistent
even when the predictor is not calibrated, its subpar performance is attributed to information loss
inherent in using confusion matrices (Garg et al., 2020). To overcome this, Garg et al. (2020) has
introduced the MLLS, resulting in significant improvements in estimation performance, especially
when combined with post-hoc calibration methods like BCT (Shrikumar et al., 2019). This EM
algorithm based MLLS method (Saerens et al., 2002; Garg et al., 2020) is concave and can be solved
efficiently.

Importance Weighted-ERM Classical ERM seeks to minimize the expected loss over the training
distribution using finite samples. However, when there is a distribution shift between the training and
test data, the objective of ERM is not to minimize the expected loss over the test distribution, regardless
of the number of training samples. To address this, IW-ERM is developed (Shimodaira, 2000;
Sugiyama et al., 2006; Byrd & C. Lipton, 2019; Fang et al., 2020), which adjusts the training loss by
weighting samples according to the importance ratio, i.e., the ratio of test-to-train density. Shimodaira
(2000) has shown that the IW-ERM estimator is asymptotically unbiased under certain conditions.
Building on this, Ramezani-Kebrya et al. (2023b) have recently introduced Federated IW-ERM,
which incorporates importance ratio estimation to handle covariate shifts in distributed learning.
However, this approach has limitations, as it does not address label shifts and the importance ratio
estimation method poses potential privacy risks.
In this work, we focus on label shifts and propose an IW-ERM framework enhanced by our VRLS
method. We show that our IW-ERM with VRLS performs comparably to an upper bound that
utilizes true importance ratios, all while preserving data privacy across distributed data sources. This
approach effectively addresses both intra-node and inter-node label shifts while ensuring convergence
in probability to the overall true risk minimizer.

3    V ERSATILE ROBUST L ABEL S HIFT: R EGULARIZED R ATIO E STIMATION
In this section, we introduce the Versatile Robust Label Shift (VRLS) method for importance ratio
estimation in a single-node setting, which forms the basis of the IW-ERM framework. To solve the
optimization problem of IW-ERM, each node k requires an accurate estimate of the ratio:
                                                PK te
                                                   j=1 pj (y)
                                       rk (y) =               ,                               (1)
                                                    ptrk (y)
where pte           tr
         j (y) and pk (y) represent the test and training label densities, respectively. To improve
clarity and avoid over-complicating notations, we first consider the scenario where we have only one


                                                          3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Algorithm 1 VRLS Importance Ratio Estimation Algorithm
                                             tr
Require: Labeled training data {(xi , yi )}ni=1 .
                                      te
Require: Unlabeled test data {xj }n j=1 .
Require: Initial predictor fθ .
Ensure: Optimized predictor fθ∗ and estimated importance ratio rf ∗ .
 1: Training:
 2:     Optimize fθ using Equation (4) via SGD.
 3:     Continue until the training loss drops below a threshold or the maximum epochs are reached.
 4:     Obtain the optimized predictor fθ∗ .
 5: Importance Ratio Estimation:
 6:     With the optimized predictor fθ∗ , estimate the importance ratio rf ∗ using equation Equation (3).



node under label shifts and then extend to multiple nodes. Table 1 presents various scenarios. In a
single-node label shift scenario, the goal is to estimate the ratio r(y) = pte (y)/ptr (y). Following
the seminal work of Garg et al. (2020), we formulate importance ratio estimation as a Maximum
Likelihood Estimation (MLE) problem by constructing an optimization problem based on Kullback-
Leibler (KL) divergence to directly estimate r(y). We train a predictor fθ to approximate ptr (y|x),
where θ denotes the parameters of a neural network. After training, we apply the predictor fθ⋆ to a
finite set of unlabeled samples drawn from the test distribution to obtain predicted label probabilities.
These predictions are then used to estimate the ratio rf ⋆ . Further details are provided in Algorithm 1.
One of the novelties of VRLS is its ability to better calibrate the predictor, enabling it to better
approximate the true conditional distribution ptr (y|x). This approximation faces two main chal-
lenges, as highlighted in Theorem 3 of (Garg et al., 2020): finite-sample error and miscalibration
error. Entropy-based regularization can directly tackle miscalibration, which occurs when predicted
probabilities systematically deviate from true likelihoods. Building on these insights, we introduce an
explicit entropy regularizer into the training objective, which is based on Shannon’s entropy (Pereyra
et al., 2017; Neo et al., 2024). The regularization term Ω(fθ ) is defined as:
                                        Xm

                              Ω(fθ ) =       ϕ fθ (x) c log ϕ fθ (x) c ,                            (2)
                                           c=1

where ϕ denotes the softmax function, and c represents the cth element of the softmax output vector.
With this regularization to the softmax outputs, VRLS encourages smoother and more reliable
predictions that account for inherent uncertainty in the data, leading to more accurate importance ratio
estimates and improving the SotA in practice. These improvements are empirically demonstrated
in Section 6. Our proposed VRLS objective is formulated as follows:

                                  rf ⋆ = arg max Ete log(fθ⋆ (x)⊤ r) ,

                                                                                                             (3)
                                            r∈Rm
                                               +

where                                         h                       i
                             θ ⋆ = arg min Etr ℓCE fθ (x), y + ζΩ(fθ ) .

                                                                                                             (4)
                                       θ

The vector r in Equation (3), representing the importance ratios for all m classes, belongs to the
non-negative real space Rm + . This constraint set is defined similarly to MLLS (Garg et al., 2022),
and we use the expected value Ete for estimation, denoting the optimal importance ratio as rf ⋆ . To
train the predictor θ, we minimize the cross-entropy loss ℓCE together with a scaled regularization
term ζΩ(fθ ), where ζ > 0 is a coefficient controlling the regularization strength. Incorporating the
regularizer Ω(fθ ) improves the model calibration under the influence of ℓCE loss.

4    VRLS FOR M ULTI -N ODE E NVIRONMENT
We now extend VRLS to the multi-node environment, taking into account the privacy and commu-
nication requirements. This extension naturally aligns with the concept of IW-ERM, effectively
integrating these considerations into the multi-node learning paradigm. We consider multiple nodes
where each node has distinct training and test distributions. The goal here is to train a global model


                                                      4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Algorithm 2 IW-ERM with VRLS in Distributed Learning
                                                ntr
Require: Labeled training data {(xtrk,i , yk,i
                                           tr     k
                                               )}i=1 at each node k, for k = [K].
                                      nte
Require: Unlabeled test data {xtek,j }j=1
                                        k
                                           at each node k, for k = [K].
Require: Initial global model hw .
Ensure: Trained global model hw optimized with IW-ERM.
 1: Phase 1: Importance Ratio Estimation with VRLS
 2: for each node k = 1 to K in parallel do
 3:     Train local predictor fk,θ on local training data {(xtrk,i , yk,i
                                                                      tr
                                                                          )}.
 4:     Use fk,θ∗ to estimate the importance ratio rk,f ∗ on unlabeled test data {xtek } at node k.
 5: end for
 6: Phase 2: Importance Ratio Aggregation
 7: for each node k = 1 to K do
 8:     Aggregate importance ratio using Equation (1).
 9: end for
10: Phase 3: Global Model Training with IW-ERM
11: Train global model hw using Equation (IW-ERM) with the aggregated importance ratios.


that utilizes local data and addresses overall test error. In this setup, each node uses its local data to
estimate the required importance ratios, as outlined in Section 3, and shares only low-dimensional
ratio information, without the need to share any local data.
The process begins with each node training a global model on its local data, independently estimating
its importance ratios. These locally computed ratios are then shared amongst the nodes, allowing for
the aggregated ratio required for IW-ERM to be computed centrally. This aggregated ratio is then
used to further refine the global model in a second round of global training. This approach ensures
minimal communication overhead and preserves node data privacy, as detailed in Section 5. Our
experimental results in Section 6 demonstrate that the IW-ERM framework significantly improves
test error performance while minimizing communication and computation overhead compared to
baseline ERM. The importance ratio estimation and IW-ERM are described in Algorithm 2.
To provide a more comprehensive understanding of the multi-node environment, the following
discussion delves into its details. Let X ⊆ Rd0 be a compact metric space for input features, Y be a
discrete label space with |Y| = m, and K be the number of nodes in an multi-node setting.2 Let Sk =
                  ntrk
{(xtrk,i , yk,i
            tr
                )}i=1  denote the training set of node k with ntrk samples drawn i.i.d. from a probability
distribution ptrk on X × Y. The test data of node k is drawn from another probability distribution pte     k
on X × Y. We assume that the class-conditional distribution pte                 tr
                                                                     k (x|y) = pk (x|y) := p(x|y) remains
the same for all nodes k. This is a common assumption and holds when label shifts primarily affect
labels’ prior distribution of the labels p(y) rather than the underlying feature distribution given the
labels, e.g., when features that are generated given a label remains constant (Zadrozny, 2004; Huang
et al., 2006; Sugiyama et al., 2007). Note that ptrk (y) and pte   k (y) can be arbitrarily different, which
gives rise to intra- and inter-node label shifts (Zadrozny, 2004; Huang et al., 2006; Sugiyama et al.,
2007; Garg et al., 2023).
In this multi-node environment, the aim is to find an unbiased estimate of the overall true risk
minimizer across multiple nodes under both intra-node and inter-node label shifts. Specifically, we
aim to find a hypothesis hw ∈ H : X → Y, represented by a neural network parameterized by w,
such that hw (x) provides a good approximation of the label y ∈ Y corresponding to a new sample
x ∈ X drawn from the aggregated test data. Let ℓ : X × Y → R+ denote a loss function. Node k
aims to learn a hypothesis hw that minimizes its true (expected) risk:

                                 Rk (hw ) = E(x,y)∼ptek (x,y) [ℓ(hw (x), y)].                         (Local Risk)


    2
      Sets and scalars are represented by calligraphic and standard fonts, respectively. We use [m] to denote
{1, . . . , m} for an integer m. We use ≲ to ignore terms up to constants and logarithmic factors. We use E[·] to
denote the expectation and ∥ · ∥ to represent the Euclidean norm of a vector. We use lower-case bold font to
denote vectors.


                                                        5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


We now modify the classical ERM and formulate IW-ERM to find a predictor that minimizes the
overall true risk over all nodes under label shifts:
                                 K        ntrk PK       te   tr
                                    1 X         j=1 pj (yk,i )
                                X
                           min                                  ℓ(hw (xtrk,i ), yk,i
                                                                                 tr
                                                                                     ), (IW-ERM)
                          hw ∈H     ntrk i=1     ptrk (yk,i
                                                         tr
                                                            )
                                 k=1

where ntrk is the number of training samples at node k.
To incorporate our VRLS importance ratio estimation method into the IW-ERM framework, we
                         K
                              pte (y tr )
                    P
                                 j   k,i
replace the ratio term j=1ptrk (yk,i
                                 tr )    with our estimated importance ratios. This modification aims to
align the empirical risk minimization with the true risk minimization over all nodes. We formalize
the convergence of this approach in Proposition 4.1.
Proposition 4.1. Under the label shift setting described in Section 1, equation IW-ERM is consistent
and the learned function hw converges in probability towards the optimal function that minimizes the
                                    PK
overall true risk across nodes, k=1 Rk .

Proof. Due to space limitations, the proof is provided in Appendix C. Convergence in probability
is established by applying the law of large numbers following (Shimodaira, 2000)[Section 3] and
(Sugiyama et al., 2007)[Section 2.2].

5   R ATIO E STIMATION B OUNDS AND C ONVERGENCE R ATES
In this section, we present bounds on ratio estimation and convergence rates for the finite sample
errors incurred during the estimation, as further discussed in Appendices E, F. In practice, we only
                                                                          tr
have access to a finite number of labeled training samples, {(xi , yi )}ni=1 , and a finite number of
                               te
unlabeled test samples, {xj }nj=1 . These samples serve to compute the following estimates:
                                          ntr
                                       1 X
                       θ̂ntr = arg min tr       ℓCE (fθ (xi ), yi ) + ζΩ(fθ ) ,
                                 θ∈Θ n i=1

                                                        nte
                                                 1 X
                             and r̂nte = arg max te     log(fθ̂ tr (xj )⊤ r).
                                          r∈Rm+
                                                n   j=1
                                                               n


We will show that the errors of these estimates can be controlled. The following assumptions are
necessary to establish our results.
Assumption 5.1 (Boundedness). The data and the parameter space Θ are bounded, i.e, there exists
bX , bΘ > 0 such that
                      ∀x ∈ X , ∥x∥2 ≤ bX           and        ∀θ ∈ Θ, ∥θ∥2 ≤ bΘ .
                                            ⋆
Assumption 5.2 (Calibration). Let θ be as defined in Equation (4). There exists µ > 0 such that
                                 E fθ⋆ (x)fθ⋆ (x)⊤ ⪰ µIm .



The calibration Assumption 5.2 first appears in (Garg et al., 2020). It is necessary for the ratio
estimation procedure to be consistent and we refer the reader to Section 4.3 of Garg et al. (2020)
for more details. We further need Assumption 5.1 because, unlike (Garg et al., 2020), the empirical
estimator r̂nte is estimated using another estimator θ̂ntr . Uniform bounds are therefore needed to
control finite sample error as we cannot directly apply concentration inequalities, as is done in the
proof of (Garg et al., 2020, Lemma 3), since we do not have independence of the terms appearing in
the empirical sums. We nonetheless prove a similar result in the following theorem.
Theorem 5.1 (Ratio Estimation Error Bound). Let δ ∈ (0, 1) and F := {x 7→ r ⊤ fθ (x), (r, θ) ∈
R × Θ}. Under Assumptions 5.1-5.2, there exist constants L > 0, B > 0 such that with probability
at least 1 − δ:
                                                      r
                             2   4                        log(4/δ)      4L
        ∥r̂nte − rf ⋆ ∥2 ≤        √ Rad(F) + 4B                 te
                                                                     +        E [∥θ − θ ⋆ ∥2 ] .   (5)
                           µpmin    n te                      n        µp min



                                                    6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Here, pmin = miny p(y) and
                                                               tr
                                                                                
                                                              n
                               1                              X
                     Rad(F) = √ Eσ1 ,...,σ  sup          σi r ⊤ fθ (xi )  ,                        (6)
                               ntr          (r,θ)∈R×Θ i=1


where σ1 , . . . , σ are Rademacher variables uniformly chosen from {−1, 1}.

Proof. The proof of Theorem 5.1 is provided in Appendix E. The Rademacher complexity appearing
in the bound will depend on the function class chosen for f . Moreover as regularization often
encourages lower complexity functions, this complexity can be reduced because of the presence of
the regularization term in the estimation of θ in our setting.

By estimating the ratios locally and incorporating them into local losses, the properties of the modified
loss with respect to neural network parameters w remain unchanged, with data-dependent parameters
like Lipschitz constants scaled linearly by rmax . Our approach trains the predictor using only local
data, ensuring IW-ERM with VRLS retains the same privacy guarantees as baseline ERM-solvers.
Communication involves only the marginal label distribution, adding negligible overhead, as it is far
smaller than model parameters and requires just one round of communication. Overall, importance
weighting does not impact communication guarantees during optimization.
Theorem 5.2 (Convergence-communication). Let maxy∈Y supf rf (y) = rmax . Suppose Algo-
rithm 2, e.g., IW-ERM with VRLS for multi-node environment, is run for T iterations. Then Algo-
rithm 2 achieves a convergence rate of O(rmax h(T )), where O(h(T )) denotes the rate of ERM-solver
baseline without importance weighting. Throughout the course of optimization, Algorithm 2 has the
same overall communication guarantees as the baseline.

In the following, we establish tight convergence rates and communication guarantees for IW-ERM
with VRLS in a broad range of importance optimization settings including upper and lower bounds for
convex optimization (Theorems 5.3- 5.4), second-order differentiability, composite optimization with
proximal operator (Theorem F.3), optimization with adaptive step-sizes, and nonconvex optimization
(Theorems F.1- F.2), along the lines of e.g., (Woodworth et al., 2020; Haddadpour et al., 2021;
Glasgow et al., 2022; Liu et al., 2023; Hu & Huang, 2023; Wu et al., 2023; Liu et al., 2023).
Assumption 5.3 (Convex and Smooth). 1) A minimizer w⋆ exists with bounded ∥w⋆ ∥2 ; 2) The ℓ ◦ hw
is β-smoothness and convex w.r.t. w; 3) The stochastic gradient g(w) = ∇
                                                                       e w ℓ(hw ) is unbiased, i.e.,
E[g(w)] = ∇w ℓ(hw ) for any w ∈ W with bounded variance E[∥g(w) − ∇w ℓ(hw )∥22 ].

For convex and smooth optimization, we establish convergence rates for IW-ERM with VRLS and
local updating along the lines of e.g., (Woodworth et al., 2020, Theorem 2).
Theorem 5.3 (Upper Bound for Convex and Smooth). Let D = ∥w0 − w⋆ ∥, τ denote the number
of local steps (number of stochastic gradients per round of communication per node), R denote
the number of communication rounds, and maxy∈Y supf rf (y) = rmax . Under Assumption 5.3,
suppose Algorithm 2 with τ local updates is run for T = τ R total stochastic gradients per node with
an optimally tuned and constant step-size. Then we have the following upper bound:
                                           rmax βD2   (rmax βD4 )1/3    D
                  E[ℓ(hwT ) − ℓ(hw⋆ )] ≲            +    √           +√      .                       (7)
                                             τR         ( τ R)2/3       Kτ R
Assumption 5.4 (Convex and Second-order Differentiable). 1) The ℓ(hw (x), y) is β-smoothness
and convex w.r.t. w for any (x, y); 2) The stochastic gradient g(w) = ∇
                                                                      e w ℓ(hw ) is unbiased, i.e.,
E[g(w)] = ∇w ℓ(hw ) for any w ∈ W with bounded variance E[∥g(w) − ∇w ℓ(hw )∥22 ].
Theorem 5.4 (Lower Bound for Convex and Second-order Differentiable). Let D = ∥w0 − w⋆ ∥,
τ denote the number of local steps, R denote the number of communication rounds, and
maxy∈Y supf rf (y) = rmax . Under Assumption 5.4, suppose Algorithm 2 with τ local updates is
run for T = τ R total stochastic gradients per node with a tuned and constant step-size. Then we
have the following lower bound:
                                           rmax βD2   (rmax βD4 )1/3    D
                  E[ℓ(hwT ) − ℓ(hw⋆ )] ≳            +    √    2/3
                                                                     +√      .                       (8)
                                             τR         ( τ R)          Kτ R

                                                    7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


We finally establish high-probability convergence bounds for IW-ERM with VRLS along the lines
of e.g., (Liu et al., 2023, Theorem 4.1). To show the impact of importance weighting on convergence
rate decoupled from the impact of number of nodes and obtain the current SotA high-probability
bounds for nonconvex optimization, we focus on IW-ERM with K = 1.
Assumption 5.5 (Sub-Gaussian Noise). 1) A minimizer w⋆ exists; 2) The stochastic gradients
g(w) = ∇e w ℓ(hw ) is unbiased, i.e., E[g(w)] = ∇w ℓ(hw ) for any w ∈ W; 3) The noise ∥g(w) −
∇w ℓ(hw )∥2 is σ-sub-Gaussian (Vershynin, 2018).
Theorem 5.5 (High-probability Bound for Nonconvex Optimization). Let δ ∈ (0, 1) and T ∈ Z+ .
Let K = 1 and maxy∈Y supf rf (y) = rmax . Under Assumption 5.5 and β-smoothness of nonconvex
                                                                      n          q          o
                                                                          1            1
ℓ ◦ hw , suppose IW-ERM is run for T iterations with a step-size min rmax   β  ,   σ rmax βT . Then
                                                                                    2

with probability 1 − δ, gradient norm squareds satisfy:
                          T                      rr
                      1X                 2             max β   σ 2 log(1/δ)
                            ∥∇w ℓ(hwt )∥2 = O σ              +                .                  (9)
                     T t=1                              T            T

Proof. We note that importance ratios do not depend on the model parameters w and the Lipschitz
and smoothness constants for ℓ ◦ hw w.r.t. w are scaled by rmax . The rest of the proof follows the
arguments of (Liu et al., 2023, Theorem 4.1).
                                                                         √
Theorem 5.5 shows that when the stochastic gradients are too noisy σ = Ω( rmax β/ log(1/δ)) such
that the second term in the rate dominates, then importance weighting does not have any negative
impact on the convergence rate.

6    E XPERIMENTS

The experiments are divided into two main parts: evaluating VRLS’s performance on a single node
focusing on intra-node label shifts, and extending it to multi-node distributed learning scenarios with
5, 100, and 200 nodes. In the multi-node cases, we account for both inter-node and intra-node label
shifts. Further experimental details, results, and discussions are provided in Appendix J.

Importance ratio estimation. We begin by evaluating VRLS on the MNIST (LeCun et al., 1998)
and CIFAR-10 (Krizhevsky) datasets in a single-node setting. Following the common experimental
setup in the literature (Lipton et al., 2018), we simulate the test dataset using a Dirichlet distribution
with varying α parameters. In this context, a higher α value indicates smoother transitions in the
label distribution, while lower values reflect more abrupt shifts. The training dataset is uniformly
distributed across all classes. Initially, using a sample size of 5,000, we investigate 20 α values
within the range [10−1 , 101 ]. Next, we fix α at either 1.0 or 0.1 and explore 50 different sample sizes
ranging from 200 to 10,000. For each experiment, we run 100 trials and compute the mean squared
error (MSE) between the true ratios and the estimated ratios. A two-layer MLP is used for MNIST,
while ResNet-18 (He et al., 2016) is applied for CIFAR-10.

                                                     Table 2: We utilize LeNet on Fashion MNIST to
    Method                   Avg.accuracy            address label shifts across 5 nodes. For the baseline
    Our IW-ERM               0.7520 ± 0.0209         methods—FedAvg, FedBN, FedProx, and SCAF-
                                                     FOLD—we run 15,000 iterations, while both the
    Our IW-ERM (small)       0.7376 ± 0.0099         Upper Bound (IW-ERM with true ratios) and our
    FedAvg                   0.5472 ± 0.0297         IW-ERM with VRLS are limited to 5,000 iterations.
                                                     Notably, we employ a simple MLP with dropout
    FedBN                    0.5359 ± 0.0306         for training the predictor. The model labeled Our
    FedProx                  0.5606 ± 0.0070         IW-ERM (small) refers to our approach where the
                                                     black-box predictor is trained using only 10% of
    SCAFFOLD                 0.5774± 0.0036
                                                     the available training data, balancing computa-
    Upper Bound              0.8273 ± 0.0041         tional efficiency with competitive performance.


                                                    8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


          MNIST                  CIFAR-10              CIFAR-10, Relaxed     CIFAR-10, Relax-m
Figure 1: MSE analysis across different datasets and settings for VRLS (ours) compared to baselines,
focusing on shift parameter (α) experiments. These subfigures include results from MNIST, CIFAR-
10, and relaxed label shift, illustrating the consistent superiority of VRLS. In the ‘relaxed’ setting,
Gaussian blur (kernel size: 3; σ: 0.1–0.5) and brightness adjustment (factor: ±0.1) are applied with
a 30% probability to introduce real-world variability. In the ‘relax-m’ scenario, augmentations are
applied with a 50% probability, with Gaussian blur (σ: 0.1–0.7) and brightness (factor: ±0.2).


          MNIST                  CIFAR-10              CIFAR-10, Relaxed     CIFAR-10, Relax-m
Figure 2: MSE analysis across different datasets and settings for VRLS (ours) compared to baselines,
focusing on sample size experiments. These subfigures include results from MNIST, CIFAR-10, and
relaxed label shift conditions, highlighting VRLS’s superior performance across varying test set sizes.
Table 3: We deploy ResNet-18 on CIFAR-10 to address label shifts across 5 nodes. The predictor
is also a ResNet-18, ensuring consistency with the single-node scenario. For a fair comparison, we
limit IW-ERM with VRLS and the true ratios to 5,000 iterations, while FedAvg and FedBN are run
for 10,000 iterations. Detailed results are provided in Table 7.

 CIFAR-10          Our IW-ERM             FedAvg               FedBN               Upper Bound
 Avg. accuracy     0.5640 ± 0.0241        0.4515 ± 0.0148      0.4263 ± 0.0975     0.5790 ± 0.0103


Table 4: We present the average node accuracies from the CIFAR-10 target shift experiment conducted
with 100 and 200 nodes, where 5 nodes are randomly sampled to participate in each training round.
Our IW-ERM with VRLS is run for 5,000 and 10,000 iterations, respectively, while both FedAvg and
FedBN are run for 10,000 iterations each.

                 CIFAR-10                      Our IW-ERM         FedAvg     FedBN
                 Avg. accuracy (100 nodes)     0.5354             0.3915     0.1537
                 Avg. accuracy (200 nodes)     0.6216             0.5942     0.1753
Figure 1 and Figure 2 compares our proposed VRLS with baselines (Garg et al., 2020; Saerens et al.,
2002) under label shifts. MLLS L2 refers to the MLLS method using convex optimization via SGD
(Garg et al., 2020), while MLLS EM employs the same objective function but is optimized using
the EM algorithm (Saerens et al., 2002). Our proposed VRLS is optimized in a similar manner,
resulting in VRLS L2 and VRLS EM, as shown in the figure. Our method consistently achieves lower
MSE across different label shift intensities (α) and test sample sizes on both datasets. Notably, our
importance ratio estimation experiments align with the error bound in Theorem 5.1, demonstrating
that increasing the number of test samples improves estimation error at a rate proportional to the
square root of the sample size. Additionally, the regularization term constrains the parameter space
and reduces Rademacher complexity, leading to smoother predictions and improved model calibration,
as supported by Section S2 in (Guo et al., 2017a). Both of them contribute to reduced estimation
error.


                                                   9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


We also tested importance ratio estimation under relaxed label shift conditions and found VRLS to
exhibit greater robustness (see Appendix J.2 for detailed settings). Although this assumption holds
broader potential for real-world applications, its precise alignment with real-world datasets requires
further investigation—an important direction for future research that extends beyond the scope of this
work.


Distributed learning settings. We apply VRLS in a distributed learning context, addressing
both intra- and inter-node label shifts. The initial experiments involve 5 nodes, using predefined
label distributions on Fashion MNIST (Xiao et al., 2017) and CIFAR-10, as shown in Tables 8- 9
in Appendix J.
We employ a simple MLP with dropout as the predictor for Fashion MNIST. For global training
with IW-ERM, LeNet (LeCun et al., 1998) is used on Fashion MNIST, and ResNet-18 (Ramezani-
Kebrya et al., 2023b) on CIFAR-10. All experiments are run with three random seeds, reporting
the average accuracy across nodes. We compare IW-ERM with VRLS against baseline methods,
including FedAvg (McMahan et al., 2017), FedBN (Li et al., 2021b), FedProx (Li et al., 2020), and
SCAFFOLD (Karimireddy et al., 2020a), as well as IW-ERM with true ratios serving as an upper
bound. Hyperparameters are kept consistent with those in (McMahan et al., 2017; Li et al., 2021b;
Ramezani-Kebrya et al., 2023b).
Each node’s stochastic gradients are computed with a batch size of 64 and aggregated using the Adam
optimizer. All experiments are run on a single GPU within an internal cluster. Both MLLS and VRLS
use identical hyperparameters and training epochs for CIFAR-10 and Fashion MNIST, stopping once
the classification loss reaches a predefined threshold on MNIST. We also conduct experiments with
100 and 200 nodes on CIFAR-10, where five nodes are randomly sampled each iteration to simulate
more realistic distributed learning. In this case, IW-ERM with true ratios does not act as the upper
bound due to the stochastic node sampling. The experiment is run once, and average accuracy across
nodes is reported, with label distribution shown in Table 10 in Appendix J. Despite FedBN’s reported
slow convergence (Ramezani-Kebrya et al., 2023b), we maintain 15,000 and 10,000 iterations for
FedAvg and FedBN on Fashion MNIST and CIFAR-10, respectively, for fair comparison. However,
IW-ERM is limited to 5,000 iterations using both true and estimated ratios due to faster convergence.
As shown in Table 2, IW-ERM achieves over 20% higher average accuracy than all baselines on
Fashion MNIST, with only a third of the iterations. Notably, even with just 10% of the training data
in the first round of global training, the performance remains comparable, demonstrating reduced
training complexity. This improvement is attributed to the theoretical benefits of IW-ERM, the
robustness of density estimation, and the fact that the aggregation of importance ratios reduces
reliance on any single local estimate. Similarly, Table 3 shows that IW-ERM approaches the upper
bound on CIFAR-10, outperforming the baselines. Individual node accuracies are detailed in Tables
6-7 in Appendix J. In the 100-node scenario, IW-ERM continues to demonstrate superior performance,
requiring only half the iterations, as shown in Table 4. It is important to note that using true ratios
does not equate to IW-ERM, given the stochasticity of node selection during training.


7   C ONCLUSIONS AND L IMITATIONS

We propose VRLS to address label shift in distributed learning. Paired with IW-ERM, VRLS
improves intra- and inter-node label shifts in multi-node settings. Empirically, VRLS consistently
outperforms MLLS-based baselines, and IW-ERM with VRLS exceeds all multi-node learning
baselines. Theoretical bounds further strengthen our method’s foundation. Future work will explore
estimating ratios by relaxing the strict class-conditional assumption and optimizing IW-ERM to
reduce time complexity while ensuring scalability and practicality in real-world distributed learning.


E THICS STATEMENT

No ethical approval was needed as no human subjects were involved. All authors fully support the
content and findings.


                                                 10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


R EPRODUCIBILITY STATEMENT
We ensured reproducibility with publicly available datasets (MNIST, CIFAR-10) and standard models
(e.g., ResNet-18). Links to datasets, code, and configurations will be provided upon camera-ready
submission. Experiments were run on NVIDIA 3090, A100 GPUs, and Google Colab, with average
results and variances reported across multiple trials.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The authors would like to thank Leello Tadesse Dadi and Thomas Pethick for helpful discussions.
This work was supported by the Research Council of Norway (RCN) through its Centres of Excellence
scheme, Integreat: Norwegian Centre for knowledge-driven machine learning, project number 332645.
The work of Changkyu Choi was funded by RCN under grant 309439. The work of Volkan Cevher
was supported by Hasler Foundation Program: Hasler Responsible AI (project number 21043), the
Army Research Office which was accomplished under Grant Number W911NF-24-1-0048, and the
Swiss National Science Foundation (SNSF) under grant number 200021 205011. The computations
were performed in part on resources provided by Sigma2 - the National Infrastructure for High-
Performance Computing and Data Storage in Norway.

R EFERENCES
Rohit Agrawal and Thibaut Horel. Optimal bounds between f-divergences and integral probability
  metrics. In International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML), 2020.
Amr M. Alexandari, Anshul Kundaje, and Avanti Shrikumar. Maximum likelihood with bias-
 corrected calibration is hard-to-beat at label shift adaptation. In International Conference on
 Machine Learning (ICML), 2020.
Martin Arjovsky, Soumith Chintala, and Léon Bottou. Wasserstein generative adversarial networks.
 In International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML), 2017.
Kamyar Azizzadenesheli, Anqi Liu, Fanny Yang, and Animashree Anandkumar. Regularized learning
  for domain adaptation under label shifts. In International Conference on Learning Representations
  (ICLR), 2019.
Arindam Banerjee, Srujana Merugu, Inderjit S. Dhillon, and Joydeep Ghosh. Clustering with bregman
  divergences. Journal of Machine Learning Research (JMLR), 6(58):1705–1749, 2005.
Jeremiah Birrell, Paul Dupuis, Markos Katsoulakis, Yannis Pantazis, and Luc Rey-Bellet. (f, Γ)-
  Divergences: Interpolating between f -divergences and integral probability metrics. Journal of
  Machine Learning Research (JMLR), 23:1–70, 2022.
Jonathon Byrd and Zachary C. Lipton. What is the effect of importance weighting in deep learning?
  In International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML), 2019.
Artur Back de Luca, Guojun Zhang, Xi Chen, and Yaoliang Yu. Mitigating data heterogeneity in
  federated learning with data augmentation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2206.09979, 2022.
Jérôme Dedecker, Clémentine Prieur, and Paul Raynaud de Fitte. Parametrized Kantorovich-
   Rubinštein theorem and application to the coupling of random variables. Springer, 2006.
Fartash Faghri, Iman Tabrizian, Ilia Markov, Dan Alistarh, Daniel M. Roy, and Ali Ramezani-
  Kebrya. Adaptive gradient quantization for data-parallel SGD. In Advances in neural information
  processing systems (NeurIPS), 2020.
Tongtong Fang, Nan Lu, Gang Niu, and Masashi Sugiyama. Rethinking importance weighting
  for deep learning under distribution shift. Advances in neural information processing systems
  (NeurIPS), 33:11996–12007, 2020.
Tongtong Fang, Nan Lu, Gang Niu, and Masashi Sugiyama. Generalizing importance weighting
  to a universal solver for distribution shift problems. Advances in neural information processing
  systems (NeurIPS), 36, 2023.


                                                11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Saurabh Garg, Yifan Wu, Sivaraman Balakrishnan, and Zachary C. Lipton. A unified view of label
  shift estimation. In Advances in neural information processing systems (NeurIPS), 2020.
Saurabh Garg, Sivaraman Balakrishnan, and Zachary C. Lipton. Domain adaptation under open set
  label shift. arXiv preprint arXiv:2207.13048, 2022.
Saurabh Garg, Nick Erickson, James Sharpnack, Alexander J. Smola, Sivaraman Balakrishnan, and
  Zachary C. Lipton. Rlsbench: Domain adaptation under relaxed label shift. In International
  Conference on Machine Learning (ICML), 2023.
Margalit R. Glasgow, Honglin Yuan, and Tengyu Ma. Sharp bounds for federated averaging (local
 SGD) and continuous perspective. In International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and
 Statistics (AISTATS), 2022.
Arthur Gretton, Karsten M. Borgwardt, Malte J. Rasch, Bernhard Schölkopf, and Alexander Smola.
  A kernel two-sample test. Journal of Machine Learning Research, 13(25):723–773, 2012.
Chuan Guo, Geoff Pleiss, Yu Sun, and Kilian Q. Weinberger. On calibration of modern neural
  networks. In Proceedings of the 34th International Conference on Machine Learning - Volume 70,
  ICML’17, pp. 1321–1330. JMLR.org, 2017a.
Chuan Guo, Geoff Pleiss, Yu Sun, and Kilian Q. Weinberger. On calibration of modern neural
  networks. In Proceedings of the 34th International Conference on Machine Learning - Volume 70,
  ICML’17, pp. 1321–1330. JMLR.org, 2017b.
Chuan Guo, Geoff Pleiss, Yu Sun, and Kilian Q. Weinberger. On calibration of modern neural
  networks. In Proceedings of the 34th International Conference on Machine Learning - Volume 70,
  ICML’17, pp. 1321–1330. JMLR.org, 2017c.
Jiaxian Guo, Mingming Gong, Tongliang Liu, Kun Zhang, and Dacheng Tao. LTF: A label transfor-
   mation framework for correcting label shift. In International Conference on Machine Learning
   (ICML), 2020.
Sharut Gupta, Kartik Ahuja, Mohammad Havaei, Niladri Chatterjee, and Yoshua Bengio. Fl games:
  A federated learning framework for distribution shifts. arXiv preprint arXiv:2205.11101, 2022.
Farzin Haddadpour, Mohammad Mahdi Kamani, Aryan Mokhtari, and Mehrdad Mahdavi. Federated
  learning with compression: Unified analysis and sharp guarantees. In International Conference on
  Artificial Intelligence and Statistics (AISTATS), 2021.
Kaiming He, Xiangyu Zhang, Shaoqing Ren, and Jian Sun. Deep residual learning for image
  recognition. In Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), 2016.
Zhengmian Hu and Heng Huang. Tighter analysis for ProxSkip. In International Conference on
  Machine Learning (ICML), 2023.
Jiayuan Huang, Arthur Gretton, Karsten Borgwardt, Bernhard Schölkopf, and Alex Smola. Correcting
   sample selection bias by unlabeled data. In Advances in neural information processing systems
   (NeurIPS), 2006.
Yutao Huang, Lingyang Chu, Zirui Zhou, Lanjun Wang, Jiangchuan Liu, Jian Pei, and Yong Zhang.
  Personalized cross-silo federated learning on non-iid data. In AAAI Conference on Artificial
  Intelligence, 2021.
P. Kairouz, H. B. McMahan, B. Avent, A. Bellet, M. Bennis, A. N. Bhagoji, K. Bonawitz, Z. Charles,
   G. Cormode, R. Cummings, R. G. L. D’Oliveira, S. E. Rouayheb, D. Evans, J. Gardner, Z. Garrett,
   A. Gascón, B. Ghazi, P. B. Gibbons, M. Gruteser, Z. Harchaoui, C. He, L. He, Z. Huo, B. Hutchin-
   son, J. Hsu, M. Jaggi, T. Javidi, G. Joshi, M. Khodak, J. Konec̆ný, A. Korolova, F. Koushanfar,
   S. Koyejo, T. Lepoint, Y. Liu, P., M. Mohri, R. Nock, A. Özgür, R. Pagh, M. Raykova, H. Qi, D. Ra-
   mage, R. Raskar, D. Song, W. Song, S. U. Stich, Z. Sun, A. T. Suresh, F. Tramèr, P. Vepakomma,
   J. Wang, L. Xiong, Z. Xu, Q. Yang, F. X. Yu, H. Yu, and S. Zhao. Advances and open problems in
   federated learning. Foundations and Trends® in Machine Learning, 14(1–2):1–210, 2021.


                                                 12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Sai Praneeth Karimireddy, Satyen Kale, Mehryar Mohri, Sashank Reddi, Sebastian Stich, and
  Ananda Theertha Suresh. SCAFFOLD: Stochastic controlled averaging for federated learning.
  In Hal Daumé III and Aarti Singh (eds.), Proceedings of the 37th International Conference on
  Machine Learning, volume 119 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pp. 5132–5143.
  PMLR, 13–18 Jul 2020a.
Sai Praneeth Karimireddy, Satyen Kale, Mehryar Mohri, Sashank Reddi, Sebastian Stich, and
  Ananda Theertha Suresh. SCAFFOLD: Stochastic controlled averaging for federated learning.
  In Hal Daumé III and Aarti Singh (eds.), Proceedings of the 37th International Conference on
  Machine Learning, volume 119 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pp. 5132–5143.
  PMLR, 13–18 Jul 2020b.
Mikhail Khodak, Maria-Florina Balcan, and Ameet Talwalkar. Adaptive gradient-based meta-learning
 methods. In Advances in neural information processing systems (NeurIPS), 2019.
Jinkyu Kim, Geeho Kim, and Bohyung Han. Multi-level branched regularization for federated
   learning. In Kamalika Chaudhuri, Stefanie Jegelka, Le Song, Csaba Szepesvari, Gang Niu, and
   Sivan Sabato (eds.), Proceedings of the 39th International Conference on Machine Learning,
   volume 162 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pp. 11058–11073. PMLR, 17–23 Jul
   2022. URL https://proceedings.mlr.press/v162/kim22a.html.
A. Krizhevsky. Learning multiple layers of features from tiny images. Technical report, University of
  Toronto, 2009.
Meelis Kull, Miquel Perello-Nieto, Markus Kängsepp, Telmo Silva Filho, Hao Song, and Peter Flach.
 Beyond temperature scaling: obtaining well-calibrated multiclass probabilities with Dirichlet
 calibration. Curran Associates Inc., Red Hook, NY, USA, 2019.
S. Kullback and R. A. Leibler. On Information and Sufficiency. The Annals of Mathematical Statistics,
   22(1):79 – 86, 1951.
Gil Kur, Eli Putterman, and Alexnader Rakhlin. On the variance, admissibility, and stability of
  empirical risk minimization. In Proceedings of the 37th International Conference on Neural
  Information Processing Systems, NIPS ’23, Red Hook, NY, USA, 2024. Curran Associates Inc.
Yann LeCun, Léon Bottou, Yoshua Bengio, and Patrick Haffner. Gradient-based learning applied to
  document recognition. Proceedings of the IEEE, 86:2278–2324, 1998.
Tian Li, Anit Kumar Sahu, Manzil Zaheer, Maziar Sanjabi, Ameet Talwalkar, and Virginia Smith.
  Federated optimization in heterogeneous networks. In Inderjit S. Dhillon, Dimitris S. Papailiopou-
  los, and Vivienne Sze (eds.), Proceedings of Machine Learning and Systems 2020, MLSys 2020,
  Austin, TX, USA, March 2-4, 2020. mlsys.org, 2020.
Tian Li, Shengyuan Hu, Ahmad Beirami, and Virginia Smith. Ditto: Fair and robust federated
  learning through personalization. In International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML),
  2021a.
Xiaoxiao Li, Meirui Jiang, Xiaofei Zhang, Michael Kamp, and Qi Dou. FedBN: Federated learning
  on non-IID features via local batch normalization. In International Conference on Learning
  Representations (ICLR), 2021b.
Zachary C. Lipton, Yu-Xiang Wang, and Alexander J. Smola. Detecting and correcting for label shift
  with black box predictors. In International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML), 2018.
Zijian Liu, Ta Duy Nguyen, Thien Hang Nguyen, Alina Ene, and Huy Nguyen. High probability
  convergence of stochastic gradient methods. In International Conference on Machine Learning
  (ICML), 2023.
Kangyang Luo, Xiang Li, Yunshi Lan, and Ming Gao. Gradma: A gradient-memory-based ac-
  celerated federated learning with alleviated catastrophic forgetting. In 2023 IEEE/CVF Con-
  ference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), pp. 3708–3717, 2023. doi:
 10.1109/CVPR52729.2023.00361.


                                                 13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


You-Wei Luo and Chuan-Xian Ren. Generalized label shift correction via minimum uncer-
  tainty principle: Theory and algorithm. ArXiv, abs/2202.13043, 2022. URL https://api.
  semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:247158776.
Pranav Mani, Manley Roberts, Saurabh Garg, and Zachary C. Lipton. Unsupervised learning under
  latent label shift. In ICML Workshop on Spurious Correlations, Invariance and Stability, 2022.
H. Brendan McMahan, Eider Moore, Daniel Ramage, Seth Hampson, and Blaise Aguera Y. Arcas.
  Communication-efficient learning of deep networks from decentralized data. In International
  Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics (AISTATS), 2017.
Dexter Neo, Stefan Winkler, and Tsuhan Chen. Maxent loss: Constrained maximum entropy for
  calibration under out-of-distribution shift. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial
  Intelligence, volume 38, pp. 21463–21472, 2024.
Gabriel Pereyra, George Tucker, Jan Chorowski, Łukasz Kaiser, and Geoffrey Hinton. Regularizing
  neural networks by penalizing confident output distributions. arXiv preprint arXiv:1701.06548,
  2017.
Stephan Rabanser, Stephan Günnemann, and Zachary C. Lipton. Failing Loudly: An Empirical Study
  of Methods for Detecting Dataset Shift. Curran Associates Inc., Red Hook, NY, USA, 2019.
Anichur Rahman, Md Sazzad Hossain, Ghulam Muhammad, Dipanjali Kundu, Tanoy Debnath, Muaz
  Rahman, Md Saikat Islam Khan, Prayag Tiwari, and Shahab S Band. Federated learning-based
  ai approaches in smart healthcare: concepts, taxonomies, challenges and open issues. Cluster
  computing, 26(4):2271–2311, 2023.
Suraj Rajendran, Zhenxing Xu, Weishen Pan, Arnab Ghosh, and Fei Wang. Data heterogeneity in
  federated learning with electronic health records: Case studies of risk prediction for acute kidney
  injury and sepsis diseases in critical care. PLOS Digital Health, 2(3):e0000117, 2023.
Ali Ramezani-Kebrya, Fartash Faghri, Ilya Markov, Vitalii Aksenov, Dan Alistarh, and Daniel M.
  Roy. NUQSGD: Provably communication-efficient data-parallel SGD via nonuniform quantization.
  Journal of Machine Learning Research (JMLR), 22(114):1–43, 2021.
Ali Ramezani-Kebrya, Kimon Antonakopoulos, Igor Krawczuk, Justin Deschenaux, and Volkan
  Cevher. Distributed extra-gradient with optimal complexity and communication guarantees. In
  International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR), 2023a.
Ali Ramezani-Kebrya, Fanghui Liu, Thomas Pethick, Grigorios Chrysos, and Volkan Cevher. Fed-
  erated learning under covariate shifts with generalization guarantees. Transactions on Machine
  Learning Research (TMLR), 2023b.
Benjamin Recht, Rebecca Roelofs, Ludwig Schmidt, and Vaishaal Shankar. Do CIFAR-10 classifiers
  generalize to CIFAR-10? arXiv preprint arXiv:1806.00451, 2018.
Marco Saerens, Patrice Latinne, and Christine Decaestecker. Adjusting the outputs of a classifier to
 new a priori probabilities: a simple procedure. In Neural Computation, 2002.
Hidetoshi Shimodaira. Improving predictive inference under covariate shift by weighting the log-
  likelihood function. Journal of Statistical Planning and Inference, 90(2):227–244, 2000.
Avanti Shrikumar, Amr M. Alexandari, and Anshul Kundaje. Adapting to label shift with bias-
  corrected calibration. arXiv preprint arXiv:1901.06852v5, 2019.
Virginia Smith, Chao-Kai Chiang, Maziar Sanjabi, and Ameet S. Talwalkar. Federated multi-task
  learning. In Advances in neural information processing systems (NeurIPS), 2017.
Masashi Sugiyama, Benjamin Blankertz, Matthias Krauledat, Guido Dornhege, and Klaus-Robert
 Müller. Importance-weighted cross-validation for covariate shift. In Joint Pattern Recognition
 Symposium, pp. 354–363. Springer, 2006.
Masashi Sugiyama, Matthias Krauledat, and Klaus-Robert Müller. Covariate shift adaptation by
 importance weighted cross validation. Journal of Machine Learning Research (JMLR), 8(5), 2007.


                                                 14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Zeyu Sun, Dogyoon Song, and Alfred Hero. Minimum-risk recalibration of classifiers. Advances in
  neural information processing systems (NeurIPS), 36, 2024.
Antonio Torralba, Rob Fergus, and William T. Freeman. 80 million tiny images: A large data set for
  nonparametric object and scene recognition. IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine
  Intelligence, 30(11):1958–1970, 2008.
Roman Vershynin. High-dimensional probability: An introduction with applications in data science.
  Cambridge university press, 2018.
Cédric Villani. The Wasserstein distances. Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 2009.
Deng-Bao Wang, Lei Feng, and Min-Ling Zhang. Rethinking calibration of deep neural networks:
  Do not be afraid of overconfidence. In M. Ranzato, A. Beygelzimer, Y. Dauphin, P.S. Liang,
  and J. Wortman Vaughan (eds.), Advances in neural information processing systems (NeurIPS),
  volume 34, pp. 11809–11820. Curran Associates, Inc., 2021.
Kaibin Wang, Qiang He, Feifei Chen, Chunyang Chen, Faliang Huang, Hai Jin, and Yun Yang.
  Flexifed: Personalized federated learning for edge clients with heterogeneous model architectures.
  In Proceedings of the ACM Web Conference 2023, pp. 2979–2990, 2023.
Jie Wen, Zhixia Zhang, Yang Lan, Zhihua Cui, Jianghui Cai, and Wensheng Zhang. A survey on
   federated learning: challenges and applications. International Journal of Machine Learning and
   Cybernetics, 14(2):513–535, 2023.
Blake Woodworth, Kumar Kshitij Patel, Sebastian Stich, Zhen Dai, Brian Bullins, Brendan Mcmahan,
  Ohad Shamir, and Nathan Srebro. Is local SGD better than minibatch SGD? In International
  Conference on Machine Learning (ICML), 2020.
Xidong Wu, Feihu Huang, Zhengmian Hu, and Heng Huang. Faster adaptive federated learning. In
  AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, 2023.
Han Xiao, Kashif Rasul, and Roland Vollgraf. Fashion-MNIST: A novel image dataset for bench-
  marking machine learning algorithms. arXiv preprint arXiv:1708.07747, 2017.
Mang Ye, Xiuwen Fang, Bo Du, Pong C Yuen, and Dacheng Tao. Heterogeneous federated learning:
 State-of-the-art and research challenges. ACM Computing Surveys, 56(3):1–44, 2023.
Mingzhang Yin, Yixin Wang, and David M Blei. Optimization-based causal estimation from
 heterogeneous environments. Journal of Machine Learning Research, 25:1–44, 2024.
Bianca Zadrozny. Learning and evaluating classifiers under sample selection bias. In International
  Conference on Machine Learning (ICML), 2004.
Helen Zhou, Sivaraman Balakrishnan, and Zachary C. Lipton. Domain adaptation under missingness
  shift. Artificial Intelligence and Statistics (AISTATS), 2023.


                                                15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


The Appendix part is organized as follows:

      • All related work are provided in Appendix A.
      • Additional details of prior work of BBSE and MLLS are in Appendix B.
      • Mathematical proof for label shifts with multiple nodes and IW-ERM is given in Appendix C.
      • General algorithmic description is in Appendix D.
      • Proof of Theorem 5.1 is in Appendix E.
      • Proof of Theorem 5.2 and Convergence-Communication-Privacy guarantees for IW-ERM
        in Equation (IW-ERM) are provided in Appendix F.
      • Complexity analysis is in Appendix G.
      • Mathematical notations are summarized in Appendix H.
      • Limitations are discussed in Appendix I.
      • Additional experiments and experimental details are provided in Appendix J.


                                                16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A    R ELATED WORK
In the context of distributed learning with label shifts, importance ratio estimation is tackled either
by solving a linear system as in (Lipton et al., 2018; Azizzadenesheli et al., 2019) or by minimizing
distribution divergence as in (Garg et al., 2020). In this section, we overview complete related work.

Federated learning (FL). Much of the current research in FL predominantly centers around the
minimization of empirical risk, operating under the assumption that each node maintains the same
training/test data distribution (Kairouz et al., 2021). Prominent methods in FL include FedAvg (McMa-
han et al., 2017), FedBN (Li et al., 2021b), FedProx (Li et al., 2020) and SCAFFOLD (Karimireddy
et al., 2020a). FedAvg and its variants such as (Huang et al., 2021; Karimireddy et al., 2020b)
have been the subject of thorough investigation in optimization literature, exploring facets such as
communication efficiency, node participation, and privacy assurance (Faghri et al., 2020; Ramezani-
Kebrya et al., 2021; 2023a;b). Subsequent work, such as the study by de Luca et al. (2022), explores
Federated Domain Generalization and introduces data augmentation to the training. This model aims
to generalize to both in-domain datasets from participating nodes and an out-of-domain dataset from
a non-participating node. Additionally, Gupta et al. (2022) introduces FL Games, a game-theoretic
framework designed to learn causal features that remain invariant across nodes. This is achieved
by employing ensembles over nodes’ historical actions and enhancing local computation, under the
assumption of consistent training/test data distribution across nodes. The existing strategies to address
statistical heterogeneity across nodes during training primarily rely on heuristic-based personalization
methods, which currently lack theoretical backing in statistical learning (Smith et al., 2017; Khodak
et al., 2019; Li et al., 2021a). In contrast, we aim to minimize overall test error amid both intra-node
and inter-node distribution shifts, a situation frequently observed in real-world scenarios. Techniques
ensuring communication efficiency, robustness, and secure aggregations serve as complementary.

Importance ratio estimation Classical Empirical Risk Minimization (ERM) seeks to minimize
the expected loss over the training distribution using finite samples. When faced with distribution
shifts, the goal shifts to minimizing the expected loss over the target distribution, leading to the
development of Importance-Weighted Empirical Risk Minimization (IW-ERM)(Shimodaira, 2000;
Sugiyama et al., 2006; Byrd & C. Lipton, 2019; Fang et al., 2020). Shimodaira (2000) established
that the IW-ERM estimator is asymptotically unbiased. Moreover, Ramezani-Kebrya et al. (2023b)
introduced FTW-ERM, which integrates importance ratio estimation.

Label shift and MLLS family For theoretical analysis, the conditional distribution p(x|y) is held
strictly constant across all distributions (Lipton et al., 2018; Garg et al., 2020; Saerens et al., 2002).
Both BBSE (Lipton et al., 2018) and RLLS (Azizzadenesheli et al., 2019) designate a discrete latent
space z and introduce a confusion matrix-based estimation method to compute the ratio w by solving
a linear system (Saerens et al., 2002; Lipton et al., 2018). This approach is straightforward and has
been proven consistent, even when the predictor is not calibrated. However, its subpar performance is
attributed to the information loss inherent in the confusion matrix (Garg et al., 2020).
Consequently, MLLS (Garg et al., 2020) introduces a continuous latent space, resulting in a significant
enhancement in estimation performance, especially when combined with a post-hoc calibration
method (Shrikumar et al., 2019). It also provides a consistency guarantee with a canonically calibrated
predictor. This EM-based MLLS method is both concave and can be solved efficiently.

Discrepancy Measure In information theory and statistics, discrepancy measures play a critical role
in quantifying the differences between probability distributions. One such measure is the Bregman
Divergence (Banerjee et al., 2005), defined as
                            Dϕ (x∥y) = ϕ(x) − ϕ(y) − ⟨∇ϕ(y), x − y⟩,
which encapsulates the difference between the value of a convex function ϕ at two points and the
value of the linear approximation of ϕ at one point, leveraging the gradient at another point.
Discrepancy measures are generally categorized into two main families: Integral Probability Metrics
(IPMs) and f -divergences. IPMs, including Maximum Mean Discrepancy (Gretton et al., 2012)
and Wasserstein distance (Villani, 2009), focus on distribution differences P − Q. In contrast, f -
divergences, such as KL-divergence (Kullback & Leibler, 1951) and Total Variation distance, operate


                                                   17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


on ratios P/Q and do not satisfy the triangular inequality. Interconnections and variations between
these families are explored in studies like (f, Γ)-Divergences (Birrell et al., 2022), which interpolate
between f -divergences and IPMs, and research outlining optimal bounds between them (Agrawal &
Horel, 2020).
MLLS (Garg et al., 2020) employs f -divergence, notably the KL divergence, which is not a metric as
it doesn’t satisfy the triangular inequality, and requires distribution P to be absolutely continuous
with respect to Q. Concerning IPMs, while MMD is reliant on a kernel function, it can suffer from the
curse of dimensionality when faced with high-dimensional data. On the other hand, the Wasserstein
distance can be reformulated using Kantorovich-Rubinstein duality (Dedecker et al., 2006; Arjovsky
et al., 2017) as a maximization problem subject to a Lipschitz constrained function f : Rd → R.


                                                  18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


B    BBSE AND MLLS FAMILY
In this section, we summarize the contributions of BBSE (Lipton et al., 2018) and MLLS (Garg et al.,
2020). Our objective is to estimate the ratio pte (y)/ptr (y). We consider a scenario with m possible
                                                                  ⋆ ⊤
label classes, where y = c for c ∈ [m]. Let r ⋆ = [r1⋆ , . . . , rm ] represent the true ratios, with each
 ⋆               ⋆    pte (y=c)
rc defined as rc = ptr (y=c) (Garg et al., 2020). We then define a family of distributions over Z,
parameterized by r = [r1 , . . . , rm ]⊤ ∈ Rm , where rc is the c-th element of the ratio vector.
                                          m
                                          X
                              pr (z) :=               pte (z|y = c) · ptr (y = c) · rc               (10)
                                          c=1
                                  Pm                         Pm
Here, rc ≥ 0 for c ∈ [m] and c=1 rc · ptr (y = c) = c=1 pte (y = c) = 1 as constraints. When
r = r ⋆ , e.g., rc = rc⋆ for c ∈ [m], we have pr (z) = pr⋆ (z) = pte (z) (Garg et al., 2020). So our task
is to find r such that
                                    Xm
                                        pte (z|y = c) · ptr (y = c) · rc x
                                   c=1
                                       m
                                                                                                     (11)
                                       X
                                                 tr                        te
                                   =         p (z, y = c) · rc = p (z)
                                       c=1

Lipton et al. (2018) introduced Black Box Shift Estimation (BBSE) to address this issue. With a
pre-trained classifier f for the classification task, BBSE assumes that the latent space Z is discrete
and defines p(z|x) = δarg max f (x) , where the output of f (x) is a probability vector (or a simplex)
over m classes. BBSE estimates pte (z|y) as a confusion matrix, using both the training and validation
data. It calculates ptr (y = c) from the training set and pte (z) from the test data. The problem then
reduces to solving the following equation:


                                                        Aw = B                                       (12)
where |Z| = m, A ∈ Rm×m with Ajc = pte (z = j|y = c) · ptr (y = c), and B ∈ Rm with
Bj = pte (z = j) for c, j ∈ [m].
The estimation of the confusion matrix in terms of pte (z|y) leads to the loss of calibration information
(Garg et al., 2020). Furthermore, when defining Z as a continuous latent space, the confusion matrix
becomes intractable since z has infinitely many values. Therefore, MLLS directly minimizes the
divergence between pte (z) and pr (z), instead of solving the linear system in Equation (12).
Within the f -divergence family, MLLS seeks to find a weight vector r by minimizing the KL-
divergence DKL (pte (z), pr (z)) = Ete [log pte (z)/pr (z)], for pr (z) defined in Equation (10). Lever-
aging on the properties of the logarithm, this is equivalent to maximizing the log-likelihood:
r := arg maxr∈R Ete [log pr (z)]. Expanding pr (z), we have
                                        "        m
                                                                     #
                                               X
                                                    tr
                  Ete [log pr (z)] = Ete log(      p (z, y = c)rc )
                                                         c=1
                                             "     m
                                                                                      #              (13)
                                                  X
                                   = Ete      log(   ptr (y = c | z)rc ) + log ptr (z) .
                                                         c=1

Therefore the unified form of MLLS can be formulated as:
                                          "     m
                                                                      #
                                               X
                          r := arg max Ete log(    ptr (y = c | z)rc ) .                             (14)
                                    r∈R                        c=1

This is a convex optimization problem and can be solved efficiently using methods such as EM,
an analytic approach, and also iterative optimization methods like gradient descent with labeled
training data and unlabeled test data. MLLS defines the p(z|x) as δx , plugs in the pre-defined f to
approximate ptr (y|x) and optimizes the following objective:


                                                            19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                      rf := arg max ℓ(r, f ) := arg max Ete log(f (x)T r) .

                                                                                               (15)
                               r∈R                   r∈R


With the Bias-Corrected Calibration (BCT) (Shrikumar et al., 2019) strategy, they adjust the logits
fˆ(x) of f (x) element-wise for each class, and the objective becomes:

                                                        h                  i
                   rf := arg max ℓ(r, f ) := arg max Ete log(g ◦ fˆ(x))T r) ,                  (16)
                             r∈R                r∈R

where g is a calibration function.


                                                20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


C     P ROOF OF P ROPOSITION 4.1

In the following, we consider four typical scenarios under various distribution shifts described
in Table 1 and formulate their IW-ERM with a focus on minimizing R1 .

C.1   N O I NTRA - NODE L ABEL S HIFT

For simplicity, we assume that there are only 2 nodes, but our results can be extended to multiple
nodes. This scenario assumes ptrk (y) = pte                       tr        tr
                                         k (y) for k = 1, 2, but p1 (y) ̸= p2 (y). Node 1 aims to learn
               tr
              p (y)
hw assuming p1tr (y) is given. We consider the following IW-ERM that is consistent in minimizing R1 :
               2


                                       1  ntr
                                  1 X
                             min tr      ℓ(hw (xtr1,i ), y1,i
                                                          tr
                                                              )
                            hw ∈H n1
                                     i=1
                                                tr
                                                                                                  (17)
                                            n2
                                          1 X  ptr1 (y2,i
                                                      tr
                                                          )
                                   +                             ℓ(hw (xtr2,i ), y2,i
                                                                                  tr
                                                                                      ).
                                         ntr2 i=1 ptr2 (y2,i
                                                         tr
                                                             )

Here H is the hypothesis class of hw . This scenario is referred to as No-LS.

C.2   L ABEL S HIFT ONLY FOR N ODE 1

Here we consider label shift only for node 1, i.e., ptr1 (y) ̸= pte         tr       te
                                                                 1 (y) and p2 (y) = p2 (y). We consider
the following IW-ERM:
                                          ntr
                                  1 X  1
                                         pte    tr
                                          1 (y1,i )
                             min tr       tr    tr    ℓ(hw (xtr1,i ), y1,i
                                                                       tr
                                                                           )
                            hw ∈H n1     p   (y     )
                                     i=1 1      1,i
                                                tr
                                                                                                  (18)
                                           n2
                                         1 X  pte  tr
                                               1 (y2,i )
                                   +                             ℓ(hw (xtr2,i ), y2,i
                                                                                  tr
                                                                                      ).
                                         ntr2 i=1 ptr2 (y2,i
                                                         tr
                                                             )

This scenario is referred to as LS on single.

C.3   L ABEL SHIFT FOR BOTH NODES

Here we assume ptr1 (y) ̸= pte         tr        te
                            1 (y) and p2 (y) ̸= p2 (y), i.e., label shift for both nodes. The cor-
responding IW-ERM is the same as Eq. Equation (18). This scenario is referred to as LS on
both.
Without loss of generality and for simplicity, we set l = 1. We consider four typical scenarios under
various distribution shifts and formulate their IW-ERM with a focus on minimizing R1 . The details
of these scenarios are summarized in Table 1.

C.4   M ULTIPLE N ODES

Here we consider a general scenario with K nodes. We assume both intra-node and inter-node label
shifts by the following IW-ERM:
                                                 tr
                                   K   nk
                                   X 1 X  pte  tr
                                           1 (yk,i )
                            min                                  ℓ(hw (xtrk,i ), yk,i
                                                                                  tr
                                                                                      ),          (19)
                           hw ∈H         ntrk i=1 ptrk (yk,i
                                                         tr
                                                             )
                                   k=1

This scenario is referred to as LS on multi.
For the scenario without intra-node label shift, the IW-ERM in Equation (17) can be expressed as


                                                       21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                             ntr
                         1 X  2
                                ptr1 (y2,i
                                        tr
                                            )           tr      tr
                          tr     tr     tr ℓ(hw (x2,i ), y2,i )
                         n2 i=1 p2 (y2,i    )
                                                             tr
                                 ntr2 →∞                    p (y)
                                −−    −−→ Eptr2 (x,y) 1tr          ℓ(hw (x), y)
                                                            p2 (y)
                                      Z tr
                                           p1 (y)
                                =             tr     Ep(x|y) [ℓ(hw (x), y)]ptr2 (y)dy)
                                           p     (y)                                               (20)
                                      ZY 2
                                =          ptr1 (y)Ep(x|y) [ℓ(hw (x), y)]dy
                                       Y
                                      Z
                                =          pte
                                            1 (y)Ep(x|y) [ℓ(hw (x), y)]dy
                                        Y
                                    = Epte1 (x,y) [ℓ(hw (x), y)]
                                    = R1 (hw ).

where the second equality holds due to the assumption of the label shift setting and Bayes’ theorem:
p(x, y) = p(x|y) · p(y), and the fourth equality holds by the assumption that ptr1 (y) = pte
                                                                                          1 (y) in the
No-LS setting.
For the scenario with label shift only for Node 1 or for both nodes, the IW-ERM in Equation (18)
admits
                              ntr
                         1 X    2
                                  pte     tr
                                   1 (y2,i )
                                                ℓ(hw (xtr2,i ), y2,i
                                                                 tr
                                                                     )                             (21)
                         ntr2 i=1 ptr2 (y2,i
                                         tr
                                              )
                                                            te
                                   ntr2 →∞                   p1 (y)
                                  −−−−→ Eptr2 (x,y) tr                ℓ(hw (x), y)                 (22)
                                                             p2 (y)
                                       Z te
                                             p1 (y)
                                  =            tr   Ep(x|y) [ℓ(hw (x), y)]ptr2 (y)dy               (23)
                                         Y p2 (y)
                                       Z
                                  =          pte
                                              1 (y = y)Ep(x|y) [ℓ(hw (x), y)]dy                    (24)
                                        Y
                                    = Epte1 (x,y) [ℓ(hw (x), y)]                                   (25)
                                    = R1 (hw ).                                                    (26)

For multiple nodes, let k ∈ [K]. Similarly, we have
                             ntr
                        1 X  k
                               pte  tr
                                1 (yk,i )                        ntrk →∞
                         tr     tr  tr    ℓ(hw (xtrk,i ), yk,i
                                                           tr
                                                               ) −−  −−→ R1 (hw ).                 (27)
                        nk i=1 pk (yk,i )

Then we have
                             tr
                   K   nk
                   X 1 X  pte  tr
                           1 (yk,i )                       ntr ,...,ntr →∞
                        tr   tr tr ℓ(hw (xtrk,i ), yk,i
                                                    tr
                                                        ) −−1−−−−K−−−→ R1 (hw ).                   (28)
                      n     p (y )
                   k=1 k i=1 k k,i

                                                                   pte (y)
Note that to solve Equation (19), node 1 needs to estimate ptr1 (y) for all nodes k in Equation (19).
                                                                    k

The consistency of Equation (IW-ERM), i.e., convergence in probability, is followed the standard
arguments in e.g., (Shimodaira, 2000)[Section 3] and (Sugiyama et al., 2007)[Section 2.2] using the
law of large numbers.


                                                      22
     Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


     D    A LGORITHMIC D ESCRIPTION
 1
 2   # Split the training dataset on each node
 3   trainsets = target_shift.split_dataset(trainset.data, trainset.targets,
         node_label_dist_train, transform=transform_train)
 4
 5   # Split the test dataset on each node
 6   testsets = target_shift.split_dataset(testset.data, testset.targets,
         node_label_dist_test, transform=transform_test)
 7
 8   # Initialize K local models (nets) for each node
 9   nets = [initialize_model() for _ in range(node_num)]
10
11   # Initialize the estimator for each local model
12   estimators = [LS_RatioModel(nets[k]) for k in range(node_num)]
13
14   # Initialize tensors to store the estimated ratios, values, and marginal
         values for each pair of nodes.
15   estimated_ratios = torch.zeros(node_num, node_num, nclass)
16   estimated_values = torch.zeros(node_num, node_num, nclass)
17   marginal_values = torch.zeros(node_num, nclass)
18
19   # Phase 1: Compute the estimated ratios for each node pair (k, j)
20   for k in range(node_num):
21       for j in range(node_num):
22           # Perform test on node k using node j’s testset
23           estimated_ratios[k, j] = estimators[k](testsets[j].data.cpu().
         numpy())
24
25   # Phase 2: Compute the marginal values on each node’s training set
26   for i, trainset in enumerate(trainsets):
27       marginal_values[i] = marginal(trainset.targets)
28
29   # Phase 3: Compute the final estimated values for each node
30   for k in range(node_num):
31       for j in range(node_num):
32           estimated_values[k, j] = marginal_values[j] * estimated_ratios[k,
          j]
33
34   # Aggregate the estimated values across nodes
35   aggregated_values = torch.sum(estimated_values, dim=1)
36
37   # Compute the final ratios for each node
38   ratios = (aggregated_values / marginal_values).to(args.device)
           Listing 1: Our VRLS in distributed learning. It is the implementation of Algorithm 2


                                                    23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


E    P ROOF OF T HEOREM 5.1
Proof. Let H(r, θ, x) = − log(f (x, θ)⊤ r). From the strong convexity in Lemma E.7, we have that
                                                  2
                          ∥r̂nte − rf ⋆ ∥22 ≤         (Lθ⋆ (r̂nte ) − Lθ⋆ (rf ⋆ ))                    (29)
                                                µpmin

Now focusing on the term on the right-hand side, we find by invoking Lemma E.4 that
           Lθ⋆ (r̂nte ) − Lθ⋆ (rf ⋆ )

           ≤ E H(r̂nte , θ̂ntr , x) − E H(rf ⋆ , θ̂ntr , x) + 2LE ∥θ̂ntr − θ ⋆ ∥2
                                          nte                             nte
                                        1 X                             1 X
           = E H(r̂nte , θ̂ntr , x) − te      H(r̂nte , θ̂ntr , xj ) + te     H(r̂n , θ̂ntr , xj )
                                       n j=1                           n j=1

                                                                               ⋆
                                     − E H(rf , θ̂n , x) + 2LE ∥θ̂n − θ ∥2
                                              ⋆    tr                     tr


                                          nte                             nte
                                        1 X                             1 X
           ≤ E H(r̂nte , θ̂ntr , x) − te      H(r̂nte , θ̂ntr , xj ) + te     H(rf ⋆ , θ̂ntr , xj )
                                       n j=1                           n j=1

                                                                               ⋆
                                    − E H(rf ⋆ , θ̂ntr , x) + 2LE ∥θ̂ntr − θ ∥2 ,

                                                                                                      (30)
                                                                                      1
                                                                                        Pn
where in the last inequality we used the fact that r̂n is a minimizer of r 7→ n j=1 H(r, θ̂t , xj ).
Finally by using Lemma E.5 and Lemma E.6 with δ/2 each, we have that with probability 1 − δ,
                                                                               r
                                       4                          ⋆                log(4/δ)
         Lθ⋆ (r̂nte ) − Lθ⋆ (rf ⋆ ) ≤ √ Rad(F) + 2LE ∥θ̂ntr − θ ∥2 + 4B                         (31)
                                       n te                                             nte
Plugging this back into Equation (29), we have that
                                                 r            !
                 2       2         4                 log(4/δ)       4L      h
                                                                                           ⋆
                                                                                             i
  ∥r̂nte − rf ⋆ ∥2 ≤            √ Rad(F) + 4B                   +        E    ∥θ̂ n tr − θ ∥2 . (32)
                       µpmin       nte                  nte        µpmin


Lemma E.1. For any r ∈ Rm
                        + , θ ∈ Θ, x ∈ X , we have that
                                                             1
                                           r ⊤ f (x, θ) ≤        .
                                                            pmin

Proof. Applying Hölder’s inequality we have that
                          r ⊤ f (x, θ) ≤ ∥r∥∞ ∥f (x, θ)∥1 = ∥r∥∞ .
                                                                                    1
Moreover, since r ∈ Rm
                                       P
                     + , we have that    y ry ptr (y) = 1 This implies that ∥r∥∞ ≤ pmin , which
yields the result.
Lemma E.2 (Implication of Assumption Assumption 5.1). Under Assumption 5.1, there exists B > 0
such that for any r ∈ Rm
                       + , θ ∈ Θ, x ∈ X ,

                                         | log(r ⊤ f (x, θ))| ≤ B.

Proof. Since r ∈ Rm   + , it has at least one non-zero coordinate and f (x, θ) is the output of a softmax
layer so all of its coordinates are non-zero. Consequently,
                                                r ⊤ f (x, θ) > 0
So by Assumption 5.1, the function (r, θ, x) 7→ log(r ⊤ f (x, θ)) is defined and continuous over a
compact set, so there exists a constant B giving us the result.


                                                      24
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Lemma E.3 (Population Strong Convexity). Let H(r, θ, x) = − log(r ⊤ f (x, θ)). Under Assump-
tion Assumption 5.2, the function

                                  Lθ⋆ : r 7→ E H(r, θ ⋆ , x)

is µpmin -strongly convex.

Proof. We first compute the Hessian of L to find that

                         2                    1                 ⋆        ⋆ ⊤
                       ∇ L(r) = E                        f (x, θ )f (x, θ ) .
                                      (r ⊤ f (x, θ ⋆ ))2
Since by Lemma E.1, we have that r ⊤ f (x, θ ⋆ ) ≤ p−1
                                                    min , we conclude that

                      2                           ⋆        ⋆ ⊤
                    ∇ L(r) ⪰ pmin E f (x, θ )f (x, θ ) ⪰ µpmin Im .


Lemma E.4 (Lipschitz Parametrization). Let H(r, θ, x) = − log(f (x, θ)⊤ r). There exists L > 0
such that for any θ1 , θ2 ∈ Θ, and r ∈ Rm + , we have that
                            |H(r, θ1 , x) − H(r, θ2 , x)| ≤ L∥θ1 − θ2 ∥2 .

Proof. The gradient of H with respect to θ is given by
                                                      1
                           ∇θ H(r, θ, x) = −                 ∇θ f (x, θ)
                                                 f (x, θ)⊤ r
                                                1
Reasoning like in Lemma E.1, we know that f (x,θ) ⊤ r is defined and continuous over the compact set

of its parameters, we also know that f is a neural network parametrized by θ, hence ∇θ f (x, θ) is
bounded when θ and x are bounded. Consequently, under Assumption 5.1, there exists a constant
L > 0 such that
                                     ∥∇θ H(r, θ, x)∥2 ≤ L.


Lemma E.5 (Uniform Bound 1). Let δ ∈ (0, 1), with probability 1 − δ, we have that
                                                 n
                                             1X
                        E H(r̂n , θ̂t , x) −        H(r̂n , θ̂t , xj )
                                             n j=1
                                              r                                                (33)
                             2                   log(4/δ)
                        ≤ √ Rad(F) + 2B                     .
                              n                      n

Proof. Let δ ∈ (0, 1). Since r̂n is learned from the samples xj , we do not have independence, which
would have allowed us to apply a concentration inequality. Hence, we derive a uniform bound as
follows. We begin by observing that:
                                                   n
                                                1X
                          E H(r̂n , θ̂t , x) −        H(r̂n , θ̂t , xj )
                                                n j=1
                                                                          
                                                          n
                                                       1 X
                          ≤ sup E H(r, θ, x) −                H(r, θ, xj )
                              r,θ                      n j=1

Now since Lemma E.2 holds, we can apply McDiarmid’s Inequality to get that with probability 1 − δ,
we have:                                             
                                        n
                                    1 X
            sup E H(r, θ, x) −           H(r, θ, xj )
             r,θ                    n j=1
                                                           
                                             n
                                                                       r
                                       1X                                log(2/δ)
             ≤ E sup E H(r, θ, x) −            H(r, θ, xj ) + 2B
                   r,θ                    n j=1                              n


                                                  25
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


The expectation of the supremum on the right-hand side can be bounded by the Rademacher com-
plexity of F := {x 7→ r ⊤ f (x, θ), (r, θ) ∈ Rm
                                              + × Θ}, and we obtain:
                                                                   
                                                     n
                                                 1X
                           sup E H(r, θ, x) −          H(r, θ, xj )
                            r,θ                   n j=1
                                                                                         (34)
                                                r
                                2                 log(2/δ)
                            ≤ √ Rad(F) + 2B                .
                                 n                   n


Lemma E.6 (Uniform Bound 2). Let δ ∈ (0, 1), with probability 1 − δ, we have that
                                                 n
                                             1X
                       E H(rf ⋆ , θ̂t , x) −        H(rf ⋆ , θ̂t , xj )
                                             n j=1
                                              r                                                (35)
                            2                   log(2/δ)
                       ≤ √ Rad(F) + 2B                   .
                             n                      n

Proof. The proof is identical to that of Lemma E.5.
Lemma E.7 (Strong Convexity of Population Loss). Let L(r, θ) be the population loss as defined in
Lemma E.7. We establish that L(r, θ) is µpmin -strongly convex under the assumptions of calibration
(Assumption 5.2).

Proof. We compute the Hessian of the population loss L as in Lemma E.7, obtaining that:

                         2                     1                       ⊤
                       ∇ L(r) = E                      f (x, θ)f (x, θ) .
                                       (r ⊤ f (x, θ))2
From Lemma E.1, we have that r ⊤ f (x, θ) ≤ p−1
                                             min . Therefore, we conclude:

                      2                                  ⊤
                    ∇ L(r) ⪰ pmin E f (x, θ)f (x, θ) ⪰ µpmin Im .



Lemma E.8 (Bound on Empirical Loss). Under Assumption 5.1, the empirical loss Lnte (r, θ̂ntr )
satisfies the following concentration bound:
                                                             !
                    P sup Lnte (r, θ̂ntr ) − L(r, θ̂ntr ) > ϵ ≤ 2 exp −cnte ϵ2 .

                     r∈Rm
                        +



Proof. This result follows from standard concentration inequalities, such as McDiarmid’s inequality,
together with the Lipschitz continuity of the loss function L with respect to the samples.


                                                26
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


F    P ROOF OF T HEOREM 5.2 AND C ONVERGENCE - COMMUNICATION
     G UARANTEES FOR IW-ERM WITH VRLS
We now establish convergence rates for IW-ERM with VRLS and show our proposed importance
weighting achieves the same rates with the data-dependent constant terms increase linearly with
maxy∈Y supf rf (y) = rmax under negligible communication overhead over the baseline ERM-
solvers without importance weighting. In Appendix F, we establish tight convergence rates and
communication guarantees for IW-ERM with VRLS in a broad range of importance optimization
settings including convex optimization, second-order differentiability, composite optimization with
proximal operator, optimization with adaptive step-sizes, and nonconvex optimization, along the lines
of e.g., (Woodworth et al., 2020; Haddadpour et al., 2021; Glasgow et al., 2022; Liu et al., 2023; Hu
& Huang, 2023; Wu et al., 2023; Liu et al., 2023).
By estimating the ratios locally and absorbing into local losses, we note that the properties of the
modified local loss w.r.t. the neural network parameters w, e.g., convexity and smoothness, do not
change. The data-dependent parameters such as Lipschitz and smoothness constants for ℓ ◦ hw w.r.t.
w are scaled linearly by rmax . Our method of importance ratio estimation trains the pre-defined
predictor exclusively using local training data, which implies IW-ERM with VRLS achieves the same
privacy guarantees as the baseline ERM-solvers without importance weighting. For ratio estimation,
the communication between clients involves only the estimated marginal label distribution, instead
of data, ensuring negligible communication overhead. Given the size of variables to represent
marginal distributions, which is by orders of magnitude smaller than the number of parameters
of the underlying neural networks for training and the fact that ratio estimation involves only one
round of communication, the overall communication overhead for ratio estimation is masked by the
communication costs of model training. The communication costs for IW-ERM with VRLS over the
course of optimization are exactly the same as those of the baseline ERM-solvers without importance
weighting. All in all, importance weighting does not negatively impact communication guarantees
throughout the course of optimization, which proves Theorem 5.2.
In the following, we establish tight convergence rates and communication guarantees for IW-ERM
with VRLS in a broad range of importance optimization settings including convex optimization,
second-order differentiability, composite optimization with proximal operator, optimization with
adaptive step-sizes, and nonconvex optimization.
For convex and second-order Differentiable optimization, we establish a lower bound on the conver-
gence rates for IW-ERM in with VRLS and local updating along the lines of e.g., (Glasgow et al.,
2022, Theorem 3.1).
Assumption F.1 (PL with Compression). 1) The ℓ(hw (x), y) is β-smoothness and convex w.r.t. w
for any (x, y) and satisfies Polyak-Łojasiewicz (PL) condition (there exists αℓ > 0 such that, for all
w ∈ W, we have ℓ(hw ) ≤ ∥∇w ℓ(hw )∥22 /(2αℓ ); 2) The compression scheme Q is unbiased with
bounded variance, i.e., E[Q(x)] = x and E[∥Q(x) − x∥22 ≤ q∥x∥22 ]; 3) The stochastic gradient
g(w) = ∇ e w ℓ(hw ) is unbiased, i.e., E[g(w)] = ∇w ℓ(hw ) for any w ∈ W with bounded variance
E[∥g(w) − ∇w ℓ(hw )∥22 ].
For nonconvex optimization with PL condition and communication compression, we establish
convergence and communication guarantees for IW-ERM with VRLS, compression, and local
updating along the lines of e.g., (Haddadpour et al., 2021, Theorem 5.1).
Theorem F.1 (Convergence and Communication Bounds for Nonconvex Optimization with PL). Let
κ denote the condition number, τ denote the number of local steps, R denote the number of communi-
cation rounds, and maxy∈Y supf rf (y) = rmax . Under Assumption F.1, suppose Algorithm 2 with τ
local updates and communication compression (Haddadpour et al., 2021, Algorithm 1) is run for
T = τ R total stochastic gradients per node with fixed step-sizes η = 1/(2rmax βγτ (q/K + 1)) and
γ ≥ K. Then we have E[ℓ(hwT ) − ℓ(hw⋆ )] ≤ ϵ by setting
                           q               1                        q+1
                     R≲         + 1 κ log         and τ ≲                        .              (36)
                            K               ϵ                  K(q/K + 1)ϵ
Assumption F.2 (Nonconvex Optimization with Adaptive Step-sizes). 1) The ℓ ◦ hw is β-smoothness
with bounded gradients; 2) The stochastic gradients g(w) = ∇    e w ℓ(hw ) is unbiased with bounded
variance E[∥g(w) − ∇w ℓ(hw )∥22 ]; 3) Adaptive matrices At constructed as in (Wu et al., 2023,
Algorithm 2) are diagonal and the minimum eigenvalues satisfy λmin (At ) ≥ ρ > 0 for some ρ ∈ R+ .


                                                 27
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


For nonconvex optimization with adaptive step-sizes, we establish convergence and communication
guarantees for IW-ERM with VRLS and local updating along the lines of e.g., (Wu et al., 2023,
Theorem 2).
Theorem F.2 (Convergence and Communication Guarantees for Nonconvex Optimization with
Adaptive Step-sizes). Let τ denote the number of local steps, R denote the number of communication
rounds, and maxy∈Y supf rf (y) = rmax . Under Assumption F.2, suppose Algorithm 2 with τ local
updates is run for T = τ R total stochastic gradients per node with an adaptive step-size similar
to (Wu et al., 2023, Algorithm 2). Then we E[∥∇w ℓ(hwT )∥2 ] ≤ ϵ by setting:
                                        rmax                rmax
                                   T ≲     3
                                               and R ≲ 2 .                                       (37)
                                        Kϵ                    ϵ
Assumption F.3 (Composite Optimization with Proximal Operator). 1) The ℓ ◦ hw is smooth and
strongly convex with condition number κ; 2) The stochastic gradients g(w) = ∇ e w ℓ(hw ) is unbiased.

For composite optimization with strongly convex and smooth functions and proximal operator, we
establish an upper bound on oracle complexity to achieve ϵ error on the Lyapunov function defined as
in (Hu & Huang, 2023, Section 4) for Gradient Flow-type transformation of IW-ERM with VRLS in
the limit of infinitesimal step-size.
Theorem F.3 (Oracle Complexity of Proximal Operator for Composite Optimization). Let κ denote
the condition number. Under Assumption F.3, suppose Gradient Flow-type transformation of Al-
gorithm 2 with VRLS and Proximal Operator evolves√in the limit of infinitesimal step-size (Hu &
Huang, 2023, Algorithm 3). Then it achieves O rmax κ log(1/ϵ) Proximal Operator Complexity.


                                                 28
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


G    C OMPLEXITY A NALYSIS
In our algorithm, the ratio estimation is performed once in parallel before the IW-ERM step.
In the experiments, we used a simple network to estimate the ratios in advance, which required
significantly less computational effort compared to training the global model. Although IW-ERM
with VRLS introduces additional computational complexity compared to the baseline FedAvg, it
results in substantial improvements in overall generalization, particularly under challenging label
shift conditions.


                                                29
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


H    M ATHEMATICAL N OTATIONS
In this appendix, we provide a summary of mathematical notations used in this paper in Table 5:

                                        Table 5: Math Symbols

          Math Symbol      Definition
          X                Compact metric space for features
          Y                Discrete label space with |Y| = m
          K                Number of clients in an FL setting
          Sk               All samples in the training set of client k
          hw               Hypothesis function hw : X → Y
          H                Hypothesis class for hw
          Z                Mapping space from X , which can be discrete or continuous


                                                 30
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


I   L IMITATIONS
The distribution shifts observed in real-world data are often not fully captured by the label shift or
relaxed distribution shift assumptions. In our experiments, we applied mild test data augmentation to
approximate the relaxed label shift and manage ratio estimation errors for both the baselines and our
method. However, the label shift assumption remains overly restrictive, and the relaxed label shift
lacks robust empirical validation in practical scenarios.
Additionally, IW-ERM’s parameter estimation relies on local predictors at each client, which limits
its scalability. In practice, a simpler global predictor could be sufficient for parameter estimation and
IW-ERM training. Future research could explore VRLS variants capable of effectively handling more
complex distribution shifts in challenging datasets, such as CIFAR-10.1 (Recht et al., 2018; Torralba
et al., 2008), as suggested in (Garg et al., 2023).


                                                   31
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


J     E XPERIMENTAL D ETAILS AND A DDITIONAL E XPERIMENTS
In this section, we provide experimental details and additional experiments. In particular, we validate
our theory on multiple clients in a federated setting and show that our IW-ERM outperforms FedAvg
and FedBN baselines under drastic and challenging label shifts.

J.1   E XPERIMENTAL D ETAILS

In single-client experiments, a simple MLP without dropout is used as the predictor for MNIST, and
ResNet-18 for CIFAR-10.
For experiments in a federated learning setting, both MNIST (LeCun et al., 1998) and Fashion
MNIST (Xiao et al., 2017) datasets are employed, each containing 60,000 training samples and
10,000 test samples, with each sample being a 28 by 28 pixel grayscale image. The CIFAR-10
dataset (Krizhevsky) comprises 60,000 colored images, sized 32 by 32 pixels, spread across 10
classes with 6,000 images per class; it is divided into 50,000 training images and 10,000 test images.
In this setting, the objective is to minimize the cross-entropy loss. Stochastic gradients for each client
are calculated with a batch size of 64 and aggregated on the server using the Adam optimizer. LeNet
is used for experiments on MNIST and Fashion MNIST with a learning rate of 0.001 and a weight
decay of 1 × 10−6 . For CIFAR-10, ResNet-18 is employed with a learning rate of 0.0001 and a
weight decay of 0.0001. Three independent runs are implemented for 5-client experiments on Fashion
MNIST and CIFAR-10, while for 10 clients, one run is conducted on CIFAR-10. The regularization
coefficient ζ in Equation (4) is set to 1 for all experiments. All experiments are performed using a
single GPU on an internal cluster and Colab.
Importantly, the training of the predictor for ratio estimation on both the baseline MLLS and our
VRLS is executed with identical hyperparameters and epochs for CIFAR-10 and Fashion MNIST.
The training is halted once the classification loss reaches a predefined threshold on MNIST.

J.2   R ELAXED L ABEL S HIFT E XPERIMENTS

In conventional label shift, it is assumed that p(x | y) remains unchanged across training and test
data. However, this assumption is often too strong for real-world applications, such as in healthcare,
where different hospitals may use varying equipment, leading to shifts in p(x | y) even with the same
labels (Rajendran et al., 2023). Relaxed label shift loosens this assumption by allowing small changes
in the conditional distribution (Garg et al., 2023; Luo & Ren, 2022).
To formalize this, we use the distributional distance D and a relaxation parameter ϵ > 0, as defined by
Garg et al. (2023): maxy D (ptr (x | y), pte (x | y)) ≤ ϵ. This allows for slight differences in feature
distributions between training and testing, capturing a more realistic scenario where the conditional
distribution is not strictly invariant.
In our case, visual inspection suggests that the differences between temporally distinct datasets,
such as CIFAR-10 and CIFAR-10.1 v6 (Torralba et al., 2008; Recht et al., 2018), may not meet
the assumption of a small ϵ. To address this, we instead simulate controlled shifts using test data
augmentation, allowing us to regulate the degree of relaxation, following the approach outlined in
Garg et al. (2023).

J.3   A DDITIONAL E XPERIMENTS

In this section, we provide supplementary results, visualizations of accuracy across clients and tables
showing dataset distribution in FL setting and relaxed label shift.


                                                   32
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 3: MSE analysis on MNIST for MLLS baselines. Left: Performance evaluation across various
alpha values, comparing different methods: MLLS EM, MLLS L1, MLLS L2, and MLLS CG.
MLLS L1 and MLLS L2 utilize convex optimization with L1 and L2 regularization for estimating
our limited test sample problem, respectively, and are solved directly with a convex solver. In
contrast, MLLS CG uses conjugate gradient descent and MLLS EM solves this convex optimization
problem with EM algorithm. Both the EM and convex optimization methods (MLLS L1, MLLS L2)
demonstrate superior and more consistent performance, especially under severe label shift conditions,
when compared to MLLS CG. Middle: At an alpha value of 1.0, the MSE analysis shows comparable
performance across most methods, with the exception of MLLS CG, which lags behind. Right: For
alpha=0.1, MLLS CG performs significantly worse than the EM and convex optimization methods,
consistent with the trends observed in the left plot.


Figure 4: In our detailed analysis with the MNIST dataset, we conduct a thorough comparison of
VRLS alongside MLLS (Garg et al., 2020), EM (Saerens et al., 2002), and also RLLS (Azizzade-
nesheli et al., 2019).


Table 6: LeNet on Fashion MNIST with label shift across 5 clients. 15,000 iterations for FedAvg and
FedBN; 5,000 for Upper Bound (FTW-ERM) using true ratios and our IW-ERM. To mention, to train
our predictor, we use a simpliest MLP and employ linear kernel.

 FMNIST               Our IW-ERM            FedAvg              FedBN                Upper Bound
 Avg. accuracy        0.7520 ± 0.0209       0.5472 ± 0.0297     0.5359 ± 0.0306      0.8273 ± 0.0041
 Client 1 accuracy    0.7162 ± 0.0059       0.3616 ± 0.0527     0.3261 ± 0.0296      0.8590 ± 0.0062
 Client 2 accuracy    0.9266 ± 0.0125       0.9060 ± 0.0157     0.9035 ± 0.0162      0.9357 ± 0.0037
 Client 3 accuracy    0.6724 ± 0.0467       0.3279 ± 0.0353     0.3612 ± 0.0814      0.7896 ± 0.0109
 Client 4 accuracy    0.7979 ± 0.0448       0.6858 ± 0.0105     0.6654 ± 0.0121      0.8098 ± 0.0112
 Client 5 accuracy    0.6468 ± 0.0248       0.4548 ± 0.0655     0.4234 ± 0.0387      0.7426 ± 0.0257


                                                 33
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


  Figure 5: In this experiment with Fashion MNIST, a simple MLP with dropout were employed.

Table 7: ResNet-18 on CIFAR-10 with label shift across 5 clients. For fair comparison, we run 5,000
iterations for our method and Upper Bound, while 10000 for FedAvg and FedBN.

 CIFAR-10             Our IW-ERM            FedAvg              FedBN               Upper Bound
 Avg. accuracy        0.5640 ± 0.0241       0.4515 ± 0.0148     0.4263 ± 0.0975     0.5790 ± 0.0103
 Client 1 accuracy    0.6410 ± 0.0924       0.5405 ± 0.1845     0.5321 ± 0.0620     0.7462 ± 0.0339
 Client 2 accuracy    0.8434 ± 0.0359       0.3753 ± 0.0828     0.4656 ± 0.2158     0.7509 ± 0.0534
 Client 3 accuracy    0.4591 ± 0.1131       0.3973 ± 0.1333     0.2838 ± 0.1055     0.5845 ± 0.0854
 Client 4 accuracy    0.4751 ± 0.1241       0.5007 ± 0.1303     0.5256 ± 0.1932     0.3507 ± 0.0578
 Client 5 accuracy    0.4013 ± 0.0430       0.4429 ± 0.1195     0.5603 ± 0.1581     0.4627 ± 0.0456


Figure 6: The average, best-client, and worst-client accuracy, along with their standard deviations,
are derived from Table 6. Our method exhibits the lowest standard deviation, showcasing the most
robust accuracy amongst the compared methods.


Figure 7: The average, best-client, and worst-client accuracy, along with their standard deviations,
are derived from Table 7.


                                                34
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Table 8: Label distribution on Fasion MNIST with 5 nodes, with the majority of classes possessing a
limited number of training and test images across each node.

                                                          Class
                         0      1      2     3        4       5     6       7       8       9
              Train     34    34     34     34     34     5862      34     34     34      34
    Node 1
              Test     977     5      5      5      5        5       5      5      5       5
              Train     34    34     34     34     34       34    5862     34     34      34
    Node 2
              Test       5   977      5      5      5        5       5      5      5       5
              Train     34    34     34     34     34       34      34   5862     34      34
    Node 3
              Test       5     5    977      5      5        5       5      5      5       5
              Train     34    34     34     34     34       34      34     34   5862      34
    Node 4
              Test       5     5      5    977      5        5       5      5      5       5
              Train     34    34     34     34     34       34      34     34     34    5862
    Node 5
              Test       5     5      5      5    977        5       5      5      5       5


Table 9: Label distribution on CIFAR-10 with 5 clients, with the majority of classes possessing a
limited number of training and test images across each client.

                                                          Class
                         0      1      2     3        4       5     6       7       8       9
              Train     34    34     34     34     34     5862      34     34     34      34
    Node 1
              Test     977     5      5      5      5        5       5      5      5       5
              Train     34    34     34     34     34       34    5862     34     34      34
    Node 2
              Test       5   977      5      5      5        5       5      5      5       5
              Train     34    34     34     34     34       34      34   5862     34      34
    Node 3
              Test       5     5    977      5      5        5       5      5      5       5
              Train     34    34     34     34     34       34      34     34   5862      34
    Node 4
              Test       5     5      5    977      5        5       5      5      5       5
              Train     34    34     34     34     34       34      34     34     34    5862
    Node 5
              Test       5     5      5      5    977        5       5      5      5       5


                                                 35
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Table 10: Label distribution on CIFAR-10 with 100 clients, wherein groups of 10 clients share the
same distribution and ratios. The majority of classes possess a limited quantity of training and test
images on each client.

                                                             Class
                                          0         1        2        3        4
                                 Train    95/100    5/9      5/9      5/9      5/9
                Client 1-10               5/9       5/9      5/9      5/9      5/9
                                 Test
                                 Train    5/9       95/100   5/9      5/9      5/9
                Client 11-20              5/9       5/9      5/9      5/9      5/9
                                 Test
                                 Train    5/9       5/9      95/100   5/9      5/9
                Client 21-30              5/9       5/9      5/9      5/9      5/9
                                 Test
                                 Train    5/9       5/9      5/9      95/100   5/9
                Client 31-40              5/9       5/9      5/9      5/9      5/9
                                 Test
                                 Train    5/9       5/9      5/9      5/9      95/100
                Client 41-50              5/9       5/9      5/9      5/9      5/9
                                 Test
                                 Train    5/9       5/9      5/9      5/9      5/9
                Client 51-60              5/9       5/9      5/9      5/9      95/100
                                 Test
                                 Train    5/9       5/9      5/9      5/9      5/9
                Client 61-70              5/9       5/9      5/9      95/100   5/9
                                 Test
                                 Train    5/9       5/9      5/9      5/9      5/9
                Client 71-80              5/9       5/9      95/100   5/9      5/9
                                 Test
                                 Train    5/9       5/9      5/9      5/9      5/9
                Client 81-90              5/9       95/100   5/9      5/9      5/9
                                 Test
                                 Train    5/9       5/9      5/9      5/9      5/9
                Client 91-100             95/100    5/9      5/9      5/9      5/9
                                 Test
                                                             Class
                                          5         6        7        8        9
                                 Train    5/9       5/9      5/9      5/9      5/9
                Client 1-10               5/9       5/9      5/9      5/9      95/100
                                 Test
                                 Train    5/9       5/9      5/9      5/9      5/9
                Client 11-20              5/9       5/9      5/9      95/100   5/9
                                 Test
                                 Train    5/9       5/9      5/9      5/9      5/9
                Client 21-30              5/9       5/9      95/100   5/9      5/9
                                 Test
                                 Train    5/9       5/9      5/9      5/9      5/9
                Client 31-40              5/9       95/100   5/9      5/9      5/9
                                 Test
                                 Train    5/9       5/9      5/9      5/9      5/9
                Client 41-50              95/100    5/9      5/9      5/9      5/9
                                 Test
                                 Train    95/100    5/9      5/9      5/9      5/9
                Client 51-60              5/9       5/9      5/9      5/9      5/9
                                 Test
                                 Train    5/9       95/100   5/9      5/9      5/9
                Client 61-70              5/9       5/9      5/9      5/9      5/9
                                 Test
                                 Train    5/9       5/9      95/100   5/9      5/9
                Client 71-80              5/9       5/9      5/9      5/9      5/9
                                 Test
                                 Train    5/9       5/9      5/9      95/100   5/9
                Client 81-90              5/9       5/9      5/9      5/9      5/9
                                 Test
                                 Train    5/9       5/9      5/9      5/9      95/100
                Client 91-100             5/9       5/9      5/9      5/9      5/9
                                 Test


                                                   36
