Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


AGENT S KILL ACQUISITION FOR L ARGE L ANGUAGE
M ODELS VIA C YCLE QD
 So Kuroki, Taishi Nakamura, Takuya Akiba, Yujin Tang
 Sakana AI, Japan
 {sokuroki,taishi,takiba,yujintang}@sakana.ai



                                                 A BSTRACT

           Training large language models to acquire specific skills remains a challenging
           endeavor. Conventional training approaches often struggle with data distribution
           imbalances and inadequacies in objective functions that do not align well with
           task-specific performance. To address these challenges, we introduce CycleQD,
           a novel approach that leverages the Quality Diversity framework through a cyclic
           adaptation of the algorithm, along with a model merging based crossover and an
           SVD-based mutation. In CycleQD, each task’s performance metric is alternated
           as the quality measure while the others serve as the behavioral characteristics.
           This cyclic focus on individual tasks allows for concentrated effort on one task
           at a time, eliminating the need for data ratio tuning and simplifying the design of
           the objective function. Empirical results from AgentBench indicate that applying
           CycleQD to L LAMA 3-8B-I NSTRUCT based models not only enables them to sur-
           pass traditional fine-tuning methods in coding, operating systems, and database
           tasks, but also achieves performance on par with GPT-3.5- TURBO, which poten-
           tially contains much more parameters, across these domains. Crucially, this en-
           hanced performance is achieved while retaining robust language capabilities, as
           evidenced by its performance on widely adopted language benchmark tasks. We
           highlight the key design choices in CycleQD, detailing how these contribute to its
           effectiveness. Furthermore, our method is general and can be applied to image
           segmentation models, highlighting its applicability across different domains1 .


1       I NTRODUCTION                                                                                                 Q: Perf on Task Z
                                                                    Archives are initially                                                 Cyclically swap Quality
                                                                                                 BC: Perf on Task Y


                                                                   populated with expert                                                     (Q) and Behavior
Large Language Models (LLMs) have es-                              models in Generation 0                                                   Characteristics (BCs)

tablished themselves as powerful tools in                                   Generation K+1
the machine learning and artificial intelli-
gence landscape, initially gaining promi-                                                                             BC: Perf on Task X
nence through their effectiveness in con-
versational tasks (Achiam et al., 2023).                                                                                 Each archive
                                                                                                                      stores a swarm of
                                                                            Q: Perf on Task X                                                                   Q: Perf on Task Y
As the demand grows for LLMs to per-                                                                                     LLM agents
                                                                                                                                           BC: Perf on Task X
                                                       BC: Perf on Task Z


form a broader range of cognitive tasks,
the ability to integrate linguistic under-
standing with actionable outputs becomes
essential. This integration facilitates the
creation of intelligent LLM-based agents,                                   BC: Perf on Task Y                          Generation K                            BC: Perf on Task Z

making continual agentic fine-tuning a
critical development in the field (Gur et al.,    Figure 1: Method Overview. CycleQD uses QD in
2023; Liu et al., 2023b; Xi et al., 2023;         a cyclic manner to merge LLMs. Archives are initial-
2024; Wang et al., 2024b). However, train-        ized with expert LLMs, each of which has been fine-
ing LLMs to acquire various agent skills          tuned to excel in a specific task. Model merging is con-
presents two major challenges that compli-        ducted using QD, treating task performance as quality
cate their development.                           (Q) and behavior characteristics (BC), which are cycli-
                                                  cally swapped in each generation.
    1
        https://github.com/SakanaAI/CycleQD


                                                      1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A significant difficulty arises from the need to balance data ratios during training, to ensure that the
model learns effectively from datasets representing different skills without favoring any particular
one and without neglecting others. For example, researchers have identified the significant influence
of code training to a model’s inferential generation and thinking capabilities (Liu et al., 2023b).
Comparing CODELLAMA and LLAMA -2, the former shows a significant edge in tasks that follow
a relatively static procedure after being tuned on code data, yet at the same time reveals decreased
performance in tasks that require general thinking abilities.
In addition, conventional objective functions, such as next token prediction, often fail to capture
the nuances required for performance across diverse tasks, typically leading to sub-optimal training
outcomes. This function, although effective for general language understanding, does not foster the
development of specific agent skills. An alternative, such as reinforcement learning (RL), has been
shown to align LLMs with user intents more effectively: Ouyang et al. (2022) demonstrated aligning
LLMs with user intents by RL from human feedback, where a reward model is trained from a dataset
of human-ranked model outputs. This method has later on been adopted by many others and become
an industrial standard. Fortunately, unlike general language tasks, the “rewards” are clearly defined
in most agent tasks. On the other hand, managing the balance of rewards in learning tasks and the
associated costs of fine-tuning pose additional problems.
In response to these challenges, we propose CycleQD, a novel framework that leverages the Quality
Diversity (QD) method (Pugh et al., 2016), specifically through a cyclic adaptation of the MAP-
Elites algorithm (Mouret & Clune, 2015). CycleQD features a dynamic cycle where each agentic
skill’s performance metric (e.g., pass@1 for coding tasks, success rate for Operation System (OS)
and Database (DB) tasks) is optimized in isolation, with other skills represented as behavioral char-
acteristics (BCs). Unlike conventional crossover operations that randomly swap the parameters
between two genes, CycleQD employs a model merging based crossover operation (Akiba et al.,
2024), which is essential for transferring skills from specialized experts to a new, cohesive model.
Furthermore, we also introduce a singular value decomposition (SVD)-based mutation method to
extrapolate model capabilities while preventing overfitting. Unlike gradient-based fine-tuning, Cy-
cleQD reduces the need for intricate design decisions and hyperparameter tuning, while inherently
capturing diverse skills and behaviors. See Figure 1 for an overview of CycleQD.
We adopt design choices specifically targeting the two major challenges in continual agentic fine-
tuning. Our proposed method not only simplifies the complex data ratio management by focusing
on one task at a time but also addresses the inadequacy of traditional loss functions by directly op-
timizing task-specific performance metrics. Moreover, the QD framework proves ideal for model
merging, particularly in LLMs where the computational pipelines are long. By allowing locally
sub-optimal solutions to persist, such as a temporarily under-performing layer, QD saves these con-
figuration in its archive and provides them a chance to improve in the future.
The empirical results from our experiments illustrate that CycleQD significantly enhances the ability
of a L LAMA 3-8B-I NSTRUCT based LLM agent to develop and refine multiple computer science
skills. Notably, the averaged performance of the final 8-billion parameter open-weight model is on
par with that of GPT-3.5- TURBO on coding, OS and DB tasks, which potentially contains much
more parameters. This superior performance is achieved without the typical degradation associated
with shifting focus among tasks or compromising general language capabilities.
Based on these results, it is important to note that while post-training of LLMs has been dominated
by gradient-based optimizations, our method demonstrates that incorporating evolutionary algo-
rithms can serve as a compelling modification to the conventional fine-tuning pipeline, effectively
enhancing the training of LLM agents. Our technical contributions are summarized as the following:

       • We introduce CycleQD, a novel approach for merging LLM agents, each specializing in a
         different task, to create a composite LLM that outperforms baseline methods on computer
         science tasks from AgentBench (Liu et al., 2023b) and popular coding benchmarks while
         maintaining language capabilities.
       • We provide ablation studies and detailed explanations of the key design choices in Cy-
         cleQD, illustrating their pivotal roles in enhancing the method’s effectiveness.
       • We extend the application of CycleQD to the Segment Anything Model (SAM) (Kirillov
         et al., 2023), demonstrating our method’s broad applicability across domains.


                                                   2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


2     P RELIMINARIES
                                                                                      Sample
Evolutionary Strategies (ES) are optimization al-                       Quality       parents
gorithms inspired by natural selection. They im-                                                    Crossover
prove a population of candidate solutions through
mutation, crossover (i.e., recombination), and selec-
                                                                                                    Mutate


                                                             BC: Y
tion, guided by a fitness function. By maintaining
diversity, ES avoids premature convergence and is
well-suited for QD optimization, which aims to gen-                                                 Evaluate
erate diverse high-performing solutions rather than a                                      Child
                                                                                        placement
single global optimum.                                                  BC: X


MAP-Elites is a key algorithm within the QD
                                                                  Figure 2: MAP-Elites flow.
paradigm, designed to optimize for both perfor-
mance and diversity by maintaining an archive of elite solutions across a discretized space of behav-
ioral characteristics (BCs). Each cell in this archive corresponds to a unique combination of BCs,
storing the best solution found for that cell. Figure 2 illustrates an optimization step: two parents
are sampled from the archive, and a child solution is generated through crossover and mutation. The
child’s fitness and BCs are then evaluated to determine its placement in the archive, replacing the
current entry if it performs better.


3     M ETHODS

To avoid the laborious tuning of the data mixing ratio and the objective function, we introduce
CycleQD. It is built on MAP-Elites, a recognized implementation of QD, but distinguishes itself
from traditional MAP-Elites systems in three key ways (see Algorithm 1 for the pseudo-code):
Alternating Quality and BCs: Pugh et al. (2016) emphasizes the importance of well-aligned BCs
with the quality (i.e., task metric that needs to be optimized). Traditional systems typically set the
design at the onset and do not alter them throughout the QD process. In contrast, CycleQD uses task
metrics as both quality and BCs, ensuring alignment and dynamically alternating them during the
QD process (lines 6-7 in Algorithm 1). This step can be viewed as if the archive is rotated by 90
degrees after each generation before proceeding to the optimization, as is illustrated in Figure 1.
Model Merging as Crossover: Unlike existing systems that optimize model parameters directly,
CycleQD leverages a model merging algorithm as a crossover operation, replacing the heuristic,
hand-designed rules often seen in practice (line 12 in Algorithm 1). I.e., in Figure 2, our crossover
operation merges the two parent models. In CycleQD, we fine-tune expert agents, each of which
only needs to specialize in one task, and use them as the seed models to initialize the model archives
(lines 2-4 in Algorithm 1).
SVD-based Mutation: Traditional mutation operations in genetic algorithms like MAP-Elites typi-
cally introduce random perturbations from a pre-defined distribution to explore new regions (i.e., the
mutation operation in Figure 2). In contrast, CycleQD utilizes perturbations aligned with the prin-
cipal components of the models’ parameters matrices, facilitating exploration outside the convex
regions formed by the parent models while avoiding overfitting (line 13 in Algorithm 1).
CycleQD repeats these three steps in each generation, and the archives, originally only occupied by
the expert models, accommodate more and more capable and diverse models, as is illustrated by
Figure 6 in the Appendix.

3.1   A LTERNATING QUALITY AND BEHAVIOR CHARACTERISTICS

CycleQD manages K archives, each dedicated to tracking the LLMs that specialize in one of the K
agent skills. Each archive evaluates LLM performance using K tasks, which serve dual roles        Qas both
the quality and BCs. An archive is structured as a lattice, the size of which is defined by k̸=i dk ,
where dk is the number of bins defined by the k-th BC, and the i-th BC is excluded from this
particular archive as it is treated as the quality metric. In generation t, the i-th archive is selected for
QD computation where i = t mod K (see Figure 1 for an illustration with K = 3). This process

                                                     3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Algorithm 1 CycleQD
 1: function T RAIN(A, EXPERTS)     ▷ A are the archives, EXPERTS are the expert LLM agents
 2:    for i ← 1 to K do                                            ▷ K is the number of tasks
 3:        A[i] ← U PDATE A RCHIVE(A[i], EXPERTS)      ▷ Place experts properly in i-th archive
 4:    end for
 5:    for t ← 1 to N do                                ▷ N is the total number of generations
 6:        i ← t mod K              ▷ Cyclically swaps the task (archive) for the next QD step
 7:        A ← QDS TEP(A, i)                          ▷ Conduct one step of the QD algorithm
 8:    end for
 9: end function

10: function QDS TEP(A, k)                      ▷ Ak is the archive corresponding to the k-th task
11:    p1 , p2 ← S AMPLE(A[k])      ▷ p1 and p2 are the parents, S AMPLE () is detailed in Sec 3.1
12:    c ← C ROSSOVER(p1 , p2 )              ▷ c is the child, C ROSSOVER () is detailed in Sec 3.2
13:    c ← M UTATE(c)                                            ▷ M UTATE () is detailed in Sec 3.3
14:    for i ← 1 to K do
15:         A[i] ← U PDATE A RCHIVE(A[i], c)                      ▷ Place c properly in i-th archive
16:    end for
17: end function


utilizes all available data from the K tasks to evaluate and update the archives without the need for
adjusting data ratios or objective functions.
CycleQD shares knowledge across K archives for efficient optimization. Specifically, in generation
t, a new model is created from the i-th archive by sampling, crossover, and mutation. This model is
used to update not only the i-th archive but all K archives (lines 14-15 in Algorithm 1). This allows
for more effective utilization of the new model and helps facilitate optimization across K tasks.
We employ task performance metrics as our BCs, imbuing them with concrete performance implica-
tions. This allows for the design of an Elite sampling algorithm aimed to expand the Pareto frontier.
Our Elite sampling algorithm is inspired by Wang et al. (2023) which expand the Pareto frontier not
only in quality but also within BCs. However, there are two major differences in CycleQD’s setup:
(1) Both Q and BCs are task metrics and are treated equally in a cyclic process, (2) We aggregate
Q and BC values into a single metric to drive the frontier towards higher performance. Specifically,
this frontier is defined by the models achieving high performance across these BCs. Concretely,
                                                                                        γ
when the i-th archive is active, a model j inside it is sampled with probability Pj = PN j γ where
                                                                                       n=1 n
N is the number of models in this archive and γj is calculated as follows:
                          K
                          Y                 fj,i − min(f1:N,i )
                   γj =         αlow +                               (αhigh − αlow )
                          i=1
                                         max(f1:N,i ) − min(f1:N,i )

Here, fj,i indicates the j-th model’s performance on the i-th task. (αlow , αhigh ) are hyper-
parameters for the purpose of normalization. Elite sampling strategically favors models that excel
across the quality and various BCs, enhancing the efficiency and evolutionary potential of CycleQD.

3.2   M ODEL MERGING BASED CROSSOVER

Training an LLM to specialize in a single task does not suffer from problems such as the data ratio
tuning, the complex combinations of objective functions, and etc. It is therefore straightforward to
initially train a set of single-task experts using conventional fine-tuning methods, and then use model
merging algorithms to develop more capable agents. In CycleQD, our model merging crossover
operator employs the parameter space merging scheme described in Akiba et al. (2024), which
creates a new model by merging task vectors at the model level (Ilharco et al., 2022). Specifically, for
a pre-trained base LLM with parameters θbase ∈ Rd and its fine-tuned LLM with parameters θ ∈ Rd ,
we define a task vector as τ = θ−θbase . The crossover operator then     generates a model’s parameters
by combining these task vectors: θchild = θbase + ω1 /(ω1 + ω2 ) τp1 + ω2 /(ω1 + ω2 ) τp2 , where
τp1 and τp2 are the parents’ task vectors. Here, ω1 and ω2 are i.i.d samples from N (µ, σ 2 ), and
(µ, σ) are predetermined hyper-parameters that remain fixed during the experiments. These ω’s do


                                                     4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        SVD-based mutation
  The l-th parameter matrix in ⌧
        <latexit sha1_base64="zazI0gzztMhS9q4QK3YhI2pUpW0=">AAAB6nicbZC5TgMxEIZnOUO4wtHRWCRIVNEuRaAjEgWUQZBDSlaR1/EmVmzvyvYihVUegYYChGipqXgSOkreBOcoIOGXLH36/xl5ZoKYM21c98tZWFxaXlnNrGXXNza3tnM7uzUdJYrQKol4pBoB1pQzSauGGU4bsaJYBJzWg/7FKK/fUaVZJG/NIKa+wF3JQkawsdZNgRfaubxbdMdC8+BNIX/+cf99+b6fVtq5z1YnIomg0hCOtW56bmz8FCvDCKfDbCvRNMakj7u0aVFiQbWfjkcdoiPrdFAYKfukQWP3d0eKhdYDEdhKgU1Pz2Yj87+smZjwzE+ZjBNDJZl8FCYcmQiN9kYdpigxfGABE8XsrIj0sMLE2Otk7RG82ZXnoXZS9ErF0rWXL7swUQYO4BCOwYNTKMMVVKAKBLrwAE/w7HDn0XlxXielC860Zw/+yHn7Aa4PkRQ=</latexit>


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           <latexit sha1_base64="FSGCWqMjorpKG+TAeyHrGJjotxQ=">AAAB9XicbVDJSgNBEK1xjXGLy81LYyJ4CjMeojcDHvQYwSyQhNDT6Uma9Cx01yhxyH948aCIR734Jd48+iNqZzlo4oOCx3tVVNVzIyk02vaHNTe/sLi0nFpJr66tb2xmtrYrOowV42UWylDVXKq5FAEvo0DJa5Hi1Hclr7q9s6FfveZKizC4wn7Emz7tBMITjKKROpCDBiBQiCH39d3KZO28PQKZJc6EZE/fbj/PX3aTUivz3miHLPZ5gExSreuOHWEzoQoFk3yQbsSaR5T1aIfXDQ2oz3UzGV09IAdGaRMvVKYCJCP190RCfa37vms6fYpdPe0Nxf+8eozeSTMRQRQjD9h4kRdLgiEZRkDaQnGGsm8IZUqYWwnrUkUZmqDSJgRn+uVZUjnKO4V84dLJFm0YIwV7sA+H4MAxFOECSlAGBgru4AEerRvr3nqynsetc9ZkZgf+wHr9AT/wlMI=</latexit>


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            w1                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   w2                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      wr
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Rank-1 matrices Ci = i ui vi
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          <latexit sha1_base64="Vf1xpgc7gHWCqpOqitJYRyn+BTY=">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</latexit>


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      …
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              <latexit sha1_base64="gsr8oB79o/noBwOGH18oGPjMaIA=">AAAB7HicbZC7SgNBFIbPJl5ivEXFymYxEazCrkW0DNhYRnCTQBLC7ORsMmR2dpmZVcKSZ7CxUMTW9/AVLAQrH0Unl0ITfxj4+P9zmHOOH3OmtON8Wpnsyuraem4jv7m1vbNb2NuvqyiRFD0a8Ug2faKQM4GeZppjM5ZIQp9jwx9eTvLGLUrFInGjRzF2QtIXLGCUaGN5pbuuW+oWik7ZmcpeBncOxWr24/vt8Atr3cJ7uxfRJEShKSdKtVwn1p2USM0ox3G+nSiMCR2SPrYMChKi6qTTYcf2iXF6dhBJ84S2p+7vjpSESo1C31SGRA/UYjYx/8taiQ4uOikTcaJR0NlHQcJtHdmTze0ek0g1HxkgVDIzq00HRBKqzX3y5gju4srLUD8ru5Vy5dotVh2YKQdHcAyn4MI5VOEKauABBQb38AhPlrAerGfrZVaaseY9B/BH1usPZCeSIw==</latexit>       <latexit sha1_base64="wUAeS8KpMvZ2PCmTQlqmtbyekjs=">AAAB7HicbZC7SgNBFIbPGi8x3qJiZbOYCFZhN0W0DNhYRnCTQLKE2clJMmR2dpmZVcKSZ7CxUMTW9/AVLAQrH0Unl0ITfxj4+P9zmHNOEHOmtON8WiuZ1bX1jexmbmt7Z3cvv39QV1EiKXo04pFsBkQhZwI9zTTHZiyRhAHHRjC8nOSNW5SKReJGj2L0Q9IXrMco0cbyinedcrGTLzglZyp7Gdw5FKqZj++3oy+sdfLv7W5EkxCFppwo1XKdWPspkZpRjuNcO1EYEzokfWwZFCRE5afTYcf2qXG6di+S5gltT93fHSkJlRqFgakMiR6oxWxi/pe1Et278FMm4kSjoLOPegm3dWRPNre7TCLVfGSAUMnMrDYdEEmoNvfJmSO4iysvQ71cciulyrVbqDowUxaO4QTOwIVzqMIV1MADCgzu4RGeLGE9WM/Wy6x0xZr3HMIfWa8/ZaySJA==</latexit>                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          <latexit sha1_base64="X0ydfB/Y/AeuyI8ZltYCjq8/B/M=">AAAB7HicbZC7SgNBFIbPJl5ivEXFymYxEazCrkW0DNhYRnCTQBLC7ORsMmR2dpmZVcKSZ7CxUMTW9/AVLAQrH0Unl0ITfxj4+P9zmHOOH3OmtON8Wpnsyuraem4jv7m1vbNb2NuvqyiRFD0a8Ug2faKQM4GeZppjM5ZIQp9jwx9eTvLGLUrFInGjRzF2QtIXLGCUaGN5pbuuLHULRafsTGUvgzuHYjX78f12+IW1buG93YtoEqLQlBOlWq4T605KpGaU4zjfThTGhA5JH1sGBQlRddLpsGP7xDg9O4ikeULbU/d3R0pCpUahbypDogdqMZuY/2WtRAcXnZSJONEo6OyjIOG2juzJ5naPSaSajwwQKpmZ1aYDIgnV5j55cwR3ceVlqJ+V3Uq5cu0Wqw7MlIMjOIZTcOEcqnAFNfCAAoN7eIQnS1gP1rP1MivNWPOeA/gj6/UHxuySZA==</latexit>


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    (Components of the task vector)                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Mutated
      Task vector                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            task vector


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      =                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         +                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         +…+                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ⌧l0                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      =                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    +                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     +…+
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 <latexit sha1_base64="vm1T/37bYF4TTvToSwsKCd2fC44=">AAAB+HicbVC7TsNAEDyHR0J4xEBBQWORIFFFNqBAGYmGMkjkIcXGOl/OySnns3W3RgpWSr6ChgKEKOFT6PgbLo8CEkZaaTSzq92dIOFMgW1/G7mV1bX1fGGjuLm1vVMyd/daKk4loU0S81h2AqwoZ4I2gQGnnURSHAWctoPh1cRv31OpWCxuYZRQL8J9wUJGMGjJN0sVF3Dq8zs3kSyiFd8s21V7CmuZOHNSrh/sPJ595KHhm19uLyZpRAUQjpXqOnYCXoYlMMLpuOimiiaYDHGfdjUVOKLKy6aHj61jrfSsMJa6BFhT9fdEhiOlRlGgOyMMA7XoTcT/vG4K4aWXMZGkQAWZLQpTbkFsTVKwekxSAnykCSaS6VstMsASE9BZFXUIzuLLy6R1WnVq1dqNU66foxkK6BAdoRPkoAtUR9eogZqIoBQ9oRf0ajwYz8ab8T5rzRnzmX30B8bnD1NRlRQ=</latexit>


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ⌧l                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Cr                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Cr
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          <latexit sha1_base64="cYMGymgcBYu7XEPWdr8SV8GEqwQ=">AAAB7HicbZC7SgNBFIbPJl5ivEXFymYxEazCrkW0DKSxjOAmgSSE2cnZZMjs7DIzK4Qlz2BjoYit7+ErWAhWPopOLoUm/jDw8f/nMOccP+ZMacf5tDLZtfWNzdxWfntnd2+/cHDYUFEiKXo04pFs+UQhZwI9zTTHViyRhD7Hpj+qTfPmHUrFInGrxzF2QzIQLGCUaGN5pVrPLfUKRafszGSvgruAYjX78f12/IX1XuG9049oEqLQlBOl2q4T625KpGaU4yTfSRTGhI7IANsGBQlRddPZsBP7zDh9O4ikeULbM/d3R0pCpcahbypDoodqOZua/2XtRAdX3ZSJONEo6PyjIOG2juzp5nafSaSajw0QKpmZ1aZDIgnV5j55cwR3eeVVaFyU3Uq5cuMWqw7MlYMTOIVzcOESqnANdfCAAoN7eIQnS1gP1rP1Mi/NWIueI/gj6/UHFLuR7w==</latexit>                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 <latexit sha1_base64="wQdqcySKhwadKGXwTgx6i4MPEiI=">AAAB7HicbZC7SgNBFIbPGi8x3qJiZbOYCFZhN0W0DKSxjOAmgSSE2cnZZMjs7DIzK4Qlz2BjoYit7+ErWAhWPopOLoUm/jDw8f/nMOccP+ZMacf5tNYy6xubW9nt3M7u3v5B/vCooaJEUvRoxCPZ8olCzgR6mmmOrVgiCX2OTX9Um+bNO5SKReJWj2PshmQgWMAo0cbyirVeudjLF5ySM5O9Cu4CCtXMx/fbyRfWe/n3Tj+iSYhCU06UartOrLspkZpRjpNcJ1EYEzoiA2wbFCRE1U1nw07sc+P07SCS5gltz9zfHSkJlRqHvqkMiR6q5Wxq/pe1Ex1cdVMm4kSjoPOPgoTbOrKnm9t9JpFqPjZAqGRmVpsOiSRUm/vkzBHc5ZVXoVEuuZVS5cYtVB2YKwuncAYX4MIlVOEa6uABBQb38AhPlrAerGfrZV66Zi16juGPrNcfFkCR8A==</latexit>                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                <latexit sha1_base64="tYXLKHPXMlEi11T6qdp3P099i5g=">AAAB7HicbZC7SgNBFIbPJl5ivEXFymYxEazCrkW0DKSxjOAmgSSE2cnZZMjs7DIzK4Qlz2BjoYit7+ErWAhWPopOLoUm/jDw8f/nMOccP+ZMacf5tDLZtfWNzdxWfntnd2+/cHDYUFEiKXo04pFs+UQhZwI9zTTHViyRhD7Hpj+qTfPmHUrFInGrxzF2QzIQLGCUaGN5pVpPlnqFolN2ZrJXwV1AsZr9+H47/sJ6r/De6Uc0CVFoyolSbdeJdTclUjPKcZLvJApjQkdkgG2DgoSouuls2Il9Zpy+HUTSPKHtmfu7IyWhUuPQN5Uh0UO1nE3N/7J2ooOrbspEnGgUdP5RkHBbR/Z0c7vPJFLNxwYIlczMatMhkYRqc5+8OYK7vPIqNC7KbqVcuXGLVQfmysEJnMI5uHAJVbiGOnhAgcE9PMKTJawH69l6mZdmrEXPEfyR9foDd4CSMA==</latexit>                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         <latexit sha1_base64="cYMGymgcBYu7XEPWdr8SV8GEqwQ=">AAAB7HicbZC7SgNBFIbPJl5ivEXFymYxEazCrkW0DKSxjOAmgSSE2cnZZMjs7DIzK4Qlz2BjoYit7+ErWAhWPopOLoUm/jDw8f/nMOccP+ZMacf5tDLZtfWNzdxWfntnd2+/cHDYUFEiKXo04pFs+UQhZwI9zTTHViyRhD7Hpj+qTfPmHUrFInGrxzF2QzIQLGCUaGN5pVrPLfUKRafszGSvgruAYjX78f12/IX1XuG9049oEqLQlBOl2q4T625KpGaU4yTfSRTGhI7IANsGBQlRddPZsBP7zDh9O4ikeULbM/d3R0pCpcahbypDoodqOZua/2XtRAdX3ZSJONEo6PyjIOG2juzp5nafSaSajw0QKpmZ1aZDIgnV5j55cwR3eeVVaFyU3Uq5cuMWqw7MlYMTOIVzcOESqnANdfCAAoN7eIQnS1gP1rP1Mi/NWIueI/gj6/UHFLuR7w==</latexit>                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        <latexit sha1_base64="wQdqcySKhwadKGXwTgx6i4MPEiI=">AAAB7HicbZC7SgNBFIbPGi8x3qJiZbOYCFZhN0W0DKSxjOAmgSSE2cnZZMjs7DIzK4Qlz2BjoYit7+ErWAhWPopOLoUm/jDw8f/nMOccP+ZMacf5tNYy6xubW9nt3M7u3v5B/vCooaJEUvRoxCPZ8olCzgR6mmmOrVgiCX2OTX9Um+bNO5SKReJWj2PshmQgWMAo0cbyirVeudjLF5ySM5O9Cu4CCtXMx/fbyRfWe/n3Tj+iSYhCU06UartOrLspkZpRjpNcJ1EYEzoiA2wbFCRE1U1nw07sc+P07SCS5gltz9zfHSkJlRqHvqkMiR6q5Wxq/pe1Ex1cdVMm4kSjoPOPgoTbOrKnm9t9JpFqPjZAqGRmVpsOiSRUm/vkzBHc5ZVXoVEuuZVS5cYtVB2YKwuncAYX4MIlVOEa6uABBQb38AhPlrAerGfrZV66Zi16juGPrNcfFkCR8A==</latexit>         <latexit sha1_base64="tYXLKHPXMlEi11T6qdp3P099i5g=">AAAB7HicbZC7SgNBFIbPJl5ivEXFymYxEazCrkW0DKSxjOAmgSSE2cnZZMjs7DIzK4Qlz2BjoYit7+ErWAhWPopOLoUm/jDw8f/nMOccP+ZMacf5tDLZtfWNzdxWfntnd2+/cHDYUFEiKXo04pFs+UQhZwI9zTTHViyRhD7Hpj+qTfPmHUrFInGrxzF2QzIQLGCUaGN5pVpPlnqFolN2ZrJXwV1AsZr9+H47/sJ6r/De6Uc0CVFoyolSbdeJdTclUjPKcZLvJApjQkdkgG2DgoSouuls2Il9Zpy+HUTSPKHtmfu7IyWhUuPQN5Uh0UO1nE3N/7J2ooOrbspEnGgUdP5RkHBbR/Z0c7vPJFLNxwYIlczMatMhkYRqc5+8OYK7vPIqNC7KbqVcuXGLVQfmysEJnMI5uHAJVbiGOnhAgcE9PMKTJawH69l6mZdmrEXPEfyR9foDd4CSMA==</latexit>


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     <latexit sha1_base64="bouRalUuUukNUqFJMo6bQDeJYBI=">AAAB73icbZC7SgNBFIbPeo3xFmNpsyQRrMKuSLQMaGEZwVwgWcLsZDYZMju7zpwVwpKXsLFQxErwIXwDKzvfxsml0MQfBj7+/xzmnOPHgmt0nG9rZXVtfWMzs5Xd3tnd288d5Bs6ShRldRqJSLV8opngktWRo2CtWDES+oI1/eHlJG/eM6V5JG9xFDMvJH3JA04JGqtV6iBJuqLUzRWdsjOVvQzuHIrVzOdH/uqtUOvmvjq9iCYhk0gF0brtOjF6KVHIqWDjbCfRLCZ0SPqsbVCSkGkvnc47to+N07ODSJkn0Z66vztSEmo9Cn1TGRIc6MVsYv6XtRMMLryUyzhBJunsoyARNkb2ZHm7xxWjKEYGCFXczGrTAVGEojlR1hzBXVx5GRqnZbdSrty4xeoZzJSBIyjACbhwDlW4hhrUgYKAB3iCZ+vOerRerNdZ6Yo17zmEP7LefwBOKpJs</latexit>


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          C1                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             C2                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   C1                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    C2


Figure 3: SVD-based mutations. Left: A task vector τ contains multiple parameter matrices τl .
E.g., the query projection matrix from the attention block in layer 1, the key projection matrix from
the attention block in layer 2, etc. Those that have a rank r > 1 can be decomposed using SVD into
r components. Right: SVD-based mutation samples a vector w ∈ Rr and scales each component by
wi , essentially adding perturbations that are aligned with the “directions” of the components.

not need to be positive numbers. By allowing negative component weights, the merged model has
more freedom in optimizing its task vectors, the process of which is automatically carried out via
evolutionary search. We normalize (τp1 , τp2 )’s mixing coefficients to ensure the merged weights do
not become outliers and cause problems for the downstream layers.
Additionally, there is potential to enhance the model merging
                                                                    process by training a neural network
policy (µ, σ) ← πϕ {bc1 , ..., bck }p1 , {bc1 , ..., bck }p2 that learns the optimal distribution param-
eters conditioned on the BC grid IDs {bc1 , ..., bck } of the parents (k − 1 in total for each parent
because one serves as the quality). However, while this approach could improve the efficiency of
model merging, it also introduces a greater initial learning burden in CycleQD.

3.3                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  SVD- BASED MUTATION

The formulation of our model merging based crossover bears one obvious limitation: The construc-
tion of θchild is a linear combination of (τp1 , τp2 ), which are themselves linear combination of their
parents. The entire process then reduces to finding the optimal linear combination of the expert mod-
els’ parameters. Due to this, θchild will likely be trapped in the “convex region” in the performance
space formed by the expert models, yet extrapolation that leads to improved performance is desired.
We introduce a mutation function θchild = h(θchild ) after the crossover to get rid of this limitation.
In conventional methods, the mutation function h(θchild ) is often an operator that samples pertur-
bations from a pre-defined distribution (e.g., Gaussian with pre-determined mean and covariance
matrix) and add them to the gene being mutated. We find this setting introduce excess freedom
and lead to overfitting in the final model. Instead, we propose to sample perturbations along the
“directions” of the components from the model’s parameter matrices. This  mutation operation is
mathematically defined as: h(θchild ) = θbase + concat [Ul (Σl w)Vl⊺ ]L      l=1 , where Ul ∈ R
                                                                                                    m×r
                                                                                                        ,
         r×r              n×r                                              ⊺
Σl ∈ R       and Vl ∈ R       are the SVD components of τl = Ul Σl Vl , the l-th parameter matrix
in the task vector τchild = θchild − θbase (i.e., τl is a reshaped subarray of τchild ). The perturbation
vector w ∈ Rr is sampled from a uniform distribution of boundaries [0, wmax ], where wmax ∈ R+
is a hyper-parameter. Our SVD-based mutation becomes a pass-through operation for parameter
matrices whose rank is one (e.g., those belonging to layer-normalization layers).
This approach provides two key advantages. First, SVD focuses mutations on the fundamental
building blocks of the task vector, which represent the essential components of agent skills. By con-
straining perturbations to these meaningful directions, we avoid the excessive exploration inherent in
random perturbations, reducing the risk of overfitting. Second, the ability to manipulate individual
components (i.e., ω) offers finer control over θchild , enabling targeted modifications at a granular
level. Figure 3 illustrates this process.

3.4                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  M ODEL AGGREGATION

CycleQD maintains K archives during the optimization process, LLMs in each of these archives
are trained to acquire one of the K agent skills. In the end, CycleQD returns hundreds or even
thousands of LLM agents with various specialties and characteristics. These LLM-based agents are
versatile and can facilitate multi-agent research in a diverse set of directions (we discuss this topic
in Section 6).
On the other hand, our goal in this work is to create a single model that achieves high performance
across multiple tasks, and a model aggregation method is therefore necessary. Our model aggrega-


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025



                                                                               PK
tion algorithm is straightforward, and can be summarized as: θagg = θbase + k=1 βk τk , where τk
is the task vector from the elite model in the k-th archive, with ties resolved by selecting the most
                                PK
recent model. βk = exp(fk )/ i=1 exp(fi ) (i.e., softmax function) is the mixing coefficient calcu-
lated from the elite model’s task performance fk in the k-th archive. In this paper, all experimental
results from CycleQD are produced with this aggregated model θagg .


4     E XPERIMENTS

4.1     E VALUATION ON COMPUTER SCIENCE TASKS

4.1.1    TASK DESCRIPTION

In this experiment, our goal is to train LLMs to master three agent skills in computer science: coding,
Operation System (OS) manipulation and Database (DB) query generation. We adopt the MBPP+
(Mostly Basic Python Programming) dataset from EvalPlus (Liu et al., 2023a) for coding skill de-
velopment, and utilize the OS and DB datasets from AgentBench (Liu et al., 2024) for training. For
the coding task, we optimize and report the pass@1 metric, whereas in OS and DB tasks we use the
success rate. Please refer to Appendix A.1.1 for extra and detailed task related setups.

4.1.2    C YCLE QD SETUPS

Experts: We employ L LAMA -3-8B-I NSTRUCT MODEL (Dubey et al., 2024) as our base model, and
use supervised fine-tuning to create LLM experts in coding, OS and DB. For the OS and DB experts,
we use the OS and DB training datasets from Agent-FLAN Chen et al. (2024). The coding expert is
fine-tuned on a combination of the M AGICODER -E VOL -I NSTRUCT-110K and M AGICODER -OSS-
I NSTRUCT-75K datasets (Wei et al., 2024). See detailed configuration in Appendix A.1.2
Datasets: We use the MBPP+ dataset, as well as the test and development datasets from OS and
DB. To ensure that the experts have the same task metrics across tasks, each dataset is split evenly
into training and test splits. For OS, problems that could not be solved by either the expert models
and GPT models are excluded beforehand to reduce computation cost.
Hyper-parameters: We use the performances of the three experts to determine the lower and upper
bounds of the BC dimension. Specifically, the lower bound is set at 85% of the performance achieved
by the least proficient expert, while the upper bound is set at 115% of the performance achieved by
the most proficient expert. All BCs are then evenly divided into 15 bins between the lower and upper
bounds. We limit the number of models in each bin to one, and run CycleQD for 1200 generations.
Since the quality and BCs are alternated in each generation, this is equivalent to optimizing for the
three skills for 400 generations each. See more detail in Appendix A.1.3

4.1.3    BASELINES

Our baselines can be categorized into fine-tuning based and merging based models.
Fine-tuning Based Models: These are models 3-6 in Table 1. In addition to the expert LLMs men-
tioned earlier, we also combine all the data from the three tasks (including the extra M AGICODER -
E VOL -I NSTRUCT-110K and M AGICODER -OSS-I NSTRUCT-75K datasets) and continue training
the L LAMA 3-8B-I NSTRUCT base model with supervised fine-tuning to develop an extra baseline
(model 6 in Table 1). In this baseline, we don’t tune the data ratio and use cross-entropy (i.e., next
token prediction) as our objective function.
Merging Based Models: These are models 7-10 in Table 1. We first introduce a naive merging
method where the merged model is produced by taking an average of the three experts’ task vectors
(model 7). Similar to this baseline, we introduce three additional learning based model merging
methods where, instead of taking an average, the coefficients of a linear combination of these task
vectors is learned through gradient descent on policy gradients (model 8), CMA-ES, an evolutionary
algorithm on the raw rewards (model 9), and NSGA-II (Deb et al., 2002), another evolutionary
algorithm that optimizes multiple objectives simultaneously (model 10).


                                                  6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                Q: MBPP                              Q: DB            0.50                    Q: OS
                                                                                                        0.45
                                    0.80                                      0.30

                                                                      0.40                              0.40

                                    0.75
                                                                                                        0.35


                                                                                                               Q scale bar
  BC: OS


                                           BC: OS


                                                                             BC: DB
                                                                      0.30
                                    0.70                                                                0.30


                                                                                                        0.25
                                    0.65                              0.20

                                                                                                        0.20

                                    0.60
                                                                      0.10                              0.15


                                    0.55                                                                0.10
                                                                      0.0
                 BC: DB                             BC: MBPP                                 BC: MBPP

Figure 4: CycleQD Archives from Computer Science Tasks. In each archive, the two axes show
the BCs, and the color intensities indicate the LLM agent’s quality in that grid. These archives
are obtained after 1200 generations of CycleQD. The red bounding boxes indicate the grids where
expert models were present. See Appendix A.1.4 for archive development across generations.

4.1.4      R ESULTS

Overall: We summarize our results from this experiment in Table 1. In addition to the baselines,
we also include the base model and the GPT models for references (highlighted with a lightgray
background). The first thing to notice is that each expert model (models 3-5), fine-tuned specifically
for its assigned task, performs better than the L LAMA 3-8B-I NSTRUCT base model (model 2), lay-
ing the stepping stones for CycleQD and other model merging based methods. After evolutionary
computing, our method, averaged across the three tasks, outperforms all baselines, and is approach-
ing the performance of GPT-3.5- TURBO. Specifically, CycleQD achieves the highest scores on the
coding and the OS tasks among the baselines, and has only a mild performance drop on the DB tasks
compared with the expert. Figure 4 gives the archives in CycleQD at the end of the experiment. It
is easy to see that CycleQD has managed to “illuminate” the three archives.
Comparison with Fine-tune Based Methods: A notable result from the table is that, the model
fine-tuned on all the datasets (model 6) is only partially and marginally better than the three experts,
despite being trained on a larger dataset. On the other hand, the expert models can be easily trained
because they do not require the data ratio or object function adjustment. The drawback of these
experts is that they specialize in only one task, prohibiting their usage in wider scenarios. This
result proves the difficulty with conventional methods, underscoring the importance and technical
contributions of CycleQD.
Comparison with Merging Based Methods: CycleQD also outperforms conventional model merg-
ing based methods (models 7-10), and we conjecture that this is due to three reasons. First, these
methods lack a mutation operation, which we believe is crucial for enabling the merged model to es-

Table 1: Evaluation on computer science tasks. We report pass@1 for MBPP and success rates for
the DB and OS tasks. The base model and the GPT models (in gray) are included for completeness.
The MBPP results for the GPT models are extracted from Dubey et al. (2024).
                  #       Methods                              MBPP             DB    OS        Avg
                  0       GPT-4                                83.6           36.5    63.7     61.3
                  1       GPT-3.5- TURBO                       82.0           41.6    38.5     53.7
                  2       Llama3-8B-Instruct (base model)      67.3            5.3    25.2     32.6
                  Fine-tuning Based Methods
                  3     Fine-tuning (Coding expert)            70.4           21.2    20.7     37.4
                  4     Fine-tuning (DB expert)                65.8           42.4    28.5     45.6
                  5     Fine-tuning (OS expert)                66.3            0.0    30.4     32.2
                  6     Fine-tuning (All)                      67.3           37.1    36.7     47.0
                  Merging Based Methods
                  7    Merging (w/o learning)                  72.9           24.7    42.6     46.7
                  8    Merging (learning w/ GD)                69.3           41.2    29.6     46.7
                  9    Merging (learning w/ CMA-ES)            69.3           41.2    30.2     46.9
                  10 Merging (learning w/ NSGA-II)             75.9           42.4    36.4     51.6
                  11      CycleQD (Ours)                       76.4           38.2    42.6     52.4


                                                        7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


  Table 2: Ablation studies. We add and highlight a different treatment from the previous trials.
         #   Trials                                              MBPP     DB     OS     Avg
         0   QD + No mutation + Random sampling                   70.4    28.8   43.7   47.6
         1   CycleQD + No mutation + Random sampling              72.9    33.5   41.9   49.4
         2   CycleQD + Gaussian mutation + Random sampling        73.4    30.0   42.2   48.5
         3   CycleQD + SVD mutation + Random sampling             75.9    38.2   41.1   51.7
         4   CycleQD + SVD mutation + Elite sampling              76.4    38.2   42.6   52.4

cape the “convex region” created by the seed models. For example, model 9 scores lower on all three
tasks compared to the experts. In contrast, CycleQD significantly surpasses expert performance in
coding and OS tasks. Second, CycleQD’s cyclic optimization mechanism incorporates elements re-
sembling non-dominant sorting in NSGA-II (model 10). However, unlike the latter, which handles
all tasks simultaneously and relies on crowding distance for diversity, CycleQD alternates between
tasks and naturally encourages diversity via the QD mechanism. This allows CycleQD to be more
effective. Lastly, we suspect that the absence of a mechanism to rehabilitate temporarily underper-
forming models contributes to this discrepancy. Given the lengthy computation pipelines in LLMs,
which include numerous layers, even a single malfunctioning layer can degrade overall performance.
Unlike QD, the baselines do not have a way to recover these layers, potentially promising models
are prematurely discarded.

4.1.5   A BLATION STUDIES

To get insights into the design choices in CycleQD and show how they contribute its effectiveness,
we conduct a series of ablation studies and summarize the results in Table 2.
CycleQD vs QD: We compare conventional QD with CycleQD in trials 0 and 1. Specifically, we
run QD for three runs. Within each run, one of the task’s metric is treated as the quality while
the others are regarded as the BCs. We control each trial to have an equal computing budget as
for CycleQD, and all other hyper-parameters are identical to CycleQD. We use the same model
aggregation method to merge the best models from these three runs (see Section 3.4). The better
performance from CycleQD suggests the importance of alternating the quality and BCs.
Mutation Methods: We focus on the impact of different mutation operations with trials 1-3. Al-
though we mentioned earlier that mutation helps the merged model extrapolate in the performance
space, naively designed mutations give excess freedom and can lead to overfitting. This is what hap-
pens to trial 2, the performance of which is even worse than trial 1 that does not have any mutation
operations. On the other hand, our SVD-based mutation (trial 3) successfully avoids the problem
and delivers a much better performance.
Sampling Methods: Finally, we demonstrate the importance of Elite sampling in CycleQD in trial
4, which has the identical settings as model 11 in Table 1, and gives the best score in the ablation
studies. Elite sampling is effective because it prioritizes merging high-performing models, the result
of which helps expand the Pareto frontier in each archive more effectively.
In summary, our ablation studies validate the importance of our design choices and shows that
improvements aren’t merely additive - poor design choices can harm performance while our well-
designed components work synergistically (e.g., comparing rows 1 and 2 in Table 2). The cumulative
improvement from baseline QD to our final CycleQD is substantial at 4.8 percentage points (from
47.6% to 52.4%). This is a significant improvement in the context of LLMs performing complex
agent tasks, particularly considering our model approaches GPT-3.5- TURBO’s performance despite
having significantly fewer parameters.

4.1.6   S KILL GENERALIZATION AND LANGUAGE CAPABILITIES

In addition to agent skills, we evaluate our model on out-of-distribution coding tasks and language
understanding across six categories, please see Appendix A.1.6 for detailed task descriptions. Ta-
ble 3 shows the results across these tasks, where we normalize the scores against the L LAMA 3-8B-
I NSTRUCT base model. On average, CycleQD outperforms the three fine-tuned experts, providing
better overall generalization across tasks. Our method generalizes well on the coding tasks while re-


                                                  8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Table 3: Generalization performance. The scores are normalized against the base model. CycleQD
generalizes well to other coding tasks unseen in the training while retaining its language capabilities.
                         Coding Tasks                             Language Tasks
Model                                                                                               Avg
               HUMANEVAL+         BigCodeBench      Reasoning    GSM8K      RC     CommonSense
MBPP expert    1.18               0.97              0.57         0.82       0.94   1.03             0.92
DB expert      0.80               0.84              0.84         0.87       0.98   0.98             0.89
OS expert      0.94               0.90              0.98         0.93       0.99   0.99             0.95
CycleQD        1.10               1.03              0.95         0.88       0.98   1.02             0.99

Table 4: Merging image segmentation Models. The scores are normalized against the performance
of the corresponding expert models. Model similarity shows how close the pair of expert models are
(the larger the similarity values, the closer the models are).
         #    Expert A    Expert B       Score A    Score B     Avg Score     Model Similarity
         0    CAM         POL             0.95         0.99        0.97             0.98
         1    CAM         SKL             0.85         0.99        0.92             0.97
         2    CAM         LEA             0.51         0.89        0.70             0.88
         3    POL         SKL             0.98         0.95        0.96             0.99
         4    POL         LEA             0.40         0.84        0.62             0.93
         5    SKL         LEA             0.83         0.84        0.83             0.95

training performance on language tasks. In contrast, the MBPP expert, while delivering competitive
scores on the coding tasks, shows significantly lower performance on specific tasks in the Reason-
ing category. This sharp decline in performance suggests the occurrence of catastrophic forgetting
during fine-tuning, where the model loses its ability to generalize across tasks outside its specializa-
tion. These findings once again underscore the efficacy of CycleQD in achieving superior and more
consistent performance across diverse tasks compared to traditional fine-tuning approaches.

4.2     E VALUATION ON IMAGE SEGMENTATION TASKS

4.2.1    TASK DESCRIPTION

Besides to its applications for LLMs, CycleQD serves as a versatile method for integrating expert
models across various data modalities beyond text. For example, we include a vision question
answering (VQA) task in addition to the CS tasks and find CycleQD to be able to outperform the
experts (see Section A.1.5). In this experiment, we go further beyond and extend CycleQD to the
fusion of multiple Segment Anything Models (SAM), which are state-of-the-art computer vision
models designed for image segmentation tasks. Specifically, our objective is to merge pairs of SAM
models, A and B, to create models whose capabilities encompass the skill sets of both A and B.

4.2.2    C YCLE QD SETUPS

Experts: We select four tasks within the image segmentation domain, each supported by extensive
datasets, for training specialized models: Camouflaged Object Segmentation (CAM), Polyp Seg-
mentation (POL), Skin Lesion Segmentation (SKL), and Leaf Segmentation (LEA). CAM detects
objects in cluttered environments, making segmentation more challenging than standard tasks. POL
identifies polyps in endoscopic images, essential for early colorectal cancer detection. SKL detects
various skin lesions in medical images. LEA identifies plant leaves in agricultural images, sup-
porting disease control and improving crop quality. We employ SAM-ViT Huge model as our base
model, which we fine-tune to develop these experts. See Appendix A.2.1 for details on the datasets
used for fine-tuning and CycleQD setups.
Hyper-parameters: CycleQD’s hyper-parameters remain the same as in Section 4.1.2.

4.2.3    R ESULTS

Overall: Table 4 shows the performance of the models merged by CycleQD, where scores are
normalized against the expert models. You can see visualization results in Appendix A.2.2. In
general, CycleQD is able to merge the experts successfully, with top models retaining more than


                                                   9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


90% of the experts’ performance (e.g., models 0, 1, and 3). On the other hand, models 2, 4 and 5
are less successful. This leads us to conduct further analysis and we report the findings next.
Analysis: We report the similarities between experts A and B in the last column in Table 4. A strong
correlation of 0.83 between the averaged scores and these similarities indicate both the limitations
and potential areas for enhancement in CycleQD. We define the similarity between models A and B
as the average cosine similarity of the singular value vectors (derived from
                                                                            the task vectors) across
                                       PL
all layers in both models: s = (1/L) i=1 cos diag(Σi,A ), diag(Σi,B ) . Here, L is the number of
weight matrices with a rank greater than 1, and Σi,∗ denotes a diagonal matrix of singular values
from the i-th weight matrix in the task vector. Although this summarizing metric does not fully
encapsulate the models’ characteristics, CycleQD tends to perform well when the models exhibit
high similarity. This observation underpins our approach of incorporating this similarity metric as a
regularization technique during model fine-tuning. Notably, a similar metric has been employed as
the “proximal term” in optimizing heterogeneous networks within the realm of federated learning,
as evidenced by research documented in (Li et al., 2020). This precedent lends credence to our
strategy, suggesting it is grounded in established methodologies.

5   R ELATED WORKS
LLM skill acquisition research has expanded beyond conversational tasks, focusing on enabling
autonomous problem-solving through the LLM-as-Agent paradigm (Xi et al., 2023; Wang et al.,
2024b). Techniques like ReAct (Yao et al., 2023) integrate reasoning with action, but skill acqui-
sition through training remains limited, often relying on standard fine-tuning (Zeng et al., 2024;
Qin et al., 2024), which struggles with balancing multiple skills. QD (Pugh et al., 2016) is an
evolutionary paradigm aimed at discovering diverse, high-performing solutions. Algorithms like
MAP-Elites (Mouret & Clune, 2015) and MOQD (Pierrot et al., 2022) have refined QD for tasks
with diverse behaviors and conflicting objectives. While QD has been applied to neural networks
and LLM prompts (Guo et al., 2024; Xue et al., 2024), evolving LLM weights remain unexplored.
Model merging, which combines capabilities across pre-trained models at lower training costs, has
advanced through techniques like sparsification (Yadav et al., 2023; Stoica et al., 2024) and optimiza-
tion (Yang et al., 2024). Our work integrates QD with model merging, allowing LLM components
to be preserved and optimized for diverse tasks. Please refer to Section B for more related works.

6   C ONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORKS
In this work, we introduced CycleQD, a compelling modification of the conventional LLM fine-
tuning pipeline, integrating evolutionary algorithms for agent skill acquisition. CycleQD begins
with single-task experts and utilizes QD to continuously generate hundreds of LLM-based agents,
possessing diverse characteristics and exhibiting a broader range of skills than the initial experts.
Through a dynamic process that cyclically swaps quality and BCs, coupled with a model merg-
ing crossover operation and an SVD-based mutation operator, CycleQD has successfully enabled
LLMs to master computer science skills. Our method not only outperforms baseline approaches but
also achieves on-par performance with GPT-3.5- TURBO, while generalizing to out-of-distribution
tasks and retaining the language capabilities. Furthermore, CycleQD’s applicability extends across
domains to image segmentation models, demonstrating its broad utility.
In terms of limitations, we acknowledge that the success of model merging hinges on the compati-
bility of the source models. CycleQD may encounter challenges when the expert models originate
from highly divergent settings. One way to address this is incorporating model similarity as a reg-
ularization term during the expert training. Furthermore, this research represents an initial foray
into the integration of QD and evolutionary model merging for agent skill acquisition. There is
substantial potential for improvement by leveraging advanced methodologies from both fields, such
as integrating strategies from CMA-ME (Fontaine et al., 2020) and PGA-MAP-Elites (Nilsson &
Cully, 2021) to enhance the efficiency of the learning process. Looking ahead, a promising direc-
tion for future research lies in multi-agent systems. Considering CycleQD generates an archive of
diverse agents, orchestrating these agents to collaborate and compete opens up exciting possibilities
for scientific exploration and practical applications.



                                                  10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
Yujin Tang and Takuya Akiba initiated the project. So Kuroki co-designed the algorithm, imple-
mented CycleQD, conducted the experiments and the studies. Taishi Nakamura developed the agen-
tic tasks, the expert models and the baseline methods. Takuya Akiba implemented the parallel
distributed optimization and proposed the SAM experiment. Yujin Tang proposed the algorithm,
designed and helped with the experiments, and managed the project. All authors contributed to the
writing and approved the final version.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
The authors would like to thank Robert Lange for providing valuable discussions and feedback while
drafting the text, and Kou Misaki and Qi Sun for providing infrastructure support. This paper is
based on results obtained from a project, JPNP20017, subsidized by the New Energy and Industrial
Technology Development Organization (NEDO).

R EFERENCES
Josh Achiam, Steven Adler, Sandhini Agarwal, Lama Ahmad, Ilge Akkaya, Florencia Leoni Ale-
  man, Diogo Almeida, Janko Altenschmidt, Sam Altman, Shyamal Anadkat, et al. Gpt-4 technical
  report. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.08774, 2023.
Takuya Akiba, Makoto Shing, Yujin Tang, Qi Sun, and David Ha. Evolutionary optimization of
  model merging recipes. arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.13187, 2024.
Jorge Bernal, F Javier Sánchez, Gloria Fernández-Esparrach, Debora Gil, Cristina Rodrı́guez, and
  Fernando Vilariño. Wm-dova maps for accurate polyp highlighting in colonoscopy: Validation
  vs. saliency maps from physicians. Computerized medical imaging and graphics, 43:99–111,
  2015.
Herbie Bradley, Andrew Dai, Hannah Benita Teufel, Jenny Zhang, Koen Oostermeijer, Marco
  Bellagente, Jeff Clune, Kenneth O. Stanley, Grégory Schott, and Joel Lehman. Quality-
  diversity through AI feedback. In The Twelfth International Conference on Learning Rep-
  resentations, ICLR 2024, Vienna, Austria, May 7-11, 2024. OpenReview.net, 2024. URL
  https://openreview.net/forum?id=owokKCrGYr.
Zehui Chen, Kuikun Liu, Qiuchen Wang, Wenwei Zhang, Jiangning Liu, Dahua Lin, Kai Chen, and
  Feng Zhao. Agent-flan: Designing data and methods of effective agent tuning for large language
  models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.12881, 2024.
Karl Cobbe, Vineet Kosaraju, Mohammad Bavarian, Mark Chen, Heewoo Jun, Lukasz Kaiser,
  Matthias Plappert, Jerry Tworek, Jacob Hilton, Reiichiro Nakano, Christopher Hesse, and John
  Schulman. Training verifiers to solve math word problems. arXiv:2110.14168, 2021.
Noel CF Codella, David Gutman, M Emre Celebi, Brian Helba, Michael A Marchetti, Stephen W
  Dusza, Aadi Kalloo, Konstantinos Liopyris, Nabin Mishra, Harald Kittler, et al. Skin lesion anal-
  ysis toward melanoma detection: A challenge at the 2017 international symposium on biomedical
  imaging (isbi), hosted by the international skin imaging collaboration (isic). In 2018 IEEE 15th
  international symposium on biomedical imaging (ISBI 2018), pp. 168–172. IEEE, 2018.
Kalyanmoy Deb, Amrit Pratap, Sameer Agarwal, and TAMT Meyarivan. A fast and elitist mul-
  tiobjective genetic algorithm: Nsga-ii. IEEE transactions on evolutionary computation, 6(2):
  182–197, 2002.
Abhimanyu Dubey, Abhinav Jauhri, Abhinav Pandey, Abhishek Kadian, Ahmad Al-Dahle, Aiesha
  Letman, Akhil Mathur, Alan Schelten, Amy Yang, Angela Fan, et al. The llama 3 herd of models.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2407.21783, 2024.
Deng-Ping Fan, Ge-Peng Ji, Guolei Sun, Ming-Ming Cheng, Jianbing Shen, and Ling Shao. Cam-
  ouflaged object detection. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and
  pattern recognition, pp. 2777–2787, 2020a.


                                                11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Deng-Ping Fan, Ge-Peng Ji, Tao Zhou, Geng Chen, Huazhu Fu, Jianbing Shen, and Ling Shao.
  Pranet: Parallel reverse attention network for polyp segmentation. In International conference on
  medical image computing and computer-assisted intervention, pp. 263–273. Springer, 2020b.
Matthew C Fontaine, Julian Togelius, Stefanos Nikolaidis, and Amy K Hoover. Covariance matrix
 adaptation for the rapid illumination of behavior space. In Proceedings of the 2020 genetic and
 evolutionary computation conference, pp. 94–102, 2020.
Kazuki Fujii, Taishi Nakamura, and Rio Yokota. llm-recipes, 2024. URL https://github.
  com/okoge-kaz/llm-recipes.
Qingyan Guo, Rui Wang, Junliang Guo, Bei Li, Kaitao Song, Xu Tan, Guoqing Liu, Jiang Bian,
  and Yujiu Yang. Connecting large language models with evolutionary algorithms yields pow-
  erful prompt optimizers. In The Twelfth International Conference on Learning Representa-
  tions, ICLR 2024, Vienna, Austria, May 7-11, 2024. OpenReview.net, 2024. URL https:
  //openreview.net/forum?id=ZG3RaNIsO8.
Izzeddin Gur, Hiroki Furuta, Austin Huang, Mustafa Safdari, Yutaka Matsuo, Douglas Eck, and
   Aleksandra Faust. A real-world webagent with planning, long context understanding, and pro-
   gram synthesis. arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.12856, 2023.
Dan Hendrycks, Collin Burns, Steven Basart, Andy Zou, Mantas Mazeika, Dawn Song, and Ja-
  cob Steinhardt. Measuring massive multitask language understanding. In International Confer-
  ence on Learning Representations, 2021. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=
  d7KBjmI3GmQ.
Gabriel Ilharco, Marco Tulio Ribeiro, Mitchell Wortsman, Suchin Gururangan, Ludwig Schmidt,
  Hannaneh Hajishirzi, and Ali Farhadi. Editing models with task arithmetic. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2212.04089, 2022.
Gabriel Ilharco, Marco Túlio Ribeiro, Mitchell Wortsman, Ludwig Schmidt, Hannaneh Hajishirzi,
  and Ali Farhadi. Editing models with task arithmetic. In The Eleventh International Confer-
  ence on Learning Representations, ICLR 2023, Kigali, Rwanda, May 1-5, 2023. OpenReview.net,
  2023. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=6t0Kwf8-jrj.
D Jha, PH Smedsrud, MA Riegler, P Halvorsen, T De Lange, D Johansen, and HD Johansen. Kvasir-
  seg: A segmented polyp dataset. multimedia modeling, 2019.
Mandar Joshi, Eunsol Choi, Daniel Weld, and Luke Zettlemoyer. TriviaQA: A large scale distantly
 supervised challenge dataset for reading comprehension. In Regina Barzilay and Min-Yen Kan
 (eds.), Proceedings of the 55th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics
 (ACL), pp. 1601–1611, Vancouver, Canada, July 2017. Association for Computational Linguis-
 tics. doi: 10.18653/v1/P17-1147. URL https://aclanthology.org/P17-1147.
Alexander Kirillov, Eric Mintun, Nikhila Ravi, Hanzi Mao, Chloe Rolland, Laura Gustafson, Tete
  Xiao, Spencer Whitehead, Alexander C Berg, Wan-Yen Lo, et al. Segment anything. In Proceed-
  ings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision, pp. 4015–4026, 2023.
Trung-Nghia Le, Tam V Nguyen, Zhongliang Nie, Minh-Triet Tran, and Akihiro Sugimoto.
  Anabranch network for camouflaged object segmentation. Computer vision and image under-
  standing, 184:45–56, 2019.
Tian Li, Anit Kumar Sahu, Manzil Zaheer, Maziar Sanjabi, Ameet Talwalkar, and Virginia
  Smith. Federated optimization in heterogeneous networks. In Inderjit S. Dhillon, Dim-
  itris S. Papailiopoulos, and Vivienne Sze (eds.), Proceedings of the Third Conference on
  Machine Learning and Systems, MLSys 2020, Austin, TX, USA, March 2-4, 2020. ml-
  sys.org, 2020. URL https://proceedings.mlsys.org/paper_files/paper/
  2020/hash/1f5fe83998a09396ebe6477d9475ba0c-Abstract.html.
Jiawei Liu, Chunqiu Steven Xia, Yuyao Wang, and LINGMING ZHANG. Is your code generated
   by chatGPT really correct? rigorous evaluation of large language models for code generation.
   In Thirty-seventh Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems, 2023a. URL https:
   //openreview.net/forum?id=1qvx610Cu7.


                                                12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Xiao Liu, Hao Yu, Hanchen Zhang, Yifan Xu, Xuanyu Lei, Hanyu Lai, Yu Gu, Hangliang Ding,
  Kaiwen Men, Kejuan Yang, et al. Agentbench: Evaluating llms as agents. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2308.03688, 2023b.
Xiao Liu, Hao Yu, Hanchen Zhang, Yifan Xu, Xuanyu Lei, Hanyu Lai, Yu Gu, Hangliang Ding,
  Kaiwen Men, Kejuan Yang, Shudan Zhang, Xiang Deng, Aohan Zeng, Zhengxiao Du, Chenhui
  Zhang, Sheng Shen, Tianjun Zhang, Yu Su, Huan Sun, Minlie Huang, Yuxiao Dong, and Jie Tang.
  Agentbench: Evaluating LLMs as agents. In The Twelfth International Conference on Learning
  Representations, 2024. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=zAdUB0aCTQ.
Ilya Loshchilov and Frank Hutter. Decoupled weight decay regularization. In International Confer-
   ence on Learning Representations, 2019. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=
   Bkg6RiCqY7.
Todor Mihaylov, Peter Clark, Tushar Khot, and Ashish Sabharwal. Can a suit of armor conduct
  electricity? A new dataset for open book question answering. In Ellen Riloff, David Chiang,
  Julia Hockenmaier, and Jun’ichi Tsujii (eds.), Proceedings of the 2018 Conference on Empir-
  ical Methods in Natural Language Processing, pp. 2381–2391, Brussels, Belgium, October-
  November 2018. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/D18-1260. URL
  https://aclanthology.org/D18-1260.
Jean-Baptiste Mouret and Jeff Clune. Illuminating search spaces by mapping elites. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1504.04909, 2015.
Olle Nilsson and Antoine Cully. Policy gradient assisted map-elites. In Proceedings of the Genetic
  and Evolutionary Computation Conference, pp. 866–875, 2021.
Long Ouyang, Jeffrey Wu, Xu Jiang, Diogo Almeida, Carroll Wainwright, Pamela Mishkin, Chong
  Zhang, Sandhini Agarwal, Katarina Slama, Alex Ray, et al. Training language models to fol-
  low instructions with human feedback. Advances in neural information processing systems, 35:
  27730–27744, 2022.
Thomas Pierrot, Guillaume Richard, Karim Beguir, and Antoine Cully. Multi-objective quality
  diversity optimization. In Proceedings of the Genetic and Evolutionary Computation Conference,
  pp. 139–147, 2022.
Justin K Pugh, Lisa B Soros, and Kenneth O Stanley. Quality diversity: A new frontier for evolu-
  tionary computation. Frontiers in Robotics and AI, 3:202845, 2016.
Yujia Qin, Shihao Liang, Yining Ye, Kunlun Zhu, Lan Yan, Yaxi Lu, Yankai Lin, Xin Cong, Xi-
  angru Tang, Bill Qian, Sihan Zhao, Lauren Hong, Runchu Tian, Ruobing Xie, Jie Zhou, Mark
  Gerstein, Dahai Li, Zhiyuan Liu, and Maosong Sun. Toolllm: Facilitating large language mod-
  els to master 16000+ real-world apis. In The Twelfth International Conference on Learning
  Representations, ICLR 2024, Vienna, Austria, May 7-11, 2024. OpenReview.net, 2024. URL
  https://openreview.net/forum?id=dHng2O0Jjr.
Pranav Rajpurkar, Robin Jia, and Percy Liang. Know what you don’t know: Unanswerable ques-
  tions for SQuAD. In Proceedings of the 56th Annual Meeting of the Association for Compu-
  tational Linguistics (ACL), pp. 784–789, 2018. doi: 10.18653/V1/P18-2124. URL https:
  //aclanthology.org/P18-2124/.
Sovit  Ranjan  Rath.        Leaf  disease segmentation dataset, 2023.
  URL                   https://www.kaggle.com/datasets/sovitrath/
  leaf-disease-segmentation-with-trainvalid-split.
Mikayel Samvelyan, Sharath Chandra Raparthy, Andrei Lupu, Eric Hambro, Aram H. Markosyan,
 Manish Bhatt, Yuning Mao, Minqi Jiang, Jack Parker-Holder, Jakob N. Foerster, Tim
 Rocktäschel, and Roberta Raileanu. Rainbow teaming: Open-ended generation of diverse ad-
 versarial prompts. CoRR, abs/2402.16822, 2024. doi: 10.48550/ARXIV.2402.16822. URL
 https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2402.16822.
Amanpreet Singh, Vivek Natarajan, Meet Shah, Yu Jiang, Xinlei Chen, Dhruv Batra, Devi Parikh,
 and Marcus Rohrbach. Towards vqa models that can read. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF
 conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, pp. 8317–8326, 2019.


                                               13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Przemysław Skurowski, Hassan Abdulameer, J Błaszczyk, Tomasz Depta, Adam Kornacki, and
  P Kozieł. Animal camouflage analysis: Chameleon database. Unpublished manuscript, 2(6):7,
  2018.
George Stoica, Daniel Bolya, Jakob Bjorner, Taylor Hearn, and Judy Hoffman. Zipit! merging
  models from different tasks without training. In ICLR, 2024.
Mirac Suzgun, Nathan Scales, Nathanael Schärli, Sebastian Gehrmann, Yi Tay, Hyung Won Chung,
 Aakanksha Chowdhery, Quoc Le, Ed Chi, Denny Zhou, and Jason Wei. Challenging BIG-bench
 tasks and whether chain-of-thought can solve them. In Anna Rogers, Jordan Boyd-Graber,
 and Naoaki Okazaki (eds.), Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: ACL
 2023, pp. 13003–13051, Toronto, Canada, July 2023. Association for Computational Linguis-
 tics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2023.findings-acl.824. URL https://aclanthology.org/2023.
 findings-acl.824.
Weihao Tan, Ziluo Ding, Wentao Zhang, Boyu Li, Bohan Zhou, Junpeng Yue, Haochong Xia,
 Jiechuan Jiang, Longtao Zheng, Xinrun Xu, Yifei Bi, Pengjie Gu, Xinrun Wang, Börje F. Karls-
 son, Bo An, and Zongqing Lu. Towards general computer control: A multimodal agent for red
 dead redemption II as a case study. CoRR, abs/2403.03186, 2024. doi: 10.48550/ARXIV.2403.
 03186. URL https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2403.03186.
Alexey Tikhonov and Max Ryabinin. It’s all in the heads: Using attention heads as a baseline for
  cross-lingual transfer in commonsense reasoning. In Findings of the Association for Computa-
  tional Linguistics (ACL), pp. 3534–3546, 2021. doi: 10.18653/V1/2021.FINDINGS-ACL.310.
  URL https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2021.findings-acl.310.
Koki Usui, Reiji Suzuki, and Takaya Arita. Towards open-ended evolution based on cvt-map-elites
  with dynamic switching between feature spaces. In ALIFE 2023: Ghost in the Machine: Pro-
  ceedings of the 2023 Artificial Life Conference. MIT Press, 2023.
Ke Wang, Nikolaos Dimitriadis, Guillermo Ortiz-Jiménez, François Fleuret, and Pascal Frossard.
  Localizing task information for improved model merging and compression. In ICML, pp. to
  appear, 2024a.
Lei Wang, Chen Ma, Xueyang Feng, Zeyu Zhang, Hao Yang, Jingsen Zhang, Zhiyuan Chen, Jiakai
  Tang, Xu Chen, Yankai Lin, et al. A survey on large language model based autonomous agents.
  Frontiers of Computer Science, 18(6):186345, 2024b.
Ren-Jian Wang, Ke Xue, Haopu Shang, Chao Qian, Haobo Fu, and Qiang Fu. Multi-objective
  optimization-based selection for quality-diversity by non-surrounded-dominated sorting. In
  Proceedings of the Thirty-Second International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence, IJ-
  CAI 2023, 19th-25th August 2023, Macao, SAR, China, pp. 4335–4343. ijcai.org, 2023. doi:
  10.24963/IJCAI.2023/482. URL https://doi.org/10.24963/ijcai.2023/482.
Jason Wei, Xuezhi Wang, Dale Schuurmans, Maarten Bosma, brian ichter, Fei Xia, Ed H. Chi,
  Quoc V Le, and Denny Zhou. Chain of thought prompting elicits reasoning in large language
  models. In Alice H. Oh, Alekh Agarwal, Danielle Belgrave, and Kyunghyun Cho (eds.), Ad-
  vances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2022. URL https://openreview.net/
  forum?id=_VjQlMeSB_J.
Yuxiang Wei, Zhe Wang, Jiawei Liu, Yifeng Ding, and LINGMING ZHANG. Magicoder: Em-
  powering code generation with OSS-instruct. In Forty-first International Conference on Machine
  Learning, 2024. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=XUeoOBid3x.
Ryan Wickman, Bibek Poudel, Michael Villarreal, Xiaofei Zhang, and Weizi Li. Efficient quality-
  diversity optimization through diverse quality species. In Sara Silva and Luı́s Paquete (eds.),
  Companion Proceedings of the Conference on Genetic and Evolutionary Computation, GECCO
  2023, Companion Volume, Lisbon, Portugal, July 15-19, 2023, pp. 699–702. ACM, 2023. doi:
  10.1145/3583133.3590581. URL https://doi.org/10.1145/3583133.3590581.
Mitchell Wortsman, Gabriel Ilharco, Samir Yitzhak Gadre, Rebecca Roelofs, Raphael Gontijo
 Lopes, Ari S. Morcos, Hongseok Namkoong, Ali Farhadi, Yair Carmon, Simon Kornblith,


                                               14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


  and Ludwig Schmidt. Model soups: averaging weights of multiple fine-tuned models im-
  proves accuracy without increasing inference time. In Kamalika Chaudhuri, Stefanie Jegelka,
  Le Song, Csaba Szepesvári, Gang Niu, and Sivan Sabato (eds.), International Conference on
  Machine Learning, ICML 2022, 17-23 July 2022, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, volume 162 of
  Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pp. 23965–23998. PMLR, 2022. URL https:
  //proceedings.mlr.press/v162/wortsman22a.html.
Zhiheng Xi, Wenxiang Chen, Xin Guo, Wei He, Yiwen Ding, Boyang Hong, Ming Zhang, Junzhe
  Wang, Senjie Jin, Enyu Zhou, et al. The rise and potential of large language model based agents:
  A survey. arXiv preprint arXiv:2309.07864, 2023.
Zhiheng Xi, Yiwen Ding, Wenxiang Chen, Boyang Hong, Honglin Guo, Junzhe Wang, Dingwen
  Yang, Chenyang Liao, Xin Guo, Wei He, et al. Agentgym: Evolving large language model-based
  agents across diverse environments. arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.04151, 2024.
Tianqi Xu, Linyao Chen, Dai-Jie Wu, Yanjun Chen, Zecheng Zhang, Xiang Yao, Zhiqiang Xie,
  Yongchao Chen, Shilong Liu, Bochen Qian, Philip Torr, Bernard Ghanem, and Guohao Li.
  CRAB: cross-environment agent benchmark for multimodal language model agents. CoRR,
  abs/2407.01511, 2024. doi: 10.48550/ARXIV.2407.01511. URL https://doi.org/10.
  48550/arXiv.2407.01511.
Ke Xue, Ren-Jian Wang, Pengyi Li, Dong Li, Jianye Hao, and Chao Qian. Sample-efficient quality-
  diversity by cooperative coevolution. In The Twelfth International Conference on Learning
  Representations, ICLR 2024, Vienna, Austria, May 7-11, 2024. OpenReview.net, 2024. URL
  https://openreview.net/forum?id=JDud6zbpFv.
Prateek Yadav, Derek Tam, Leshem Choshen, Colin A. Raffel, and Mohit Bansal. Ties-
  merging: Resolving interference when merging models.      In Alice Oh, Tristan Nau-
  mann, Amir Globerson, Kate Saenko, Moritz Hardt, and Sergey Levine (eds.), Advances
  in Neural Information Processing Systems 36: Annual Conference on Neural Informa-
  tion Processing Systems 2023, NeurIPS 2023, New Orleans, LA, USA, December 10 - 16,
  2023, 2023. URL http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/
  1644c9af28ab7916874f6fd6228a9bcf-Abstract-Conference.html.
Enneng Yang, Zhenyi Wang, Li Shen, Shiwei Liu, Guibing Guo, Xingwei Wang, and Dacheng Tao.
  Adamerging: Adaptive model merging for multi-task learning. In ICLR, 2024.
Shunyu Yao, Jeffrey Zhao, Dian Yu, Nan Du, Izhak Shafran, Karthik R. Narasimhan, and Yuan
  Cao. React: Synergizing reasoning and acting in language models. In The Eleventh International
  Conference on Learning Representations, ICLR 2023, Kigali, Rwanda, May 1-5, 2023. OpenRe-
  view.net, 2023. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=WE_vluYUL-X.
Chenchen Ye, Ziniu Hu, Yihe Deng, Zijie Huang, Mingyu Derek Ma, Yanqiao Zhu, and Wei Wang.
  MIRAI: evaluating LLM agents for event forecasting. CoRR, abs/2407.01231, 2024. doi: 10.
  48550/ARXIV.2407.01231. URL https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2407.01231.
Le Yu, Bowen Yu, Haiyang Yu, Fei Huang, and Yongbin Li. Language models are super mario:
  Absorbing abilities from homologous models as a free lunch. In ICML, pp. to appear, 2024.
Rowan Zellers, Ari Holtzman, Yonatan Bisk, Ali Farhadi, and Yejin Choi. HellaSwag: Can a
  machine really finish your sentence? In Anna Korhonen, David Traum, and Lluı́s Màrquez
  (eds.), Proceedings of the 57th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics,
  pp. 4791–4800, Florence, Italy, July 2019. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.
  18653/v1/P19-1472. URL https://aclanthology.org/P19-1472.
Aohan Zeng, Mingdao Liu, Rui Lu, Bowen Wang, Xiao Liu, Yuxiao Dong, and Jie Tang. Agent-
  tuning: Enabling generalized agent abilities for llms. In Lun-Wei Ku, Andre Martins, and Vivek
  Srikumar (eds.), Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics, ACL 2024, Bangkok,
  Thailand and virtual meeting, August 11-16, 2024, pp. 3053–3077. Association for Computational
  Linguistics, 2024. URL https://aclanthology.org/2024.findings-acl.181.
Zihan Zhong, Zhiqiang Tang, Tong He, Haoyang Fang, and Chun Yuan. Convolution meets lora:
  Parameter efficient finetuning for segment anything model. ICLR, 2024.


                                               15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Terry Yue Zhuo, Minh Chien Vu, Jenny Chim, Han Hu, Wenhao Yu, Ratnadira Widyasari,
  Imam Nur Bani Yusuf, Haolan Zhan, Junda He, Indraneil Paul, et al. Bigcodebench: Bench-
  marking code generation with diverse function calls and complex instructions. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2406.15877, 2024.


                                               16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A     A PPENDIX

A.1     C OMPUTER SCIENCE TASKS

A.1.1    E XTRA TASK SETUPS

The MBPP+ dataset, based on the original MBPP, uses a subset of 399 hand-verified problems
from MBPP-sanitized to ensure well-formed programming tasks. Each problem includes a problem
statement, function signature, and test cases. EvalPlus extends this dataset with additional test cases
to provide a more rigorous evaluation of code generation capabilities. For our evaluation, we use the
pass@1 metric on the Base Tests of MBPP+, which reflects the model’s ability to generate correct
code on the first attempt using the original test cases. The OS dataset evaluates LLMs in genuine
interactive bash environments (Ubuntu Docker) on human questions with deterministic answers and
practical operational tasks. The DB dataset assesses LLMs’ abilities to operate on real databases via
SQL, encompassing the complete pipeline of database analysis with authentic SQL interfaces and
multiple tables. Both OS and DB datasets use success rate as the primary evaluation metric. The OS
tasks are designed to be solved within a maximum of 5 interaction turns and employ a 1-shot setup.
The DB tasks have a similar interaction limit but are evaluated in a 0-shot manner.

A.1.2    T RAINING CONFIGURATION FOR EXPERTS

We utilize llm-recipes (Fujii et al., 2024) (commit 606cdfb) for fine-tuning. We adopt the AdamW
optimizer (Loshchilov & Hutter, 2019) with β1 = 0.9 and β2 = 0.95. A global batch size of 64
is used across all fine-tuning processes. We employ cosine learning rate scheduling with a range of
[4 × 10−6 , 2 × 10−5 ], starting with a linear warmup for the first 10% of the total training steps. The
OS and DB experts are trained for 1 epoch, while the code model is trained for 3 epochs due to its
larger training data size.

A.1.3    C YCLE QD HYPER - PARAMETERS

We set αlow = 0.5 and αhigh = 0.8 in Elite
sampling, µ = 1.0 and σ = 0.03 in model
merging-based crossover, and wmax = 0.3 in
our SVD-based mutations. These hyperpa-
rameters are determined in preliminary studies,
where we arbitrarily determined a set of values,
ran CycleQD for a small number of generations
and picked the set with the best performance.
We believe the performance of CycleQD can be
further improved when incorporating sophisti-
cated hyperparameter searching methods.
To investigate the influence of the number of
generations on CycleQD performance, we an-
                                                    Figure 5: Averaged performance on computer
alyzed the average scores of the computer sci-
                                                    science tasks. Evaluated every 100 generations.
ence tasks every 100 generations. Figure 5 il-
lustrates these results. The performance gradu-
ally increases over the generations with no obviously significant oscillations. While still showing a
slight upward trend beyond this point, it stabilizes around 1000 generations.

A.1.4    C YCLE QD DEVELOPMENT OF ARCHIVES ACROSS GENERATIONS .

Figure 6 shows the development of archives across generations. The archives are shown in incre-
ments of 300 generations from top to bottom. The corresponding generation for each archive is
displayed on the left side of the figure. The red bounding boxes indicate the grids where expert
policies were present in each archive. It can be observed that the frontier of the archives expands
with each passing generation.


                                                   17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A.1.5   A DDING A VISION QUESTION ANSWERING TASK

In addition to the computer science tasks, we add a visual question answering (VQA) task to Cy-
cleQD to further demonstrate its generally applicability across tasks that differ drastically. The
VQA task lies within the vision-language modeling (VLM) domain, which presents challenges when
merging it with tasks from LLM domain.
Specifically, we use the TextVQA dataset (Singh et al., 2019) as part of the CycleQD experiments
along with the coding, DB, and OS tasks. The experimental setup follows the same configurations
described in Section 4.2.2, including parameters and the 1200 generations training budget. To create
a VQA expert, we optimize the L LAMA 3-L LAVA -N EXT-8B model using 4000 samples from the
TextVQA data as training data. Additionally, we allocate 500 distinct samples, separated from the
training data, for CycleQD training. These 500 samples are evenly divided into optimization and
test datasets.
During the CycleQD optimization process, we extract the L LAMA 3-8B- INSTRUCT component of
the VLM and perform merge and mutate operations. The results, presented in Table 5, show that
CycleQD achieves the best average performance compared to both the base and the expert models.
Notably, CycleQD outperforms the several expert models on VQA, coding, and OS tasks, highlight-
ing its effectiveness in combining knowledge across diverse domains.


Table 5: Evaluation on computer science tasks and VQA. We add VQA task to computer science
tasks and evaluate CycleQD.
             #   Methods                            VQA        MBPP   DB     OS     Avg
             0   Llama3-8B-Instruct (base model)        39.0   67.3   5.3    25.2   34.2
             Experts models
             1 VQA expert                               51.4    4.0   0.0    1.5    14.2
             2 Coding expert                            32.9   70.4   21.2   20.7   36.3
             3 DB expert                                45.4   65.8   42.4   28.5   45.5
             4 OS expert                                46.1   66.3    0.0   30.4   35.7
             5   CycleQD (Ours)                         54.1   72.9   32.4   39.6   49.7


A.1.6   B ENCHMARK DATASETS FOR SKILL GENERALIZATION AND LANGUAGE
        UNDERSTANDING

In the Coding category, we employ two key benchmarks: HUMANEVAL+ (Liu et al., 2023a), eval-
uated in a 0-shot setting using the pass@1 metric on the Base Tests, and BigCodeBench (Zhuo et al.,
2024), which is designed to assess code generation with diverse function calls and complex instruc-
tions. We report the average Pass@1 scores for both BigCodeBench-Complete and BigCodeBench-
Instruct variants in the full setting, using 0-shot evaluation. For the General Knowledge and Rea-
soning (Reasoning) category, we utilize two comprehensive benchmarks: MMLU (Hendrycks et al.,
2021) with a 5-shot evaluation, and BBH (Big Bench Hard) (Suzgun et al., 2023) using a 3-shot
chain-of-thought (Wei et al., 2022) prompting approach. These benchmarks provide a holistic as-
sessment of our model’s ability to handle a wide range of knowledge-based and reasoning tasks. To
evaluate Mathematical Reasoning, we employ the GSM8K benchmark (Cobbe et al., 2021) with a 4-
shot evaluation, challenging our model’s ability to solve complex mathematical problems. For Read-
ing Comprehension (RC), we use two established benchmarks: SQuAD2 (Rajpurkar et al., 2018)
and TriviaQA (Joshi et al., 2017), both evaluated using a 4-shot approach. These datasets assess the
model’s capacity to understand and reason over complex textual information. In the Commonsense
Reasoning (CommonSense) category, we employ three diverse benchmarks: HellaSwag (Zellers
et al., 2019) for commonsense inference, OpenBookQA (Mihaylov et al., 2018) for elementary-
level science question answering that requires both core scientific knowledge and broader common
knowledge, and XWinograd (English version) (Tikhonov & Ryabinin, 2021) for cross-lingual com-
monsense reasoning and coreference resolution. All these evaluations are conducted with 4-shot
prompts.


                                                   18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A.1.7    T RAINING TIME COMPARISON
We used NVIDIA H100 GPUs for our experiments. The gradient fine-tuning method (model #6 in
Table 1) took approximately 200 GPU hours, and our method (model #11 in Table 1) took about 410
GPU hours (excluding the expert models training time). We wish to point out that (1) the extra time
spent on CycleQD is mostly due to agentic task evaluations rather than the optimization, (2) due
to GPU memory constraints, the merging process was carried out on CPU, (3) CycleQD produces
an archive of models whereas fine-tuning generates only one. Furthermore, it is important to note
that fine-tuning is a mature and well-established approach with software implementations that are
optimized for efficiency. By contrast, the proposed method was developed primarily to assess its
performance, and as such, there is ample room for further efficiency improvements.

A.2     I MAGE SEGMENTATION TASKS

A.2.1    DATASETS FOR FINE - TUNING EXPERTS AND C YCLE QD TRAINING
We followed Zhong et al. (2024) to prepare the datasets. For Camouflaged Object Segmentation,
we use three datasets: COD10K (Fan et al., 2020a), CHAMELEON (Skurowski et al., 2018), and
CAMO (Le et al., 2019). Following Fan et al. (2020a) we train on a combined dataset consisting of
the 4040 training images from COD10K and CAMO for 20 epochs, randomly splitting 10% of the
images from the training set for validation. The model is then tested on the 250 COMO test images.
For Polyp Segmentation, we use two datasets: Kvasir (Jha et al., 2019) and CVC-ClinicDB/CVC-
612 (Bernal et al., 2015). Following Fan et al. (2020b), we divide the images into a 9:1 ratio for
training and testing, resulting in 1450 training images. We then randomly split 20 % of the training
set for validation. The model is trained for 30 epochs and tested on the 101 Kvasir test images. For
Skin Lesion Segmentation, we use the ISIC 2017 dataset (Codella et al., 2018). We train the model
on the 2000 training and 150 validation images for 30 epochs and evaluate it on the 600 test images.
For Leaf Segmentation, we use the Leaf Disease Segmentation Dataset (Rath, 2023). We train the
model on the 498 training image, using 80% for training and 20% for validation for 30 epochs, and
evaluate it on 90 test images.

A.2.2    V ISUALIZATION RESULT
The visualization results are shown in Figure 7 for SKL and POL, and Figure 8 for SKL and LEA. In
both figures, ”Ours” refers to a single merged model via CycleQD, identical to model #3 (for SKL
and POL) and model #5 (for SKL and LEA) in Table 4. In Figure 7, our model retains near expert-
level performance for both tasks after merging. However, in Figure 8, while our model generally
performs at an expert level for both tasks, a slight drop is observed. Notably, in the bottom images
of SKL, the model seems to detect the edges of the skin lesions instead of the lesions themselves, as
if confusing the task with leaf disease detection. The expert model similarities are high—0.99 for
SKL and POL, and 0.95 for SKL and LEA. This corresponds with the observation that the merged
model from the highly similar SKL and POL performs better than the one from SKL and LEA.

B     M ORE RELATED WORKS
LLM Skill Acquisition: Beyond conversational tasks, increasing attention has been given to en-
abling LLMs to acquire skills to take action. This allows LLMs to function as agents capable of
solving problems autonomously, and this approach is known as LLM-as-Agent (Xi et al., 2023;
Wang et al., 2024b). Benchmarks for LLM-as-Agent have been developed, and research has demon-
strated that LLMs can successfully perform tasks such as computer operations and web browsing
to a certain extent (Gur et al., 2023; Liu et al., 2023b; Xi et al., 2024; Xu et al., 2024; Tan et al.,
2024; Ye et al., 2024). ReAct (Yao et al., 2023) is the most frequently used approach for constructing
LLM-as-Agent systems, which integrates CoT reasoning with action. ReAct is typically employed
through prompting and few-shot in-context learning, where models learn skills from a small number
of examples. However, attempts to equip LLMs with such skills through actual training with more
examples are still quite limited, with a few studies focusing only on standard fine-tuning (Zeng et al.,
2024; Qin et al., 2024). This fine-tuning approach often struggles with balancing multiple agent
skills and suffers from the gap between next token prediction loss and actual task performance. Our
proposed method uses QD techniques to optimize each skill independently and directly.


                                                  19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Quality Diversity: QD is an emerging paradigm in evolutionary computation that aims to discover
a diverse collection of high-performing solutions rather than a single optimal result (Pugh et al.,
2016). QD algorithms balance two key aspects: quality, which represents a solution’s performance,
and behavior characterization (BC), which describes its observable properties. These algorithms
maintain an archive of diverse, high-quality solutions, continuously updated through an evolution-
ary process. MAP-Elites (Mouret & Clune, 2015) is a prominent QD algorithm that maintains an
archive defined by the BCs, discretizes it into tessellation, and stores the best-performing solutions
in each cell to preserve diversity. In each generation, it samples parents from the archive, creates
offspring through crossover and mutation, and evaluates their quality and BCs. Offspring replace
existing elites if they perform better in their respective cells. This process simultaneously explores
diverse behaviors and optimizes performance within each niche, resulting in a map of high-quality,
diverse solutions. Recent improvements to MAP-Elites include a new selection method for better
diversity (Wang et al., 2023) and an approach that removes the need for predefined niches (Wickman
et al., 2023). Additionally, to address potential stagnation in a fixed BC space, Usui et al. (2023)
propose dynamic switching of the BC space. CycleQD goes further by aiming for MOQD, rotating
both the BCs and the quality across tasks. MOQD (Pierrot et al., 2022) has been proposed to address
problems with multiple, potentially conflicting objectives while maintaining diversity. Instead of the
fitness, it maximizes a Pareto front hyper-volume in each niche of the descriptor space. CycleQD is
a simplified form of MOQD in the sense that it uses task metrics as both BCs and the quality, the
product of which approximates the hyper-volume, and the coordinate-ascent style of optimization
allows it to avoid complex hyper-volume calculations for higher-dimensional archives.
Quality Diversity for LLMs: Evolutionary computation, particularly QD, has occasionally been
applied to neural networks and LLMs (Guo et al., 2024; Xue et al., 2024; Akiba et al., 2024). How-
ever, there has been no prior research that evolves the main weights of LLMs using QD. Samvelyan
et al. (2024) proposed Rainbow Teaming, which applies QD to evolve diverse adversarial prompts
for evaluating LLM safety. Bradley et al. (2024) introduced QDAIF, which applies QD with LLM
feedback to evolve populations of generated creative texts. Our work represents the first attempt
to merge LLMs through QD. We believe this approach holds great promise, as it allows individual
components of the model to be preserved even when they are temporarily sub-optimal, with the
potential to contribute to future performance improvements. Given the cost and complexity of opti-
mizing the many layers of LLMs, QD offers a unique advantage by retaining useful configurations
in archives that may later enhance overall model performance.
Model Merging: Model merging refers to combining multiple pre-trained models into a single
model. This technique is gaining attention because it can enhance model performance and integrate
multiple capabilities at a much lower training cost. Additionally, unlike ensemble methods, model
merging does not increase inference costs either. This technique is particularly effective when ap-
plied to different fine-tuned versions of the same base model. The most basic method involves a
linear combination of weights (Wortsman et al., 2022; Ilharco et al., 2023). More advanced merging
techniques have been proposed, incorporating methods such as election and sparsification (Yadav
et al., 2023; Yu et al., 2024; Wang et al., 2024a; Stoica et al., 2024). Furthermore, the applicability
and performance of these methods have been significantly improved through optimization (Akiba
et al., 2024; Yang et al., 2024). Inspired by these merging strategies, CycleQD combines QD with
model merging, allowing for more effective synthesis of multiple capabilities in LLMs.


                                                  20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


  Generations         Q: MBPP                                 Q: DB    0.50                Q: OS
                                                                                                      0.45
                                       0.80                                     0.30

                                                                       0.40                           0.40

                                       0.75
                                                                                                      0.35


                                                                                                              Q scale bar
           BC: OS


                                               BC: OS


                                                                               BC: DB
                                                                       0.30
                                       0.70                                                           0.30

   0                                                                                                  0.25
                                       0.65                            0.20

                                                                                                      0.20

                                       0.60
                                                                       0.10                           0.15


                                       0.55                                                           0.10
                                                                       0.0
                       BC: DB                             BC: MBPP                       BC: MBPP
                       Q: MBPP                                Q: DB     0.50               Q: OS
                                                                                                      0.45
                                       0.80                                     0.30

                                                                        0.40                          0.40

                                       0.75
                                                                                                      0.35


                                                                                                              Q scale bar
           BC: OS


                                               BC: OS


                                                                               BC: DB
                                                                        0.30
                                       0.70                                                           0.30

  300                                                                                                 0.25
                                       0.65                             0.20

                                                                                                      0.20

                                       0.60
                                                                        0.10                          0.15


                                       0.55                                                           0.10
                                                                        0.0
                       BC: DB                             BC: MBPP                        BC: MBPP
                       Q: MBPP                                Q: DB     0.50               Q: OS
                                                                                                      0.45
                                       0.80                                      0.30

                                                                        0.40                          0.40

                                       0.75
                                                                                                      0.35


                                                                                                               Q scale bar
           BC: OS


                                               BC: OS


                                                                               BC: DB
                                                                        0.30
                                       0.70                                                           0.30


  600                                                                                                 0.25
                                       0.65                             0.20

                                                                                                      0.20

                                       0.60
                                                                        0.10                          0.15


                                       0.55                                                           0.10
                                                                        0.0
                       BC: DB                             BC: MBPP                       BC: MBPP

                       Q: MBPP                                Q: DB     0.50               Q: OS
                                                                                                       0.45
                                        0.80                                     0.30

                                                                        0.40                           0.40

                                        0.75
                                                                                                       0.35


                                                                                                                Q scale bar
            BC: OS


                                                BC: OS


                                                                                BC: DB


                                                                        0.30
                                        0.70                                                           0.30

  900
                                                                                                       0.25
                                        0.65                            0.20

                                                                                                       0.20

                                        0.60
                                                                        0.10                           0.15

                                      0.55
                                        0.55                                                         0.10
                                                                                                       0.10
                                                                      0.00.0
                      BC:
                       BC:DB
                           DB                            BC:
                                                          BC:MBPP
                                                              MBPP                       BC:
                                                                                          BC:MBPP
                                                                                              MBPP
                       Q: MBPP                                Q: DB     0.50               Q: OS
                                                                                                      0.45
                                       0.80                                     0.30

                                                                        0.40                          0.40

                                       0.75
                                                                                                      0.35
                                                                                                               Q scale bar
           BC: OS


                                               BC: OS


                                                                               BC: DB


                                                                        0.30
                                       0.70                                                           0.30

  1200
                                                                                                      0.25
                                       0.65                             0.20

                                                                                                      0.20

                                       0.60
                                                                        0.10                          0.15


                                       0.55                                                           0.10
                                                                        0.0
                       BC: DB                             BC: MBPP                        BC: MBPP


Figure 6: CycleQD Development of Archives Across Generations. In each archive, the two axes
represent the BCs, and the color intensities in each grid indicate the quality of the LLM agent in that
grid. The archives are shown in increments of 300 generations from top to bottom. The correspond-
ing generation for each archive is displayed on the left side of the figure. The red bounding boxes
indicate the grids where expert policies were present in each archive. The experiment shown in this
figure is the same as in Figure 4, and the archive for 1200 generations is identical to that in Figure 4.



                                                         21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


              Skin Lesion Segmentation (SKL)                       Polyp Segmentation (POL)
      Image       Ground truth    Expert       Ours        Image     Ground truth   Expert    Ours


Figure 7: CycleQD of SAM for SKL and POL. Ours is a single merged model via CycleQD, and
it is the same model as the one in Table 4 (# 3). The similarity between the two expert models is
high (0.99), and the model maintains expert-level performance across both tasks.


              Skin Lesion Segmentation (SKL)                        Leaf Segmentation (LEA)
      Image       Ground truth    Expert       Ours        Image     Ground truth   Expert    Ours


Figure 8: CycleQD of SAM for SKL and LEA. Ours is a single merged model via CycleQD, and
it is the same model as the one in Table 4 (# 5). The similarity between the two expert models is
0.95, which is lower than #3 (0.99) from Table 4, resulting in a slight decrease in performance, as
observed when comparing the bottom images in SKL.


                                                      22
