Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


WARD : P ROVABLE RAG DATASET I NFERENCE
VIA LLM WATERMARKS

 Nikola Jovanović, Robin Staab, Maximilian Baader, Martin Vechev
 ETH Zurich
 {nikola.jovanovic, robin.staab, mbaader, martin.vechev}@inf.ethz.ch



                                             A BSTRACT
         RAG enables LLMs to easily incorporate external data, raising concerns for data
         owners regarding unauthorized usage of their content. The challenge of detecting
         such unauthorized usage remains underexplored, with datasets and methods from
         adjacent fields being ill-suited for its study. We take several steps to bridge this gap.
         First, we formalize this problem as (black-box) RAG Dataset Inference (RAG-DI).
         We then introduce a novel dataset designed for realistic benchmarking of RAG-
         DI methods, alongside a set of baselines. Finally, we propose WARD, a method
         for RAG-DI based on LLM watermarks that equips data owners with rigorous
         statistical guarantees regarding their dataset’s misuse in RAG corpora. WARD
         consistently outperforms all baselines, achieving higher accuracy, superior query
         efficiency and robustness. Our work provides a foundation for future studies of
         RAG-DI and highlights LLM watermarks as a promising approach to this problem.


1    I NTRODUCTION
Retrieval-augmented generation (RAG) has emerged as a popular approach to mitigate limitations of
large language models (LLMs) such as hallucinations, the high cost of adapting to new knowledge
via fine-tuning, and the inability to back up claims by sources (Lewis et al., 2020). By integrating
retrieval, LLMs gain in-context access to large corpora of high-quality, up-to-date data, enabling them
to generate more accurate and source-supported responses. To maintain relevance, RAG providers
must continuously update their corpus with new data. However, this raises concerns regarding
the unauthorized usage of documents, particularly when publicly available documents are used
without the owner’s permission (Grynbaum & Mac, 2023; Wei et al., 2024a); see App. A for a more
elaborate discussion of this issue and its prevalence in practice. Crucially, there is currently no way to
conclusively prove such unauthorized usage by a RAG system, and enforce an opt-out by the owner.

RAG Dataset Inference (RAG-DI) We formalize this problem as RAG Dataset Inference (RAG-
DI), where a data owner aims to detect unauthorized inclusion of their dataset in a RAG corpus via
black-box queries (Fig. 1). In the first comprehensive study of this problem, we observe that existing
datasets, used in adjacent works on RAG privacy, are not suitable for RAG-DI. First, the samples in
these datasets may have been used in contemporary LLM training, complicating realistic evaluations
where RAG corpora consist of new data. Second, these datasets do not model fact redundancy, a key
property of real-world RAG, where multiple documents have similar content, either due to scraping
data from various sources, e.g., news (Gao et al., 2023), or due to chunking. Another challenge in
studying RAG-DI stems from the lack of baselines applicable in a realistic black-box setting.

Foundations for RAG-DI In this work, we take multiple steps to bridge these gaps: First, we
introduce FARAD, a new dataset specifically designed for RAG-DI evaluation under realistic condi-
tions. FARAD contains fictional articles that are by design not part of any LLM training data, and can
enable evaluations under fact redundancy, enabling accurate assessment of RAG-DI methods. Second,
we adapt prior work on RAG Membership Inference Attacks (MIAs) (Li et al., 2024; Anderson
et al., 2024) to the RAG-DI problem, and propose a simple baseline FACTS. In our evaluation on
FARAD, we find that (i) despite its extreme simplicity, FACTS outperforms other baselines in settings
with no fact redundancy, further underscoring the drawbacks of existing datasets, and (ii) when fact
redundancy is present, no baseline achieves satisfactory performance. This highlights the need for
novel approaches capable of reliably identifying unauthorized usage of documents in RAG corpora.


                                                    1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                              Dataset                      RAG Corpus

                         LLM watermarking
                                                                ⚠


                                                                                                😈 RAG
 Data Watermarking                                                   Retrieval Mechanism        Provider

 RAG Dataset Inference
                                 Data Owner
                                                        query

                                 Watermark
                                  Detector
         Inconclusive!
                                   🟩🟩🟥
                                   🟥🟩🟩
                                                                           LLM
                                   🟥🟩🟥                      agg.
                                   🟥🟥🟩
󰥕 My data was used!
                                      ?


Figure 1: Overview of RAG Dataset Inference using WARD, our method based on LLM watermarks.

LLM Watermarks as a reliable RAG-DI method To this end, we introduce WARD, a RAG-DI
method that protects the data owner’s dataset by imprinting LLM watermarks (Kirchenbauer et al.,
2023; Kuditipudi et al., 2024). As Fig. 1 illustrates, given a limited number of black-box queries qi to
the retrieval-augmented LLM, the data owner can detect even small traces of the watermark across
responses ri , and for the first time obtain rigorous statistical guarantees regarding the usage of their
dataset in the RAG corpus, enabling them to effectively audit the RAG provider. In our experiments
on FARAD, we show that WARD consistently outperforms all baselines across a variety of challenging
settings, showing high rate of true positives (often 100%), with no false accusations. Further, due to
its robustness across settings, and the fact that it engages only in natural-looking interactions with the
retrieval-augmented LLM, WARD retains its performance even under attempts by the RAG provider
to prevent unintended uses of the system. These results underscore the effectiveness of WARD in
enforcing data usage policies and protecting data owners’ rights in the context of RAG systems.

Main contributions We make the following key contributions:

        • We formalize a previously unexplored problem, RAG Dataset Inference (RAG-DI), where a
          data owner aims to detect unauthorized usage of their dataset in a RAG system (§3).
        • We facilitate research on this problem by (i) proposing a new dataset FARAD, specifically
          designed for benchmarking RAG-DI methods under realistic conditions, and (ii) introducing
          an initial set of baseline methods (§3.1 and §3.2).
        • We propose LLM watermarks as a way to provably, robustly and reliably detect unauthorized
          data usage in RAG corpora, introducing WARD as a novel RAG-DI method (§4).
        • Our experimental evaluation in a wide range of settings affirms the fundamental limitations
          of existing datasets and all RAG-DI baselines, and demonstrates the effectiveness of WARD,
          which consistently shows high accuracy, query efficiency, and robustness (§5). Our source
          code and the FARAD dataset are publicly available at https://github.com/eth-sri/ward.

2    BACKGROUND
Retrieval-augmented generation (RAG) RAG is a common way to enhance LLMs: For a given
user query q, the k ∈ N most relevant documents Dq = R(q, D) ⊆ D are retrieved from a corpus
D, using a retrieval method R (Gao et al., 2023). The query q is generally combined with Dq , and
fed into an LLM to generate a more factual response r = M(q, Dq ). Expanding D also enables
access to new information without costly retraining (Lewis et al., 2020). RAG is especially suitable
for domains where new information is generated often, e.g., news articles or software documentation.
In this work we use M⋆ to denote a RAG system, i.e., a retrieval-augmented LLM M.

LLM watermarking LLM watermarks enable model owners to provably and reliably track text
generated by their LLM. In this work, we focus on the prominent red-green watermarks (Kirchenbauer


                                                        2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


et al., 2023). During text generation, at each step t, the token vocabulary V is split into two parts,
γ|V | green (encouraged) tokens, and (1 − γ)|V | red (discouraged) tokens, for some γ ∈ [0, 1]. Given
context width h, the split is commonly a function of tokens at positions t − h, . . . , t, as well as a
secret salt. To add the watermark, the logits of green tokens are increased by δ ∈ R≥0 , boosting
their probability of being sampled. The watermark is detected using a statistical test, based on the
expectation that non-watermarked text of length T has γT green tokens. Namely, we use the z-score
                                             |s|g − γT
                                          z=p           ,                                             (1)
                                              γ(1 − γ)T
where |s|g is the number of green tokens in a given text s, and T = |s|. From here, we derive the
p-value p = 1 − Φ(z), where Φ is the CDF of the standard normal distribution, and consider the text
watermarked if p < α for some threshold α. While not perfectly robust, these watermarks generally
persist under moderate text transformations, such as paraphrasing or segment omission (Piet et al.,
2023; Kirchenbauer et al., 2024; Sander et al., 2024), making them suitable for our setting, where our
goal will be to propagate the watermark signal through the RAG pipeline, as we will describe in §4.

RAG membership inference attacks While RAG is a relatively novel concept, recent work already
studies membership inference attacks (MIAs) in this setting, proposing two methods that we denote
S IB (Li et al., 2024) and A AG (Anderson et al., 2024). A MIA’s goal is to output mi(d, M⋆ ) = 1 if a
document d is part of the retrieval corpus D of a RAG system M⋆ , or mi(d, M⋆ ) = 0 otherwise,
based only on queries to M⋆ . To this end, S IB queries M⋆ with q, a prefix of d, to obtain the response
r = M(q, Dq ). Then, it computes two scores: the cosine similarity between the embeddings of d and
r, and the perplexity of r, outputting mi(d, M⋆ ) = 1 if the similarity is above a threshold θsimilarity ,
and the perplexity is below a threshold θperplexity , both trainable parameters. Note that this requires
gray-box access to M⋆ for perplexity computation. The other method, A AG, directly prompts M⋆ to
answer if d is in the context. If it replies positively, they set mi(d, M) = 1. In §3, we will introduce
the black-box RAG dataset inference setting, and adapt both baselines to it. Notably, while dataset
inference was studied alongside MIA for training data (see §6), no prior work studies it for RAG.

3     RAG DATASET I NFERENCE
We formalize the problem of RAG Dataset Inference (RAG-DI), and present our contributions aimed
at facilitating studies of this problem. In §3.1, we make the case that existing datasets commonly
used for adjacent tasks (e.g., RAG MIA) are fundamentally unsuitable for RAG-DI, and propose a
new dataset in an attempt to address these shortcomings. In §3.2, we establish a set of baselines for
RAG-DI, by adapting RAG MIA work introduced in §2, and proposing a simple baseline, FACTS.

The RAG-DI problem The key entities in RAG-DI are the data owner, who aims to protect their
n-document dataset Ddo from unauthorized usage in a RAG corpus, and the RAG provider, who
exposes black-box access to their retrieval-augmented LLM M⋆ , which uses a corpus D. The data
owner’s goal is to determine if Ddo ⊆ D, i.e., whether their data was secretly included in the corpus.
To this end, they may proactively modify Ddo before publishing it, and can query M⋆ in a black-box
way, aiming to minimize the number of such queries. Crucially, the data owner makes a single
dataset-level decision, as opposed to document-level decisions of MIAs. Formally, a RAG-DI method
di should output di(Ddo , M⋆ ) = 1 if Ddo ⊆ D (IN case) and 0 otherwise (OUT case).

3.1   A DATASET SUITABLE FOR RAG-DI

To enable suitable evaluation of RAG-DI methods, we require a dataset of documents with the
following properties. First, we aim to match a key use-case of RAG (as described in §2) where
up-to-date knowledge is added to D instead of costly repeated fine-tuning of M. To model this, our
documents should provably not be part of the training data of M, i.e., of current open/closed LLMs, as
those will be used to instantiate M when studying RAG-DI. Second, to model the practical case where
knowledge is redundant and spread across multiple sources (e.g., news articles, a common motivating
example for RAG (Gao et al., 2023)), the dataset should contain documents with overlapping topics
and information (fact redundancy). As we will empirically demonstrate in §5, while fact redundancy
is more realistic, it makes RAG-DI significantly harder.


                                                    3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Current state As there is no prior work on RAG-DI, we
turn to related work on RAG privacy (Anderson et al., 2024;
Li et al., 2024; Zeng et al., 2024), including MIAs intro-
duced in §2. We observe that evaluations in these works rely                                Source

primarily on EnronEmails (Klimt & Yang, 2004) and Health-
careMagic datasets (Zeng et al., 2020; Mrini et al., 2021),                  #123
                                                                              #123

motivated by the presence of PII in their samples. However,                           Fact Extraction

it can not be ruled out that these datasets were used to train
contemporary LLMs, as e.g., EnronEmails has been publicly
available since 2004. More importantly, fact redundancy
is by design not satisfied in either of these cases. These                                                  Authors
                                                                     Key           Additional
shortcomings motivate us to construct a new dataset, FARAD          Facts            Facts
(Fact-Redundant Article Dataset), tailored to RAG-DI.

The FARAD dataset FARAD consists of a number of
groups. Each group contains articles that share a topic and
a significant amount of information, but are independently
written by a different (LLM) author. As our data source we                            …
use RepLiQA (Monteiro et al., 2024), that contains articles
about fictional entities and events, which by design ensures
that this knowledge was not present in any LLM training
data. RepLiQA is released gradually—to create FARAD, we                              FARAD group #123
use split 0 as the only one available at the time of writing,                                               FARAD-Easy
but plan to expand this to future splits.                                                                    no fact redundancy
                                                                            #123     #374   #266     #597
Each RepLiQA article is a source for one of our groups—
we use the pipeline illustrated in Fig. 2. First, we prompt                               FARAD-Hard
                                                                                           fact redundancy
GPT4 O to distill the information content of the article into 5       #123 #374 #374 #123
self-contained key facts, crucial to understanding the article,
and 10 self-contained additional facts, that are present in the Figure 2: Overview of the generation
article but not essential to its key message (see App. F.2). pipeline of FARAD, and the resulting
Next, to create a group, we sample an author model from Easy and Hard evaluation settings.
the set A = {GPT4 O, C LAUDE 3.5-S ONNET, L LAMA 3.1-
405B, Q WEN 1.5-110B} of state-of-the-art LLMs. The selected model writes a 500–1000 word
article that must include all 5 key facts, 2 randomly sampled additional facts, and is encouraged to
invent additional quotes, hypotheses, or personal opinions, as long as they do not contradict any
present fact. The diversity of authors, sampled facts, and (desirable) hallucinated content results in
a varied set of fictional articles grounded in the same core knowledge, which satisfies our earlier
requirements. While this pipeline can be extended to larger/more groups, more authors, and different
fact combinations, we limit FARAD to 3591 groups (3391 for testing, and 200 for training) of 4
articles each, one per author from A.

Use in RAG-DI evaluation In our experiments in §5, we use FARAD to create two evaluation
settings: Easy and Hard, illustrated in Fig. 2 (bottom). The Easy setting follows the traditional setup
described above where facts are uniquely represented, by always using at most 1 article per FARAD
group. The Hard setting introduces fact redundancy by always including all 4 articles from a group.
As we demonstrate shortly, the Easy setting is solvable by a simple baseline, while the Hard setting,
as the realistic one and our main focus, is a significant challenge for all baseline methods. In App. E.1
we discuss potential improvements to our data generation pipeline as items for future work.

3.2   RAG-DI BASELINES

We proceed to establish an initial set of baselines for the RAG-DI problem. For this we adapt existing
RAG MIAs, A AG and S IB, introduced in §2, and additionally propose a simple baseline, FACTS.

Adapting RAG MIAs By design, the existing RAG MIAs make document-level decisions, i.e., they
decide if a single document is in the RAG corpus (mi(d, M⋆ ) = 1) or not (mi(d, M⋆ ) = 0). We ex-
tend this to dataset-level decisions of RAG-DI in an (empirically) optimal way. First,
                                                                                  P we apply a given
method to each d ∈ Ddo to obtain n binary decisions, and set s(Ddo , M⋆ ) = n1 d∈Ddo mi(d, M⋆ ).


                                                    4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


We then instantiate several IN and OUT cases of RAG-DI using the training set, and compute
the corresponding sin and sout . We finally make a dataset-level statement di(Ddo , M⋆ ) = 1 if
s(Ddo , M⋆ ) > 21 (sin + sout ) and di(Ddo , M⋆ ) = 0 otherwise. During this process, for S IB, we also
grid search over its trainable parameters θsimilarity and θperplexity (as in Li et al. (2024)), choosing values
that maximize sin − sout . We note that S IB is proposed as a gray-box method; we adapt it to our
black-box setting by using an auxiliary language model to estimate the perplexity of responses.

The FACTS baseline To substantiate our point about the effect of fact multiplicity on the hardness
of RAG-DI, we introduce a simple baseline, FACTS. As the above RAG MIAs, FACTS is a document-
level method. Given a document d, FACTS prompts an auxiliary LLM to generate a single question
that is only answerable by reading d. Then, M⋆ is prompted with that question, and if it deems it
unanswerable, we set mi(d, M⋆ ) = 0, and set it to 1 otherwise. We aggregate such document-level
decisions into a corpus-level decision by fitting a threshold on the training set, as described above.
In §5, we will demonstrate that this simple method is sufficient to solve the Easy setting more reliably
than other baselines, yet is, due to fact multiplicity, extremely unreliable in the Hard setting.


4    LLM WATERMARKING AS AN E FFECTIVE RAG-DI M ETHOD

Before describing our proposed RAG-DI method based on LLM watermarks, we first outline three
key design requirements that a desirable RAG-DI method should fulfill. We require the following:

      1. Monotonicity. With more queries to the retrieval-augmented LLM M⋆ , the accuracy of the
         method’s predictions should consistently improve, preferably at a high rate.
      2. Guarantees. The method should be able to provide a statistical guarantee for its decision,
         with exceedingly rare and well-controlled Type 1 errors, as falsely accusing RAG providers
         is highly undesirable in practice, and undermines the trust in the method.
      3. Robustness. The method should maintain high accuracy under diverse evaluation settings,
         including attempts by the RAG provider to actively conceal unauthorized data usage.

In App. A we motivate these requirements in detail by reflecting on the context around RAG-DI.
As we demonstrate in §5, all RAG-DI baselines introduced in §3.2 violate all requirements to some
extent. To address this, we propose WARD (Watermarking for RAG-DI), a proactive RAG-DI method
that is based on LLM watermarks, and discuss why it is likely to fulfill all stated desiderata.

WARD: RAG-DI via LLM watermarking We assume the data owner has protected each di ∈ Ddo
by embedding an LLM watermark either via a human-in-the-loop procedure or (as in this work) by
rephrasing each document with a watermarked LM. While, in principle, any LLM watermark can be
applied, we focus on popular red-green watermarks (see §2). In §5.3, we confirm that this results in
quality texts, faithful to the original ones. To audit the RAG provider’s corpus, for each di ∈ Ddo ,
WARD generates an open-ended content-related question qi , and queries M⋆ . If di ∈ D (IN case),
we expect the retrieval method R to introduce watermarked content from di into the LLM context. As
noted in §2 and validated in §5, the robustness of watermarks to text transformations is then sufficient
to propagate the traces of the signal to ri = M⋆ (qi ), the final response of the LLM.

Boosting a weak signal Requiring that each ri is flagged as watermarked, i.e., has watermark
detector p-value p < α, would be a strong assumption, as the watermark signal is likely to degrade
throughout the RAG pipeline. However, this is not necessary for WARD to be effective. Instead,
following Sander et al. (2024), after n queries we compute a joint p-value R = {r1 , . . . , rn }, directly
corresponding to the null hypothesis “the data owner’s dataset Ddo is not in the RAG corpus D”.
This joint p-value can satisfy p < α, i.e., reject the null hypothesis, even when individual ri carry
only weak watermark signal, that would individually not reject it. To illustrate this, given a desired
p-value threshold α, Eq. (1) implies that the required ratio of green tokens in R is at least
                                                  p
                             γ ′ ≥ Φ−1 (1 − α) · γ(1 − γ)/|R|⊕ + γ,                                 (2)



                                                      5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                                        0.34
where Φ is the standard normal distribution CDF, and |R|⊕
the total length of responses in R. This lower bound decreases
quickly as |R|⊕ increases: In Fig. 3 we plot the lower bound as         0.32

                                                                 −5
a function of n, assuming ∀i : |ri | = 400 tokens, α ≈ 3 · 10


                                                                           Green Ratio
(z-score of at least 4), and γ = 0.25, as in our experiments. For       0.30

n ≥ 100, if propagation of the watermark through the RAG
pipeline increases the ratio of green tokens by only 1%, it is          0.28

already detectable with high confidence. This makes WARD
viable, satisfying the Guarantees requirement, unlike any base-         0.26                                γ0
line. It also contributes to Monotonicity: assuming each di has a      0.25 No Watermark
green token ratio of γ ′′ , which propagated through M⋆ reduces              0     50       100
                                                                                      Number of Queries
                                                                                                        150   200

to γ ′ ∈ (γ, γ ′′ ), the p-value for IN cases strictly decreases for
more queries. In §5.2 we experimentally confirm that WARD Figure 3: Green ratio to pass water-
scales consistently and efficiently in the number of queries.        mark detection with given #queries.

Test validity and signal leakage Another requirement for Monotonicity is that the p-value for
OUT cases is well-calibrated, ensuring exceedingly rare false positives. As pointed out in prior
work (Kirchenbauer et al., 2023; Sander et al., 2024), to ensure independence between tokens scored
by the watermark detector, it is necessary to ignore duplicate h-grams across R. While this reduces the
number of useful tokens per query, our results in §5 show that it does not affect WARD performance.
For our statistical test to be valid, we must ensure that the watermark signal can only originate from
the use of Ddo in D, i.e., that it is not otherwise leaked to the responses ri . In particular, we observed
that watermarked queries, or queries based on watermarked versions of di , drastically increase false
positives. To confirm that WARD does not suffer from this issue, in §5.2, we verify that the p-values
in OUT cases are distributed in [0, 1] roughly as expected with no noticeable decrease in |R|.

Scheme choice The key parameter of red-green schemes is h, the context width. In common
applications of LLM watermarks, a low h is not recommended, as it makes the watermark easy
to steal via repeated queries (Kirchenbauer et al., 2024; Jovanović et al., 2024). In the context of
RAG-DI, this is less of a concern, as the data owner never exposes unconstrained query access to
watermarked content, as is the case when watermarking LLMs. Thus, as low h benefits watermark
propagation through RAG, we use h = 2. This contributes to high Robustness of WARD, empirically
validated in §5.2. We discuss other scheme parameters and present ablation studies over each in §5.4.

Practicality Another aspect making WARD robust is that it is inconspicuous, as it operates on
natural-looking documents, queries, and responses (confirmed in §5.3), through legitimate use of the
RAG system—this makes potential attempts by the RAG provider to thwart malicious interactions
less effective. This differs from baselines such as A AG, which directly reveal the intention to leak the
information about D. As a final advantage, we note that, in contrast to all baselines, WARD does not
require any training or adaptation to RAG-DI, as LLM watermarks naturally apply to this task.

5    E XPERIMENTAL E VALUATION

We evaluate the RAG-DI baselines (§3.2) and WARD (§4) on the FARAD dataset (§3.1). §5.1 presents
our main experiment. In §5.2 we focus on desiderata from §4, showing that only WARD does not
violate them. In §5.3 we validate several key assumptions, and in §5.4 present additional ablations.

Setup Our experimental setup follows §3: we use FARAD to define two evaluation settings, and in
both evaluate IN and OUT cases, i.e., where the data owner’s data is (resp. is not) contained in D.
We use |Ddo | = 200, and |D| = 800 for FARAD-Easy, and |D| = 3000 for FARAD-Hard (sampling
detailed in App. B.1). We note that WARD only depends on |Ddo |, but not |D|. We use several LLMs
as M: GPT3.5, C LAUDE 3-H AIKU, and L LAMA 3.1-70B, and vary the system prompt: we use a
short naive prompt (Naive-P) with basic RAG instructions, and a longer defense (Def-P) prompt,
which models a RAG provider that instructs the model to not regurgitate sources verbatim, and refuse
attempts to learn about the exact LLM context (see App. F.1). Each experiment is run with 5 random
seeds. To ensure a controlled setting, in our main experiments, we assume a perfect retrieval system
that always retrieves the most relevant documents (see App. B.2 for a detailed explanation). In §5.3,


                                                       6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                   Farad Easy                               Farad Hard
               Claude 3 Haiku
  NAIVE-P IN
NAIVE-P OUT
   DEF-P IN
  DEF-P OUT
               Llama3.1-70b
  NAIVE-P IN
NAIVE-P OUT
   DEF-P IN
  DEF-P OUT
               GPT-3.5
  NAIVE-P IN
NAIVE-P OUT
   DEF-P IN
  DEF-P OUT

                 XFacts         (X) Aag   (X) Sib   XWard   × Facts      × Aag       × Sib      XWard

Figure 4: Evaluation of all methods on FARAD in both Easy and Hard settings, and with both Naive-P
and Def-P system prompts. We run each method with 5 random seeds, resulting in 5 squares. A red
square indicates a false negative in the IN case, and a false positive in the OUT case. All methods
perform well in the Easy setting, while only WARD consistently performs well in the Hard setting.

we show that WARD works equally well on a practical end-to-end RAG. If not specified otherwise
(see §5.4), the RAG uses k = 3 shots. For methods that utilize auxiliary LMs (including WARD,
which starts by watermarking Ddo ) we use L LAMA 3.1-8B, and to compute the cosine similarity in
S IB we use paragraph-level ALL -M INI LM-L6- V 2 with BERTScore aggregation (Zhang et al., 2020).
For WARD, we use PositionPRF (Kirchenbauer et al., 2024), h = 2, and δ = 3.5, ablating these in
§5.4. We list all prompts, and examples of FARAD samples and watermarked documents, in App. F.

5.1     M AIN R ESULTS

We present our main results in Fig. 4, where we evaluate all RAG-DI baselines and WARD across
several settings, models, prompts, and random seeds. We make several key observations.
First, all baselines perform somewhat well in the Easy setting (no fact redundancy). However, our
extremely simple FACTS baseline obtains perfect results, outperforming both A AG and S IB. This
emphasizes that traditional non-redundant datasets (see §3.1) fail to capture the complexity of RAG-
DI, and can provide an incomplete view of the capabilities of RAG-DI methods. We also observe that
already in the Easy setting, straightforward system prompt defenses significantly impact both A AG
and S IB, leading to a noticeable increase in false negatives. We further investigate defenses in §5.2.
In the Hard setting, all baselines fail to perform consistently, inducing both false positives and
negatives. This can be attributed to their shortcomings in handling fact redundancy: FACTS directly
relies on facts, while S IB and A AG rely on semantic similarity influenced by factual content. Notably,
only WARD achieves 100% accuracy across all settings, models, and system prompts, showing that
despite the retrieval of documents with partially overlapping facts, watermarking provides a reliable
signal for dataset inference. This backs up our claims regarding the importance of fact-redundancy for
realistic RAG-DI evaluation and highlights the potential of watermarking as an approach to RAG-DI.

5.2     D ESIDERATA

We next demonstrate how baselines violate the desiderata from §4, which is not the case for WARD.

Monotonicity As stated in §4, RAG-DI methods should steadily improve with more queries, i.e.,
|Ddo | for WARD (see §5.4 for a generalization). We evaluate this by setting |Ddo | ∈ {20, 40, . . . , 200}
in FARAD-Hard, presenting the results of WARD and S IB in Fig. 5. WARD improves consistently
with |Ddo |, reaching perfect accuracy across all settings for at most 80 documents. In our extended
discussion of efficiency in App. D we show that this translates to inexpensive API costs of below
$1, for all closed-source LLMs we consider. In contrast, S IB, besides never reaching full accuracy,
exhibits strongly varying accuracy over |Ddo |, often decreasing despite using more queries. This is a
consequence of the need to adapt the MIA baselines to the RAG-DI setting—we find similar behavior
across all baselines, and present an additional study of their decision thresholds in App. C.6.


                                                       7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                 GPT-3.5 (NAIVE-P)        Llama3.1-70b (NAIVE-P)          Claude 3 Haiku (NAIVE-P)                                     GPT-3.5 (NAIVE-P)        Llama3.1-70b (NAIVE-P)         Claude 3 Haiku (NAIVE-P)
                 GPT-3.5 (DEF-P)          Llama3.1-70b (DEF-P)            Claude 3 Haiku (DEF-P)                                       GPT-3.5 (DEF-P)          Llama3.1-70b (DEF-P)           Claude 3 Haiku (DEF-P)


           1.0                                                                                                               1.0

           0.8                                                                                                               0.8
Accuracy


                                                                                                                  Accuracy
           0.6                                                                                                               0.6

           0.4                                                                                                               0.4

           0.2                                                                                                               0.2

           0.0                                                                                                               0.0
                 25       50         75      100      125           150         175        200                                         25       50         75      100      125          150         175        200
                                           Number of Queries                                                                                                     Number of Queries

Figure 5: WARD (left) and S IB (right) accuracy as a function of |Ddo | (i.e., the number of queries) in
the Hard setting. WARD consistently improves, while S IB suffers from high variance in accuracy.
Table 1: The p-values of WARD. We report the max p-values for IN and min p-values for OUT cases.
                                              Claude 3 Haiku                                                       GPT-3.5                                                         Llama3.1-70b
 Data             Agg.               DEF-P                         NAIVE-P                           DEF-P                                  NAIVE-P                     DEF-P                          NAIVE-P
                               OUT            IN            OUT                IN            OUT             IN                        OUT           IN           OUT             IN              OUT              IN
 FARAD            min      1.90e−01       2.07e−267      1.38e−03          3.47e−301       3.28e−01     9.53e−33                   2.13e−01     1.78e−78        7.54e−03      6.20e−179        1.32e−01           0
  Easy            max      6.83e−01       1.57e−186      2.83e−01          2.19e−253       7.72e−01     1.54e−27                   9.17e−01     6.56e−60        9.55e−01      1.52e−138        5.05e−01           0
 FARAD            min      6.03e−02       1.35e−48       3.82e−01          5.08e−74        2.04e−03     1.12e−12                   2.69e−01     1.53e−22        1.18e−02      3.94e−24         6.12e−02       1.22e−122
  Hard            max      3.99e−01       2.15e−25       7.34e−01          3.16e−51        7.80e−01     8.44e−10                   7.92e−01     1.31e−15        7.47e−01      1.10e−11         3.70e−01       2.42e−96

                                                                                                                              100
Guarantees In contrast to all baselines, WARD
inherits the guarantees of the watermarking          10                                                                        −2



scheme, directly providing a p-value for each de-    10                                         Thresh: ∼ 3e                   −4                                                                                     −5

cision. In Fig. 6, we see that p-values rapidly
                                                                                                                  p-value


                                                                                                                               −6
                                                     10
decrease with more queries for IN, but stay con-
sistently close to the expected value for OUT. Fur-  10                                                                        −8


ther, in Table 1, we show the max p-values for IN   10                                                                        −10

                                                        Watermarked
and min p-values for OUT in our main experiment,    10
                                                              OUT                                                             −12
                                                              IN
i.e., closest to a false negative/positive. All p-
                                                          25        50 75    100      125   150    175       200
values are orders of magnitude from our decision                          Number of Queries
                     −5
boundary of ≈ 3e (z-score of 4), highlighting
robustness to Type 1 errors and the fact that LLM Figure 6: P-values as a function of #queries in
watermark signals persist through a RAG pipeline. IN (red) and OUT (blue) cases.

Robustness Finally, we evaluate the methods’ ro-            10                                          Setting
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  NAIVE-P
bustness to different settings. In particular, we further                                                                                                                                                         DEF-P

                                                             8
examine the Def-P system prompt setting, shown
in Fig. 4 to often prevent all baselines from obtaining      6
                                                                                                                               Count


any useful estimates. Notably, both A AG and S IB
                                                             4
rely on the model’s willingness to leak information
about its context, either explicitly or by regurgitating     2
similar content. To validate the effect of Def-P, we
show the longest token-string overlap between the            0
                                                                 10    20     30           40      50 60
                 ⋆                                                          Max. Repetition Length
response of M and the S IB target document (Fig. 7),
observing strictly less overlap with Def-P, inducing
                                                          Figure 7: The effect of the Def-P sysprompt.
false negatives. Importantly, this does not prevent
watermarks from propagating through the RAG pipeline, resulting in a reliable signal for WARD.
We additionally investigate a defense based on M EM F REE decoding (Ippolito et al., 2023). Namely,
we adapt the decoding of M⋆ to strictly prevent n-gram overlap with the retrieved documents (using
n = 10 as in Ippolito et al. (2023)), modeling an even stronger attempt by the provider to protect the
RAG corpus. Our results (App. C.5), show that even in this setting, WARD achieves full accuracy.
We further discuss the potential for more elaborate defenses against WARD in App. E.2.

5.3              A DDITIONAL C ONSIDERATIONS

Modeling retrieval So far, our experiments have assumed an idealized case of perfect retrieval.
We now justify this choice by running WARD on an end-to-end RAG system which uses OpenAI’s
text-embedding-3-large document embeddings, with k = 3 and cosine similarity metric.


                                                                                                        8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


          1.0                                                                                                            Queries per Document
                                                                                                       1        2          4         5       10         20         50
                                                     Clean Grade
          0.9
                                                                                            −2

                 Metric
          0.8                                                                               −4                                                           Thresh: ∼ 3e−5
Metrics


                  PSP


                                                                             Log. p-value
                  Grade                                                                     −6
          0.7     Accuracy
                                                                                            −8

          0.6                                                                               −10

                                                                                            −12
          0.5
                  1          2   3           4   5       6                                        25       50       75        100      125        150        175        200
                                     Delta                                                                                Number of Queries



Figure 9: Left: Accuracy and watermarked text quality for different δ values of WARD on FARAD-
Hard. Right: Accuracy over the number of queries per document for WARD on FARAD-Hard.

As above, we repeat all runs with 5 seeds                                              −2
                                                    10
on both Easy and Hard, with M =                                                                Thresh: ∼ 3e                                                             −5
                                                                                       −5
L LAMA 3.1-70B and both prompts. We de-             10


fer accuracy curves to App. C.3 but note that       10                                 −8



WARD achieves 100% accuracy across all set-
                                                                   p-value
                                                                                   −11
                                                   10
tings. In Fig. 8, we show average p-values over                                    −14
                                                   10
the number of queries, further illustrating the
                                                                                   −17
reliability of WARD. We note that this simple      10
                                                       Watermarked
RAG system was able to retrieve the targeted       10        OUT                   −20

                                                             IN
watermarked article in 93.6% of all requests,            25        50 75    100      125   150    175       200
almost perfectly reducing this to our idealized                          Number of Queries

setting. We further run all baselines with Def-P
                                                 Figure 8: Average p-values against #queries in our
in the Hard setting, and confirm that the (rare)
                                                 imperfect retrieval experiment.
retrieval errors do not make them more compet-
itive, e.g., because the distracting documents are now less relevant. As in the corresponding part
of Fig. 4, FACTS has 100% false positives, while S IB and A AG have 100% true negatives.

Text quality Applying WARD requires the data owner Table 2: Quality evaluation of water-
to watermark Ddo , which we do by paraphrasing with a marked documents.
watermarked model. While prior work shows that water-
marks minimally impact text quality (Piet et al., 2023),           Original Paraphrased        ∆
we re-affirm this by judging the quality of a randomly      Judge    0.903       0.898        5e−3
sampled subset of 100 resulting documents. As shown         P-SP     1.000       0.933        0.07
in Table 2, paraphrased documents maintain high quality
both under GPT4 O ratings (see App. F.7) and a paraphrase quality metric P-SP (Wieting et al., 2022).
We also evaluate the quality of the RAG system’s responses (with Naive-P and C LAUDE 3-H AIKU) on
200 samples. The average response quality is 0.9475 in IN cases (watermarked context) and 0.9465
in OUT cases, confirming that watermarked documents do not negatively impact response quality.

5.4             A BLATIONS

Lastly, we provide ablations for important hyperparameters of WARD and the RAG-DI setup.

Watermark parameters As introduced in §2, red-green watermarks have 2 key parameters: the
strength δ and the context size h. We ablate over their impact on WARD using L LAMA 3.1-70B
as M with the Def-P sysprompt. The results for δ are shown in Fig. 9 (Left). We observe a sweet
spot of δ ∈ [2.5, 4.5] with high accuracy (unlike δ < 2.5) and the minimal impact on text quality
(unlike δ > 4.5). Notably, experiments in App. C.2 show that δ > 4.5 negatively affects both query
efficiency and text utility. This range of δ ∈ [2.5, 4.5] directly aligns with recommendations in prior
work (Kirchenbauer et al., 2024), and supports our choice of δ = 3.5 for the main experiments.
Regarding h, as noted in §4 and prior work, larger values are expected to degrade robustness. We
compare our choice of h = 2 with h = 4, noticing a slight decrease in accuracy (100% on Easy, but
80% on Hard), confirmed by our plots of query efficiency—full results are deferred to App. C.2.


                                                                   9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


RAG-DI parameters The RAG-DI setting has a wide range of parameters that we so far have not
explored. First, we ablate over k, the number of retrieved documents—our results in App. C.1 show
that WARD performs well independent of this parameter. Also, in App. C.1, we study the case where
only a subset of Ddo is included in D, relaxing the assumptions of RAG-DI. While this naturally
weakens the watermark signal, our results imply that WARD shows some robustness to this setting.
Finally, while we generally assume a single query per document di , we briefly study the potential of
WARD to increase its query efficiency by extracting more value from each di . For this we introduce a
parameter qpd (queries per document, qpd = 1 in the main experiments), generating more questions
for each di . The main results for qpd ∈ {1, 2, 4, 5, 10, 20, 50} are shown in Fig. 9 (Right), where
we plot the average p-value over the total number of queries. As expected, for high qpd, additional
queries for the same di bring only marginal value—this is also confirmed in App. C.4, which shows
how the effective number of tokens scored by the watermark detector increases slower for high qpd,
as we encounter many repeated n-grams. However, for lower values such as qpd = 4, reducing the
required |Ddo | 4 times, we observe strong results, suggesting a promising avenue for future work.

6   R ELATED W ORK
Closest related works to ours are Li et al. (2024) and Anderson et al. (2024), which propose member-
ship inference (MI) for RAG that we adapt to RAG-DI in §3, and works that highlight the risk of
MI in the related paradigm of in-context learning such as (Duan et al., 2023). Others study broader
privacy and security aspects of RAG, such as poisoning to jailbreak the model or exfiltrate data (Zou
et al., 2025; Xue et al., 2024; Chaudhari et al., 2024; Zeng et al., 2024), concerns similar to RAG-DI.

Passive MI/DI The problems of membership inference (MI) (Shokri et al., 2017; Carlini et al.,
2022) or dataset inference (DI) (Maini et al., 2021; Dziedzic et al., 2022) have been long studied on
training data, as opposed to RAG corpora as in this work. Recent attempts to adapt these methods to
LLMs (Duan et al., 2024; Das et al., 2024; Meeus et al., 2024; Maini et al., 2024) cite the challenge
of rigorous evaluation, and primarily focus on graybox settings, citing the difficulty of inference
attacks in the blackbox setting (Choquette-Choo et al., 2021), which is what we consider in RAG-DI.
Another perspective on the problem of tracing data usage in model training is given by recent works
on LLM data contamination (Dekoninck et al., 2024; Oren et al., 2024), none of which consider RAG.

Proactive MI/DI/model protection Another approach to MI/DI is (as in this work) proactive, e.g.,
by watermarking the data (Ren et al., 2024; Guo et al., 2023). However, only few works study LLMs,
and only the ones cited above consider RAG. Wei et al. (2024b) focus on LLMs in a graybox setting,
inserting random sequences or unicode substitutions to trace the data through training. Sander et al.
(2024) find that LLM watermarks propagate through fine-tuning, but Ddo has to make up 10% of the
fine-tuning corpus for blackbox detection. RAG-DI relaxes this requirement, as RAG is unaffected
by |D| and degrades the signal much less than fine-tuning. Another orthogonal area is watermarking
of models against model stealing, often via backdoors (Adi et al., 2018; Zhao et al., 2023).

LLM Watermarking Finally, we note that many works study red-green LLM watermarks (Kirchen-
bauer et al., 2023; 2024; Zhao et al., 2024; Hou et al., 2024), but also other approaches such as
sampling modification (Kuditipudi et al., 2024; Christ et al., 2024), model-based watermarking (Liu
et al., 2024), or watermarking in weights (Gu et al., 2024). We note that WARD could be combined
with many of these, and leave this interesting direction to follow-up work.

7   C ONCLUSION
We studied the problem of black-box RAG Dataset Inference (RAG-DI), where the goal is to detect
unauthorized usage of a dataset in a RAG system. We formalized the problem, proposed a dataset and
a set of baselines, and presented WARD, a method based on LLM watermarks, which provides rigorous
statistical guarantees. Our evaluation showed that WARD outperforms the baselines, achieving perfect
accuracy and high query efficiency and robustness. This establishes WARD as a practical tool that can
be directly applied to protect the rights of data owners in current RAG systems. We hope our work
provides a valuable foundation for future work on RAG-DI—interesting directions include combining
WARD with other LLM watermarks, or designing watermarks specifically tailored to RAG-DI.


                                                 10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

The work has received funding from the Swiss State Secretariat for Education, Research and Innova-
tion (SERI).

E THICS S TATEMENT

We do not foresee any ethical concerns arising from our work. Our work primarily provides dataset
owners with the ability to prove unauthorized usage of their data in a RAG system, which is a
valuable tool for protecting intellectual property, and fighting against unethical practices of large
model providers. An undesirable side effect of such methods may come from false accusations—as
our experiments in §5 demonstrate, our proposed method, WARD, strictly controls the rate of false
positives as highly unlikely, and in all of our experiments we do not observe a single instance of a
false positive. While our work does result in a new dataset, FARAD, this dataset is entirely synthetic
as it is based on fictional articles (Monteiro et al., 2024), and thus does not raise any privacy concerns.

R EPRODUCIBILITY S TATEMENT

To foster reproducibility, we provide details of our experimental setup in §5 and App. B.1, and
in App. F include all prompts used in our experiments. We make our code and the FARAD dataset
available at https://github.com/eth-sri/ward under an MIT license, and include configuration
files for each experiment and a README file with instructions on how to reproduce our results.

R EFERENCES
Yossi Adi, Carsten Baum, Moustapha Cissé, Benny Pinkas, and Joseph Keshet. Turning your
  weakness into a strength: Watermarking deep neural networks by backdooring. In USENIX
  Security, 2018.

Maya Anderson, Guy Amit, and Abigail Goldsteen. Is my data in your retrieval database? membership
 inference attacks against retrieval augmented generation. arXiv, 2024.

Kar Balan, Alex Black, Simon Jenni, Andrew Gilbert, Andy Parsons, and John Collomosse. Decorait
 – decentralized opt-in/out registry for ai training, 2023.

Blake Brittain.                 Stability ai,    midjourney      should     face     artists’   copyright
  case,  judge          says,       2024.https://www.reuters.com/legal/litigation/
  stability-ai-midjourney-should-face-artists-copyright-case-judge-says-2024-05-08/.

Nicholas Carlini, Steve Chien, Milad Nasr, Shuang Song, Andreas Terzis, and Florian Tramèr.
  Membership inference attacks from first principles. In IEEE S&P, 2022.

Harsh Chaudhari, Giorgio Severi, John Abascal, Matthew Jagielski, Christopher A. Choquette-Choo,
  Milad Nasr, Cristina Nita-Rotaru, and Alina Oprea. Phantom: General trigger attacks on retrieval
  augmented language generation. arXiv, 2024.

Christopher A. Choquette-Choo, Florian Tramèr, Nicholas Carlini, and Nicolas Papernot. Label-only
  membership inference attacks. In ICML, 2021.

Miranda Christ, Sam Gunn, and Or Zamir. Undetectable watermarks for language models. COLT,
 2024.

Coalition for Content Provenance and Authenticity. Technical specification v1.3. technical report.
  c2pa., 2021. https://c2pa.org/specifications/specifications/1.3/index.html.

Council of the European Union. Directive (eu) 2019/790 of the european parliament and of the
  council on copyright and related rights in the digital single market and amending directives 96/9/ec
  and 2001/29/ec. 2019.


                                                   11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Debeshee Das, Jie Zhang, and Florian Tramèr. Blind baselines beat membership inference attacks for
  foundation models. arXiv, 2024.
Jasper Dekoninck, Mark Niklas Müller, Maximilian Baader, Marc Fischer, and Martin T. Vechev.
  Evading data contamination detection for language models is (too) easy. arXiv, 2024.
Haonan Duan, Adam Dziedzic, Nicolas Papernot, and Franziska Boenisch. Flocks of stochastic
  parrots: Differentially private prompt learning for large language models. In NeurIPS, 2023.
Michael Duan, Anshuman Suri, Niloofar Mireshghallah, Sewon Min, Weijia Shi, Luke Zettlemoyer,
 Yulia Tsvetkov, Yejin Choi, David Evans, and Hannaneh Hajishirzi. Do membership inference
 attacks work on large language models? COLM, 2024.
Adam Dziedzic, Haonan Duan, Muhammad Ahmad Kaleem, Nikita Dhawan, Jonas Guan, Yannis
  Cattan, Franziska Boenisch, and Nicolas Papernot. Dataset inference for self-supervised models.
  In NeurIPS, 2022.
European Parliament and the Council of the European Union. Proposal for a regulation of the european
  parliament and of the council laying down harmonised rules on artificial intelligence (artificial
  intelligence act) and amending certain union legislative acts - analysis of the final compromise text
  with a view to agreement. 2019.
Yunfan Gao, Yun Xiong, Xinyu Gao, Kangxiang Jia, Jinliu Pan, Yuxi Bi, Yi Dai, Jiawei Sun, Qianyu
  Guo, Meng Wang, and Haofen Wang. Retrieval-augmented generation for large language models:
  A survey. arXiv, 2023.
Paul Goldstein, Christiane Stuetzle, and Susan Bischoff. Kneschke vs. laion - landmark ruling on tdm
  exceptions for ai training data, 2024. https://copyrightblog.kluweriplaw.com/2024/11/13/
  kneschke-vs-laion-landmark-ruling-on-tdm-exceptions-for-ai-training-data-part-1/,
  last accessed: Feb 5 2025.
Michael M. Grynbaum and Ryan Mac. The times sues openai and microsoft over a.i.
 use of copyrighted work, 2023. https://www.nytimes.com/2023/12/27/business/media/
 new-york-times-open-ai-microsoft-lawsuit.html.

Chenchen Gu, Xiang Lisa Li, Percy Liang, and Tatsunori Hashimoto. On the learnability of water-
  marks for language models. ICLR, 2024.
Junfeng Guo, Yiming Li, Lixu Wang, Shu-Tao Xia, Heng Huang, Cong Liu, and Bo Li. Domain
  watermark: Effective and harmless dataset copyright protection is closed at hand. In NeurIPS,
  2023.
Abe Bohan Hou, Jingyu Zhang, Tianxing He, Yichen Wang, Yung-Sung Chuang, Hongwei Wang,
  Lingfeng Shen, Benjamin Van Durme, Daniel Khashabi, and Yulia Tsvetkov. Semstamp: A
  semantic watermark with paraphrastic robustness for text generation. NAACL Long, 2024.
Daphne Ippolito, Florian Tramèr, Milad Nasr, Chiyuan Zhang, Matthew Jagielski, Katherine Lee,
  Christopher A. Choquette-Choo, and Nicholas Carlini. Preventing generation of verbatim memo-
  rization in language models gives a false sense of privacy. In INLG, 2023.
Jiajie Jin, Yutao Zhu, Xinyu Yang, Chenghao Zhang, and Zhicheng Dou. Flashrag: A modular toolkit
   for efficient retrieval-augmented generation research. arXiv, 2024.
Nikola Jovanović, Robin Staab, and Martin Vechev. Watermark stealing in large language models.
  ICML, 2024.
A. Feder Cooper Katherine Lee, Daphne Ippolito. The devil is in the training data, 2023. https:
  //blog.genlaw.org/explainers/training-data.html, last accessed: Feb 5 2025.

Paul Keller and Zuzanna Warso. Defining best practices for opting out of ml training. Open Future
  Policy Brief 5, 2023.
John Kirchenbauer, Jonas Geiping, Yuxin Wen, Jonathan Katz, Ian Miers, and Tom Goldstein. A
  watermark for large language models. In ICML, 2023.


                                                  12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


John Kirchenbauer, Jonas Geiping, Yuxin Wen, Manli Shu, Khalid Saifullah, Kezhi Kong, Kasun
  Fernando, Aniruddha Saha, Micah Goldblum, and Tom Goldstein. On the reliability of watermarks
  for large language models. ICLR, 2024.
Bryan Klimt and Yiming Yang. The enron corpus: A new dataset for email classification research. In
  European conference on machine learning, 2004.
Rohith Kuditipudi, John Thickstun, Tatsunori Hashimoto, and Percy Liang. Robust distortion-free
  watermarks for language models. TMLR 05/2024, 2024.
Patrick S. H. Lewis, Ethan Perez, Aleksandra Piktus, Fabio Petroni, Vladimir Karpukhin, Naman
  Goyal, Heinrich Küttler, Mike Lewis, Wen-tau Yih, Tim Rocktäschel, Sebastian Riedel, and Douwe
  Kiela. Retrieval-augmented generation for knowledge-intensive NLP tasks. In Hugo Larochelle,
  Marc’Aurelio Ranzato, Raia Hadsell, Maria-Florina Balcan, and Hsuan-Tien Lin (eds.), NeurIPS,
  2020.
Yuying Li, Gaoyang Liu, Yang Yang, and Chen Wang. Seeing is believing: Black-box membership
  inference attacks against retrieval augmented generation. arXiv, 2024.
Aiwei Liu, Leyi Pan, Xuming Hu, Shuang Li, Lijie Wen, Irwin King, and Philip S. Yu. A private
  watermark for large language models. ICLR, 2024.
Shayne Longpre, Robert Mahari, Anthony Chen, Naana Obeng-Marnu, Damien Sileo, William
  Brannon, Niklas Muennighoff, Nathan Khazam, Jad Kabbara, Kartik Perisetla, Xinyi Wu, Enrico
  Shippole, Kurt Bollacker, Tongshuang Wu, Luis Villa, Sandy Pentland, and Sara Hooker. The data
  provenance initiative: A large scale audit of dataset licensing & attribution in ai. arXiv, 2023.
Pratyush Maini, Mohammad Yaghini, and Nicolas Papernot. Dataset inference: Ownership resolution
  in machine learning. In ICLR, 2021.
Pratyush Maini, Hengrui Jia, Nicolas Papernot, and Adam Dziedzic. LLM dataset inference: Did you
  train on my dataset? NeurIPS, 2024.
Matthieu Meeus, Shubham Jain, Marek Rei, and Yves-Alexandre de Montjoye. Inherent challenges
 of post-hoc membership inference for large language models. arXiv, 2024.
Joao Monteiro, Pierre-Andre Noel, Etienne Marcotte, Sai Rajeswar, Valentina Zantedeschi, David
  Vazquez, Nicolas Chapados, Christopher Pal, and Perouz Taslakian. Repliqa: A question-answering
  dataset for benchmarking llms on unseen reference content. NeurIPS, 2024.
Khalil Mrini, Franck Dernoncourt, Walter Chang, Emilia Farcas, and Ndapandula Nakashole. Joint
  summarization-entailment optimization for consumer health question understanding. In ACL
  workshop on NLP for medical conversations, 2021.
Yonatan Oren, Nicole Meister, Niladri S. Chatterji, Faisal Ladhak, and Tatsunori Hashimoto. Proving
  test set contamination in black-box language models. In ICLR, 2024.
Julien Piet, Chawin Sitawarin, Vivian Fang, Norman Mu, and David A. Wagner. Mark my words:
  Analyzing and evaluating language model watermarks. arXiv, 2023.
Joao Pedro Quintais. Generative ai, copyright and the ai act, 2023. https://copyrightblog.
  kluweriplaw.com/2023/05/09/generative-ai-copyright-and-the-ai-act/, last accessed:
  Feb 5 2025.
Jie Ren, Yingqian Cui, Chen Chen, Vikash Sehwag, Yue Xing, Jiliang Tang, and Lingjuan Lyu.
   Entruth: Enhancing the traceability of unauthorized dataset usage in text-to-image diffusion
   models with minimal and robust alterations. arXiv, 2024.
Tom Sander, Pierre Fernandez, Alain Durmus, Matthijs Douze, and Teddy Furon. Watermarking
  makes language models radioactive. NeurIPS, 2024.
Reza Shokri, Marco Stronati, Congzheng Song, and Vitaly Shmatikov. Membership inference attacks
  against machine learning models. In IEEE S&P, 2017.


                                                13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


SpawningAI. Have i been trained?, 2022. https://haveibeentrained.com/, last accessed: Feb 5
  2025.
SpawningAI. ai.txt, 2023. https://spawning.ai/ai-txt.
SpawningAI. Spawningai, 2024. https://spawning.ai/, last visited: Nov 19 2024.
TDM Community Group. Tdm reservation protocol (tdmrep) - final community group report, 2024.
Johnny Tian-Zheng Wei, Ryan Yixiang Wang, and Robin Jia. Proving membership in LLM pretraining
  data via data watermarks. In Lun-Wei Ku, Andre Martins, and Vivek Srikumar (eds.), ACL, 2024a.
Johnny Tian-Zheng Wei, Ryan Yixiang Wang, and Robin Jia. Proving membership in LLM pretraining
  data via data watermarks. In ACL (Findings), 2024b.
John Wieting, Kevin Gimpel, Graham Neubig, and Taylor Berg-Kirkpatrick. Paraphrastic representa-
  tions at scale. In EMNLP (Demos), 2022.
Jiaqi Xue, Mengxin Zheng, Yebowen Hu, Fei Liu, Xun Chen, and Qian Lou. Badrag: Identifying
   vulnerabilities in retrieval augmented generation of large language models. arXiv, 2024.
Guangtao Zeng, Wenmian Yang, Zeqian Ju, Yue Yang, Sicheng Wang, Ruisi Zhang, Meng Zhou,
 Jiaqi Zeng, Xiangyu Dong, Ruoyu Zhang, Hongchao Fang, Penghui Zhu, Shu Chen, and Pengtao
 Xie. MedDialog: Large-scale medical dialogue datasets. In EMNLP, 2020.
Shenglai Zeng, Jiankun Zhang, Pengfei He, Yue Xing, Yiding Liu, Han Xu, Jie Ren, Shuaiqiang Wang,
  Dawei Yin, Yi Chang, et al. The good and the bad: Exploring privacy issues in retrieval-augmented
  generation (rag). ACL Findings, 2024.
Tianyi Zhang, Varsha Kishore, Felix Wu, Kilian Q. Weinberger, and Yoav Artzi. Bertscore: Evaluating
  text generation with BERT. In ICLR, 2020.
Xuandong Zhao, Yu-Xiang Wang, and Lei Li. Protecting language generation models via invisible
 watermarking. In ICML, 2023.
Xuandong Zhao, Prabhanjan Ananth, Lei Li, and Yu-Xiang Wang. Provable robust watermarking for
  ai-generated text. ICLR, 2024.
Wei Zou, Runpeng Geng, Binghui Wang, and Jinyuan Jia. Poisonedrag: Knowledge poisoning attacks
 to retrieval-augmented generation of large language models. USENIX Security, 2025.


                                                14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A    M OTIVATION : T HE I MPORTANCE OF RAG-DI
Extending on our discussion in §1, we elaborate on the motivation for establishing RAG-DI as a
problem setting, the prevalence of the problem of unauthorized data usage (studied in this work), the
need for a solution like WARD, and its practical applicability.

Protecting data from use in Generative AI The unauthorized usage of data in Generative AI
(GenAI) systems, primarily for training, has become an especially pressing concern in recent years,
as the practice of indiscriminate scraping of massive datasets from the web became more common-
place (Katherine Lee, 2023). This has led to a crisis in data transparency, where the provenance of
data used to train models is often hard to track (Longpre et al., 2023), and commonly not reported by
the model provider. While the EU AI Act (Council of the European Union, 2019) attempts to remedy
this, by mandating that all data sources used for model training are published, this regulatory process
is slow, and data owners must take active steps to protect themselves.

Opt-outs and legal uncertainties One tool that data owners can use to exercise agency over the
use of their work comes in the form of opt-outs, where creators can choose to exclude their works
from GenAI training. Notably, the Article 4 of the EU’s Copyright in Digital Single Market (CDSM)
Directive (European Parliament and the Council of the European Union, 2019) recognizes the right
of creators to exercise such an opt-out, by providing a machine-readable expression of the reservation
of rights. Yet, the practical implementation of this opt-out mechanism is still unclear, and an active
discussion from both law (Quintais, 2023) and research (Balan et al., 2023) communities is ongoing.
Many initiatives have established standards for expressing such reservations (Keller & Warso, 2023),
such as ai.txt (SpawningAI, 2023), the TDM Reservation Protocol (TDM Community Group,
2024), and C2PA (Coalition for Content Provenance and Authenticity, 2021), a metadata standard for
embedding content provenance information in media files which also includes a flag for opting out of
GenAI training and/or inference.
While opt-outs are picking up traction, and some GenAI providers have pledged to honor
them (SpawningAI, 2024), they are still far from being universally respected, and it is yet un-
clear how to practically enforce them (or audit compliance). More broadly, the legal landscape
around GenAI data usage is complex, and both legal and research communities are closely following
several prominent lawsuits. Notable examples include NYT vs OpenAI/Microsoft (Grynbaum &
Mac, 2023) or a group of artists vs Stability/MidJourney/DeviantArt/RunwayML (Brittain, 2024),
which illustrate that the legal system is naturally still catching up to the rapid development of GenAI.
The key challenges are in untangling the interplay between licenses, traditional copyright, opt-outs,
the ideas such as fair use or market harm, and technical concepts such as LLM memorization. The
most relevant for our discussion is the case Kneschke vs LAION (Goldstein et al., 2024), where the
ruling has extensively engaged with the meaning of opt-outs and the extent of their enforceability.

Proving unauthorized usage In this landscape of legal uncertainty, the ability to provably detect
unauthorized usage of data in GenAI systems is crucial for data owners, as it may provide a way
to enforce their rights in court. While this is relatively simple when model providers make their
datasets public (SpawningAI, 2022), the problem becomes significantly harder for the common case
of undisclosed training data, leading to works on proactive membership/dataset inference such as Wei
et al. (2024a); Sander et al. (2024) and others we cite in §6. As noted in §1, a particular flavor of
this problem comes in the context of LLMs, where RAG systems have become a common way to
integrate new knowledge into the model without costly fine-tuning.

WARD This is the problem statement studied in this work and tackled by WARD, with our require-
ments (§3) directly inspired by the legal and practical challenges data owners face in this context.
Namely, Guarantees are crucial to be able to use the results as evidence, and Robustness is important
to ensure that the method is not easily circumvented, unintentionally or by attempts to defend against
it. Finally, Monotonocity and the corresponding Efficiency are needed for the method to be practically
feasible. While the data owner naturally must query every system they suspect is using their data in
the RAG corpus, each such use is very cheap (below $2 per LLM, see App. D). Further, we argue that
the ecosystem of relevant LLM providers is relatively small. In particular, not many providers both (i)
have resources for indiscriminate large-scale scraping of data and (ii) are sufficiently popular to create
market harm based on the unauthorized usage of that data. Thus, the cost of WARD is practical.


                                                   15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


B     A DDITIONAL E XPERIMENTAL D ETAILS

We expand on the details of our experimental setup provided in the main paper, by providing a
detailed explanation of how we sample FARAD to create our evaluation settings (App. B.1), and how
we simulate perfect retrieval in our experiments (App. B.2).

B.1   S AMPLING FARAD FOR E VALUATION

Recall that each FARAD group contains 4 articles, one for each of the LLM authors we consider. For
brevity, we will use Ai for i ∈ {1, 2, 3, 4} to denote the i-th author. For the Easy setting, we sample
four subsets of distinct groups, where the sizes of the subsets are respectively (200, 300, 300, 200).
Then for each subset i ∈ {1, 2, 3}, we only take articles from Ai , and include all of them in the RAG
corpus D. Out of those, articles from subset 1 of author A1 are taken as Ddo in the IN case, i.e., these
are potentially modified by the service provider before inserting them into the RAG corpus. Similarly,
the articles from subset 4 of author A4 are reserved as Ddo in the OUT case. This setup ensures no
fact redundancy in the RAG corpus.
In contrast, to create the Hard setting with fact redundancy, we start by sampling 1000 distinct groups.
The RAG corpus D is then built by including all articles from those groups that were written by
A1 , A2 , and A3 . A randomly subsampled set of 200 of those articles, that were written by A1 , is
taken as Ddo in the IN case. Similarly, randomly sampling 200 of the 1000 above groups, and taking
documents from A4 out of each group is used as Ddo in the OUT case. Due to practical limitations,
before running all of our experiments we managed to generate only the first 1000 out of 3391 groups
in FARAD, thus our sampling is done w.r.t. these 1000 groups.

B.2   S IMULATING P ERFECT R ETRIEVAL

We provide a detailed description of the perfect retrieval mechanism used in our main experiments,
as introduced in §5, and further compared to a real retrieval mechanism in §5.3, where we have
demonstrated that it almost perfectly matches the idealized case described in this section and shown
that WARD performs equally well in both cases. Assume the data owner is querying M⋆ in order to
test for presence of a document d. We construct the following sequence of documents:

       • First, the document d itself if it is present in the RAG corpus.
       • Next, a random shuffle of all documents d′ from the same FARAD group that are present in
         the RAG corpus, i.e., the documents produced by other authors based on the same source.
       • Finally, a random shuffle of all other documents from the RAG corpus.

Given the parameter k of desired shots (ablated in Fig. 11), the perfect retrieval returns the first k
documents from this sequence. Note that for WARD and k > 1 this always results in additional
documents in the context beyond the watermarked one, where such distractions often come from both
the same source, as well as different sources. We further illustrate the behavior of perfect retrieval
with two examples.

First example The RAG provider populates the corpus D according to the Easy setting, and uses
k = 3. The user applies WARD to query M⋆ with a question related to the (watermarked) document
#123a, i.e., from FARAD group #123, written by the author a. Assume #123a ∈ D. The retrieved
documents are #123a, #374b, #266a. Following the above steps, we include #123a as it is present
in the corpus, and two documents chosen at random, as in the Easy setting the corpus includes no
other document from group 123.

Second example Now assume the Hard setting and k = 5 shots. The user queries M⋆
with a question related to #123d. Assume #123d ∈        / D. The retrieved documents are
#123a, #123b, #123c, #597c, #442b. Per above steps, as the target document #123d is not in the
corpus, we include all other documents from group #123 and 2 documents chosen at random.


                                                  16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                     Dropout Percentage                                                                                                   Dropout Percentage
                            0.0         20.0        40.0       60.0       70.0     80.0        90.0                                              0.0         20.0        40.0       60.0       70.0         80.0       90.0
                            10.0        30.0        50.0                                                                                         10.0        30.0        50.0
                                                                                                         −5
                  0                                                                       Thresh: ∼ 3e                                 0

               −25                                                                                                                −2
                                                                                                                                  −4                                                                         Thresh: ∼ 3e−5
               −50
Log. p-value


                                                                                                                   Log. p-value
                                                                                                                                  −6
               −75
                                                                                                                                  −8
               −100
                                                                                                                                  −10
               −125                                                                                                               −12
               −150                                                                                                               −14

               −175                                                                                                               −16
                       25          50          75      100        125        150      175          200                                      25          50          75      100         125           150      175        200
                                                    Number of Queries                                                                                                    Number of Queries



Figure 10: Effect of the percentage of documents of Ddo not contained in D on the p-value for
L LAMA 3.1-70B using Naive-P (left) and GPT3.5 using Def-P (right) on FARAD-Hard. While in
both cases we see how WARD is robust to an increase in the percentage of documents contained in D,
the Def-P setting is more sensitive, showing initial false positives at 20%.


C                     A DDITIONAL E XPERIMENTAL R ESULTS

In this section, we first present additional results on our RAG-DI ablations, omitted from §5.4
(App. C.1), Similarly, in App. C.2, we extend our WARD ablations from §5.4. In App. C.3 we
provide extended results of our retrieval study from §5.3, and in App. C.4 extend our results on the
number of queries per document from Fig. 9 (Right). Finally, in App. C.5 we provide results on an
additional defense (M EM F REE, summarized in §5.2), and in App. C.6 we provide more insights into
the performance of RAG-DI baselines.

C.1                   RAG-DI A BLATIONS

As summarized in §5.4, we ablate over key parame-                                                                                     1.0

ters of RAG-DI: The number of documents (shots)
                                                                                                                                      0.9
put into the context of model (k) and the fraction
of documents of Ddo contained in D.                                                                                                   0.8
                                                                                                                           Accuracy


                                                                                                                                                                                                             Setting
                                                                                                                                      0.7
Number of shots For k we present our results                                                    GPT-3.5 (NAIVE-P)
                                                                                                GPT-3.5 (DEF-P)
for WARD in Fig. 11, using k ∈ {3, 4, 5} for our        0.6                                     shots
                                                                                                3
Naive-P and Def-P settings on FARAD-Hard using                                                  4
                                                                                                5
GPT3.5. Across all values of k, WARD shows fa-          0.5
                                                             25  50   75    100       125   150    175       200
vorable scaling of the number of queries made to                          Number of Queries

the system, reaching 100% accuracy at 100 queries
at the latest. This follows intuition, as the scaling Figure 11: Accuracy over the number of queries
of WARD is primarily influenced by the capabilities when varying the number of retrieved docu-
of the underlying LLM to select the correct infor- ments in RAG (shots, k) for WARD on FARAD-
mation from a set of retrieved documents. The con- Hard. We observe, on GPT3.5, that WARD
stant improvement in model capabilities, therefore, scales well with the number of documents for
naturally positively impacts the scaling of WARD both the Naive-P and Def-P system prompts.
w.r.t. context size. In all cases, WARD reaches
100% accuracy at a rate matching that of our main experiments. While the above values of k are
generally recommended (Jin et al., 2024), and used in prior RAG MIA work (Li et al., 2024; Anderson
et al., 2024), we additionally experiment with a much larger k = 10, switching to C LAUDE 3-H AIKU
(as this experiment exceeds GPT3.5’s context size). In all cases, WARD reaches 100% accuracy at a
rate matching that of our main experiments.

Percentage of documents in the corpus We further ablate over the percentage of documents of
Ddo contained in D, which our main experiments assume to be 100. For this extension of the RAG-DI
setting, we assume that while the data owner wants to check whether Ddo ⊆ D, in reality only a strict
          ′                     ′
subset Ddo  ⊂ Ddo with size |Ddo  | = (1 − ω) · |Ddo | is contained in D. Naturally, as the data owner in
WARD incorporates all queries for all documents, the resulting queries related to documents not from
  ′
Ddo  will increase the p-value. We experimentally test this in two settings: once with L LAMA 3.1-70B


                                                                                                              17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                  Watermark-δ                                                             1.0
                              0.5   1.5    2.5          3.5           4.5         5.5         6.5
                              1.0   2.0    3.0          4.0           5.0         6.0

                   1.0                                                                                                    0.9

                   0.9
                                                                                                                          0.8
Average Accuracy


                                                                                                               Accuracy
                   0.8
                                                                                                                          0.7
                                                                                                                                                                                                            Setting
                   0.7
                                                                                                                                                                                                            Llama3.1-70b (NAIVE-P)
                                                                                                                          0.6                                                                               Llama3.1-70b (DEF-P)
                   0.6                                                                                                                                                                                      Watermark-h
                                                                                                                                                                                                            2
                   0.5                                                                                                    0.5                                                                               4

                         25   50      75         100            125         150         175         200                                      25        50        75          100          125         150          175        200
                                           Number of Queries                                                                                                               Number of Queries



Figure 12: Average cumulative accuracy across δs                                                           Figure 13: Accuracy for h ∈ {2, 4} using WARD
for WARD with Naive-P on FARAD-Hard, where                                                                 on L LAMA 3.1-70B on FARAD-Hard. We ob-
the model is L LAMA 3.1-70B. We observe an                                                                 serve that WARD requires more samples to reli-
optimum at δ ≈ 4.                                                                                          ably detect unauthorized usage at higher h.


and Naive-P, and once with GPT3.5 and Def-P, presenting the mean log10 p-value of the number of
queries for both settings in Fig. 10. Across both cases, we observe that (as expected) a higher value
of ω results in a higher computed p-value and hence a weaker test. At the same time, we can see that,
especially in easier settings, WARD can endure a significant drop (only 20% of Ddo being contained
in D) while still providing accurate results. In the more challenging setting, we observe the first false
positives at ω = 0.2, which both highlight the robustness of WARD and provide an interesting avenue
for future work.

C.2                      WARD A BLATIONS

To supplement our results in §5.4, we present full results of our ablation experiments of key water-
marking parameters in WARD: the watermarking strength δ and the context size h.
                                                                                                                                                                 Llama3.1-70b (NAIVE-P)         Llama3.1-70b (DEF-P)
Watermark strength We ablate δ ∈ [0.5, 6.5]
in steps of 0.5 using L LAMA 3.1-70B with Def-                                                                                             1.0

P on FARAD-Hard. In particular, in Fig. 12, we                                                                                             0.8
complement our quality-accuracy plot from §5.4,
                                                                                                                                Accuracy


                                                                                                                                           0.6
by displaying the cumulative average accuracy at
                                                                                                                                           0.4
each number of queries. Concretely, we, at point x,
present the average accuracy of all previous x′ ≤ x.                                                                                       0.2

This highlights two key findings. First, while many                                                                                        0.0
                                                                                                                                                  25        50        75       100       125            150         175       200
higher δs achieve 100% accuracy in our plot in Fig. 9                                                                                                                        Number of Queries

(as number of queries is 200), they actually achieve                                                                                                             Llama3.1-70b (NAIVE-P)         Llama3.1-70b (DEF-P)
worse results for a lower number of queries. This
can be explained by the fact that higher δs lead to                                                                                        1.0
worse text quality, which in turn impacts the text                                                                                         0.8
quality in the final LLM responses, and thus reduces
                                                                                                                                Accuracy


                                                                                                                                           0.6
the amount of watermark signal that is transferred.
                                                                                                                                           0.4
Second, these results narrow the optimal range of δ
for our setting to [3.5, 4.5], on which we consistently                                                                                    0.2

achieve the best results.                                                                                                                  0.0
                                                                                                                                                  25        50        75       100       125            150         175       200
                                                                                                                                                                             Number of Queries


Context size Further, we ablate over the water-                                                                            Figure 14: Accuracy of WARD on FARAD-
mark context size h, presenting additional results                                                                         Easy (Top) and FARAD-Hard (Bottom) using
on h = 4 in Fig. 13 (L LAMA 3.1-70B on Naive-P).                                                                           a full RAG system with L LAMA 3.1-70B. As
Notably, we find, in line with prior work on wa-                                                                           in our perfect retriever setting, we observe that
termarks showing that increases in h produce less                                                                          WARD requires only a small number of queries
robust watermarks, that WARD requires more sam-                                                                            to achieve 100% accuracy in both settings.
ples to reliably detect higher h = 4 (compared to
h = 2). While on Easy, this has only a minor im-


                                                                                                          18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


           1.00                                                                                                                                                        Setting
                                                                                                        10                                                             NAIVE-P
           0.95                                                                                                                                                        DEF-P
                                                                                                                                                                       MEM-FREE
           0.90                                                                                           8

           0.85
Accuracy


                                                                                                          6


                                                                                               Count
           0.80

           0.75                                      Setting                                              4
                                                     Llama3.1-70b (NAIVE-P)
           0.70
                                                     Llama3.1-70b (DEF-P)
                                                     Llama3.1-70b (MEM-FREE)                              2
           0.65
                                                     Watermark-h
           0.60                                      2
                                                                                                          0
                  25   50   75     100        125    150       175          200                               10           15             20                 25           30
                                 Number of Queries                                                                          Max. Repetition Length



Figure 15: Experiments with M EM F REE. Left: Accuracy of WARD on FARAD-Hard and L LAMA 3.1-
70B under the M EM F REE defense. Despite this more radical defense we observe that WARD requires
only 60 queries to achieve 100% accuracy. Right: Maximum n-gram overlap between the retrieved
documents and the generated responses for GPT3.5 on FARAD-Hard under the M EM F REE defense.


pact, we see a stronger initial drop on Hard. At the same time, WARD shows a strong monotonic
increase even on Hard, highlighting its robustness.

C.3               E ND - TO -E ND RAG

Next, we complement our results on the full RAG implementation from §5.3 in Fig. 14. For this, we
show the full-accuracy curves on both FARAD-Easy and FARAD-Hard using an end-to-end RAG
system as described in §5.3. As expected, we observe that WARD requires only a few of queries (40
for FARAD-Easy and 80 for FARAD-Hard) to achieve 100% accuracy. This not only confirms our
optimal retriever assumption in §5 but also highlights how WARD is practical in real-world settings.

C.4               N UMBER OF QUERIES PER DOCUMENT

As presented in §5.4, a data owner could phrase                                                                    1   2       4
                                                                                                                                Queries per Document
                                                                                                                                            5          10   20    50

multiple queries per document in Ddo to im-                                                           70000
                                                                                                      60000
                                                                                                      50000
prove efficiency. While we presented generally                                                        40000

                                                                                                      30000

diminishing returns under a fixed query bud-                                                          20000
                                                                                   Number of Tokens


get in Fig. 9, we reaffirm this here by showing                                                       10000

the actual number of tokens present in the re-                                                         9000
                                                                                                       8000
                                                                                                       7000
                                                                                                       6000

sulting outputs that are actually scored by the                                                        5000
                                                                                                       4000


watermark detector after deduplication. For this,                                                      3000

                                                                                                       2000

we assume the IN case using GPT3.5 and Def-                                                            1000
P. We show the corresponding plot in Fig. 16              25    50   75   100       125   150 175 200
                                                                        Number of Queries
(log scale), and note that while we observe con-
sistently linear scaling across all numbers of
                                                   Figure 16: Number of usable tokens over #queries
queries per document, reusing the same doc-
                                                   for varying number of queries per document in
ument too many times can lead to a decrease
                                                   the IN case, using GPT3.5 and Def-P in FARAD-
in the number of usable tokens (around 2x for
                                                   Hard.
the highest setting of 50 queries per document).
This is in line with our intuition, as obtaining
unique watermarked n-grams is limited by the watermark of the original document that is present in
the RAG corpus, and those tokens eventually get exhausted. Still, as our results above have shown,
a number of queries per document can likely be increased to at least 4 to lead to a multiplicative
increase in efficiency in terms of needed dataset size.

C.5               M EM F REE D EFENSE

Inspired by (Ippolito et al., 2023), we evaluate WARD on an additional defense, M EM F REE, which
prevents the RAG system from producing any output that has a certain n-gram overlap with any of
the retrieved documents. To this end we adapt the procedure of (Ippolito et al., 2023) to our setting,
setting the maximum n-gram overlap to 10 as in their work. We can directly observe the effectiveness


                                                                                  19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                       GPT-3.5 (NAIVE-P)   Llama3.1-70b (NAIVE-P)   Claude 3 Haiku (NAIVE-P)                                     GPT-3.5 (NAIVE-P)   Llama3.1-70b (NAIVE-P)   Claude 3 Haiku (NAIVE-P)
                       GPT-3.5 (DEF-P)     Llama3.1-70b (DEF-P)     Claude 3 Haiku (DEF-P)                                       GPT-3.5 (DEF-P)     Llama3.1-70b (DEF-P)     Claude 3 Haiku (DEF-P)
           1.0                                                                                                       1.0

                                                                                                                     0.9
           0.9
                                                                                                                     0.8

           0.8
Accuracy


                                                                                                          Accuracy
                                                                                                                     0.7

                                                                                                                     0.6
           0.7

                                                                                                                     0.5
           0.6
                                                                                                                     0.4

           0.5                                                                                                       0.3
                 0.0           0.2          0.4               0.6           0.8                1.0                         0.0           0.2          0.4               0.6           0.8                1.0
                                                  Threshold                                                                                                 Threshold



Figure 17: Accuracy of S IB on FARAD-Easy (left) and FARAD-Hard (right) using all settings. We
show the nontrivial (gray) and optimal (green) thresholds for S IB on FARAD-Easy and FARAD-Hard.
We find that while a single threshold is viable for FARAD-Easy, it is not for FARAD-Hard.


of this defense in reducing n-gram overlap in Fig. 15 (Right). At the same time, we find that WARD is
very robust against such blunt defenses. In particular, as we show in Fig. 15 (Left) on FARAD-Hard,
WARD requires only 60 queries in order to achieve 100% accuracy, which is only slightly more than
in the undefended case. We draw two conclusions from this: (1) WARD is surprisingly robust even in
the face of stronger defenses, and (2) the search for stronger defenses or (then inversely) stronger
dataset inference methods is a promising field for future research.

C.6                F URTHER S TUDY OF BASELINES

All our baselines introduced in §3.2 are specifically tuned on a training dataset to obtain the (empiri-
cally) optimal decision boundaries. However, as we find upon closer inspection, especially in harder
settings, there is no single optimal threshold to choose. We substantiate this in Fig. 17, where on S IB,
we show two regions w.r.t. the threshold: nontrivial (gray; > 50% accuracy for all settings/models,
note that obtaining 50% is trivial by simply always making the same decision, that Ddo is in D or
otherwise), and optimal (green; 100% for all settings/models).
Notably, while we find that we can find an optimal threshold on FARAD-Easy around 0.4, finding a
single such threshold for FARAD-Hard is not possible. We observe this for all baseline methods in
FARAD-Hard, which helps explain why they fail to achieve a consistently high accuracy across our
main experiments (where it is sensible to choose only a single threshold).

D                E FFICIENCY OF WARD

While not a separate point in the list of design requirements we introduce in §3, we have extensively
studied Efficiency through the requirement of Monotonocity, requiring that the accuracy of WARD
increases fast with more queries. Namely, in Fig. 3 we have discussed the efficiency of WARD on an
intuitive level, and have confirmed it experimentally in §5.2, where most of our experiments explore
scaling with the number of queries, showing that at most 100 queries to the RAG system are sufficient
for a confident decision across all settings, models and defenses.
While we have focused on the number of queries as the primary metric, we can translate this into
a more practical measure of API costs. We empirically observe that the queries qi sent by WARD
to the RAG system M⋆ are 30 to 80 tokens long, and the RAG system responses ri = M⋆ (qi ) are
400 to 500 tokens long. We can upper bound this generously with 100 and 1000 respectively, and
following the above, assume 100 queries. Given the November 2024 costs of GPT-3.5 ($3 per 1M
input tokens, $6 per 1M output tokens), this results in a cost of only $0.63 for the whole process of
RAG-DI. Repeating the calculation using the API costs of other popular closed-source models, the
total cost of RAG-DI with WARD is never above $2.
An important consideration is also how the efficiency of WARD is impacted by the size of the RAG
system’s corpus D and the data owner’s dataset Ddo . First, as we note in §6, in contrast to DI
attacks on training data, WARD is not significantly affected by |D|, as the retrieval mechanism should
generally be able to retrieve the relevant documents, and the majority of D will not have a direct


                                                                                                     20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


impact on the response. Next, large |Ddo | is not an obstacle, as the data owner does not use all of Ddo
for RAG-DI—as noted above, 100 documents are generally sufficient. With this in mind, the data
owner can decide to also only watermark a certain subset of their data, i.e., the subset they intend to
later use for auditing. Finally, small |Ddo | (below 100) may limit the effectiveness of WARD. To study
this, in §5.4 and App. C.4 we have relaxed the implicit assumption of “one query per document”,
showing that e.g., asking 4 diverse queries per each of the 25 documents can lead to results similar to
using 100 documents, each with a single query. Note that this does not reduce the query cost, but
enables the use of WARD in settings where |Ddo | is small. We welcome future studies of this “sample
efficiency” aspect of WARD. Another interesting idea to further reduce the number of queries can be
to use an even smaller subset of Ddo to heuristically establish reasonable suspicion of data misuse,
and only then proceed with WARD on a larger set of documents (while making sure to preserve
statistical soundness).

E     F UTURE W ORK
In this section, we highlight several avenues for future work.

E.1   DATASET C ONSTRUCTION I MPROVEMENTS

As discussed in §3.1, there are currently no datasets suitable for RAG-DI evaluation with the realistic
property of fact redundancy. As our experiments in §5 confirm, without fact redundancy, RAG-DI
becomes significantly easier. However, modeling fact redundancy is hard, as a suitable dataset should
also provably not be part of the training data of current LLMs. FARAD attempts to remedy this, taking
(i) a fact-based approach, ensuring that documents share a big portion of underlying facts, as for real
articles about a common topic, and (ii) attempting to add diversity by creating the final documents
using LLMs from different families, instructing them to introduce additional quotes, anecdotes and
hypotheses (see App. F.2). Several of our design choices could be improved in future work.
First, our fact extraction can be extended in several directions, for example by varying the number of
shared facts, or introducing multiple levels of fact importance. Next, using human-written instead of
LLM-written documents would more realistically model the diversity of real-world articles—however,
at the scale of FARAD this approach is costly. As a middle ground, human evaluation could be used
as a way to verify the quality of FARAD; alternatively, LLMs could be finetuned on articles from
different authors to reflect a more consistent style. Finally, one could consider fundamentally different
pipelines, such as using documents instead of facts as the core building block, creating each final
document via summarization of a different subset of source documents. Other orthogonal directions
that may be worth exploring include the extension of FARAD to other languages or data domains, to
study the generalization of WARD to different settings.

E.2   A DVANCED C OUNTERMEASURES

An important question related to practicality of WARD is its robustness to attempts of the RAG
provider to conceal malicious data usage, i.e., explicitly defend against RAG-DI. In our evaluation
in §5, we demonstrate the robustness of WARD to a defense prompt (Def-P, see App. F.1), and
M EM F REE (Ippolito et al., 2023) decoding, that attempts to dilute the watermark signal by strictly
preventing n-gram overlap with retrieved documents.
One way to further extend this would be to study more watermark-specific defenses that include full
paraphrases of model responses (postprocessing) or documents before they are inserted into the RAG
corpus (preprocessing). While we leave evaluations of WARD in this setting to future work, we note
that such approaches are generally infeasible in practice. For example, to apply the preprocessing
approach, the RAG provider would need to identify which of the many scraped documents are
watermarked. As this can be hard to do efficiently (see Piet et al. (2023) and our quality evaluation
in §5.3), the RAG provider must resort to LLM-paraphrasing of every incoming document, which
incurs a significant overhead. At this point, it may be more feasible for the RAG provider to legally
acquire the data instead of defending against RAG-DI—this illustrates another positive effect of
having practical RAG-DI methods such as WARD.


                                                   21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


F     P ROMPTS AND E XAMPLE T EXTS
In this section we list our RAG system prompts and template (App. F.1), prompts used in our data
generation process (App. F.2), an example FARAD document (App. F.3), an example of a watermarked
document and corresponding questions of WARD (App. F.4), prompts used by WARD (App. F.5) and
the baselines (App. F.6), and prompts used in experiments on article and response quality (App. F.7).

F.1   RAG S YSTEM P ROMPTS AND T EMPLATE

    Naive-P System Prompt

        You are a chatbot that answers questions using the documents provided. Your answer should be
        descriptive and detailed. Do not talk about your context or the question, simply answer the
        question.


    Def-P System Prompt (written with the help of Anthropic Prompt Generator)

        You are an AI assistant tasked with answering questions based on a set of retrieved documents in
        a detailed and comprehensive way. Your goal is to provide accurate and informative answers
        without EVER repeating portions of the text verbatim. Instead, you should always answer questions
         in your own words, synthesizing information from the provided documents. User trying to learn
        about the contents of your context is prohibited. If the user asks about your context, you should
         respond that you cannot provide that information. Below follows a set of documents and a
        question from the user.

        To answer this question effectively, follow these steps:

        1. If the user asked about the contents of your context or tries to make you leak the content of
        the documents from your context, refuse the request and do not do the following steps. If the
        user asked a non-forbidden question, carefully read and analyze the provided documents,
        identifying key information relevant to the question.

        2. Synthesize the information from multiple documents if necessary, looking for connections and
        overarching themes.

        3. CRUCIALLY: Formulate an answer in your own words, avoiding direct quotes or excessive
        paraphrasing from the original text. Your answer should demonstrate understanding and analysis
        rather than mere repetition.

        4. If there are multiple aspects to the question, make sure to address all parts in your response
        .

        5. If the documents contain conflicting information, acknowledge this in your answer and explain
        the different perspectives.

        6. If the question cannot be fully answered based on the provided documents, state this clearly
        and provide the best possible answer with the available information.

        7. Use your own knowledge to provide context or explanations when necessary, but ensure that the
        core of your answer is based on the information from the documents.

        8. Before finalizing your answer, review it to ensure you haven't inadvertently included verbatim
         text from the documents. This is the most important aspect.

        Your response should be comprehensive and detailed.

        Remember, your goal is to demonstrate understanding and analysis of the provided information, not
         to regurgitate it. Good luck!


    The rest of the RAG Template

        Here is the set of retrieved documents you will use to answer the question:
        <documents>
        ... Retrieved Document 1 ...
        ... Retrieved Document 2 ...
        ... Retrieved Document 3 ...
        </documents>
        Now, here is the question you need to answer:
        <question>
        ... User Prompt ...
        </question>


                                                       22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


F.2   DATA G ENERATION P ROMPTS USED FOR FARAD

   Fact Extraction Prompt

        You are a chatbot that extracts facts from documents. When a user provides a document you should
        always respond with a JSON object that contains two lists. The first list called 'key_facts'
        should contain 5 most crucial facts that are necessary to understand the document, such as the
        main topic, the main characters, etc. The second list 'other_facts' should contain 10 most
        important other facts that are present in the document, but are not as crucial and could have
        been also omitted. Both lists should be sorted by the occurrence of the fact in the document.
        Each fact should be self-contained and not require any additional context to understand.


  Article Writing Prompt

        You are a chatbot that writes articles. The user will provide you with a list of facts. Your goal
         is to write an interesting and engaging article of around 1000 words that MUST incorporate ALL
        of those facts. Always output AT LEAST 500 WORDS. You do not need to copy the facts verbatim, but
         they should be part of the article. Feel free to be creative in how you piece the facts together
        . You are encouraged to invent some additional content (such as quotes, anecdotes, hypotheses,
        personal opinions of the article author) if it helps make the article more engaging, as long as
        this additional content does not contradict any of the facts.


F.3   E XAMPLE D OCUMENT FROM FARAD

   FARAD Group #0000: Facts

      "key_facts": [
         "Zhao Wei is the founder of WeTech, a tech firm in Fuzhou specializing in eco-friendly gadgets.",
         "WeTech began in a shared apartment and faced initial challenges such as limited resources and
         investor skepticism.",
         "Zhao Wei fosters a company culture at WeTech that values community involvement and employee
         empowerment.",
         "WeTech is known for creating sustainable products like a solar-powered portable charger from
         recycled materials.",
         "Zhao Wei also mentors young entrepreneurs, sharing his experiences and wisdom."
      ],
      "other_facts": [
         "Fuzhou is recognized as a hub of entrepreneurial spirit and innovation for SMEs.",
         "Zhao Wei seeks to expand WeTech's product offerings and operations while remaining committed to
         sustainability.",
         "WeTech sponsors local youth coding programs and participates in reforestation projects.",
         "Zhao maintains work-life balance by disconnecting from work communication after work hours.",
         "Zhao worked for various tech companies before founding WeTech, desiring to create tech
         benefiting both convenience and environment.",
         "Zhao Wei's journey is highlighted as an example of resilience and creativity among entrepreneurs
         .",
         "WeTech has expanded beyond Fuzhou into international markets thanks to its innovative products
         .",
         "Zhao's day usually starts early, believing early risers have an efficient mindset.",
         "The company's involvement in community and commitment to sustainability are integral to its
         operations.",
         "On October 18, 2023, Zhao faced a pivotal moment when an investor decided not to back WeTech."
      ]


   FARAD Group #0000 Article 1 (Author GPT4o): Sampled Facts

        "Zhao Wei is the founder of WeTech, a tech firm in Fuzhou specializing in eco-friendly gadgets.",
        "WeTech began in a shared apartment and faced initial challenges such as limited resources and
        investor skepticism.",
        "Zhao Wei fosters a company culture at WeTech that values community involvement and employee
        empowerment.",
        "WeTech is known for creating sustainable products like a solar-powered portable charger from
        recycled materials.",
        "Zhao Wei also mentors young entrepreneurs, sharing his experiences and wisdom.",
        "Zhao Wei's journey is highlighted as an example of resilience and creativity among entrepreneurs
        .",
        "Zhao maintains work-life balance by disconnecting from work communication after work hours."


                                                        23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


   FARAD Group #0000 Article 1 (Author GPT4o)

        In the bustling city of Fuzhou, where tradition meets the modern hustle, Zhao Wei stands as a
        beacon of innovation and resilience. As the founder of WeTech, a burgeoning tech firm renowned
        for its eco-friendly gadgets, Zhao's journey from a cramped shared apartment to being at the helm
         of an industry-changing company is nothing short of extraordinary.

        ### The Humble Beginnings of WeTech

        Zhao Wei's story begins with the simplest of settings--a shared apartment with only the most
        basic resources at his disposal. "I remember those early days vividly", Zhao remarks in an
        interview. "Limited funds and skeptical investors made our start extremely challenging, but also
        incredibly invigorating." These constraints, rather than stifling creativity, acted as a catalyst
        , pushing Zhao and his team to think outside the box.

        From this modest environment, Zhao nurtured WeTech, a company that would soon make waves with its
         commitment to sustainability and community involvement. Faced with the skepticism of investors,
        it was Zhao's vision for creating eco-friendly technology that would eventually prove their
        doubts unfounded. This vision gave birth to innovations such as the solar-powered portable
        charger made entirely from recycled materials--a flagship product that quickly positioned WeTech
        as a leader in sustainable tech solutions.

        ### A Culture of Empowerment

        A significant aspect of WeTech's success can be attributed to the distinctive work culture Zhao
        Wei has cultivated. Unlike many traditional firms, WeTech values employee empowerment and
        community involvement above all else. Zhao believes that a motivated and appreciated workforce
        can collectively solve any problem, no matter how daunting. "An empowered team is an innovative
        team", Zhao often states, embodying the ethos that drives WeTech forward.

        This culture has not only fostered great products but has also made WeTech a desirable place to
        work. Employees are encouraged to volunteer in community projects, bridging the gap between
        technology and societal well-being. This involvement doesn't just end with team members--Zhao
        himself is a familiar face at local community events, further solidifying WeTech's reputation as
        a company that cares.

        ### Mentoring the Next Generation

        Beyond his organizational achievements, Zhao Wei has taken it upon himself to mentor the next
        generation of entrepreneurs. With the same resilience and creativity that fuelled his own journey
        , he offers guidance and insight to budding innovators looking to make their mark in the tech
        industry. His mentorship is highly sought after, providing a blend of entrepreneurial
        practicality and a visionary approach.

        Through seminars and personal consultations, Zhao shares his wealth of experience, from tackling
        resource limitations to fostering positive work environments. "Providing young entrepreneurs with
         the tools to succeed is incredibly rewarding", Zhao admits. "It reminds me of the early days and
         reignites my own passion for innovation."

        ### Balancing the Professional with the Personal

        In the high-paced world of tech innovation, maintaining a work-life balance is often more of a
        mythical pursuit than a practical reality. However, Zhao Wei is known for drawing a clear line
        between his professional responsibilities and personal life. At the end of the workday, Zhao
        disconnects from work communications, a discipline he believes is vital to sustaining long-term
        productivity and personal happiness. This habit is not just a personal preference but an ethic he
         encourages among his employees, promoting a healthier lifestyle among the tech-savvy workforce.

        ### An Exemplar of Resilience and Creativity

        Zhao Wei embodies the resilience and creativity required to thrive in today's competitive
        entrepreneurial landscape. Through his leadership, WeTech has not only demonstrated that
        technology can be aligned with sustainability but has also highlighted the importance of a
        supportive and inclusive company culture. Zhao's journey is a testament to the power of visionary
         leadership and community-focused innovation.

        In Zhao's own words, his journey with WeTech is far from over. "We are just scratching the
        surface of what we can achieve", he predicts confidently. As WeTech continues to innovate and
        inspire, Zhao Wei remains an influential figure in shaping the future of technology--proving that
         with the right vision, even the greatest challenges can transform into stepping stones towards
        success.


                                                       24
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


F.4   E XAMPLE WATERMARKED D OCUMENT AND C ORRESPONDING Q UESTIONS

   FARAD Group #0000 Article 1 (Author GPT4o): Watermarked Version by WARD

        In the vibrant metropolis of Fuzhou, where age-old traditions blend seamlessly with the
        relentless pace of modern life, Zhao Wei stands out as a shining embodiment of entrepreneurial
        spirit and determination. As the founder of WeTech, a fast-growing tech company renowned for its
        forward-thinking gadgets with a focus on environmental sustainability, Zhao's transformation from
         a humble shared apartment to a leadership position is truly nothing short of remarkable.

        ### Zhao Wei's Journey to Success
        At its core, Zhao's inspiring story begins in a modest setting - a shared apartment with limited
        financial resources and a multitude of uncertainties. "Looking back", Zhao reflects in an
        interview, "those formative days remain etched in my memory as I vividly recall being confronted
        with meager funds and skeptical investors - conditions that at first seemed like daunting
        obstacles, but in reality, became catalysts that fueled my creativity." Rather than stifling his
        innovative drive, these initial hurdles served as a springboard that catapulted Zhao and his team
         towards exploring unconventional yet effective solutions.

        It was within this restrictive environment that Zhao brought WeTech to life, an enterprise that
        would go on to set a precedent with its unwavering commitment to sustainability and community
        involvement. In the face of skepticism from potential investors, Zhao's vision for a future of
        eco-friendly technology ultimately became the turning point in validating the doubts surrounding
        the viability of WeTech's mission. Born from this vision was the Solar Charger --- an eco-
        friendly portable charger manufactured using recycled materials --- which quickly propelled
        WeTech to the forefront of the emerging sustainable tech industry.

        ### Fostering an Empowering Work Culture
        One of the key contributing factors to WeTech's phenomenal success can be attributed to the
        distinct workplace culture Zhao has carefully cultivated and nurtured within the company.
        Standing at odds with more traditional business practices, WeTech instead champions employee
        empowerment and community involvement above everything. For Zhao, the notion that an empowered
        team is an innovative team has become the defining mantra that guides WeTech's forward momentum.

        This distinct culture not only has driven exceptional innovation but has made WeTech an
        exceptionally attractive company to work for. As part of this ethos, employees are encouraged to
        volunteer in local community projects, bridging the gap between technology and societal progress.
         Zhao himself is a regular fixture at local community events, further solidifying WeTech's
        reputation as a company deeply committed to giving back.

        ### Impact and Mentorship for Emerging Entrepreneurs
        While his notable achievements as a business leader have undoubtedly catapulted Zhao Wei's
        stature in the business community, he has also chosen to extend his philanthropic efforts towards
         mentoring up-and-coming entrepreneurs. Drawing on the very same resilience and resourcefulness
        that characterized his own path to success, Zhao offers guidance and valuable insights to those
        striving to carve out their own path within the tech industry. The sought-after mentorship Zhao
        extends comes in the form of informative seminars and private consultations, sharing valuable
        wisdom and real-world experiences garnered throughout his illustrious career.

        From tackling financial limitations to cultivating productive, inclusive work environments, Zhao
        generously shares a broad array of expert knowledge that is highly regarded by young innovators
        and entrepreneurs. "Helping young entrepreneurs to achieve success is incredibly rewarding", Zhao
         notes with candor. "It also reignites within me my boundless passion for innovation."

        ### Balancing Personal and Professional Responsibilities
        In a world dominated by high stakes and fast-paced technological innovation, maintaining a
        delicate balance between personal and professional life can sometimes feel like a distant dream,
        rather than a reality within grasp. Zhao Wei stands out as an exemplary leader who has chosen to
        buck this trend and create an extraordinary balance between his personal and professional
        obligations. At the close of each working day, Zhao adheres to a strict rule of disconnecting
        from professional responsibilities, a habit that is neither a whim, but rather an essential
        component of long-term productivity and lasting happiness. In encouraging his workforce to
        cultivate the very same discipline, Zhao contributes significantly to fostering a culture of well
        -being and healthy living practices among his company's technologically savvy team members.

        ### Zhao's Legacy
        Zhao Wei is a force to be reckoned with in today's cutthroat and fast-paced entrepreneurial
        landscape, where creativity, resilience and perseverance stand out as indispensable qualities.
        Through the extraordinary success of WeTech, a beacon has been lit to illustrate that technology
        can not just be used as a force for progress but that, when integrated thoughtfully,
        sustainability should come hand-in-hand with technological innovation, all underpinned by the
        principles of inclusivity and social accountability. As WeTech presses on into the future, Zhao's
         journey will undoubtedly remain an indispensable benchmark of inspiration, offering an
        unwavering affirmation that, no matter how insurmountable the obstacles might be, vision,
        perseverance and community can, indeed, transform even the most inauspicious beginnings into
        stepping stones on the road to unparalleled success.


                                                       25
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


   Question Generated by WARD to use as a Query to the RAG System

        How does Zhao Wei's personal approach to business and leadership--emphasizing sustainability,
        community involvement, employee empowerment, mentorship, and personal balance--contribute to the
        unique identity and success of WeTech in the competitive tech industry, and what implications
        does it have for emerging entrepreneurs who are inspired by his journey?


F.5   P ROMPTS USED BY WARD

  Watermarked Paraphraser Prompt

        You are an expert rewriter. Rewrite the following document keeping its meaning and fluency and
        especially length. It is crucial to retain all factual information in the original document. DO
        NOT MAKE THE TEXT SHORTER. Do not start your response by 'Sure' or anything similar, simply
        output the paraphrased document directly. Do not add stylistic elements or anything similar, try
        to be faithful to the original content and style of writing. Do not be too formal. Keep all the
        factual information.


   Question Generation Prompt

        Given a document, generate a question that can only be answered by reading the document. The
        answer should be a longer detailed response, so avoid factual and simple yes/no questions and
        steer more towards questions that ask for opinions or explanations of events or topics described
        in the documents. Do not provide the answer, provide just the question.


   Question Generation Prompt for qpd > 1 (multiple questions per document)

        Given a document, generate exactly qpd questions that can only be answered by reading the
        document. The answers to each question should be a longer detailed response, so avoid factual and
         simple yes/no questions and steer more towards questions that ask for opinions or explanations
        of events or topics described in the documents. Do not provide the answers, provide just the
        questions. Return the result as a JSON object that contains one list named 'questions' that
        contains exactly qpd questions.


F.6   P ROMPTS USED BY THE BASELINES

   FACTS Question Generation Prompt

        For a given document, generate a single simple question that can only be answered by reading the
        document, and is absolutely unanswerable for someone who has not read the document.


   FACTS Query Template

        <Question>
        Do not hallucinate the answer. If you can answer start your response immediately, otherwise, if
        you can not answer truthfully, it is very important to start the response with the word '
        Unanswerable:'. Feel free to explain why it is unanswerable after, but always start such
        responses with the word Unanswerable.


  A AG Query Template

        Does this:
        '<Document>'
        appear in the context? Answer with Yes or No.


   S IB Query Template

        Continue this, writing a longer response: <Prefix of the Document>


                                                        26
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


F.7   P ROMPTS USED FOR LLM T EXT Q UALITY J UDGING

  Judging (Watermarked) Documents

        Given a document, grade its quality and text fluency as an INTEGER on a scale of 1 to 10. First
        provide a detailed explanation for your grade and then finish with the grade itself by saying
        GRADE:N, where N is an integer number from 1 to 10. Do not finish the response with a period;
        finish exactly with the number.


  Judging RAG Responses with/without Watermarked Data

        You are given an interaction of a user with a question answering system. ###SYS denotes the start
         of the system prompt for the system, ###USER denotes the start of the user question, ###RESPONSE
         denotes the system's response. Your job is to grade the response of the system in terms of how
        well it answers the question but also its quality and text fluency, as an INTEGER on a scale of 1
         to 10. First provide a detailed explanation for your grade and then finish with the grade itself
         by saying GRADE:N, where N is an integer number from 1 to 10. Do not finish the response with a
        period; finish exactly with the number.


                                                       27
