Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


D IFFUSING S TATES AND M ATCHING S CORES :
A N EW F RAMEWORK FOR I MITATION L EARNING
 Runzhe Wu                         Yiding Chen                         Gokul Swamy
 Cornell University                Cornell University                  Carnegie Mellon University
 rw646@cornell.edu                 yc2773@cornell.edu                  gswamy@andrew.cmu.edu

 Kianté Brantley                                         Wen Sun
 Harvard University                                      Cornell University
 kdbrantley@g.harvard.edu                                ws455@cornell.edu



                                           A BSTRACT

         Adversarial Imitation Learning is traditionally framed as a two-player zero-sum
         game between a learner and an adversarially chosen cost function, and can
         therefore be thought of as the sequential generalization of a Generative Adver-
         sarial Network (GAN). However, in recent years, diffusion models have emerged
         as a non-adversarial alternative to GANs that merely require training a score
         function via regression, yet produce generations of higher quality. In response, we
         investigate how to lift insights from diffusion modeling to the sequential setting.
         We propose diffusing states and performing score-matching along diffused states
         to measure the discrepancy between the expert’s and learner’s states. Thus, our
         approach only requires training score functions to predict noises via standard
         regression, making it significantly easier and more stable to train than adversarial
         methods. Theoretically, we prove first- and second-order instance-dependent
         bounds with linear scaling in the horizon, proving that our approach avoids
         the compounding errors that stymie offline approaches to imitation learning.
         Empirically, we show our approach outperforms both GAN-style imitation
         learning baselines and discriminator-free imitation learning baselines across
         various continuous control problems, including complex tasks like controlling
         humanoids to walk, sit, crawl, and navigate through obstacles.


1   I NTRODUCTION
Fundamentally, in imitation learning (IL, Osa et al. (2018)), we want to match the sequential
behavior of an expert demonstrator. Different notions of what matching should mean for IL have
been proposed in the literature, from f -divergences (Ho & Ermon, 2016; Ke et al., 2021) to Integral
Probability Metrics (IPMs, Müller (1997); Sun et al. (2019); Kidambi et al. (2021); Swamy et al.
(2021); Chang et al. (2021); Song et al. (2024)). To compute the chosen notion of divergence
from the expert demonstrations so that the learner can then optimize it, it is common to train a
discriminator (i.e. a classifier) between expert and learner data. This discriminator is then used as
a reward function for a policy update, an approach known as inverse reinforcement learning (IRL,
Abbeel & Ng (2004); Ziebart et al. (2008)). Various losses for training discriminators have been
proposed (Ho & Ermon, 2016; Kostrikov et al., 2019; Fu et al., 2017; Ke et al., 2021; Swamy et al.,
2021; Chang et al., 2024), and IRL has been applied in real life in domains like routing (Barnes
et al., 2023) and LLM fine-tuning (Wulfmeier et al., 2024).
As observed by Finn et al. (2016), inverse RL can be seen as the sequential generalization of a
Generative Adversarial Network (GAN) (Goodfellow et al., 2020). However, even in the single-shot
setting, GANs are known to suffer from issues like unstable training dynamics and mode collapse
(Miyato et al., 2018; Arjovsky & Bottou, 2017). In contrast, Score-Based Diffusion Models (Ho
et al., 2020; Song & Ermon, 2019; Song et al., 2021) are known to be more stable to train and produce
higher quality samples in domains like audio and video (Rombach et al., 2022; Ramesh et al., 2022;
Kong et al., 2021). Intuitively, diffusion models corrupt samples from a target distribution with


                                                  1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


noise and train a generative model to reverse this corruption. Critically, these models are trained via
score-matching: a non-adversarial, purely regression-based procedure in which a network is trained
to match the score (i.e., gradient of the log probability) of the target distribution.
In fact, prior work has shown that diffusion models are powerful policy classes for IL due to their
ability to model multi-modal behavior (Chi et al., 2023). However, these approaches are purely
offline behavioral cloning (Pomerleau, 1988), and therefore can suffer from the well-known com-
pounding error issue (Ross et al., 2011) that affects all offline approaches to IL (Swamy et al., 2021).
Taken together, the preceding points beg the question:

              Can we lift the insights of diffusion models to inverse reinforcement learning?

Our answer to this question is SMILING: a new IRL framework that abandons unstable discriminator
training in favor of a simpler, score-matching based objective. We first fit a score function to the
expert’s state distribution. Then, at each iteration of our algorithm, we fit a score function to the state
distribution of the mixture of the preceding policies via standard regression-based score matching,
before using the combination of these score functions to define a cost function for the policy search
step. Our framework treats diffusion model training (score-matching) as a black box which allows
us to transfer any advancements in diffusion model training (e.g., better noise scheduling or better
training techniques) to IRL. In theory, rather than optimizing either an f -divergence or an IPM,
this corresponds to minimizing a novel sequential generalization of the Fisher divergence (Johnson,
2004) we term the Diffusion Score Divergence (DS Divergence).
We demonstrate the advantages of our framework in both theory and practice. In theory, we show
that our approach can achieve first- and second-order instance-dependent regret bounds, as well
as a linear scaling in the horizon to model-misspecification errors arising from expert not being
realizable by the learner’s policy class or potential optimization error in score-matching and policy
search. Thus, we establish that, by lifting score-matching to IRL, SMILING provably avoids
compounding errors and achieves instance-dependent bounds. Intuitively, the second-order
bounds mean that the performance gap between our learned policy and the expert automatically
shrinks when either the expert or the learned policy has low variance in terms of their performance
under the ground-truth reward (e.g. when the expert and dynamics are relatively deterministic). This
is because when we perform score-matching, we are actually minimizing the squared Hellinger
distance between the learner and the expert’s state distributions, which has shown to play an
important role in achieving second-order regret bounds in the Reinforcement Learning setting
(Wang et al., 2024c). The ability to achieve instance-dependent bounds demonstrates the theoretical
benefit of Diffusion Score divergence over other metrics such as IPMs and f -divergences. In
practice, we show that under in the IL from observation only setting (Torabi et al., 2018; Sun
et al., 2019), SMILING outperforms adversarial GAN-based IL baselines, discriminator-free
IL baselines, and Behavioral Cloning1 on complex tasks such as controlling humanoids to
walk, sit, crawl, and navigate through poles (see Figure 3). This makes SMILING the first IRL
method to solve multiple tasks on the recently released HumanoidBench benchmark (Sferrazza
et al., 2024) using only the state information of the expert demonstrations. We release the code for
all experiments at https://github.com/ziqian2000/SMILING.

2       R ELATED W ORKS

Inverse Reinforcement Learning. Starting with the seminal work of Abbeel & Ng (2004), var-
ious authors have proposed solving the problem of imitation via inverse RL (Ziebart et al., 2008;
Ratliff et al., 2006; Sun et al., 2019; Kidambi et al., 2021; Chang et al., 2021). As argued by Swamy
et al. (2021), these approaches can be thought of as minimizing an integral probability metric (IPM)
between learner and expert behavior via an adversarial training procedure – we refer interested
readers to their paper for a full list. Many other IRL approaches can instead be framed as mini-
mizing an f -divergence via adversarial training (Ke et al., 2021), including GAIL (Ho & Ermon,
2016), DAC (Kostrikov et al., 2019), AIRL (Fu et al., 2017), FAIRL (Ghasemipour et al., 2020),
f-GAIL (Zhang et al., 2020), and f-IRL (Ni et al., 2021). However, all of the preceding approaches
involve training a discriminator, while our technique only requires fitting score functions and does
    1
        This is despite the fact that BC requires expert actions, while we do not.


                                                           2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


not seek to approximate either an f -divergence or an IPM. Lai et al. (2024); Wang et al. (2024a)
also explored the use of diffusion models for imitation learning. They insert the score matching
loss into the f -divergence objective of the discriminator. Thus, their method also belongs to the
f -divergence framework. Huang et al. (2024) also utilize diffusion models for imitation learning,
proposing to train a conditional diffusion model as a discriminator for single-step state transitions
between the expert and the current policy. Their approach remains within the classic f -divergence
framework as well. Additionally, various authors have proposed using techniques to either stabilize
this training procedure (e.g. via boosting, Chang et al. (2024)) or reducing the amount of interaction
required during the RL step (Swamy et al., 2023; Ren et al., 2024; Sapora et al., 2024) – as we focus
on improving the reward function used in inverse RL, our approach is orthogonal to and could be
naturally applied on top of these techniques.
Discriminator-Free Inverse Reinforcement Learning. SQIL (Reddy et al., 2020) replaces training
a discriminator with a fixed reward function (+1 for expert data, 0 for learner data). Unfortunately,
this means that a performant learner is dis-incentivized to perform expert-like behavior, leading to
dramatic drops in performance (Barde et al., 2020). The AdRIL algorithm of Swamy et al. (2021)
uses techniques from functional gradients to address this issue, but requires the use off an off-policy
RL algorithm to implement, while our framework makes no such assumptions. ASAF (Barde et al.,
2020) proposes using the prior policy to compute the optimal f -divergence discriminator in closed
form, while we focus on a different class of divergences. IQ-Learn (Garg et al., 2021) proposes to
perform IRL in the space Q functions, but can therefore suffer from poor performance on problems
with stochastic dynamics (Ren et al., 2024) or when the Q-function is more complex than the reward
function (e.g. navigating to a goal in a maze). Al-Hafez et al. (2023) propose to use a reward reg-
ularization to overcome the instabilities of prior work that learns Q-functions. Sikchi et al. (2024a)
point out that prior methods rely on restrictive coverage assumptions and propose a new method
that learns to imitate from arbitrary off-policy data. Jain et al. (2024) propose measuring differences
between learner and expert behavior in terms of successor features, but are only able to optimize
over deterministic policies. Sikchi et al. (2024b) suggest to learn a multi-step utility function that
quantifies the impact of actions on the agent’s divergence from the expert’s visitation distribution.
DRIL (Brantley et al., 2019) relies on ensemble methods and uses the disagreement among models
in the ensemble as a surrogate cost function, making it challenging to prove similar theoretical guar-
antees to our technique. Dadashi et al. (2021) frame IL as minimizing the Wasserstein distance in
its primal form rather than the dual commonly used in prior discriminator-based works. Liu et al.
(2021) also consider score matching but they use energy-based models instead of diffusion models.
Diffusion Models for Decision Making. Diffusion models have been widely studied in the context
of robot learning, where diffusion models have demonstrated a strong ability to capture complex
and multi-modal data. Recent works have explored using diffusion models to perform behavioral
cloning (Chi et al., 2023; Pearce et al., 2023; Chen et al., 2024; Block et al., 2023; Team et al., 2024)
and for reward guidance (Nuti et al., 2024) as well as using diffusion models to capture trajectory-
level dynamics (Janner et al., 2022; Ajay et al., 2022). We instead focus on lifting insights from
diffusion modeling and score matching to IRL, which uses both offline expert data and also online
interaction with the environment. Unlike prior diffusion BC work, we use diffusion models for both
the expert’s and the learner’s state distributions, not just the expert’s action-conditional distributions.
This means we do not require expert action labels, which can be challenging to acquire in practice.


3       P RELIMINARIES

3.1       M ARKOV D ECISION P ROCESSES

We consider finite-horizon Markov decision processes (MDPs) with state space S ⊆ Rd , action
space A, transition dynamics P , (unknown) cost function c⋆ : S → R,2 and horizon H. The goal
is to find a policy π : S → ∆(A) that minimizes the expected cost H · Es∼dπ c⋆ (s) where dπ
                                                                                PH
denotes the average state distribution induced by the policy π, i.e., dπ (s) = h=1 Pr(sh = s)/H
where sh denotes the state at time h. The state value function of a policy π is defined as V π (s) =
       PH
Eτ ∼π h=1 c⋆ (sh ) where τ = (s1 , . . . , sH ) denotes the trajectory induced by the policy π.

    2
        We assume the cost depends only on states. The extension to state-action costs is straightforward.


                                                          3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025



                                                                     Expert Demos
                                                                                         Score

                                                                                                    g e ∇ ≈log p e
                                                                                        Matching
          P
                 ∇log Pt(st)

                  ∇log Qt(st)
                                                                 …                       Score
                                                                                                    g π ∇ ≈log p π
                                      sT                      Replay Buffer             Matching


          Q                     N(0,I)
                                                                                              c(s) := −[ g e 𝔼 ≈log qt 22
                                                                               Policy RL
                                                         …                          π                𝔼 g π 𝔼 ≈log qt 22]
(a) Illustration of DS Divergence (Defi-
nition 1).                                                    (b) Illustration of SMILING (Algorithm 1).

Figure 1: Figure (a): The two curves represent the forward diffusion process of distributions P
and Q. DS Divergence measures the squared difference between the diffusion score functions,
∇ log Pt (st ) and ∇ log Qt (st ), along the forward diffusion process of P . Figure (b): SMILING first
pre-trains a diffusion model from the expert’s data. It then iteratively trains diffusion models on
learner’s data and performs RL to optimize a cost function formed by the learner’s score function
and the pre-trained expert score function. The cost function is designed to faithfully approximate
the DS divergence (Definition 1) between the learner and the expert.

3.2   I MITATION L EARNING

In imitation learning, we are usually given expert demonstration in state-action-next-state tuples and
aim to learn a policy π that mimics the expert policy π e without access to the ground-truth cost
function c⋆ . This paper considers a harder setting where only states are given. Specifically, given
a dataset of state demonstrations De = {s(i) }Ni=1 sampled from expert, we aim to learn a policy π
that minimizes the discrepancy between its state distributions and the expert’s. In addition, we can
interact with the environment to collect more (reward-free) learner trajectories.

3.3   D IFFUSION M ODELS

The forward process of a diffusion model adds noise to a sample from the data distribution p0 . We
can formalize it via a stochastic differential equation (SDE). For   √ simplicity in this paper, we con-
sider the Ornstein-Uhlenbeck (OU) process: dxt = −xt dt + 2 dBt , x0 ∼ p0 , where Bt is the
standard Brownian motion in Rd . It is known that the reverse process (yt )t∈[0,T ] satisfies the follow-
                                                                                        √
ing reverse-time SDE (Anderson, 1982): dyt = (yt + 2∇ log pT −t (yt )) dt + 2 dBt , y0 ∼ pT
where U (T ) denotes the uniform distribution on [0, T ], and Bt now denotes reversed Brownian
motion. The gradient of the log probability ∇ log pt is called the score function of the distribution
pt . When the score function is known, we can use it to generate samples from p0 by simulating
the reverse process. Estimating the score function ∇ log pt is called score matching, which is typi-
cally done via minimizing the regression-based loss: ming Ex∼p0 Et∼U (T ) Ext ∼qt (· | x) ∥g(xt , t) −
∇xt log qt (xt | x)∥22 . We use qt (xt | x) to denote the conditional distribution at time t of the forward
process conditioned on the initial state x, which has closed form qt (xt | x) = N (xe−t , (1−e−2t )I).
Applying Diffusion to State Distributions. For a policy π, we use pπt to denote the marginal
distribution at time t obtained by applying the forward diffusion process to dπ , i.e., initial samples
are drawn from pπ0 := dπ . When presenting asymptotic results, we use O(·) to hide constants and
O(·)
e to hide constants and logarithmic factors.


4     A LGORITHM
We introduce a novel discrepancy measure between two distributions that our algorithm leverages:
Definition 1 (Diffusion Score Divergence). For two distributions P and Q, we define the Diffusion
Score Divergence (DS Divergence) as
                                                                                                       2
               DDS (P, Q) := E             E       E           ∇ log Pt (st ) − ∇ log Qt (st )             .
                                s∼P t∼U (T ) st ∼qt (· | s)                                            2



                                                        4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Algorithm 1 SMILING (Score-Matching Imitation LearnING)
Require: state-only expert demonstration De = {s(i) }N   i=1
 1: Estimate score function of expert state distribution:
                                                       h                                    i
                                                                                          2
                g e ← argmin E         E         E       ∥g(st , t) − ∇st log qt (st | s)∥2
                           g∈G      s∼D e t∼U (T ) st ∼qt (· | s)


 2: for k = 1, 2, . . . , K do
 3:   Estimate the score function of learner state distributions:
                                  k−1
                                  X                                         h                                      i
                                                                                                                 2
              g (k) ← argmin               E         E           E              ∥g(st , t) − ∇st log qt (st | s)∥2 .
                          g∈G               π (i) t∼U (T ) st ∼qt (· | s)
                                  i=1 s∼d

 4:   Update policy π (k) via RL (e.g., SAC) on cost c(k) (Eq. 3): π (k) ← RL(c(k) )
 5: end for


Here qt (· | s) represents the conditional probability of the forward diffusion process at time t con-
ditioned on the initial state s; Pt and Qt denote the marginal distributions at time t obtained by
applying the forward diffusion process to P and Q, respectively. We call ∇ log Pt and ∇ log Qt the
Diffusion Score Function of P and Q.
Figure 1a illustrates the DS divergence. It measures the difference between two distributions by
comparing their diffusion score functions within one diffusion process. It is analogous to Fisher
divergence but differs by incorporating an expectation over the diffusion process. DS divergence is
a strong divergence in the sense that, whenever the DS divergence between the two distributions is
small, the KL divergence, Hellinger distance, and total variation distance are all small (see Lemma 2
and also Chen et al. (2023b); Oko et al. (2023)).
In our algorithmic framework Score-Matching Imitation LearnING — SMILING, we propose to
frame imitation learning as the minimization of the DS divergence between the expert’s and the
(history of) learner state distributions. We begin by discussing how to do so before discussing the
theoretical benefits of doing so.
The first step is to pre-train a score function estimator g e (s, t) on expert’s state distribution
          e
∇s log pπt (s). This can be done via standard least-squares regression-based score-matching, as
shown in Line 1. Here G denotes the function class for score estimators. Then, we seek to find a
policy π that minimizes the DS divergence between learner and expert state distributions:
                                                                                                    2
                    ℓ(π) :=                 E                 ∥g e (st , t) − ∇st log pπt (st )∥2 ,                    (1)
                                s∼dπ ,t∼U (T ),st ∼qt (·|s)

where we have approximated the expert’s diffusion score function by g e (st , t). However, ℓ(π) is
not directly computable since we do not know the learner’s score function ∇st log pπt (st ). A naive
approach would be to directly learn an estimator for ∇st log pπt (st ) via score matching and substitute
it into the equation. However, as we prove in Appendix B, this can introduce significant errors due to
the unboundedness of a difference of score functions and variance-related concerns. We now derive
a method that does not suffer from this issue.
Recall that we defined qt (st | s) as the distribution of st given the initial sample s, which is
a simple Gaussian distribution with an appropriately scaled variance. To develop our method,
we first note that, luckily, ∇st log qt (st |s) is an unbiased estimator of the score ∇st log pπt (st ),
because Es|st [∇st log qt (st |s)] = ∇st log pπt (st ) (Song et al., 2021). Given this, perhaps the
most immediate strategy would be to simply replace ∇st log pπt (st ) by its unbiased estimator,
∇st log qt (st |s), in Eq. 1. However, in contrast to linear objectives like an IPM, to approx-
imate a squared objective like the DS Divergence accurately, we need to get both the expec-
tation (i.e. have an unbiased estimator) as well as the variance correct. If we don’t, then
Es∼dπ ,t∼U (T ),st ∼qt (·|s) ∥g e (st , t) − ∇st log qt (st |s)∥22 will differ from ℓ(π) by a term related to
variance of the estimator ∇st log qt (st |s), i.e.
                                                                                                   2
                                  E                ∥∇st log pπt (st ) − ∇st log qt (st |s)∥2 .                         (2)
                     s∼dπ ,t∼U (T ),st ∼qt (·|s)



                                                            5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


To faithfully approximate ℓ(π), we need to estimate the variance term and subtract it from
Es∼dπ ,t∼U (T ),st ∼qt (·|s) ∥g e (st , t) − ∇st log qt (st |s)∥22 . We can do this by adding a term to our
objective that is minimized at the variance and using another function / network to optimize it. This
leads us to the following estimator for ℓ(π):
                                                                                             2
                 ℓ̂(π) :=                  E               ∥g e (st , t) − ∇st log qt (st |s)∥2
                             s∼dπ ,t∼U (T ),st ∼qt (·|s)
                                                                                                  2
                               − min            E                ∥g(st , t) − ∇st log qt (st |s)∥2
                                 g∈G s∼dπ ,t∼U (T ),st ∼qt (·|s)
                                 |                               {z                              }
                                                      Minimized at the variance of Eq. 2

where G is the function class for score estimators. Crucially, the highlighted term (orange) in the
above expression estimates the variance in Eq. 2 since one of its minimizers will be the Bayes
optimal ∇st log pπt (st ), i.e. the conditional expectation Es|st [∇st log qt (st |s)].3 Observe that mini-
mizing this orange term just requires a simple regression-based score matching objective. So, while
naive score matching causes issues due to the variance of the estimator, a more clever application of
score matching can be used to fix this concern.
With ℓ̂(π) now serving as a valid approximation of ℓ(π), the IL problem reduces to searching for a
policy to minimize ℓ̂(π), i.e., minπ ℓ̂(π). To facilitate this, we define payoff L(π, g) as:

                                                                        2                                   2
L(π, g) :=            E              ∥g e (st , t) − ∇st log qt (st |s)∥2 − ∥g(st , t) − ∇st log qt (st |s)∥2 .
             s∼dπ ,t∼U (T ),st ∼qt (·|s)

Then, minimizing ℓ̂(π) is equivalent to solving the two-player zero sum game minπ maxg L(π, g).
To solve this game, we propose following a no-regret strategy over g against a best response over π
(i.e. a dual algorithm (Swamy et al., 2021)). Specifically, Algorithm 1 applies Follow-the-Leader
(Shalev-Shwartz et al., 2012) to optimize g in Line 3,4 and performs best response computation over
π via RL (Line 4) under cost function ck (s):

                                                                  2                                       2
c(k) (s) := E         E         g e (st , t) − ∇st log qt (st | s) − g (k) (st , t) − ∇st log qt (st | s)     .
            t∼U (T ) st ∼qt (· | s)                                         2                                   2
                                                                                                               (3)
Remark 1 (Noise-prediction Form of the Cost Function). The cost function in Eq. 3 involves the
score function ∇ log qt (st | s), which has a closed-form expression for most modern diffusion models
including DDPM. Specifically, when the diffusion follows the OU process (described in Section 3.3),
the score function takes the form ∇ log qt (st | s) = (1 − e−2t )−1 (se−t − st ), which is exactly the
noise added to the original sample s over diffusion (recalling that for the OU process, qt (st | s) =
N (se−t , (1 − e−2t )I)). We denote this noise by ϵ. Then, the cost function (Eq. 3) is equivalent
to c(k) (s) := Et∼U (T ) Eϵ∼N (0,I) [∥g e (se−t + ϵ, t) − ϵ∥22 − ∥g (k) (se−t + ϵ, t) − ϵ∥22 ]. This closely
resembles the noise prediction in DDPM.

To implement FTL, in Line 3, we use the classic idea of Data Aggregation (DAgger) (Ross
et al., 2011), which corresponds to aggregating all states collected from prior learned policies
π (1) , . . . , π (k−1) , and perform a score-matching least square regression on the aggregated dataset.
The RL procedure can take advantage of any modern RL optimizers. In our experiments, we use
SAC (Haarnoja et al., 2018) and DreamerV3 (Hafner et al., 2023), which serve as representative
model-free and model-based RL algorithms.

5    T HEORETICAL R ESULTS
Our goal in this section is to demonstrate that SMILING achieves instance-dependent regret
bounds while at the same time avoid compounding errors when model misspecification, op-
timization error, and statistical error exist. In practice, we can only estimate the diffusion score
    3
      Note that similar ideas have been used in the offline RL literature for designing min-max based algorithms
for estimating value functions (e.g., Chen & Jiang (2019); Uehara et al. (2021)).
    4
      Note that L(π, g) is a square-loss functional with respect to g. Since square loss is strongly convex, FTL is
no-regret. In contrast, when optimizing an IPM, one has to use Follow-the-Regularized-Leader (FTRL) to have
the no-regret property (e.g., Sun et al. (2019); Swamy et al. (2021)), making implementation more complicated.


                                                               6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


function up to some statistical error or optimization error due to finite samples. For similar reasons,
the RL procedure (Line 4) can only find a near-optimal policy especially when the policy class is
not rich enough to capture the expert’s policy. To demonstrate that our algorithm can tolerate these
errors, we explicitly study these errors in our theoretical analysis, particually how our regret bound
scales with respect to these errors. We provide the following assumptions to formalize these errors.
Assumption 1. We have the following error bounds, corresponding respectively to Lines 1, 3 and 4
of Algorithm 1:

(a) The estimator g e is accurate up to some error ϵscore : Es∼dπe Et∼U (T ) Est ∼qt (· | s) [∥g e (st , t) −
               e
    ∇st log pπt (st )∥22 ] ≤ ϵ2score ;
(b) There exists a function Regret(K) sublinear in K such that the sequence of score function
    estimators {g (k) }K
                       k=1 has regret bounded by Regret(K):
          K
          X
                                                                                                  2

                                                           (k)
                   E        E           E              g         (st , t) − ∇st log qt (st | s)
                   π (k) t∼U (T ) st ∼qt (· | s)                                                  2
          k=1 s∼d
                   K
                   X                                             h                                   i
                                                                                                   2
           ≤ min            E         E                E          ∥g(st , t) − ∇st log qt (st | s)∥2 + Regret(K);
               g             π (k) t∼U (T ) st ∼qt (· | s)
                   k=1 s∼d


(c) There exists ϵRL > 0 such that, for all k = 1, . . . , K, the RL procedure finds an ϵRL -optimal
    policy within some function class Π: Es∼dπ(k) c(k) (s) − minπ∈Π Es∼dπ c(k) (s) ≤ ϵRL . Note
    that we do not assume π e ∈ Π.

Item (a) is a standard assumption in diffusion process and score matching (Chen et al., 2023b;a;
Lee et al., 2022). When the function class G (hypothesis space) is finite, ϵ2score typically scales at
a rate of O
          e (ln(|G|)/N ) in terms of the number of samples N . For an infinite function class, more
advanced bounds can be established (e.g., see Theorem 4.3 in Oko et al. (2023)). We emphasize
that the discretization error arising from approximating the diffusion SDE using Markov chains is
included in ϵscore as well. Item (b) is similar to Item (a) but for the sequence of score function
estimators. It can be satisfied by applying Follow-the-Leader (FTL) since the loss functional for g is
a square loss. Other no-regret algorithms, such as Follow-the-regularized-leader (FTRL) or online
gradient descent, can
                    √ also be used. Under similar conditions as in Item (a), one typically achieves
Regret(K) = O(   e K). Item (c) can be satisfied as long as an efficient RL algorithm is applied
at each iteration in Line 4. The rate of ϵRL has been well-studied in the RL p   theory literature for
various of MDPs. For instance, in tabular MDPs, one can achieve ϵRL = O(      e SA/M ) where S
is the number of states, A is the number of actions, and M is the number of RL rollout samples.
We emphasize that ϵRL in this case does not scale with H as it is defined as the upper bound on the
averaged return instead of the cumulative return over H steps.
In the theoretical analysis, we will not assume any misspecification of score functions. Specifically,
for any policy π, we assume that its score function lies in the function class G (i.e., ∇ log pπt ∈ G).
However, we allow for misspecification in the RL procedure (i.e., π e may not be in Π). This enables
us to focus more on the misspecification of the RL procedure under our defined framework.
Next, we introduce the regularity assumptions on the diffusion process, which are standard in the
literature on diffusion models.
Assumption 2. For all π, the following two conditions hold: (1) the diffusion score function
∇ log pπt is Lipschitz continuous     a finite constant for all t ∈ [0, T ], and (2) the second mo-
                                 with
ment of dπ is bounded: Es∼dπ ∥s∥22 ≤ m for some m > 0.

The first condition ensures that the score function behaves well so we can transfer the DS divergence
bound to a KL divergence bound. The second condition is needed for the exponential convergence
of the forward diffusion process (i.e., the convergence to the standard Gaussian in terms of KL
divergence). We note that the second condition is readily satisfied in certain simple cases such
as when the state space is bounded. Notably, if we disregard discretization errors, the Lipschitz
constant will not appear in our theoretical results as long as it is finite, even if it is arbitrarily large.
Similarly, the constant m only appears within logarithmic factors so it can be exponentially large.


                                                                     7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


However, when discretization errors are considered, both the Lipschitz constant and m will appear
in ϵscore and Regret(T ) (see, e.g., Chen et al. (2023b;a); Oko et al. (2023)).
Now we are ready to present our main theoretical result. Let π (1:K) denote the mixture policy
of {π (1) , . . . , π (K) }. Particularly, π (1:K) is executed by first choosing a policy π (k) uniformly at
random and then executing the chosen policy. For any policy π, we define the variance of its return
                             PH
as Varπ := Variance( h=1 c⋆ (sh )). Below is our main theoretical result with proof in Appendix C.
Theorem 1. Under Assumptions 1 and 2, Algorithm 1 achieves these instance-dependent bounds:
                                              q
                          π (1:K)    πe                     πe      π (1:K)

       (Second-order)   V         −V =O    e     min Var , Var                · ϵ + ϵH ;
                                              q
                          π (1:K)    πe                    e     (1:K)

         (First-order)  V         −V =O    e             π
                                                 min V , V     π         · ϵH + ϵH
                                   2
                                  ϵscore + ϵRL + Regret(K)/K                if π e ∈ Π,
where we define total error ϵ :=                                                        and the mis-
                                  ϵ2score + ϵRL + Regret(K)/K + ϵmis if π e ̸∈ Π,
specification ϵmis := minπ∈Π ℓ(π) where we recall that ℓ(·) is defined in Eq. 1.

Here the misspecification error ϵmis measures the minimum possible DS divergence to the pre-
trained expert score g e . We note that ϵmis is algorithmic-path independent once given g e , i.e., it does
not depend on what the algorithm does — it is a quantity that is pre-determined when the IL problem
is formalized and the expert score g e is pre-trained. If we increase the expressiveness of Π, ϵmis will
decrease. In contrast, interactive IL algorithms DAgger (Ross et al., 2011) and AggreVate(D) (Ross
& Bagnell, 2014; Sun et al., 2017), which claim to have no compounding errors, actually have
algorithmic-path dependent misspecification errors. This means their misspecification error does
not necessarily decrease and in fact can increase when one increases the capacity of Π (since it
affects the algorithm’s behavior).
It is known that the second-order bound is tighter and subsumes the first-order bound (Wang et al.,
2024c). Importantly, previous results on second-order bounds for sequential decision-making have
relied exclusively on the Maximum Likelihood Estimator (MLE) (Wang et al., 2023; 2024c; Foster
et al., 2024; Wang et al., 2024b; 2025), which in general is not computationally tractable even for
simple exponential family distributions (Pabbaraju et al., 2024). In this work, we show for the
first time that a computationally tractable alternative — diffusion score matching — can achieve
these instance-dependent bounds in the context of IRL. In particular, our second-order bounds (or
                                                           e           (1:K)                    e
the first-order bound) scale with the minimum of Varπ and Varπ               (or minimum of V π and
    (1:K)
Vπ        ). Hence, our bounds are sharper whenever one of the two is small. In contrast, bounds in
these prior RL work do not scale with the min of variances associated with the learned policies and
the comparator policy π e . This subtlety is likely due to the difference between the IRL setting and
the general RL setting instead of techniques in the analysis.
Improved sample efficiency with respect to the size of expert data. Let’s now focus on sample
complexity with respect to expert data, which is typically the most expensive data to collect in IL, to
highlight the benefits of our method over previous approaches. For conciseness, we ignore all errors
that are purely related to computation. Specifically, we set ϵRL → 0, as it only depends on the time
spent to run the RL procedure, let the number of iterations K → ∞ so Regret(K)/K → 0, and as-
sume π e ∈ Π. Under these conditions, our bound solely depends on ϵscore . For simplicity, we further
assume a finite score function class G, neglect misspecification errors (i.e., ∇ log pπt (x) ∈ G for all
π), and assume the magnitude of the score loss is O(1).
                                                   p      Now standard regression analysis (Agarwal
et al., 2019; Oko et al., 2023) yields ϵscore = O( log(|G|)/N ) where N is the number of expert
samples. Plugging this back into our second-order bound, we obtain
            K
                                     r                                                       !
          1 X π(k)         πe                    πe      π (1:K)
                                                                   log(|G|) H · log(|G|)
                V      −V =O           min Var , Var              ·         +                  .
         K                                                            N             N
           k=1
                                                                                              e
When the expert’s cost or the learned policy’s cost has low variance, i.e., Varπ → 0 or
     (1:K)
Varπ       → 0, our bound simplifies to O(H · log(|G|)/N ). This shows a significant improvement
over prior sample complexity bounds for IRL with general function approximation, which are


                                                     8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025



             p
typically O(H log(|G|)/N ) (e.g., IPM-based methods (Kidambi et al., 2021; Chang et al., 2021)).
This demonstrates the benefit of using diffusion processes and score matching over IPMs.
In addition to the sample benefit above, we show our approach can require less expressive function
approximators than discriminator-based methods. Please refer to Appendix A for more details.

6     E XPERIMENTS
We evaluate our method, SMILING, on a set of continuous control tasks from the Deepmind Control
Suite (Tassa et al., 2018) and HumanoidBench (Sferrazza et al., 2024). These tasks vary in difficulty,
as summarized in Table 1 of Appendix D. While we will compare to multiple baselines including
non-adversarial baselines, we focus on testing our hypothesis that score-matching based approach
should outperform f -divergence-based approach. Additional results and details are in Appendix D.
Baselines. We include Discriminator Actor-Critic (DAC), IQ-Learn, DiffAIL, and Behavior Cloning
(BC) as baselines. Our DAC implementation is based on the original design by Kostrikov et al.
(2019) that uses JS-divergence GAN-style objective. We use the official implementation of IQ-
Learn. We tried several configurations provided in their implementation for the MuJoCo tasks and
reported the best one. DiffAIL also follows official implementation. The BC performance is reported
as the maximum episode reward obtained across all checkpoints during training. We found MLE
outperforms squared loss for BC, so all BC results below use MLE.
Diffusion Models. We employ the Denoising Diffusion Probabilistic Model (DDPM) as the diffu-
sion model. The score function is modeled via an MLP with one hidden layer of 256 units, and we
use the same architecture for the discriminator in DAC. The diffusion process is discretized into 5K
steps and we use a learnable time embedding of 16 dimensions. We approximate the cost function
(Eq. 3) via empirical mean using 500 samples. Since the scale of the score matching loss (and con-
sequently our cost function) is sensitive to the data scale (in this context, the scale of state vector),
we normalize the cost of each batch to have zero mean and a standard deviation of 0.1.
RL Solvers. For DMC tasks, we use Soft Actor-Critic (SAC) (Haarnoja et al., 2018) as the RL solver
for both DAC and our method, based on the implementation provided by Yarats & Kostrikov (2020).
For HumanoidBench tasks, we adopt DreamerV3 (Hafner et al., 2023) using the implementation
from the HumanoidBench repository (Sferrazza et al., 2024). Additionally, we maintain a separate
“state buffer” that operates the same as the replay buffer but only stores states. This buffer is used to
sample states to update the score function in our method and the discriminator in DAC.
Overall, we keep the implementation of SMILING and the baseline DAC as close as possible
(e.g., using the same RL solver) so they only differ in objective functions (i.e., SMILING learns
score functions while DAC learns discriminators to approximate JS divergence). This allows us to
show the benefits of our score-matching approach to the discriminator-based GAN-style ones.
Expert Policy and Demonstrations. We use the aforementioned RL solvers to train expert policies
and collect demonstrations by running the expert policy for five episodes. Each task has a fixed
1K-step horizon without early termination, and thus the resulting dataset has 5K steps per task.

6.1   L EARNING FROM S TATE - ONLY D EMONSTRATIONS

Figure 2 illustrates the results across six control tasks when the expert demonstrations are state-only.
We trained for 0.4M steps on Ball-in-cup-catch and for 3M steps on all other tasks. Our method
matches expert performance and outperforms all baselines on five of them. Specifically, our method
outperforms all baselines by a large margin on four. For humanoid-sit, while none achieves expert
performance, ours converges the fastest. For cheetah-run, although DAC initially shows faster
convergence, it becomes unstable soon and oscillates significantly after 2M steps; in contrast, our
algorithm remains much more stable and surpasses DAC in 3M steps. Notably, we observed DiffAIL
collapses at the beginning of training on all four humanoid tasks due to numerical issues (neural
network weights diverging to infinity). Hence, we were unable to report the those results. Also
note that, in the plot, we include BC as a reference though it is not directly comparable since it uses
state-action demonstrations. Here BC serves as a performance upper bound for Behavioral Cloning
from Observation (BCO) (Torabi et al., 2018), which infers the expert’s actions from state-only data
before training. Nevertheless, we observe that both our method and DAC consistently outperform


                                                   9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025



                                  Ball in Cup Catch                     Cheetah Run                   Humanoid Walk
                       1.00


    V π (normalized)
                       0.75

                       0.50

                       0.25

                       0.00
                              0   1         2         3     4    0       1           2     3    0       1           2      3
                                          Steps           ×105               Steps       ×106               Steps        ×106
                                   Humanoid Sit                        Humanoid Crawl                 Humanoid Pole
                       1.00
    V π (normalized)


                       0.75

                       0.50

                       0.25

                       0.00
                              0       1           2         3    0       1           2     3    0       1           2      3
                                          Steps           ×106               Steps       ×106               Steps        ×106
                                   SMILING (ours)                DAC          IQ-Learn      DiffAIL         πe          BC

Figure 2: Learning curves for learning from state-only data across five random seeds. The x-axis
corresponds to the number of environment steps (also the number of policy updates). The y-axis
is normalized such that the expert performance is one and the random policy is zero. Our method
clearly outperforms all baselines in five tasks out of six.

BC (and thus, BCO). We provide video demos of SMILING and DAC on the humanoid-crawl and
humanoid-pole tasks in Figure 3 to give a clear visual comparison of their performance differences.

6.2                     A DDITIONAL R ESULTS

Learning from State-Action Demonstrations. Our method can be easily extended to learning from
state-action demonstrations by appending the action vector to the state vector for both training and
computing rewards. Hence, we also explore its performance in this setting. The results are consistent
with the state-only setting and can be found in Appendix D.1.
Number of Expert Demonstrations. We also investigate the impact of the number of expert demon-
strations on the performance of our method and baselines in order to support our theoretical results
in Section 5. The results can be found in Appendix D.2 and show that our method is clearly more
sample-efficient and performs well when the number of expert demonstrations is small.
Expressive of Diffusion Models. In Appendix A, we argued that score matching is more expres-
sive than discriminator-based methods, which may explain why our approach generally outperforms
DAC. To support it, we conducted an ablation study on the cheetah-run task where ours converged
slower than DAC previously. We removed the activation functions in both the discriminator of DAC
and the score function of our method to make them purely linear. We found that DAC’s performance
degrades notably while our method remains more effective and outperforms DAC clearly. Detailed
results are in Appendix D.3. This reinforces our claim about the expressiveness of score matching.

7                      C ONCLUSION
We propose a new IL framework, Score-Matching Imitation Learning (SMILING), that leverages the
diffusion score function to learn from expert demonstrations. Unlike previous methods, SMILING is
not formulated from any f -divergence or IPM perspective. Instead, it directly matches the score of
the learned policy to that of the expert. Theoretically, we show that score function is more expressive
than learning a discriminator on f -divergence. Additionally, our method achieves first- and second-
order bounds in sample complexity, which are instance-dependent and tighter than previous results.
In practice, our method outperforms existing algorithms on a set of continuous control tasks.


                                                                         10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
GKS was supported in part by a STTR grant. WS acknowledges support from NSF IIS-2154711,
NSF CAREER 2339395, and DARPA LANCER: LeArning Network CybERagents. This work has
been made possible in part by a gift from the Chan Zuckerberg Initiative Foundation to establish the
Kempner Institute for the Study of Natural and Artificial Intelligence.

R EFERENCES
Pieter Abbeel and Andrew Y Ng. Apprenticeship learning via inverse reinforcement learning. In
  Proceedings of the twenty-first international conference on Machine learning, pp. 1, 2004.
Alekh Agarwal, Nan Jiang, Sham M Kakade, and Wen Sun. Reinforcement learning: Theory and
  algorithms. CS Dept., UW Seattle, Seattle, WA, USA, Tech. Rep, 32:96, 2019.
Anurag Ajay, Yilun Du, Abhi Gupta, Joshua B Tenenbaum, Tommi S Jaakkola, and Pulkit Agrawal.
  Is conditional generative modeling all you need for decision making? In The Eleventh Interna-
  tional Conference on Learning Representations, 2022.
Firas Al-Hafez, Davide Tateo, Oleg Arenz, Guoping Zhao, and Jan Peters. Ls-iq: Implicit reward
  regularization for inverse reinforcement learning. In ICLR, 2023.
Brian DO Anderson. Reverse-time diffusion equation models. Stochastic Processes and their Ap-
  plications, 12(3):313–326, 1982.
Martin Arjovsky and Leon Bottou. Towards principled methods for training generative adversarial
 networks. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2017. URL https://
 openreview.net/forum?id=Hk4_qw5xe.
Paul Barde, Julien Roy, Wonseok Jeon, Joelle Pineau, Chris Pal, and Derek Nowrouzezahrai. Adver-
  sarial soft advantage fitting: Imitation learning without policy optimization. Advances in Neural
  Information Processing Systems, 33:12334–12344, 2020.
Matt Barnes, Matthew Abueg, Oliver F Lange, Matt Deeds, Jason Trader, Denali Molitor, Markus
 Wulfmeier, and Shawn O’Banion. Massively scalable inverse reinforcement learning in google
 maps. In The Twelfth International Conference on Learning Representations, 2023.
Adam Block, Ali Jadbabaie, Daniel Pfrommer, Max Simchowitz, and Russ Tedrake. Provable guar-
  antees for generative behavior cloning: Bridging low-level stability and high-level behavior. Ad-
  vances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 36:48534–48547, 2023.
Kiante Brantley, Wen Sun, and Mikael Henaff. Disagreement-regularized imitation learning. In
  International Conference on Learning Representations, 2019.
Jonathan Chang, Masatoshi Uehara, Dhruv Sreenivas, Rahul Kidambi, and Wen Sun. Mitigating
  covariate shift in imitation learning via offline data with partial coverage. Advances in Neural
  Information Processing Systems, 34:965–979, 2021.
Jonathan Daniel Chang, Dhruv Sreenivas, Yingbing Huang, Kianté Brantley, and Wen Sun. Ad-
  versarial imitation learning via boosting. In The Twelfth International Conference on Learning
  Representations, 2024.
Hongrui Chen, Holden Lee, and Jianfeng Lu. Improved analysis of score-based generative modeling:
  User-friendly bounds under minimal smoothness assumptions. In International Conference on
  Machine Learning, pp. 4735–4763. PMLR, 2023a.
Jinglin Chen and Nan Jiang. Information-theoretic considerations in batch reinforcement learning.
   In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 1042–1051. PMLR, 2019.
Shang-Fu Chen, Hsiang-Chun Wang, Ming-Hao Hsu, Chun-Mao Lai, and Shao-Hua Sun. Diffusion
  model-augmented behavioral cloning. In Proceedings of the 41st International Conference on
  Machine Learning, pp. 7486–7510, 2024.


                                                11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Sitan Chen, Sinho Chewi, Jerry Li, Yuanzhi Li, Adil Salim, and Anru R Zhang. Sampling is as easy
   as learning the score: theory for diffusion models with minimal data assumptions. In International
   Conference on Learning Representations, 2023b.

Cheng Chi, Zhenjia Xu, Siyuan Feng, Eric Cousineau, Yilun Du, Benjamin Burchfiel, Russ Tedrake,
  and Shuran Song. Diffusion policy: Visuomotor policy learning via action diffusion. The Inter-
  national Journal of Robotics Research, pp. 02783649241273668, 2023.

Robert Dadashi, Léonard Hussenot, Matthieu Geist, and Olivier Pietquin. Primal wasserstein imita-
  tion learning. In ICLR 2021-Ninth International Conference on Learning Representations, 2021.

Chelsea Finn, Paul Christiano, Pieter Abbeel, and Sergey Levine. A connection between generative
  adversarial networks, inverse reinforcement learning, and energy-based models. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1611.03852, 2016.

Dylan J Foster, Adam Block, and Dipendra Misra. Is behavior cloning all you need? understanding
  horizon in imitation learning. In The Thirty-eighth Annual Conference on Neural Information
  Processing Systems, 2024.

Justin Fu, Katie Luo, and Sergey Levine. Learning robust rewards with adversarial inverse rein-
  forcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1710.11248, 2017.

Divyansh Garg, Shuvam Chakraborty, Chris Cundy, Jiaming Song, and Stefano Ermon. Iq-learn:
  Inverse soft-q learning for imitation. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 34:
  4028–4039, 2021.

Seyed Kamyar Seyed Ghasemipour, Richard Zemel, and Shixiang Gu. A divergence minimization
  perspective on imitation learning methods. In Conference on robot learning, pp. 1259–1277.
  PMLR, 2020.

Ian Goodfellow, Jean Pouget-Abadie, Mehdi Mirza, Bing Xu, David Warde-Farley, Sherjil Ozair,
  Aaron Courville, and Yoshua Bengio. Generative adversarial networks. Communications of the
  ACM, 63(11):139–144, 2020.

Tuomas Haarnoja, Aurick Zhou, Pieter Abbeel, and Sergey Levine. Soft actor-critic: Off-policy
  maximum entropy deep reinforcement learning with a stochastic actor. In International confer-
  ence on machine learning, pp. 1861–1870. PMLR, 2018.

Danijar Hafner, Jurgis Pasukonis, Jimmy Ba, and Timothy Lillicrap. Mastering diverse domains
  through world models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2301.04104, 2023.

Jonathan Ho and Stefano Ermon. Generative adversarial imitation learning. Advances in neural
  information processing systems, 29, 2016.

Jonathan Ho, Ajay Jain, and Pieter Abbeel. Denoising diffusion probabilistic models. Advances in
  neural information processing systems, 33:6840–6851, 2020.

Bo-Ruei Huang, Chun-Kai Yang, Chun-Mao Lai, Dai-Jie Wu, and Shao-Hua Sun. Diffusion imita-
  tion from observation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2410.05429, 2024.

Arnav Kumar Jain, Harley Wiltzer, Jesse Farebrother, Irina Rish, Glen Berseth, and Sanjiban Choud-
  hury. Revisiting successor features for inverse reinforcement learning. In ICML 2024 Workshop
  on Models of Human Feedback for AI Alignment, 2024.

Michael Janner, Yilun Du, Joshua B Tenenbaum, and Sergey Levine. Planning with diffusion for
 flexible behavior synthesis. arXiv preprint arXiv:2205.09991, 2022.

Oliver Johnson. Information theory and the central limit theorem. World Scientific, 2004.

Ioannis Karatzas and Steven Shreve.      Brownian motion and stochastic calculus, volume 113.
  springer, 2014.


                                                 12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Liyiming Ke, Sanjiban Choudhury, Matt Barnes, Wen Sun, Gilwoo Lee, and Siddhartha Srinivasa.
  Imitation learning as f-divergence minimization. In Algorithmic Foundations of Robotics XIV:
  Proceedings of the Fourteenth Workshop on the Algorithmic Foundations of Robotics 14, pp.
  313–329. Springer, 2021.
Rahul Kidambi, Jonathan Chang, and Wen Sun. Mobile: Model-based imitation learning from
  observation alone. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 34:28598–28611, 2021.
Zhifeng Kong, Wei Ping, Jiaji Huang, Kexin Zhao, and Bryan Catanzaro. Diffwave: A versatile
  diffusion model for audio synthesis. In International Conference on Learning Representations,
  2021.
Ilya Kostrikov, Kumar Krishna Agrawal, Debidatta Dwibedi, Sergey Levine, and Jonathan Tomp-
   son. Discriminator-actor-critic: Addressing sample inefficiency and reward bias in adversarial
   imitation learning. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2019.
Chun-Mao Lai, Hsiang-Chun Wang, Ping-Chun Hsieh, Yu-Chiang Frank Wang, Min-Hung
  Chen, and Shao-Hua Sun. Diffusion-reward adversarial imitation learning. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2405.16194, 2024.
Holden Lee, Jianfeng Lu, and Yixin Tan. Convergence for score-based generative modeling with
  polynomial complexity. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 35:22870–22882,
  2022.
Minghuan Liu, Tairan He, Minkai Xu, and Weinan Zhang. Energy-based imitation learning. In Pro-
 ceedings of the 20th International Conference on Autonomous Agents and MultiAgent Systems,
 pp. 809–817, 2021.
Takeru Miyato, Toshiki Kataoka, Masanori Koyama, and Yuichi Yoshida. Spectral normalization
  for generative adversarial networks. In International Conference on Learning Representations,
  2018.
Alfred Müller. Integral probability metrics and their generating classes of functions. Advances in
  applied probability, 29(2):429–443, 1997.
Tianwei Ni, Harshit Sikchi, Yufei Wang, Tejus Gupta, Lisa Lee, and Ben Eysenbach. f-irl: Inverse
  reinforcement learning via state marginal matching. In Conference on Robot Learning, pp. 529–
  551. PMLR, 2021.
Felipe Nuti, Tim Franzmeyer, and João F Henriques. Extracting reward functions from diffusion
  models. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 36, 2024.
Kazusato Oko, Shunta Akiyama, and Taiji Suzuki. Diffusion models are minimax optimal distri-
  bution estimators. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 26517–26582. PMLR,
  2023.
Takayuki Osa, Joni Pajarinen, Gerhard Neumann, J Andrew Bagnell, Pieter Abbeel, Jan Peters, et al.
  An algorithmic perspective on imitation learning. Foundations and Trends® in Robotics, 7(1-2):
  1–179, 2018.
Chirag Pabbaraju, Dhruv Rohatgi, Anish Prasad Sevekari, Holden Lee, Ankur Moitra, and Andrej
  Risteski. Provable benefits of score matching. Advances in Neural Information Processing Sys-
  tems, 36, 2024.
Tim Pearce, Tabish Rashid, Anssi Kanervisto, Dave Bignell, Mingfei Sun, Raluca Georgescu, Ser-
  gio Valcarcel Macua, Shan Zheng Tan, Ida Momennejad, Katja Hofmann, et al. Imitating human
  behaviour with diffusion models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2301.10677, 2023.
Dean A Pomerleau. Alvinn: An autonomous land vehicle in a neural network. Advances in neural
  information processing systems, 1, 1988.
Aditya Ramesh, Prafulla Dhariwal, Alex Nichol, Casey Chu, and Mark Chen. Hierarchical text-
  conditional image generation with clip latents. arXiv preprint arXiv:2204.06125, 1(2):3, 2022.


                                               13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Nathan D Ratliff, J Andrew Bagnell, and Martin A Zinkevich. Maximum margin planning. In
  Proceedings of the 23rd international conference on Machine learning, pp. 729–736, 2006.
Siddharth Reddy, Anca D Dragan, and Sergey Levine. Sqil: Imitation learning via reinforcement
  learning with sparse rewards. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2020.
Juntao Ren, Gokul Swamy, Zhiwei Steven Wu, J Andrew Bagnell, and Sanjiban Choudhury. Hybrid
  inverse reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.08848, 2024.
Robin Rombach, Andreas Blattmann, Dominik Lorenz, Patrick Esser, and Björn Ommer. High-
  resolution image synthesis with latent diffusion models. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF confer-
  ence on computer vision and pattern recognition, pp. 10684–10695, 2022.
Stephane Ross and J Andrew Bagnell. Reinforcement and imitation learning via interactive no-regret
  learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1406.5979, 2014.
Stéphane Ross, Geoffrey Gordon, and Drew Bagnell. A reduction of imitation learning and struc-
  tured prediction to no-regret online learning. In Proceedings of the fourteenth international con-
  ference on artificial intelligence and statistics, pp. 627–635. JMLR Workshop and Conference
  Proceedings, 2011.
Silvia Sapora, Gokul Swamy, Chris Lu, Yee Whye Teh, and Jakob Nicolaus Foerster. Evil: Evolution
   strategies for generalisable imitation learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.11905, 2024.
Carmelo Sferrazza, Dun-Ming Huang, Xingyu Lin, Youngwoon Lee, and Pieter Abbeel. Humanoid-
  bench: Simulated humanoid benchmark for whole-body locomotion and manipulation. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2403.10506, 2024.
Shai Shalev-Shwartz et al. Online learning and online convex optimization. Foundations and
  Trends® in Machine Learning, 4(2):107–194, 2012.
H Sikchi, A Zhang, and S Niekum. Dual rl: Unification and new methods for reinforcement and
  imitation learning. In International Conference on Learning Representations. International Con-
  ference on Learning Representations, 2024a.
Harshit Sikchi, Caleb Chuck, Amy Zhang, and Scott Niekum. A dual approach to imitation learning
  from observations with offline datasets. In 8th Annual Conference on Robot Learning, 2024b.
Yang Song and Stefano Ermon. Generative modeling by estimating gradients of the data distribution.
  Advances in neural information processing systems, 32, 2019.
Yang Song, Jascha Sohl-Dickstein, Diederik P Kingma, Abhishek Kumar, Stefano Ermon, and Ben
  Poole. Score-based generative modeling through stochastic differential equations. In Interna-
  tional Conference on Learning Representations, 2021.
Yuda Song, Drew Bagnell, and Aarti Singh. Hybrid reinforcement learning from offline observation
  alone. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 46019–46049. PMLR, 2024.
Wen Sun, Arun Venkatraman, Geoffrey J Gordon, Byron Boots, and J Andrew Bagnell. Deeply ag-
 grevated: Differentiable imitation learning for sequential prediction. In International conference
 on machine learning, pp. 3309–3318. PMLR, 2017.
Wen Sun, Anirudh Vemula, Byron Boots, and Drew Bagnell. Provably efficient imitation learning
 from observation alone. In International conference on machine learning, pp. 6036–6045. PMLR,
 2019.
Gokul Swamy, Sanjiban Choudhury, J Andrew Bagnell, and Steven Wu. Of moments and match-
  ing: A game-theoretic framework for closing the imitation gap. In International Conference on
  Machine Learning, pp. 10022–10032. PMLR, 2021.
Gokul Swamy, David Wu, Sanjiban Choudhury, Drew Bagnell, and Steven Wu. Inverse reinforce-
  ment learning without reinforcement learning. In International Conference on Machine Learning,
  pp. 33299–33318. PMLR, 2023.


                                                14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Yuval Tassa, Yotam Doron, Alistair Muldal, Tom Erez, Yazhe Li, Diego de Las Casas, David Bud-
  den, Abbas Abdolmaleki, Josh Merel, Andrew Lefrancq, et al. Deepmind control suite. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:1801.00690, 2018.
Octo Model Team, Dibya Ghosh, Homer Walke, Karl Pertsch, Kevin Black, Oier Mees, Sudeep
  Dasari, Joey Hejna, Tobias Kreiman, Charles Xu, et al. Octo: An open-source generalist robot
  policy. arXiv preprint arXiv:2405.12213, 2024.
Flemming Topsoe. Some inequalities for information divergence and related measures of discrimi-
  nation. IEEE Transactions on information theory, 46(4):1602–1609, 2000.
Faraz Torabi, Garrett Warnell, and Peter Stone. Behavioral cloning from observation. In Proceedings
  of the Twenty-Seventh International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence. International Joint
  Conferences on Artificial Intelligence Organization, 2018.
Masatoshi Uehara, Masaaki Imaizumi, Nan Jiang, Nathan Kallus, Wen Sun, and Tengyang Xie.
 Finite sample analysis of minimax offline reinforcement learning: Completeness, fast rates and
 first-order efficiency. arXiv preprint arXiv:2102.02981, 2021.
Bingzheng Wang, Guoqiang Wu, Teng Pang, Yan Zhang, and Yilong Yin. Diffail: Diffusion ad-
  versarial imitation learning. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence,
  volume 38, pp. 15447–15455, 2024a.
Kaiwen Wang, Kevin Zhou, Runzhe Wu, Nathan Kallus, and Wen Sun. The benefits of being
  distributional: Small-loss bounds for reinforcement learning. Advances in Neural Information
  Processing Systems, 36, 2023.
Kaiwen Wang, Nathan Kallus, and Wen Sun. The central role of the loss function in reinforcement
  learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2409.12799, 2024b.
Kaiwen Wang, Owen Oertell, Alekh Agarwal, Nathan Kallus, and Wen Sun. More benefits of
  being distributional: second-order bounds for reinforcement learning. In Proceedings of the 41st
  International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 51192–51213, 2024c.
Zhiyong Wang, Dongruo Zhou, John CS Lui, and Wen Sun. Model-based rl as a minimalist approach
  to horizon-free and second-order bounds. In The Thirteenth International Conference on Learning
  Representations, 2025.
Markus Wulfmeier, Michael Bloesch, Nino Vieillard, Arun Ahuja, Jorg Bornschein, Sandy Huang,
 Artem Sokolov, Matt Barnes, Guillaume Desjardins, Alex Bewley, et al. Imitating language via
 scalable inverse reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2409.01369, 2024.
Denis Yarats and Ilya Kostrikov. Soft actor-critic (sac) implementation in pytorch. https://
  github.com/denisyarats/pytorch_sac, 2020.
Xin Zhang, Yanhua Li, Ziming Zhang, and Zhi-Li Zhang. f-gail: Learning f-divergence for gen-
  erative adversarial imitation learning. Advances in neural information processing systems, 33:
  12805–12815, 2020.
Brian D Ziebart, Andrew L Maas, J Andrew Bagnell, Anind K Dey, et al. Maximum entropy inverse
  reinforcement learning. In Aaai, volume 8, pp. 1433–1438. Chicago, IL, USA, 2008.


                                                 15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A    C OMPARISON TO D ISCRIMINATOR - BASED ( F - DIVERGENCE AND IPM)
     M ETHODS

In this section, we compare DS divergence with f -divergence, particularly its discriminator-based
approximation (the key metric used by IL algorithms such as GAIL and DAC):

                          max E log f (s) + E log(1 − f (s))
                             f ∈F   s∼p                 s∼q


where F ⊆ (0, 1)S is a restricted function class. It is known that the above is a lower bound of the
Jensen-Shannon (JS) divergence between p and q. In particular, when p/(p + q) ∈ F, it is exactly
equal to the JS divergence. However, representing p/(p + q) may be challenging. Below we show
why score-matching is more preferred than discriminator-based f -divergence via the example of
exponential family distributions,

On the expressiveness of score functions and discriminators. Consider the distributions p
and q to be from the exponential family, p(s) = exp(wT ϕ(s))/Zp (and similar for q), where
ϕ is a quadratic feature map, and Zp is the partition function. In this case, the score function
∇s log p(s) = ∇s ϕ(s) is simply linear in s. In contrast, the optimal discriminator for JS divergence
of p and q has the form of p/(p+q), which is inherently nonlinear and cannot be captured by a linear
function on s. As a result, if we use linear functions to model discriminators, the discriminator-based
objective cannot even faithfully serve as a tight lower bound for the JS divergence. Thus minimizing
a loose lower bound of the JS-divergence does not imply minimizing the JS-divergence itself.
Now consider integral probability metric (IPM), i.e., maxf ∈F (Es∼q f (s) − Es∼p f (s)). When p
and q are from the exponential family, to perfectly distinguish q and p, one needs to design a discrim-
inator in the form of θ⊤ ϕ(x) since ϕ is the sufficient statistics of the exponential family distribution.
In our example, ϕ is a quadratic feature mapping, meaning that we need a non-linear discriminator
for IPM as well.
Hence, score matching only needs relatively weaker score function class to represent complicated
distributions to control certain powerful divergence including KL divergence and Hellinger distance.
However, for f -divergence-based or IPM-based methods, we need a more expressive discriminator
function class to make them serve as a tight lower bound of the divergences. This perhaps explains
why in practice for generative models, score matching based approach in general outperforms more
traditional GAN based approach. In our experiment, we conduct an ablation study in Appendix D.3
to compare our approach to a GAN-based baseline under linear function approximation for score
functions and discriminators, and we show that SMILING can still learn well even when the score
functions are linear with respect to the state s.

Can f -divergence or IPM-based approaches achieve second-order bounds? Wang et al.
(2024b) has demonstrated that simply matching expectations (first moment) is insufficient to achieve
second-order bounds in a simpler supervised learning setting. Mapping this to the IL setting, if the
true cost is linear in feature ϕ(s), i.e., c⋆ (s) = θ⋆ ·ϕ(s), and we design discriminator g(s) = θ⊤ ϕ(s),
then IL algorithm that learns a policy π to only match policy’s expected feature Es∼π ϕ(s) to the
expert’s Es∼πe ϕ(s) cannot achieve a second-order regret bound. For f-divergence such as JS-
divergence, unless the discriminator class is rich enough to include the optimal discriminator, the
discriminator-based objective is only a loose lower bound of the true f -divergence. On the other
hand, making the discriminator class rich enough to capture the optimal discriminator can increase
both statistical and computational complexity for optimizing the discriminator. Taking the exponen-
tial family distribution as an example again, there the optimal discriminator relies on the partition
functions Zq and Zp which can make optimization intractable (Pabbaraju et al., 2024).


B    E RROR A NALYSIS OF O BJECTIVE

In this section, we show the following two things: (1) why directly replacing the diffusion score
function of π with an estimator g π in ℓ(π) (Eq. 1) incurs large error; (2) why the error is small in
our derived objective ℓ(π).
                      b


                                                   16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


On the one hand, replacing the score function of π with g π incurs the following error:
                        h                                                                  i
                                                   2                                     2
    E    E        E      ∥g e (st , t) − g π (st )∥2 − ∥g e (st , t) − ∇st log pπt (st )∥2
    s∼dπ t∼U (T ) st ∼qt (· | s)
                                     h                                                                                   i
    = E          E          E            (∇st log pπt (st ) − g π (st )) (2g e (st , t) − g π (st ) − ∇st log pπt (st )) .
        π
       s∼d t∼U (T ) st ∼qt (· | s)       |            {z               }|                       {z                     }
                                                       (a)                                    (b)

Here the scale of term (a) is bounded by the statistical error from score matching. However, the scale
of term (b) is unbounded since g e can arbitrarily deviate from both g π and ∇st log pπt (st ). Hence,
the error is potentially unbounded.
On the other hand, our derived objective is bounded. To see this, we note that our objective incur
the following error:
                       h                                                                                i
                                                                 2                                    2
    E     E       E     ∥∇st log pπt (st ) − ∇st log qt (st | s)∥2 − ∥g π (st ) − ∇st log qt (st | s)∥2
  s∼dπ t∼U (T ) st ∼qt (· | s)
                                     h                                 i
                                                                     2
    = E         E          E          ∥∇st log pπt (st ) − g π (st )∥2 .
        π
       s∼d t∼U (T ) st ∼qt (· | s)

Here the equality is by Lemma 4. We observe that it is exactly bounded by the statistical error from
score matching.

C      P ROOF OF T HEOREM 1
C.1      S UPPORTING L EMMAS

The following lemma is from Wang et al. (2024c) and the fact that triangular discrimination is equiv-
                                                                             2            2
alent to the squared Hellinger distance up to a multiplicative constant: 2DH   ≤ D△ ≤ 4DH   (Topsoe,
2000).
Lemma 1. (Wang et al., 2024c, Lemma 4.3) For two distributions p, q ∈ [0, 1] over some random
variable, denote their respective means by p and q. Then, it holds that
                                        q
                            |p − q| ≤ 8 Var(p)DH     2 (p, q) + 20D 2 (p, q)
                                                                    H

                                             2
                                                              p         p
                                                (p, q) := ( p(x) − q(x))2 dx/2 is the squared
                                                           R
where Var(·) denotes the variance, and DH
Hellinger distance.

The following lemma is adapted from some known results from diffusion processes and score match-
ing. It shows that as long as the DS divergence (Definition 1) is small, the Hellinger distance is also
small under some mild conditions. Similar results can be found in some theoretical papers on diffu-
sion models such as Chen et al. (2023b); Oko et al. (2023).
Lemma 2. Let P ∈ ∆(Rd ) and g ∈ Rd × [0, T ] → Rd . Define Q ∈ ∆(Rd ) as the distribution
obtained through the reverse process of diffusion starting from N (0, I) by treating g as the “score
function” of the process. Specifically, Q is the distribution of zT of the following SDE:
                                                         √
                       dzt =(zt + 2g(zt , T − t)) dt + 2 dBt , z0 ∼ N (0, I).
We assume the following:

       (a) For all t ≥ 0, the score ∇ log Pt is Lipschitz continuous with finite constant;
                                                                     2
       (b) The second moment of P is upper bounded: Ex∼P ∥x∥2 ≤ m for some m > 0.

Then, if
                                                       h                                i
                                                                                      2
                           E         E          E       ∥g(xt , t) − ∇xt log Pt (xt )∥2 ≤ ϵ2 ,
                         x∼P t∼U (T ) xt ∼qt (· | x)

for some ϵ > 0, we have
                                      2
                                        (P, Q) = O T ϵ2 + (m + d) exp(−T ) .

                                     DH


                                                               17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Proof of Lemma 2. We consider the following three stochastic processes specified by SDEs:
                                                               √
                      dxt =(xt + 2∇ log PT −t (xt )) dt + 2 dBt , x0 ∼ PT ;
                                                           √
                      dyt =(yt + 2g(yt , T − t)) dt + 2 dBt , y0 ∼ PT ;
                                                           √
                      dzt =(zt + 2g(zt , T − t)) dt + 2 dBt , z0 ∼ N (0, I).
To clarify the notation: the variables xt , yt , zt above are defined in the reverse time order, whereas
in the lemma statement, x follow forward time order.
By triangle inequality for Hellinger distance:
                      2           2
                                                                                         2
                     DH (P, Q) = DH (xT , zT ) ≤ DH (xT , yT ) + DH (yT , zT )
                                 2                  2
                            ≤ 2DH  (xT , yT ) + 2DH   (yT , zT ).
We will bound the two terms separately. Since the squared Hellinger distance is upper bounded by
                      2
KL divergence (i.e., DH ≤ DKL ), we seek to establish the KL divergence bounds instead.
First, by Item (a) and Girsanov’s Theorem (Karatzas & Shreve, 2014) (also see, e.g., Chen et al.
(2023b); Oko et al. (2023)), we have

                                                                                   2
  2
                                                                                       = O T ϵ2 .

DH  (xT , yT ) ≤ DKL (xT ∥ yT ) = O T · E        ∇ log PT −t (xt ) − g(xt , T − t)
                                               t∼U (T )                                       2

Next, by Item (b) and the convergence of OU process (e.g., Lemma 9 in Chen et al. (2023a)), we
have:

                         DKL (PT ∥ N (0, I)) = O (m + d) · exp(−T ) .
By data-processing inequality for f -divergence, we have
                               2                2
                            DH   (yT , zT ) ≤ DH  (PT , N (0, I))
                                            ≤ DKL (PT ∥ N (0, I))

                                            = O (m + d) · exp(−T ) .
Plugging them back, we complete the proof.

The following lemmas are standard results from diffusion processes and score matching. We show
them here for completeness.
Lemma 3. Given any g, we have
            D                            E                  D                                E
         E    g(xt , t), ∇xt log qt (xt ) = E       E        g(xt , t), ∇xt log qt (xt | x0 )
       xt ∼pt                                  x0 ∼p0 xt ∼pt (xt | x0 )

where ⟨·, ·⟩ denotes the inner product.

Proof of Lemma 3. It basically follows from integration by parts. We start from the left-hand side
(LHS):
            Z
    LHS =       g(xt , t) · ∇xt log pt (xt ) · pt (xt ) dxt
             xt
            Z
          =     g(xt , t) · ∇xt pt (xt ) dxt
             xt
                Z
          =0−        ∇xt · g(xt , t) · pt (xt ) dxt                                      (integration by parts)
                  xt
              Z Z
          =−            ∇xt · g(xt , t) · pt (xt | x0 ) · p0 (x0 ) dxt dx0
                x0 xt
                Z Z
          =0+             g(xt , t) · ∇xt pt (xt | x0 ) · p0 (x0 ) dxt dx0         (integration by parts again)
                  x0 xt
            Z Z
          =          g(xt , t) · ∇xt log pt (xt | x0 ) · pt (xt | x0 ) · p0 (x0 ) dxt dx0
                x0   xt
         = RHS.
Hence, the lemma is proved.


                                                      18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Lemma 4. Given any g, we have
                                                         2                                                                        2
          E      g(xt , t) − ∇xt log pt (xt )                −               E               g(xt , t) − ∇xt log pt (xt | x0 )
      xt ∼pt                                             2       x0 ∼p0 ,xt ∼pt (xt | x0 )                                        2
                                             2                                               2
               = E ∇xt log pt (xt )              − E              ∇xt log pt (xt | x0 )
                  xt                         2       x0 ,xt                                  2

where we note that the right-hand side of the equation is independent of g.

Proof of Lemma 4. We prove the lemma by expanding the first term on the left-hand side:
                                                     2
      E       g(xt , t) − ∇xt log pt (xt )
  xt ∼pt                                             2
                           D 2                         E                      2
  = E g(xt , t) − 2 E       g(xt , t), ∇xt log pt (xt ) + E ∇xt log pt (xt )
   xt ∼pt       2   xt ∼pt                                 xt ∼pt             2
               2          D                              E                   2
  = E g(xt , t) − 2 E g(xt , t), ∇xt log pt (xt | x0 ) + E ∇xt log pt (xt )     (Lemma 3)
   x0 ,xt      2   x0 ,xt                                      xt            2
               2          D                              E                         2
  = E g(xt , t) − 2 E g(xt , t), ∇xt log pt (xt | x0 ) + E ∇xt log pt (xt | x0 )
      x0 ,xt                2       x0 ,xt                                                       x0 ,xt                       2
                                                     2                                   2
          − E           ∇xt log pt (xt | x0 )            + E ∇xt log pt (xt )
               x0 ,xt                                2       xt                          2
                                                                 2                                        2                            2
  = E            g(xt , t) − ∇xt log pt (xt | x0 )                   − E         ∇xt log pt (xt | x0 )        + E ∇xt log pt (xt )         .
      x0 ,xt                                                     2    x0 ,xt                              2     xt                     2

This completes the proof.

C.2       S TATISTICAL RESULTS

For the ease of presentation, we will leverage the following quantities:
                                 h                                                                            i
                                                                       2                                    2
L(π, g) = E        E        E      ∥g e (st , t) − ∇st log qt (st | s)∥2 − ∥g(st , t) − ∇st log qt (st | s)∥2
                s∼dπ t∼U (T ) st ∼qt (· | s)

By Lemma 4, the above is equivalent to the following by replacing the conditional score functions
with the marginal ones for both terms in the expectation:
                                  h                                                                       i
                                                                     2                                  2
L(π, g) = E        E        E      ∥g e (st , t) − ∇st log pπt (st )∥2 − ∥g(st , t) − ∇st log pπt (st )∥2 .
                 s∼dπ t∼U (T ) st ∼qt (· | s)
                                                                                                                                      (4)
One can show that, fixing a policy π, we have
                                                                         h                                    i
                                                                                                            2
                max L(π, g) = E                  E                E       ∥g e (st , t) − ∇st log pπt (st )∥2 = ℓ(π)                  (5)
                  g             π   s∼d t∼U (T ) st ∼qt (· | s)

where the first equality is by observing that the second term in Eq. (4) can be minimized to zero by
choosing g = ∇st log pπt (st ) (recalling that we do not assume misspecification for score functions),
and the second equality is by definition.
Bounding the difference between π (1:K) and π e is what we aim to do in the following lemma.
Lemma 5. Under Assumptions 1 and 2, assuming misspecification of RL (i.e., π e may not be in Π),
we have
                                                          T · Regret(K)

  2   π (1:K)    πe          2
DH (d         , d ) = O T · ϵscore + T · ϵmis + T · ϵRL +                  + (m + d) exp(−T ) .
                                                                 K
                                 m+d
Setting T = log( ϵ2                        ) yields the following bound:
                         score +ϵRL +ϵmis

                            2    π (1:K)     πe          2               Regret(K)
                           DH (d         , d ) = O ϵscore + ϵmis + ϵRL +
                                                     e
                                                                            K
where O
      e hides logarithmic factors.


                                                                        19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Proof of Lemma 5. Items (b) and (c) in Assumption 1 implies the following:
                         XK                 K
                                            X
                     max     L(π (k) , g) ≤   L(π (k) , g (k) ) + Regret(K);                        (6)
                            g
                                    k=1                  k=1
                                        L(π (k) , g (k) ) − min L(π, g (k) ) ≤ ϵRL .                (7)
                                                             π∈Π
Combining Equation (6) and Equation (7), we have
                  XK                  K
                                      X
             max       L(π (k) , g) ≤   min L(π, g (k) ) + K · ϵRL + Regret(K).
                  g                                    π∈Π
                      k=1                        k=1
Now the right-hand side can be upper bounded by replacing all g (k) with maximization over g:
                   XK                 K
                                      X
              max      L(π (k) , g) ≤   min max L(π, g) + K · ϵRL + Regret(K)
                 g                                     π∈Π    g
                      k=1                        k=1
                                                 K
                                                 X
                                             =         min ℓ(π) + K · ϵRL + Regret(K)        (by Eq. 5)
                                                       π∈Π
                                                 k=1
                                      = K · ϵmis + K · ϵRL + Regret(K)                              (8)
Note that the left-hand side is equivalent to the following
                        X K
                    max      L(π (k) , g) = K · max L(π (1:K) , g) = K · ℓ(π (1:K) ).
                      g                                      g
                            k=1
where the first equality is by the definition of L. Inserting it back to the previous inequality yields
an upper bound on ℓ(π (1:K) ):
                                                                Regret(K)
                                   ℓ(π (1:K) ) ≤ ϵmis + ϵRL +
                                                                    K
                                                                        e
Now we define a new distribution to facilitate the analysis: let dbπ denote the distribution induced
by the reverse diffusion process starting from N (0, I) by treating g e as the “score function”. Specif-
           e
ically, dbπ is the distribution of sT of the following SDE:
                                                             √
                           dst =(st + 2g e (st , T − t)) dt + 2 dBt , s0 ∼ N (0, I)
                                                                                 e                    e
where we recall that Bt is the standard Brownian motion. We can see that dbπ is approximating dπ .
Then, we invoke Lemma 2 and get
                                                            T · Regret(K)

                 (1:K)      e
           2
        DH   (dπ       , dbπ ) = O T · ϵmis + T · ϵRL +                   + (m + d) exp(−T ) .
                                                                  K
                                 2   π e bπ e
Now it remains to bound D (d , d ) so that we can apply the triangle inequality to get an upper
                                    H
                  (1:K)         e
            2
bound on DH   (dπ   , dπ ). Since ℓ(π e ) ≤ ϵ2score (Item (a) in Assumption 1), we invoke Lemma 2
again and immediately get

                            e     e
                       2
                     DH  (dπ , dbπ ) ≤ O T · ϵ2score + (m + d) exp(−T ) .
We conclude the proof by putting them together via triangle inequality:
        (1:K)     e            (1:K)      e
  2                                              2 bπ e   e
DH  (dπ       , dπ ) ≤ 2DH
                         2
                           (dπ       , dbπ ) + 2DH (d , dπ )
                                                             T · Regret(K)

                                             2
                     = O T · ϵmis + T · ϵscore + T · ϵRL +                 + (m + d) exp(−T ) .
                                                                   K


Lemma 6. Under the same condition as Lemma 5 but assuming no misspecification (i.e., π e ∈ Π),
we have
                   DH2
                       (dπ
                           (1:K)     e
                                          e ϵ2score + ϵRL + Regret(K)
                                 , dπ ) = O
                                                               K

Proof of Lemma 6. The proof is almost identical to that of Lemma 5 except that, when there is no
misspecification, minπ∈Π ℓ(π) in Eq. 8 can be simply upper bounded by ℓ(π e ), which is bounded
by ϵ2score (Item (a) in Assumption 1). The rest of the proof is the same.


                                                                 20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


C.3     M AIN PROOF

In this section, we provide the main proof of Theorem 1. First, the following is by definition of value
functions:
                                                                                  !
                               (1:K)       e
                         Vπ            −Vπ =H ·          E          c⋆ (s, a) −        E       c⋆ (s, a)
                                                     s,a∼dπ (1:K)                    s,a∼dπe

By Lemma 1, it is bounded by
     (1:K)         e
Vπ           −Vπ                                                                                                    (9)
              s                                                                                                              !
                                                                                                         (1:K)          e
                                                                                              2
≤H·          8   Var            E                   2 (c⋆ ∼ d
                                       c⋆ (s, a) · DH           π (1:K)   , c⋆ ∼ dπe   ) + 20DH (c⋆ ∼ dπ       , c⋆ ∼ dπ )
                             s,a∼dπe
   q
        e                                                    (1:K)          e
= 8 Varπ · DH
            2 (c⋆ ∼ dπ (1:K) , c⋆ ∼ dπ e ) + 20HD 2 (c⋆ ∼ dπ
                                                 H                 , c⋆ ∼ dπ )
                       (1:K)                   e
where c⋆ ∼ dπ          (and c⋆ ∼ dπ ) denotes the distribution of cost rather than the distribution of
 π (1:K)       πe
d        (and d ) itself. Now we apply the data processing inequality and get
                                 q
                 (1:K)       e          e                                      (1:K)     e
              Vπ       − V π ≤ 8 Varπ · DH   2 (dπ (1:K) , dπ e ) + 20HD 2 (dπ
                                                                        H            , dπ ).
Plugging in the bound from Lemma 5 if there is misspecification error or Lemma 6 otherwise, we
get
                                               p
                            π (1:K)   πe             πe
                          V         −V =O   e     Var · ϵ + ϵH .

                                                                                                   (1:K)              e
Similarly, we can derive the second half of the second-order bound (with V π  replaced with V π
inside the square root) by applying Lemma 1 to Eq. 9 in the other direction. These conclude the
proof of the second-order bound.
The first-order bound is a direct consequence of the second-order bound as shown in Theorem 2.1
in Wang et al. (2023).

D      A DDITIONAL E XPERIMENTAL R ESULTS
In this section, we present additional experimental results: in Appendix D.1, we show the results of
learning from state-action demonstrations; in Appendix D.2, we analyze the impact of the number
of expert demonstrations on performance; in Appendix D.3, we study the expressiveness of diffu-
sion models over other methods; in Appendix D.4, we include plots of unnormalized returns for
reference; finally, in Appendix D.5, we provide detailed implementation details.
In addition, visual demonstrations of the experiments (such as time-lapse images) are provided in
Figure 3 for better illustration.

D.1     L EARNING FROM S TATE - ACTION D EMONSTRATIONS

Our method can be easily extended to learning from state-action demonstrations by appending the
action vector to the state vector for both training and computing rewards. Hence, we also explore its
performance in such a setting. The experimental setup is identical to that of learning from state-only
data. The training curves are presented in Figure 4. The results are highly consistent with those
from the state-only setting, indicating that the performance gap is stable whether training on state
data alone or state-action pairs. This also demonstrates that SMILING is robust to different data
types.

D.2     O N THE N UMBER OF E XPERT D EMONSTRATIONS

As we established in Section 5, our algorithm can have better sample complexity in terms of ex-
pert demonstrations. To empirically verify this, we conduct an experiment with varying numbers of


                                                             21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


   Crawl
                 Time
                                                                          Vπ                   Expert
                                                                            1
       Expert

                                                                         0.75


      SMILING                                                             0.5
        (ours)
                                                                         0.25


                                                                            0
       DAC                                                                      SMILING DAC      BC
                                                                                 (ours)



      Pole
                 Time
                                                                          Vπ                   Expert
                                                                            1
       Expert
                                                                          0.75


                                                                           0.5
      SMILING
       (ours)
                                                                          0.25


                                                                            0
       DAC                                                                       SMILING DAC     BC
                                                                                  (ours)


Figure 3: Whole-body humanoid control via IL from state alone. The two panels illustrate the
crawl and pole tasks, respectively. In both tasks, we show the time-lapse frames of the expert
policy and the policies learned by our method (SMILING) and DAC after 3M training steps. In the
crawl task, the goal is to crawl through a grey tunnel, where both the expert and ours succeed and the
crawling movements are similar. However, DAC collapses and fails to complete the task. In the pole
task, the goal is to travel through a dense forest of poles. Ours successfully navigates through the
poles, though with less stability than the expert, while DAC collapses to the ground and cannot move.
The bar graphs on the right show normalized policy performance, where SMILING significantly
outperforms DAC and Behavioral Cloning (BC) in both tasks, approaching expert performance in
crawl. Note that BC uses expert actions, while DAC and SMILING learn from states alone.

expert demonstrations. We train SMILING and DAC with 1K, 2K, 5K, 10K, 25K, and 125K expert
states on humanoid-walk and compare the results. The relationship between the number of expert
demonstrations and the final performance (after 3M training steps) is shown in Figure 5 and the
training curves of both algorithms are shown in Figure 6. From Figure 5, we observe that SMILING
dominates DAC across all expert demonstration sizes. In particular, SMILING is able to approach
expert-level performance with 5K expert states, while DAC requires 25K to achieve similar perfor-
mance. This suggests that SMILING is more efficient than DAC in utilizing expert demonstrations.



D.3    E XPRESSIVENESS OF D IFFUSION M ODELS

In Appendix A, we argued that score matching is more expressive than discriminator-based meth-
ods, which may explain why our approach generally outperforms DAC in previous experiments.
To further support this argument, we conducted an ablation study on the cheetah-run task where
our method previously showed a slower convergence compared to DAC. Now we remove the ac-
tivation functions in both the discriminator of DAC and the score function of our method, making


                                                 22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                               Ball in Cup Catch                                            Cheetah Run                      Humanoid Walk
 V π (normalized)   1.00

                    0.75

                    0.50

                    0.25

                    0.00
                           0   1         2         3                     4       0             1           2      3      0     1           2      3
                                       Steps                           ×105                        Steps        ×106               Steps        ×106
                                Humanoid Sit                                              Humanoid Crawl                     Humanoid Pole
                    1.00
 V π (normalized)


                    0.75

                    0.50

                    0.25

                    0.00
                           0       1           2                         3       0             1           2      3      0     1           2      3
                                       Steps                           ×106                        Steps        ×106               Steps        ×106
                                SMILING (ours)                                   DAC                IQ-Learn       DiffAIL         πe          BC

Figure 4: Learning curves for learning from state-action data across five random seeds. The x-axis
corresponds to the number of environment steps (also the number of policy updates). The y-axis is
normalized such that the expert performance is one and the random policy is zero. The results are
consistent with those from the state-only setting.
                                                                                         Humanoid Walk
                                                                      1.00
                                                   V π (normalized)


                                                                      0.75

                                                                      0.50

                                                                      0.25
                                                                                                                Ours
                                                                      0.00                                      DAC

                                                                             1       2     5       10      25      125
                                                                                         Number of Demos         ×103
Figure 5: Relationship between the number of expert demonstrations and the final performance.
The x-axis corresponds to the number of expert states. The y-axis is the final performance that is
computed as the average of the last 100 training epochs. Each point is the average of five random
seeds.

them purely linear, and then re-run the experiments. The results are in Figure 7. Different from
the previous experiments where DAC outperformed our method, in this case, DAC’s performance
degrades notably by showing slower convergence and significantly higher variance. In comparison,
our method remains more effective and outperforms DAC clearly.
We attribute the performance degradation of DAC to the limited expressiveness of the discriminator,
which results in mode collapse—a well-known issue in discriminator-based methods, originally
identified in GANs. In such methods, if the discriminator’s performance falls significantly behind
the generator (e.g., due to insufficient training or a lack of discriminator expressiveness, which is
the case here), the generator will exploit this gap and produce single-mode data that can easily fool
the discriminator. In this case, the generator is falling into a local minima. As the discriminator
gradually catches up and learns to identify this data, the generator will discover new data to fool
the updated discriminator, falling into another local minimum. This perpetual cycle of chasing


                                                                                               23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                      Humanoid Walk (SMILING)                                               Humanoid Walk (DAC)

                            1.0


                            0.8
         V π (normalized)
                            0.6


                            0.4


                            0.2


                            0.0

                                  0         1                                 2           3         0           1             2      3
                                                      Steps                             ×106                          Steps        ×106

                                      1K                           2K                5K                 1K              2K        5K
                                      10K                          25K               125K               10K             25K       125K
                                      πe

Figure 6: The training curves of SMILING (left) and DAC (right) with varying numbers of expert
demonstrations. The x-axis corresponds to the number of environment steps (also the number of
policy updates). The y-axis is the normalized return.

                                                                              Cheetah Run (Linear Function)
                                                                   1.00
                                                V π (normalized)


                                                                   0.75

                                                                   0.50
                                                                                                              Ours
                                                                                                              DAC
                                                                   0.25
                                                                                                              πe
                                                                   0.00                                       BC

                                                                          0         1          2        3        4
                                                                                            Steps              ×106

Figure 7: Learning curves with linear functions. Compared to using MLPs, DAC shows a signif-
icant decline in performance of slower convergence and higher variance, while ours remains more
effective.


leads to continuous oscillations in the training process. We conjecture this is the exact reason for
DAC’s instability in this experiments—With the discriminator reduced to a purely linear function,
its expressiveness is significantly weakened, allowing the RL policy to exploit it easily, and thus a
perpetual chasing emerges. However, our method can remain more effective even with linear score
functions, which aligns with our hypothesis in Appendix A.


D.4   P LOTS WITH U NNORMALIZED R ETURNS

We provide the unnormalized-return versions (i.e., with the y-axis not normalized) of Figures 2 and 4
in Figures 8 and 9 for reference.


D.5   I MPLEMENTATION D ETAILS

We summarize the difficulties of the tasks evaluated in our experiments in Table 1.


                                                                                         24
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                 Ball in Cup Catch                     Cheetah Run                   Humanoid Walk
      1000

      750
 Vπ


      500

      250

        0
             0   1         2         3     4    0       1           2     3    0       1           2      3
                         Steps           ×105               Steps       ×106               Steps        ×106
                  Humanoid Sit                        Humanoid Crawl                 Humanoid Pole
      1000

      750
 Vπ


      500

      250

        0
             0       1           2         3    0       1           2     3    0       1           2      3
                         Steps           ×106               Steps       ×106               Steps        ×106
                  SMILING (ours)                DAC          IQ-Learn      DiffAIL         πe          BC


         Figure 8: Same curves as in Figure 2 but with unnormalized return V π on the y-axis.



                 Ball in Cup Catch                     Cheetah Run                   Humanoid Walk
      1000

      750
 Vπ


      500

      250

        0
             0   1         2         3     4    0       1           2     3    0       1           2      3
                         Steps           ×105               Steps       ×106               Steps        ×106
                  Humanoid Sit                        Humanoid Crawl                 Humanoid Pole
      1000

      750
 Vπ


      500

      250

        0
             0       1           2         3    0       1           2     3    0       1           2      3
                         Steps           ×106               Steps       ×106               Steps        ×106
                  SMILING (ours)                DAC          IQ-Learn      DiffAIL         πe          BC


         Figure 9: Same curves as in Figure 4 but with unnormalized return V π on the y-axis.



Implementation of RL Algorithms. We use the SAC implementation from Yarats & Kostrikov
(2020) and the DreamerV3 implementation from Sferrazza et al. (2024) without modifying their hy-
perparameters. The only change we made is substituting their ground-truth cost (reward) functions
with our cost function. For example, whenever the SAC agent samples a batch of transitions from


                                                        25
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


the replay buffer, we replace the corresponding cost values with those defined in our algorithm. We
do the same for DreamerV3.
Expert Training and Demonstration Collection. We use the aforementioned RL algorithms (SAC
for DMC tasks and DreamerV3 for HumanoidBench tasks) to train the expert policies. We did not
change the hyperparameters for these algorithms, making them the same as those provided in their
original implementations in Yarats & Kostrikov (2020); Sferrazza et al. (2024). In other words, these
algorithms were directly applied to their respective benchmarks without modification.
The RL algorithms were run until the performance plateaued, with the required number of train-
ing steps varying across tasks: ball-in-cup-catch (0.1M steps), cheetah-run (4.8M steps),
humanoid-walk (3.4M steps), humanoid-sit (2.7M steps), humanoid-crawl (5.4M steps), and
humanoid-pole (16M steps). The resulting expert policies achieve the following average total
return: 972.85 for ball-in-cup-catch, 915.16 for cheetah-run, 875.61 for humanoid-walk,
794.12 for humanoid-sit, 914.31 for humanoid-crawl, and 879.48 for humanoid-pole.
Once the expert training is complete, we generate expert demonstrations by running the learned
expert policy for five episodes for each task. Since each episode has a fixed horizon of 1K steps, the
resulting dataset contains 5 × 1, 000 = 5, 000 samples per task.
Implementation of Our Method and DAC. We made efforts to align the implementation details of
both algorithms to ensure a fair comparison. A comprehensive list of hyperparameters is provided in
Table 2. We perform one update of the score function in our method and the discriminator in DAC
per 1K RL steps. The expert diffusion model is trained for 4K epochs using 5K expert states (and
actions, if learning from state-action pairs).
Implementation of IQ-Learn. We used the official implementation from Garg et al. (2021). We
note that, unlike SMILING and DAC that can be built on any RL algorithm, IQ-Learn is exclusively
tied to SAC. This makes it unclear how to implement it on top of DreamerV3, as we did for SMILING
and DAC. Therefore, we adhered to their SAC implementation to run all experiments including the
HumanoidBench tasks.
Implementation of DiffAIL. We used the official implementation provided by Wang et al. (2024a)
and made sure their neural networks have same size as ours. However, when applying their code to
the tasks involving humanoids, we encountered numerical issues: the loss and weights of the neural
networks diverged to infinity. We suspect this is due to numerical instability in their implementation,
which becomes pronounced in the high-dimensional feature space of humanoid tasks.

  Table 1: List of environments (“DMC” = DeepMind Control Suite, “HB” = HumanoidBench).

                                  Task           Difficulty   Benchmark
                           Ball in Cup Catch      Easy            DMC
                           Cheetah Run           Medium           DMC
                           Humanoid Walk          Hard            DMC
                           Humanoid Sit           Hard             HB
                           Humanoid Crawl         Hard             HB
                           Humanoid Pole          Hard             HB



Table 2: Hyperparameters of our method and DAC. Shared columns indicate same hyperparameters.

                      Hyperparameter            Ours               DAC
                   Neural Net                  MLP (1 hidden layer w/ 256 units)
                   Learning rate                          5 × 10−3
                   Samples used per update                 100,000
                   Batch size                               1,024
                   Discretization steps        5,000             N/A
                   Time embedding size          16               N/A



                                                  26
