Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


S IMULTANEOUS R EWARD D ISTILLATION AND P REF -
ERENCE L EARNING : G ET YOU A L ANGUAGE M ODEL
W HO C AN D O B OTH
 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                             A BSTRACT

         Reward modeling of human preferences is one of the cornerstones of building
         usable generative large language models (LLMs). While traditional RLHF-based
         alignment methods explicitly maximize the expected rewards from a separate re-
         ward model, more recent supervised alignment methods like Direct Preference
         Optimization (DPO) circumvent this phase to avoid problems including model drift
         and reward overfitting. Although popular due to its simplicity, DPO and similar di-
         rect alignment methods can still lead to degenerate policies, and rely heavily on the
         Bradley-Terry-based preference formulation to model reward differences between
         pairs of candidate outputs. This formulation is challenged by non-deterministic or
         noisy preference labels, for example human scoring of two candidate outputs is of
         low confidence. In this paper, we introduce DRDO (Direct Reward Distillation
         and policy-Optimization), a supervised knowledge distillation-based preference
         alignment method that simultaneously models rewards and preferences to avoid
         such degeneracy. DRDO directly mimics rewards assigned by an oracle while
         learning human preferences from a novel preference likelihood formulation. Our
         experimental results on the Ultrafeedback and TL;DR datasets demonstrate that
         policies trained using DRDO surpass previous methods such as DPO and e-DPO
         in terms of expected rewards and are more robust, on average, to noisy preference
         signals as well as out-of-distribution (OOD) settings.


1    I NTRODUCTION

In the development of large language models (LLMs), robust modeling of human preferences is
essential for producing outputs that are contextually and situationally appropriate, in order to result in
models that users will actually want to use. Inherent in this problem is that while popular approaches
like direct preference optimization (DPO) and its variants implicitly assume that pairs of preferred
and dispreferred samples in preference data have an unambiguous winner, this does not reflect
the reality of actual data, where human-annotated preferences may have low labeler confidence or
the preference strength itself might be weak in the data. As such, reward functions estimated on
such data with current popular approaches can lead to policy degeneracy and underfitting the true
preference distribution. To address these challenges, we follow the insight that certain problems
with the DPO implicit reward formulation at the policy learning stage are less problematic at the
reward modeling stage, and make the following novel contributions: 1) We introduce Direct Reward
Distillation and policy-Optimization (DRDO), a novel efficient, non-ensemble and reference-free
method for preference optimization that combines the two stages by explicitly distilling rewards into
the policy model (Fig. 1); 2) We provide a thorough theoretical grounding of problems with DPO and
variants according to the Bradley-Terry model that demonstrates why they are challenged by nuanced
or “non-deterministic” preference pairs, and how DRDO avoids limitations in two major current
methods; 3) Through experiments on the Ultrafeedback and TL;DR datasets along with benchmarks
like AlpacaEval, we demonstrate that DRDO outperforms competing popular preference optimization
methods across multiple models and sizes at the aggregate data level, and is better able to distinguish
preferred and dispreferred responses with low confidence or small reward difference scores.

                                                    1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 1: Unlike popular supervised preference alignment algorithms like Direct Preference Optimization
(DPO; Rafailov et al. (2024)) that learns rewards implicitly, DRDO directly optimizes for explicit rewards
from an Oracle while simultaneously learning diverse kinds of preference signals during alignment.
Optimized with a simple regression loss based on difference of rewards assigned by the Oracle and a novel
focal-log-unlikelihood component (see Sec. 4), DRDO avoids DPO’s particular challenges at learning non-
deterministic preference pairs, thereby bridging the gap between estimating the preference distribution from the
data and the true preference distribution p∗ . Additionally, DRDO does not require an additional reference model
during training and can leverage reward signals even when preference labels are not directly accessible.
2    BACKGROUND AND R ELATED W ORK
Recent advancements in Large Language Models (LLMs) involve refining pretrained LLMs for
downstream tasks by utilizing human-written completions (Chung et al., 2022; Mishra et al., 2021) or
datasets labeled with human-preferred completions and contrasting alternatives (Ouyang et al., 2022;
Bai et al., 2022; Ziegler et al., 2019). The two most prominent techniques in learning from preference
data are reinforcement learning from human feedback (RLHF) and direct preference optimization
(DPO). In the following sections, we summarize these methods.

Reinforcement learning from human feedback. Reinforcement Learning from Human Feedback
(RLHF) aims to harmonize LLMs with human preferences and values (Christiano et al., 2017).
Conventional RLHF typically consists of three phases: supervised fine-tuning, reward model training,
and policy optimization. Proximal Policy Optimization (PPO; Schulman et al. (2017)) is a widely used
algorithm in the third phase of RLHF. RLHF has been extensively applied across various domains,
including mitigating toxicity (Korbak et al., 2023; Amini et al., 2024), addressing safety-concerns (Dai
et al., 2023), enhancing helpfulness (Tian et al., 2024), web search and navigation (Nakano et al.,
2021), and enhancing reasoning in models (Havrilla et al., 2024). Recent work by (Casper et al.,
2023) has identified challenges and problems throughout the entire RLHF pipeline, from gathering
preference data to model training to biased results, such as verbose outputs (Dubois et al., 2024;
Singhal et al., 2023; Wang et al., 2023).
                                                                 (i)   (i)
Given a dataset of pairwise preference data D = {x(i) , yw , yl }N    i=1 , where x
                                                                                      (i)
                                                                                          are prompts and
 (i)      (i)
yw and yl are the preferred and dispreferred completions, respectively, RLHF begins with an initial
model πref that parameterizes a distribution πref (y|x). Typically, πref is initialized from an LLM that
has undergone supervised fine-tuning (SFT). The preference between yw and yl is modeled using the
Bradley-Terry model (Bradley & Terry, 1952), which defines the probability of preferring yw over yl :
                                p(yw ≻ yl |x) = σ(r(x, yw ) − r(x, yl ))                               (1)
where σ(·) is the logistic function, and r(x, y) represents an underlying reward function. To estimate
this reward function r, RLHF minimizes the negative log-likelihood of the data:
                   LR (rϕ , D) = −E(x,yw ,yl )∼D [log(σ(rϕ (x, yw ) − rϕ (x, yl )))] .                 (2)
Using this learned reward function rϕ , reinforcement learning is applied to optimize and generate a
new LLM distribution πθ , with a KL constraint for regularization.

Offline and Online Preference Optimization Given the intricacy and complexity of online prefer-
ence optimization (Zheng et al., 2023), research has proliferated into more efficient and simpler offline
algorithms. Direct Preference Optimization (DPO) (Rafailov et al., 2024) is a notable example, which
demonstrates that the same KL-constrained objective as RLHF can be optimized without explicitly
learning a reward function. The problem is reformulated as a maximum likelihood estimation (MLE)
over the distribution πθ , leading to the following objective:

                                                                 πθ (yw |x)πref (yl |x)
                LDPO (πθ ; πref ) = −E(x,yw ,yl )∼D log σ β log                                       (3)
                                                                 πθ (yl |x)πref (yw |x)

                                                       2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


where β is a regularization term controlling the KL-constraint strength. In this case, the implicit
reward function is r(x, y) = β log ππrefθ (y|x)
                                          (y|x) . Rafailov et al. (2024) further showed that all reward
models based on the Plackett-Luce distribution (Plackett, 1975; Luce, 2005), including Bradley-Terry,
can be expressed in this form. However the absence of an explicit reward model in DPO limits
its ability to sample preference pairs from the optimal policy. Zhao et al. (2023) have investigated
augmenting preference data using a trained SFT policy and Liu et al. (2024b) have done the same
with a refined SFT policy with rejection sampling, enabling policy learning from data generated by
the optimal policy.

Exploring Preference Optimization Objectives Various other preference optimization objectives
have been proposed in the literature. Ranking objectives facilitate compare multiple instances beyond
just pairs (Dong et al., 2023; Liu et al., 2024a; Song et al., 2024; Yuan et al., 2023). Hong et al.
(2024) and Xu et al. (2023) investigate objectives that do not require a reference model. Bansal et al.
(2024) suggest a method that jointly optimizes instructions and responses, demonstrating notable
improvements over DPO. Zheng et al. (2024) focuses on post-training extrapolation between the
(SFT) model and the aligned model to enhance overall performance. In contrast to MLE-based
DPO, Fisch et al. (2024) argue, given potentially unlimited unlabeled samples (x, y1 , y2 ) ∼ ρ, a
simple “distillation” loss that explicitly regresses the implicit reward difference in DPO onto the true
pointwise reward estimates provided by an explicit reward model or a suite of reward models1 , as
follows:
                                        "                                                           2 #
             ∗                             ∗            ∗                 πθ (y1 | x)πref (y2 | x)
  Ldistill (r , πθ ; ρ) = Eρ(x,y1 ,y2 )   r (x, y1 ) − r (x, y2 ) − β log                               . (4)
                                                                          πθ (y2 | x)πref (y1 | x)

Iterative sampling algorithms like rejection sampling are compute-intensive, and in this work, we
focus exclusively on offline settings, avoiding any iterative training processes. For simplicity, we
define πratio (y|x) = ππrefθ (y|x)
                             (y|x) which can be parametrized with the winning and losing responses to get
the respective likelihood ratios. We build upon insights from the previous literature to bypass issues
inherent in existing offline preference optimization frameworks.

3       T HEORETICAL M OTIVATION : L IMITATIONS OF D IRECT A LIGNMENT
In order to theoretically motivate DRDO, we first provide an in-depth analysis of limitations of DPO
specific to non-deterministic or weak preference labels, as well as limitations of recent proposed
solutions like IPO (Azar et al., 2023) and Ensemble-DPO (e-DPO; Fisch et al. (2024)). We then apply
knowledge distillation-based techniques on rewards to provide a practical algorithm for DRDO.

Non-Deterministic Human Preferences Following Bradley & Terry (1952), Rafailov et al. (2024)
and other preference optimization frameworks posit that the relative preference of one outcome
over another is governed by the true reward differences, expressed as p∗ (y1 ≻ y2 ) = σ(r1 − r2 ),
where p∗ is the true preference distribution. Generally, in the RLHF framework, the true preference
distribution is typically inferred from a dataset of human preferences, using a reward model r that
subsequently guides the optimal policy learning. More importantly, to estimate the rewards and
thereby the optimal policy parameters, the critical reward modeling stage involves human annotators
choosing between pairs of candidate answers (y1 , y2 ), indicating their preferences.2 As such, typical
alignment methods assume that p(yw ≻ yl |x) (the human annotations of preference) is equivalent
to p∗ (y1 ≻ y2 |x) or any ranking or choice thereby established with the human decisions. However,
prospect theory and empirical studies in rational choice theory suggest that human preferences
are often stochastic, intransitive, and can fluctuate across time and contexts (Tversky, 1969; von
Weizsäcker, 2005; Regenwetter et al., 2011).
Existing direct alignment methods, such as DPO-based supervised alignment, assume access to
deterministic preference labels, disregarding the inherent variability in human judgments, even
    1
     Notably Fisch et al. (2024) propose two versions of this reward distillation loss, one with a single reward
model, the other with an ensemble of reward models. For simplicity of analysis, we only show the former here.
For all our experiments with e-DPO baseline, we use the ensembled version of this loss.
   2
     This framework can be extended to rank multiple responses using the Plackett-Luce (Plackett, 1975) model.


                                                       3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


when popular preference datasets are inherently annotated with such variability, noise, or “non-
deterministic preferences” given their provenance in human labeling. More importantly, such implicit
trust in the preference data by DPO-like algorithms without explicit instance-level penalization on
the loss, can cause policies that are trained to deviate from true intentions of human preference
learning (see Lemma 1 and Lemma 2 for details). Additionally, in many datasets, a significant
proportion of preference pair annotations display low human confidence, or are scored the same
by common reward models (e.g., GPT-4) despite being textually different, indicating that the two
responses are likely semantically similar or similar in intent, content or quality. Note that we consider
non-deterministic preference samples to be distinct from noise present as flipped labels Chowdhury
et al. (2024); Wang et al. (2024a)(where the correct preference can be retrieved with a label flip), the
latter typically resolved using label-smoothing based heuristics, data exclusion or prior knowledge of
noise coefficients in the data in preference learning. As with preference learning, such discrepancies
in preference signals can similarly derail reward learning and limit reward models from reaching
a consensus, even with majority voting with reward ensembles (Wang et al., 2024a). These cases
reflect the stochastic nature of human choices, and challenge the assumption of stable, deterministic
preferences in alignment frameworks.
We now formally define such “noisy” or non-deterministic preference labels in offline finite preference
data regimes and offer some insights into limitations of current approaches like DPO and e-DPO. For
the sake of analysis, we still consider a Bradley-Terry-based modeling to represent such preference
signals. All proofs are deferred to the appendix.
                                        (i)   (i)
Assumption 1. Let Dpref = {(x(i) , yw , yl )}N       i=1 be an offline dataset of pairwise preferences with
                                         (i)                   (i)       (i)
sufficient coverage, where each x is a prompt, and yw and yl are the corresponding preferred
                                                       ∗
and dispreferred responses, respectively. Let r (x, y) ∈ R be an underlying true reward function
that is deterministic3 and finite everywhere. Let πθ∗ (y | x) be the learned model and πref (y | x) the
reference, with supp(πref ) = Y. Assume supp(ρ) = supp(µ) × Y × Y, where Y is the space of all
responses, ρ is the data distribution, and µ is the prompt or context distribution.
Proposition 1 (Non-Deterministic Preferences). Define the subset Dnd ⊂ Dpref with non-deterministic
preferences as Dnd = {(x, y, y ′ ) ∈ Dpref | P (y ≻ y ′ | x) ≈ 12 }, where |Dnd | ≪ N . Under As-
sumption 1 and antisymmetric preferences (Munos et al., 2023), the preference relation is given
            (i)     (i)                      (i)    (i)
by P (yw ≻ yl | x(i) ) = 1 − P (yl ≻ yw | x(i) ). Given non-deterministic preferences, i.e.,
(y, y ) ∈ Dnd , the Bradley-Terry model assigns ∆r = 0, implying r∗ (x, y) = r∗ (x, y ′ ). Thus,
      ′

∀(x, y, y ′ ) ∈ Dnd , ∆r = 0. See Appendix A.1 for a complete derivation.
Lemma 1. Under Proposition 1, a) the DPO implicit reward difference in its objective
 πθ∗ (y)πref (y ′ )
 πθ∗ (y ′ )πref (y) → 1, that leads to the policy empirically underfitting the preference distribution. b) For
                                                                                            ′
|Dnd | ≪ N where N is finite, if DPO estimates that p∗ (y ≻ y ′ ) = 1, then ππθθ∗∗ (y)π  ref (y )
                                                                                   (y ′ )πref (y) → ∞. c) For
all minimizers πθ∗ of the DPO objective (Eq. 3), it follows that πθ∗ (yl ) → 0 and πθ∗ (C(yl )c ) → 1,
                                                                                 (i)
where C(yl )c denotes the complement of the set of dispreferred responses yl , ∀i ∈ N.

Given non-trivial occurrences of non-deterministic preference pairs in typical preference learning
datasets, a consequence of Lemma 1 is that DPO’s learned optimal policy can effectively assign
non-zero or even very high probabilities to tokens that never appear as preferred in the training
data, causing substantial policy degeneracy. Moreover, as noted and shown emprirically in previous
work (Azar et al., 2023; Pal et al., 2024), DPO effectively underfits the preference distribution because
its empirical preference probabilities (RHS of Eq. 3 without the expectation) are only estimates of
the true preference probabilities, especially when p∗ (y ≻ y ′ ) ∈ {0, 1}. A noteworthy implication of
Lemma 1 is that this weak regularization effect of DPO can theoretically assign very high probabilities
to the complement set of dispreferred tokens that never appear in the training data at all, especially
when |Nnd | ≪ N for finite data regimes. In realistic settings where non-deterministic preferences
constitute a non-trivial proportion of data, Lemma 1 additionally implies that DPO leads to unstable
updates and inconsistent policy behavior, where the gradient update is effectively cancelled out for
these samples since the log probabilities of both the winning and the losing responses are roughly
equal (∆r ≈ 0), so the scaled weighting factor (sigmoid of implicit reward differences) does not
   3
     Deterministic and non-deterministic preferences are only defined on the true preference distribution p∗
and should not be confused with the empirical probabilities or confidence assigned by the policy. The use of
"deterministic" here is simply to imply that the true reward function r∗ (x, y) is finite and scalar.


                                                      4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


contribute as much as when p∗ (y ≻ y ′ ) ∈ (0, 1). In other words, with DPO, πθ∗ not only sees less of
this type of preference but also fails to adequately regularize when it does.
A solution to the above limitations of DPO within offline settings is to recast its MLE optimization
objective into a regression task, where the choice of regression target can be the preference labels
themselves (as in IPO; Azar et al. (2023)) or reward differences (as in e-DPO; Fisch et al. (2024)).
While the former directly utilizes preference labels, regressing the log-likelihood ratio πratio to the
KL-β parameter as defined in Eq. 3, the latter extends IPO by regressing against the difference in
true rewards r∗ (x, y), independent of explicit preference labels and acting as a strict generalization
of the IPO framework. Notably, both these methods ensure that the resulting policy induces a valid
Bradley-Terry preference distribution p∗ (y1 ≻ y2 | x) > 0, ∀x, y1 , y2 ∈ µ × Y × Y.
However, these approaches have inherent limitations. IPO regresses the log-likelihood difference on
a Bernoulli-distributed preference label, failing to capture nuanced strength in relative preferences.
Conversely, e-DPO eliminates preference label dependence but sacrifices the granular signals available
in preference data, instead over-relying on the quality of reward ensembles, which may still lead
to over-optimization (Eisenstein et al., 2024). Furthermore, the use of reward ensembles in e-DPO
introduces significant computational overhead, potentially limiting its broader applicability due to
increased resource requirements. Consider the following lemma that derives from Assumption 1 and
Proposition 1:
Lemma 2. Under Proposition 1 and in the spirit of Fisch et al. (2024)’s argument, using e-DPO
                                                                               ′
alignment over non-deterministic preferences pairs leads to ππθθ∗∗ (y)π  ref (y )              ′
                                                                   (y ′ )πref (y) → ∞ for (y, y ) ∈ Dnd
                 (i)            (i)
where y = yw and y ′ = yl , ∀i ∈ N. Then, for all minimizers πθ∗ of the e-DPO objective (Eq. 4), it
                                               (i)
follows that πθ∗ (C(yl )c ) → 1 with 0 < πθ∗ (yw ) ≤ 1, ∀i ∈ N, where C(yl )c denotes the complement
                                                   (i)
of the set of responses y appearing as preferred yl , ∀i ∈ N.

Our core insight in proposing DRDO is that modeling relative preference strengths during the policy
learning stage, particularly at the extrema of the preference distribution, is only problematic if one
uses a DPO-like MLE loss formulation that maximizes implicit reward differences. On the other hand,
the MLE formulation for the reward modeling stage does not suffer from this limitation precisely
because estimated rewards are scalar quantities with no likelihood terms within the log-sigmoid
term (as in Eq. 2), provided there is enough coverage in the preference data. Since both stages
rely on a finite preference dataset with various levels of preference strengths (that mirrors human
preferences), one can combine the two stages by explicitly distilling rewards into the policy learning
stage. Assuming access to the true reward function r∗ (x, y) or an Oracle, one can resolve the above
limitation by distilling the estimated rewards into the policy model. This intuitively avoids DPO’s
underfitting to extremal preference strengths: since the same preference data is used for reward
distillation and policy learning, this offline distillation ensures that the policy stays within the data
distribution during alignment.

4       D IRECT R EWARD D ISTILLATION AND POLICY-O PTIMIZATION (DRDO)
Training the Oracle Reward Model The first step in DRDO involves training an Oracle model
O to act as a robust proxy of true human preference inferred from the preference data. Second, we
use O as a teacher to align the policy model (student) with a knowledge-distillation-based multi-task
loss (Hinton, 2015; Gou et al., 2021) that regresses the student’s rewards onto those assigned by the
Oracle. Within this multi-task setting, the student model simultaneously draws additional supervision
from binary preference labels to make the most efficient use of finite preference data.
Crucially, since the student model’s alignment depends on the quality of the Oracle and its generaliz-
ability, we use Yang et al. (2024)’s strategy to optimize O while retaining its language generation
abilities. The core idea here is that regularizing the shared hidden states with a language generation
loss in addition to the traditional RLHF-based reward modeling (Eq. 2) improves generalization
ability for out-of-distribution preferences. In practice, this is achieved by initializing a separate
linear reward head (parametrized by ϕ′ )4 on top of the base LM (parametrized by ϕ). This also helps
minimize reward hacking (Kumar et al., 2022; Eisenstein et al., 2024), especially in offline settings.

    4
        For simplicity of notation, we subsume parameters ϕ′ in ϕ in getting oracle reward estimates in Eq. 5.


                                                          5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


As such, our Oracle is optimized to minimize the following objective:
  LO (rϕ , Dpref ) = −E(x,yw ,yl )∼Dpref [(1 − α)(log σ(rϕ (x, yw ) − rϕ (x, yl ))) + αrϕ (log(yw ))] (5)
where α is the strength of language-generation regularization on the winning response log-likelihoods
assigned by the oracle and ϕ represents the parameters of O being estimated. For more details on
hyperparameter α, see Section 5.
A converged Oracle O can plausibly estimate true pointwise reward differences r∗ (x, y1 ) − r∗ (x, y2 )
for any unlabeled sample (x, y1 , y2 ), without needing explicit access to preference labels. To fully
leverage the diversity of preference signals, including non-deterministic preferences, we formulate
the DRDO loss to utilize these signals directly. Specifically, the student model πθ is optimized to
match the Oracle’s reward differences using its own reward predictions (rˆ1 and rˆ2 ), aligning closely
with the Oracle’s behavior, while O itself does not get updated. The student model’s reward estimates
are computed with a linear reward head initialized on top of the base LM, similar to Oracle training.
This optimization is achieved by a knowledge-distillation loss (Lkd ) that combines both a supervised
ℓ2 -norm term and a novel focal-softened (Lin et al., 2018; Welleck et al., 2020) log odds-unlikelihood
component:
                                               "
                                                                                                 2
                 Lkd (r∗ , πθ ) = E(x,y1 ,y2 )∼Dpref (r∗ (x, y1 ) − r∗ (x, y2 ) − (r̂1 − r̂2 ))
                                                     |                   {z                    }
                                                                   Reward Difference
                                                                              #
                                                           πθ (yw | x)
                                  − α(1 − pw )γ log                             ,                              (6)
                                                         1 − πθ (yl | x)
                                    |                  {z                  }
                                            Contrastive Log-"unlikelihood"


where pw = σ(zw − zl ) = 1+e−(z1 w −zl ) and quantifies the student policy’s confidence in correctly
assigning the preference from zw = log πθ (yw | x) and zl = log πθ (yl | x), or the log-probabilities
of the winning and losing responses, respectively. γ and α are hyperparameters that regulate the
strength of the modulating term and weighting factor5 respectively. As shown in Eq. 6, there is no
shared parametrization between the policy and the Oracle. LO is only a function of the Oracle’s own
parameters ϕ and the preference dataset, Dpref . The Oracle parameters are not updated during policy
training. Tab. 5 shows our complete DRDO algorithm.
Intuitively, DRDO’s first component in the loss effectively
regresses over the Oracle’s reward differences across all
response pairs (x, y1 , y2 ) in Dpref , using πθ ’s own reward
estimates, r̂1 and r̂2 . Assuming the Oracle’s reward esti-
mates correctly reflect the true preference strength, this
simple distillation component is precisely minimized when
the student πθ perfectly emulates the Oracle’s reward
difference assignment, without requiring it to explicitly
match the pointwise rewards. The square over this term
ensures that training is stabilized especially since we al-
low this component to fully regularize the loss without
applying any weighting terms.                                  Figure 2: Illustration of the DRDO pref-
                                                                        erence loss as a function of the log-
                                                                        unlikelihood ratio across various values of
How does the DRDO gradient update affect preference γ, the focal modulation parameter.
learning? “Contrastive log-unlikelihood” in Eq. 6 is
DRDO’s preference component. One can immediately draw a comparison with DPO which uses a
fixed β parameter (Eq. 3). DRDO uses a modulating focal-softened term, (1 − pw )γ where πθ learns
from both deterministic and non-deterministic preferences, effectively blending reward alignment
with preference signals to guide optimization. Intuitively, unlike DPO’s fixed β that is applied across
the whole training dataset, this modulating term amplifies gradient updates when preference signals
are weak (pw ≈ 0.5) and tempering updates when they are strong (pw ≈ 1), thus ensuring robust
learning across varying preference scenarios. When πθ assigns high confidence to the winning
    5
      Note that we do not use α as it is traditionally used in focal loss for weighting class imbalances (Mukhoti
et al., 2020). Instead, since the true preference distribution is unknown, we tune the empirical optimal value
based on validation data and keep it fixed during training.


                                                         6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


response (pw ≈ 1, see Eq. 6), the focal loss contribution diminishes, reflecting minimal penalty due
to strong deterministic preference signals. However, for harder cases with non-deterministic true
preference (p∗ (y ≻ y ′ ) = (p∗ (y ′ ≻ y)), the focal term α(1 − pw )γ keeps DRDO gradient updates
active and promotes learning even when preferences are ambiguous (Fig. 2). This adaptive behavior
ensures that DRDO maintains effective preference learning across varying preference strengths,
especially when conventional methods like DPO struggle. See Lemma 1 and Lemma 2 for in-depth
analysis. As shown in the gradient analysis in Appendix A with empirical proof in Fig. 4 (bottom-
right), this modulating term acts like DPO’s gradient scaling term, in that it scales the DRDO gradient
when the model incorrectly assigns preferences to easier samples.

5    E XPERIMENTAL S ETUP
Our experimental setup addresses two questions: How robust is DRDO alignment to nuanced or
diverse preferences, in OOD settings?, and How well does DRDO achieve reward distillation
with respect to model size? We empirically investigate these questions on two tasks: summarization
and single-turn instruction following. Our experiments, including choice of datasets and models for
each task are designed to to validate our approach as robustly as possible, subject to research budget
constraints (see Appendix B.1 for more). We compare our approach with competitive baselines such
as DPO (Rafailov et al., 2024) and e-DPO (Fisch et al., 2024), including the supervised finetuned
(baseline) versions depending on the experiment. Some minor notes on the experimental setup
described below can be found in Appendix B.

How robust is DRDO alignment to nuanced or diverse preferences, in OOD settings? We
evaluate this on the Reddit TL;DR summarization dataset (Völske et al., 2017; Stiennon et al.,
2020). For a robust OOD-setting evaluation, we only train models on the Reddit forum posts in
TL;DR and not on the CNN daily articles, the latter constituting an out-of-domain input distribution.
Specifically, we split the training data—Reddit forum posts—based on human labeler confidence in
their preference annotation (high-confidence vs. low-confidence) and token edit distance between the
preferred and the dispreferred responses (high-edit distance vs. low-edit distance). This results in two
splits: Dhc,he and Dℓc,ℓe . Each contains ∼10k training samples, where the former comprises samples
from the upper 50th percentile of the confidence and edit distance scores, mutatis mutandis. Intuitively,
Dhc,he and Dℓc,ℓe represent “easy” (deterministic) and “hard” (non-deterministic) preference samples
where combined labeler confidence and string-dissimilarity act as proxy for the extreme ends of
preference strengths/signals. See Appendix B.2 for more details. We denote the original training data
Dall . For each split, we compare our approach to DPO and e-DPO, where all baselines are initialized
with Phi-3-Mini-4K-Instruct weights (Abdin et al., 2024) with supervised fine-tuning (SFT) on Reddit
TL;DR human-written summaries. The test set is composed of news articles from CNN Daily, and
therefore an out-of-distribution (OOD) setting.

How well does DRDO achieve reward distillation w.r.t. model size? We evaluate all baselines
on the cleaned version of the Ultrafeedback dataset (Cui et al., 2024) This experiment is conducted
on the OPT suite of models (Zhang et al., 2022), at 125M, 350M, 1.3B, and 2.7B parameter sizes.
The student policy is trained with SFT on the chosen responses of the dataset, following Rafailov
et al. (2024). We exclude larger OPT models to focus on testing our distillation strategy with
full-scale training, rather than parameter-efficient methods (PEFT) (Houlsby et al., 2019; Hu et al.,
2021) to allow a full-fledged comparison considering all trainable parameters of the base model.
For completeness and comparison across model families, we also include Phi-3-Mini-4K-Instruct
following the same initialization.

DRDO and e-DPO Specifics Although DRDO requires an explicit reward Oracle O, we fix only
one model (based on parameter size and model family) for each experiment. We use Phi-3-Mini-4K-
Instruct and OPT 1.3B causal models initialized with a separate linear reward head while retaining the
language modeling head weights.6 Fixing the size of O allows us to evaluate the extent of preference
alignment to smaller models, as in classic knowledge distillation (Gou et al., 2021). To reproduce the
e-DPO (Fisch et al., 2024) baseline, we train three reward models using Eq. 2 with the mentioned
base models but with different random initialization on the reward heads.
    6
      Similar to Yang et al. (2024), we found better generalization in reward learning when our Oracle reward
learning loss is regularized with the SFT component (second term in Eq. 5) with an α of 0.01.


                                                     7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Evaluation TL;DR provides human-written reference summaries, so we use a high-capacity Judge
to compute win-rates against baselines on 1000 randomly-chosen samples from the TL;DR test set.
Following Rafailov et al. (2024), we use GPT-4o to compare the conciseness and the quality of
the DRDO summaries and baseline summaries, while grounding its ratings to the human written
summary. See Appendix E for our prompt format. For instruction following on Ultrafeedback, we
sample generations from DRDO and all baselines at various diversity-sampling temperatures and
report win-rates on the Ultrafeedback test set against O. Following Lambert et al. (2024), we consider
a win to be when, for two generations y1 and y2 , we get r(x, y1 ) > r(x, y2 ), where r(x, y1 ) and
r(x, y2 ) are the expected rewards (logits) from the policies being compared. We also evaluate DRDO
(trained on Ultrafeedback) against baselines (all trained on Ultrafeedback) on AlpacaEval, another
instruction following benchmark for which we evaluating using GPT-4 Turbo as suggested by the
creators (Li et al., 2023). Hyperparameters and model configurations are given in Appendix D.


6   R ESULTS

Non-deterministic preferences Table 1 shows the win rates computed with GPT-4o as judge for
1,000 randomly selected sample-prompts x from the CNN Daily TL;DR evaluation set (Nallapati
et al., 2016) under OOD settings. We follow similar settings as Rafailov et al. (2023) but further
ground the prompt using human-written summaries as reference for GPT to conduct its evaluation
(see Appendix E). For a fairer evaluation (Wang et al., 2024c; Goyal et al., 2023; Rafailov et al.,
2023), we swap positions of πθ -generated summaries y in the prompt to eliminate any positional bias
and evaluate the generated summaries on criteria like coherence, preciseness and conciseness, with
the human written summaries explicitly in the prompt to guide evaluation. Note that the win rate does
not necessarily equal N/1000 because for a small number of samples (< 10) GPT-4o did not return a
judgment. These samples were discarded from the denominator.
For all policies πθ trained on all three splits of the   Table 1: Win rates computed with GPT-4o as judge
training data: Dall , Dhc,he , and Dℓc,ℓe , we compute   for 1,000 randomly selected samples from the eval-
the win-rates of DRDO vs. e-DPO and DPO to eval-         uation set of the TL;DR CNN Daily dataset un-
uate how each method performs at various levels of       der OOD settings. This comparison evaluates the
preference types. Across all settings, DRDO policies     model against a baseline, presenting win counts
significantly outperform the two baselines. For in-      alongside win rates. Dall , Dhc,he , and Dℓc,ℓe rep-
                                                         resent TL;DR training splits. “Gold” samples re-
stance, DRDO’s average win rates are almost 79.4%
                                                         fer to human-written reference summaries used in
and 79.9% against e-DPO and DPO, respectively.           prompts to ground the win rate computations.
As we had hypothesized, DRDO-aligned πθ is able
to learn preferences more effectively, especially in       Comparison             # Wins     Win Rate
Dℓc,ℓe the subset containing more non-deterministic        DRDO vs. e-DPO
preference samples. This suggests that DRDO is              Dall                    731        78.27%
more robust to OOD-settings at various levels of dif-       Dhc,he                  759        80.92%
ficulty in learning human preferences.                      Dℓc,ℓe                  738        79.01%
                                                           DRDO vs. DPO
                                                            Dall                    748        80.78%
Reward distillation Table 2 shows results from              Dhc,he               746      79.11%
our evaluation of DRDO’s reward model distillation          Dℓc,ℓe               746      79.79%
framework compared to DPO and e-DPO as well                Gold vs. DRDO         525      52.82%
as baseline SFT-trained policies on the Ultrafeed-
back evaluation data, when compared across vari-           Gold vs. e-DPO        540      54.38%
ous model parameter sizes and at varying levels of         Gold vs. DPO          579      58.54%
temperature sampling. We sample πθ -generated re-
sponses to instruction-prompts in the test set using
top-p (nucleus) sampling (Holtzman et al., 2019) of 0.8 at various temperatures ∈ {0.2, 0.5, 0.7, 0.9}.
DRDO significantly outperforms competing baselines, especially for larger models in the OPT family.
DRDO-trained OPT-1.3B, OPT-2.7B, and Phi-3-Mini-4K-Instruct achieve average win rates of 76%,
74%, and 72%, respectively, across all baselines. This is notable as responses are sampled on unseen
prompts, and DRDO’s policy alignment is reference-free. DRDO’s robustness to diversity sampling
further boosts performance, up to an 88% win rate against DPO with the Phi-3-Mini-4K-Instruct
model. At lower temperatures, DRDO’s posted gains are more modest. Our results also indicate
that performance is correlated with model size, as DRDO policies of the same size as the Oracle


                                                  8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Table 2: Average win-rates computed with DRDO’s Oracle reward model against all baselines—SFT, DPO and
e-DPO—at various diversity sampling temperatures (T ). Bolded numbers show the highest win-rates against
each baseline at each temperature.

                                                                               Baselines
                                       T = 0.2                              T = 0.5                                 T = 0.7                            T = 0.9
    Policy (Student)         SFT       DPO           e-DPO       SFT        DPO          e-DPO         SFT          DPO       e-DPO          SFT       DPO         e-DPO
    OPT-125M                 0.47       0.61          0.51       0.52        0.63         0.50         0.57         0.58        0.54         0.57       0.64       0.61
    OPT-350M                 0.58       0.63          0.60       0.61        0.70         0.65         0.60         0.70        0.69         0.66       0.70       0.68
    OPT-1.3B                 0.83       0.70          0.83       0.82        0.65         0.81         0.83         0.63        0.75         0.81       0.59       0.78
    OPT-2.7B                 0.81       0.68          0.83       0.80        0.64         0.80         0.79         0.62        0.78         0.79       0.60       0.75
    Phi-3                    0.66       0.80          0.57       0.71        0.83         0.58         0.75         0.86        0.60         0.76       0.88       0.66

(1.3B) show the strongest gains. In smaller models, results are more mixed.7 . DRDO shows moderate
improvement and posts smaller gains against SFT models.
Next, to precisely pinpoint DRDO’s instruction fol-
lowing ability in OOD settings, we further evaluate Table 3: Win rates on the AlpacaEval benchmark
on the popular automatic evaluation benchmark Al- with GPT-4 Turbo as judge (N = 805).
pacaEval (Li et al., 2023), where LLM responses are
specifically evaluated on 805 instructions chosen to  Comparison             # Wins Win Rate
be representative of how human-preferred policies     DRDO vs. e-DPO           495     62.03%
would respond. Table 3 shows that, within controlled
                                                      DRDO vs. DPO             491     61.61%
evaluation settings, GPT 4-Turbo consistently prefers
DRDO responses 62.03% and 61.61% times compared to e-DPO and DPO respectively.

7      A NALYSIS
Table 4 shows example generations from DRDO and a competitor where the DRDO example was
preferred by the automatic judge. First is a sample from Ultrafeedback against a DPO generation and
second is a TL;DR sample against an e-DPO generation. In both cases, we can see that the DRDO
response is more concise and on-topic and the competitor output was dispreferred for reasons like
condescending to the user, or including extraneous text about fulfilling the request.
Table 4: Example generations from DRDO and competing methods, showing where DRDO generates more
preferred responses.

 Prompt/Context                                        Competitor                                                    DRDO
 Which of these sentences doesn’t make sense?          1. The sentence “the garden has so many flowers” makes        Sentence B: “the garden has so many pigs” does not
 Options:                                              no sense. The phrase “so many flowers” makes no sense.        make sense because the garden has no pigs. The sentence
 - Sentence A: “the garden has so many flowers”        The phrase “so many pigs” makes no sense.                     implies that there are pigs in the garden, but there is
 - Sentence B: “the garden has so many pigs”           2. The sentence “the garden has so many flowers” makes        no evidence to support this.
 Hmm, let me think, I want to lay out the solution     perfect sense. The phrase “so many flowers” makes
 in detail                                             perfect sense. The phrase “so many pigs” makes perfect
                                                       sense.
                                                       If you disagree, you’re wrong, and you should go back
                                                       to English class.
 Summarize this news article clearly and concisely.    TL;DR: Rocker Jack White will take a brief, $3 acoustic       TL;DR: Jack White announces a $3 acoustic tour in
 Use TL;DR in your response:                           tour to the U.S. states he has yet to perform in. Tickets     five states he hasn’t played yet. Tickets are $3, one per
 TITLE: Jack White to play mystery $3 shows            are limited to one per person and will be sold on a first-    person, and available only at the venue on a first-come,
 <2015 Billboard article on upcoming Jack White        come, first-served basis.                                     first-served basis.
 acoustic tour> (full text omitted for length)         I’m sorry, but I cannot fulfill this request.


Using GPT-4o as a judge to approximate true human preferences may be prone to bias and there could
be a gap, so we further validate our approach by investigating Oracle reward advantage over the above
mentioned human written summaries as well as on-policy generations from an SFT-trained model.
Fig. 3 shows the computed expected reward advantages on the CNN Daily TL;DR evaluation set,
sampled according to the method outlined in Sec. 6. Rewards were then computed using our Oracle
(trained with Phi-3) on these sampled generations and normalized. To compute the advantage, we
used SFT-trained model summaries (Fig. 3[L]) and human written summaries (Fig. 3[R]). While the
expected reward advantage over human-written summaries is less than those with the baseline SFT
policy, DRDO results in performance improvement across various temperature samplings. DRDO
    7
      This may be due to spurious length-correlation (Singhal et al., 2024; Meng et al., 2024), as smaller models
generated avg. ∼211.9 tokens compared to their policy counterparts’ ∼190.8 tokens, which is closer to the
original preferred responses in Ultrafeedback (∼168.8). See Appendix D for more details.


                                                                                     9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


alignment appears in-tune with improving over a baseline SFT policy as our results on instruction
tuning also suggest, brings in a considerable performance gain over competitive baselines like DPO
and ensemble-based e-DPO while also being robust to OOD settings.


                   Figure 3: Oracle expected reward advantage on CNN Daily articles.


Our evaluations vs. “gold” summaries in Table 1 also demonstrate where bias may arise in the
GPT-4o evaluation. The last three rows compare the model’s performance directly against these
gold summaries (win counts and win rates are shown for gold samples). GPT-4o narrowly prefers
generated summaries to human-written ones. One possible reason could be that Reddit TL;DR data is
massive and crowd-sourced which naturally results in noisy labels. However, under this experiment
too, DRDO-trained policies are better-performing than e-DPO and DPO, by about 1.5–6%. We
should note that human summaries may contain more implicit diversity than generated summaries,
and this may demonstrate the “regression to the mean” effect in LLM generation (Wu et al., 2024).


8   C ONCLUSION

We introduce Direct Reward Distillation and policy-Optimization (DRDO), a novel approach to
preference optimization that unifies the reward distillation and policy learning stages into a single,
cohesive framework. Unlike popular methods like DPO that rely heavily on implicit reward-based
estimation of the preference distribution, DRDO uses an Oracle to distill rewards directly into the
policy model, while simultaneously learning from varied preference signals, leading to a more
accurate estimation of true preferences. Our experiments on Reddit TL;DR data for summarization as
well on instruction-following in Ultrafeedback and AlpacaEval suggest that DRDO is not only high-
performing when compared head-to-head with competitive baselines like DPO but is also particularly
robust to OOD settings. More importantly, unlike traditional RLHF that requires "online" rewards,
reward distillation in DRDO is simple to implement, is model-agnostic since it is reference-model
free and efficient, since Oracle rewards are easy to precompute.


9   L IMITATIONS

DRDO still requires access to a separate Oracle reward model even though the Oracle need not be in
loaded in memory during DRDO alignment as all expected rewards can effectively be precomputed.
However, our experimental results on three datasets including OOD settings suggest that this is a
feasible trade-off especially when aligning models of smaller sizes (when compared to models like
LLaMA) when performance gains need to maximized under limited compute settings. Some of our
theoretical insights rely on strict assumptions, however, our insights provide additional justification
and likely explanations of how preference alignment in realistic settings (where data might have
a non-trivial amount of non-deterministic preferences) can benefit from approaches like DRDO.
We did not experiment with cross-model distillation in this work. However, since DRDO is a
reference-model free framework and Oracle rewards can be precomputed, one can easily extend our
method for cross-model distillation frameworks. Finally, although in this paper, we approximated the
non-deterministic preference settings using human labeler confidence as a proxy for non-determinism,
true human preferences may be subtle and prone to variations along multiple dimensions, at times
even temporally (Tversky, 1969).

                                                  10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


R EPRODUCIBILITY S TATEMENT
We have included our code as part of the supplementary material. The datasets we used are enumerated
in Sec. 5, including methods we used to create our different training and testing splits. Links to the
specific datasets are given in the appendix, as are hyperparameters used.

R EFERENCES
Marah Abdin, Jyoti Aneja, Hany Awadalla, Ahmed Awadallah, Ammar Ahmad Awan, Nguyen
 Bach, Amit Bahree, Arash Bakhtiari, Jianmin Bao, Harkirat Behl, Alon Benhaim, Misha Bilenko,
 Johan Bjorck, Sébastien Bubeck, Martin Cai, Qin Cai, Vishrav Chaudhary, Dong Chen, Dongdong
 Chen, Weizhu Chen, Yen-Chun Chen, Yi-Ling Chen, Hao Cheng, Parul Chopra, Xiyang Dai,
 Matthew Dixon, Ronen Eldan, Victor Fragoso, Jianfeng Gao, Mei Gao, Min Gao, Amit Garg,
 Allie Del Giorno, Abhishek Goswami, Suriya Gunasekar, Emman Haider, Junheng Hao, Russell J.
 Hewett, Wenxiang Hu, Jamie Huynh, Dan Iter, Sam Ade Jacobs, Mojan Javaheripi, Xin Jin,
 Nikos Karampatziakis, Piero Kauffmann, Mahoud Khademi, Dongwoo Kim, Young Jin Kim, Lev
 Kurilenko, James R. Lee, Yin Tat Lee, Yuanzhi Li, Yunsheng Li, Chen Liang, Lars Liden, Xihui
 Lin, Zeqi Lin, Ce Liu, Liyuan Liu, Mengchen Liu, Weishung Liu, Xiaodong Liu, Chong Luo,
 Piyush Madan, Ali Mahmoudzadeh, David Majercak, Matt Mazzola, Caio César Teodoro Mendes,
 Arindam Mitra, Hardik Modi, Anh Nguyen, Brandon Norick, Barun Patra, Daniel Perez-Becker,
 Thomas Portet, Reid Pryzant, Heyang Qin, Marko Radmilac, Liliang Ren, Gustavo de Rosa,
 Corby Rosset, Sambudha Roy, Olatunji Ruwase, Olli Saarikivi, Amin Saied, Adil Salim, Michael
 Santacroce, Shital Shah, Ning Shang, Hiteshi Sharma, Yelong Shen, Swadheen Shukla, Xia Song,
 Masahiro Tanaka, Andrea Tupini, Praneetha Vaddamanu, Chunyu Wang, Guanhua Wang, Lijuan
 Wang, Shuohang Wang, Xin Wang, Yu Wang, Rachel Ward, Wen Wen, Philipp Witte, Haiping
 Wu, Xiaoxia Wu, Michael Wyatt, Bin Xiao, Can Xu, Jiahang Xu, Weijian Xu, Jilong Xue, Sonali
 Yadav, Fan Yang, Jianwei Yang, Yifan Yang, Ziyi Yang, Donghan Yu, Lu Yuan, Chenruidong
 Zhang, Cyril Zhang, Jianwen Zhang, Li Lyna Zhang, Yi Zhang, Yue Zhang, Yunan Zhang, and
 Xiren Zhou. Phi-3 technical report: A highly capable language model locally on your phone, 2024.
 URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2404.14219.
Afra Amini, Tim Vieira, and Ryan Cotterell. Direct preference optimization with an offset. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2402.10571, 2024.
Mohammad Gheshlaghi Azar, Mark Rowland, Bilal Piot, Daniel Guo, Daniele Calandriello, Michal
 Valko, and Rémi Munos. A general theoretical paradigm to understand learning from human
 preferences, 2023.
Mohammad Gheshlaghi Azar, Zhaohan Daniel Guo, Bilal Piot, Remi Munos, Mark Rowland, Michal
 Valko, and Daniele Calandriello. A general theoretical paradigm to understand learning from
 human preferences. In International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics, pp.
 4447–4455. PMLR, 2024.
Yuntao Bai, Andy Jones, Kamal Ndousse, Amanda Askell, Anna Chen, Nova DasSarma, Dawn Drain,
  Stanislav Fort, Deep Ganguli, Tom Henighan, et al. Training a helpful and harmless assistant with
  reinforcement learning from human feedback. arXiv preprint arXiv:2204.05862, 2022.
Hritik Bansal, Ashima Suvarna, Gantavya Bhatt, Nanyun Peng, Kai-Wei Chang, and Aditya Grover.
  Comparing bad apples to good oranges: Aligning large language models via joint preference
  optimization. arXiv preprint arXiv:2404.00530, 2024.
R. A. Bradley and M. E. Terry. Rank analysis of incomplete block designs: I. the method of paired
  comparisons. Biometrika, 39(3/4):324–345, 1952. doi: 10.2307/2334029.
Stephen Casper, Xander Davies, Claudia Shi, Thomas Krendl Gilbert, Jérémy Scheurer, Javier
  Rando, Rachel Freedman, Tomasz Korbak, David Lindner, Pedro Freire, et al. Open problems
  and fundamental limitations of reinforcement learning from human feedback. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2307.15217, 2023.
Souradip Chakraborty, Jiahao Qiu, Hui Yuan, Alec Koppel, Dinesh Manocha, Furong Huang, Amrit
  Bedi, and Mengdi Wang. Maxmin-rlhf: Alignment with diverse human preferences. In Forty-first
  International Conference on Machine Learning.


                                                 11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Sayak Ray Chowdhury, Anush Kini, and Nagarajan Natarajan. Provably robust dpo: Aligning
  language models with noisy feedback. arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.00409, 2024.
Paul F Christiano, Jan Leike, Tom Brown, Miljan Martic, Shane Legg, and Dario Amodei. Deep
  reinforcement learning from human preferences. Advances in neural information processing
  systems, 30, 2017.
Hyung Won Chung, Le Hou, Shayne Longpre, Barret Zoph, Yi Tay, William Fedus, Yunxuan Li,
 Xuezhi Wang, Mostafa Dehghani, Siddhartha Brahma, et al. Scaling instruction-finetuned language
  models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2210.11416, 2022.
Ganqu Cui, Lifan Yuan, Ning Ding, Guanming Yao, Bingxiang He, Wei Zhu, Yuan Ni, Guotong Xie,
  Ruobing Xie, Yankai Lin, Zhiyuan Liu, and Maosong Sun. Ultrafeedback: Boosting language
  models with scaled ai feedback, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2310.01377.
Josef Dai, Xuehai Pan, Ruiyang Sun, Jiaming Ji, Xinbo Xu, Mickel Liu, Yizhou Wang, and
  Yaodong Yang. Safe RLHF: Safe reinforcement learning from human feedback. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2310.12773, 2023.
Tim Dettmers, Artidoro Pagnoni, Ari Holtzman, and Luke Zettlemoyer. Qlora: Efficient finetuning
  of quantized llms. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 36, 2024.
Hanze Dong, Wei Xiong, Deepanshu Goyal, Yihan Zhang, Winnie Chow, Rui Pan, Shizhe Diao,
  Jipeng Zhang, SHUM KaShun, and Tong Zhang. RAFT: Reward ranked finetuning for generative
  foundation model alignment. Transactions on Machine Learning Research, 2023.
Yann Dubois, Balázs Galambosi, Percy Liang, and Tatsunori B Hashimoto. Length-controlled
  AlpacaEval: A simple way to debias automatic evaluators. ArXiv, abs/2404.04475, 2024.
Jacob Eisenstein, Chirag Nagpal, Alekh Agarwal, Ahmad Beirami, Alexander Nicholas D’Amour,
  Krishnamurthy Dj Dvijotham, Adam Fisch, Katherine A Heller, Stephen Robert Pfohl, Deepak
  Ramachandran, Peter Shaw, and Jonathan Berant. Helping or herding? reward model ensembles
  mitigate but do not eliminate reward hacking. In First Conference on Language Modeling, 2024.
  URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=5u1GpUkKtG.
Kawin Ethayarajh, Winnie Xu, Niklas Muennighoff, Dan Jurafsky, and Douwe Kiela. KTO: Model
  alignment as prospect theoretic optimization. ArXiv, abs/2402.01306, 2024.
Adam Fisch, Jacob Eisenstein, Vicky Zayats, Alekh Agarwal, Ahmad Beirami, Chirag Nagpal, Pete
  Shaw, and Jonathan Berant. Robust preference optimization through reward model distillation,
  2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2405.19316.
Jianping Gou, Baosheng Yu, Stephen J Maybank, and Dacheng Tao. Knowledge distillation: A
   survey. International Journal of Computer Vision, 129(6):1789–1819, 2021.
Tanya Goyal, Junyi Jessy Li, and Greg Durrett. News summarization and evaluation in the era of
  gpt-3, 2023. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2209.12356.
Alex Havrilla, Yuqing Du, Sharath Chandra Raparthy, Christoforos Nalmpantis, Jane Dwivedi-Yu,
  Maksym Zhuravinskyi, Eric Hambro, Sainbayar Sukhbaatar, and Roberta Raileanu. Teaching large
  language models to reason with reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.04642, 2024.
Geoffrey Hinton. Distilling the knowledge in a neural network. arXiv preprint arXiv:1503.02531,
  2015.
Ari Holtzman, Jan Buys, Li Du, Maxwell Forbes, and Yejin Choi. The curious case of neural text
  degeneration. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2019.
Jiwoo Hong, Noah Lee, and James Thorne. ORPO: Monolithic preference optimization without
  reference model. ArXiv, abs/2403.07691, 2024.
Neil Houlsby, Andrei Giurgiu, Stanislaw Jastrzebski, Bruna Morrone, Quentin De Laroussilhe,
  Andrea Gesmundo, Mona Attariyan, and Sylvain Gelly. Parameter-efficient transfer learning for
  nlp. In International conference on machine learning, pp. 2790–2799. PMLR, 2019.


                                              12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Edward J Hu, Yelong Shen, Phillip Wallis, Zeyuan Allen-Zhu, Yuanzhi Li, Shean Wang, Lu Wang,
  and Weizhu Chen. Lora: Low-rank adaptation of large language models. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2106.09685, 2021.
Tomasz Korbak, Kejian Shi, Angelica Chen, Rasika Vinayak Bhalerao, Christopher Buckley, Jason
  Phang, Samuel R Bowman, and Ethan Perez. Pretraining language models with human preferences.
  In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 17506–17533. PMLR, 2023.
Ananya Kumar, Aditi Raghunathan, Robbie Jones, Tengyu Ma, and Percy Liang. Fine-tuning can
  distort pretrained features and underperform out-of-distribution. arXiv preprint arXiv:2202.10054,
  2022.
Nathan Lambert, Valentina Pyatkin, Jacob Daniel Morrison, Lester James Validad Miranda,
  Bill Yuchen Lin, Khyathi Raghavi Chandu, Nouha Dziri, Sachin Kumar, Tom Zick, Yejin Choi,
  Noah A. Smith, and Hanna Hajishirzi. RewardBench: Evaluating reward models for language
  modeling. ArXiv, abs/2403.13787, 2024.
Xuechen Li, Tianyi Zhang, Yann Dubois, Rohan Taori, Ishaan Gulrajani, Carlos Guestrin, Percy
  Liang, and Tatsunori B Hashimoto. Alpacaeval: An automatic evaluator of instruction-following
  models, 2023.
Tsung-Yi Lin, Priya Goyal, Ross Girshick, Kaiming He, and Piotr Dollár. Focal loss for dense object
  detection, 2018. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/1708.02002.
Tianqi Liu, Zhen Qin, Junru Wu, Jiaming Shen, Misha Khalman, Rishabh Joshi, Yao Zhao, Moham-
  mad Saleh, Simon Baumgartner, Jialu Liu, et al. LiPO: Listwise preference optimization through
  learning-to-rank. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.01878, 2024a.
Tianqi Liu, Yao Zhao, Rishabh Joshi, Misha Khalman, Mohammad Saleh, Peter J Liu, and Jialu
  Liu. Statistical rejection sampling improves preference optimization. In The Twelfth International
  Conference on Learning Representations, 2024b. URL https://openreview.net/forum?
  id=xbjSwwrQOe.
Ilya Loshchilov, Frank Hutter, et al. Fixing weight decay regularization in adam. arXiv preprint
   arXiv:1711.05101, 5, 2017.
R Duncan Luce. Individual choice behavior: A theoretical analysis. Courier Corporation, 2005.
Yu Meng, Mengzhou Xia, and Danqi Chen. Simpo: Simple preference optimization with a reference-
  free reward, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2405.14734.
Swaroop Mishra, Daniel Khashabi, Chitta Baral, and Hannaneh Hajishirzi. Cross-task generalization
  via natural language crowdsourcing instructions. arXiv preprint arXiv:2104.08773, 2021.
Jishnu Mukhoti, Viveka Kulharia, Amartya Sanyal, Stuart Golodetz, Philip Torr, and Puneet Dokania.
   Calibrating deep neural networks using focal loss. Advances in Neural Information Processing
   Systems, 33:15288–15299, 2020.
Rémi Munos, Michal Valko, Daniele Calandriello, Mohammad Gheshlaghi Azar, Mark Rowland,
  Zhaohan Daniel Guo, Yunhao Tang, Matthieu Geist, Thomas Mesnard, Andrea Michi, et al. Nash
  learning from human feedback. arXiv preprint arXiv:2312.00886, 2023.
Reiichiro Nakano, Jacob Hilton, Suchir Balaji, Jeff Wu, Long Ouyang, Christina Kim, Christopher
  Hesse, Shantanu Jain, Vineet Kosaraju, William Saunders, et al. Webgpt: Browser-assisted
  question-answering with human feedback. arXiv preprint arXiv:2112.09332, 2021.
Ramesh Nallapati, Bowen Zhou, Caglar Gulcehre, Bing Xiang, et al. Abstractive text summarization
  using sequence-to-sequence rnns and beyond. arXiv preprint arXiv:1602.06023, 2016.
Long Ouyang, Jeffrey Wu, Xu Jiang, Diogo Almeida, Carroll Wainwright, Pamela Mishkin, Chong
  Zhang, Sandhini Agarwal, Katarina Slama, Alex Ray, et al. Training language models to follow
  instructions with human feedback. Advances in neural information processing systems, 35:27730–
  27744, 2022.


                                                13
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Arka Pal, Deep Karkhanis, Samuel Dooley, Manley Roberts, Siddartha Naidu, and Colin White.
  Smaug: Fixing failure modes of preference optimisation with dpo-positive. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2402.13228, 2024.

Robin L Plackett. The analysis of permutations. Journal of the Royal Statistical Society Series C:
  Applied Statistics, 24(2):193–202, 1975.

Rafael Rafailov, Archit Sharma, Eric Mitchell, Christopher D Manning, Stefano Ermon, and Chelsea
  Finn. Direct preference optimization: Your language model is secretly a reward model. Proceedings
  of the Annual Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS), 2023.

Rafael Rafailov, Archit Sharma, Eric Mitchell, Christopher D Manning, Stefano Ermon, and Chelsea
  Finn. Direct preference optimization: Your language model is secretly a reward model. Advances
  in Neural Information Processing Systems, 36, 2024.

Alexandre Ramé, Guillaume Couairon, Mustafa Shukor, Corentin Dancette, Jean-Baptiste Gaya,
  Laure Soulier, and Matthieu Cord. Rewarded soups: towards pareto-optimal alignment by interpo-
  lating weights fine-tuned on diverse rewards, 2023. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2306.
  04488.

Jeff Rasley, Samyam Rajbhandari, Olatunji Ruwase, and Yuxiong He. Deepspeed: System optimiza-
   tions enable training deep learning models with over 100 billion parameters. In Proceedings of
   the 26th ACM SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge Discovery & Data Mining, pp.
   3505–3506, 2020.

Michel Regenwetter, Jason Dana, and Clintin P Davis-Stober. Transitivity of preferences. Psycholog-
 ical review, 118(1):42, 2011.

John Schulman, Filip Wolski, Prafulla Dhariwal, Alec Radford, and Oleg Klimov. Proximal policy
  optimization algorithms. arXiv preprint arXiv:1707.06347, 2017.

Prasann Singhal, Tanya Goyal, Jiacheng Xu, and Greg Durrett. A long way to go: Investigating
  length correlations in RLHF. arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.03716, 2023.

Prasann Singhal, Tanya Goyal, Jiacheng Xu, and Greg Durrett. A long way to go: Investigating
  length correlations in rlhf, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2310.03716.

Feifan Song, Bowen Yu, Minghao Li, Haiyang Yu, Fei Huang, Yongbin Li, and Houfeng Wang.
  Preference ranking optimization for human alignment. In AAAI, 2024.

Nisan Stiennon, Long Ouyang, Jeffrey Wu, Daniel Ziegler, Ryan Lowe, Chelsea Voss, Alec Radford,
  Dario Amodei, and Paul F Christiano. Learning to summarize with human feedback. Advances in
  Neural Information Processing Systems, 33:3008–3021, 2020.

Katherine Tian, Eric Mitchell, Huaxiu Yao, Christopher D Manning, and Chelsea Finn. Fine-
  tuning language models for factuality. In The Twelfth International Conference on Learning
  Representations, 2024. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=WPZ2yPag4K.

Lewis Tunstall, Edward Beeching, Nathan Lambert, Nazneen Rajani, Kashif Rasul, Younes Belkada,
  Shengyi Huang, Leandro von Werra, Clémentine Fourrier, Nathan Habib, Nathan Sarrazin, Omar
  Sanseviero, Alexander M. Rush, and Thomas Wolf. Zephyr: Direct distillation of lm alignment,
  2023.

Amos Tversky. Intransitivity of preferences. Psychological review, 76(1):31, 1969.

Michael Völske, Martin Potthast, Shahbaz Syed, and Benno Stein. Tl; dr: Mining reddit to learn
 automatic summarization. In Proceedings of the Workshop on New Frontiers in Summarization, pp.
 59–63, 2017.

Carl Christian von Weizsäcker. The welfare economics of adaptive preferences. MPI Collective
  Goods Preprint, (2005/11), 2005.


                                                14
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Binghai Wang, Rui Zheng, Lu Chen, Yan Liu, Shihan Dou, Caishuang Huang, Wei Shen, Senjie Jin,
  Enyu Zhou, Chenyu Shi, Songyang Gao, Nuo Xu, Yuhao Zhou, Xiaoran Fan, Zhiheng Xi, Jun
  Zhao, Xiao Wang, Tao Ji, Hang Yan, Lixing Shen, Zhan Chen, Tao Gui, Qi Zhang, Xipeng Qiu,
  Xuanjing Huang, Zuxuan Wu, and Yu-Gang Jiang. Secrets of rlhf in large language models part ii:
  Reward modeling, 2024a. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2401.06080.
Kaiwen Wang, Rahul Kidambi, Ryan Sullivan, Alekh Agarwal, Christoph Dann, Andrea Michi,
  Marco Gelmi, Yunxuan Li, Raghav Gupta, Avinava Dubey, et al. Conditional language policy:
  A general framework for steerable multi-objective finetuning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2407.15762,
  2024b.
Yizhong Wang, Hamish Ivison, Pradeep Dasigi, Jack Hessel, Tushar Khot, Khyathi Chandu, David
  Wadden, Kelsey MacMillan, Noah A Smith, Iz Beltagy, et al. How far can camels go? exploring the
  state of instruction tuning on open resources. In Thirty-seventh Conference on Neural Information
  Processing Systems Datasets and Benchmarks Track, 2023.
Ziqi Wang, Hanlin Zhang, Xiner Li, Kuan-Hao Huang, Chi Han, Shuiwang Ji, Sham M Kakade, Hao
  Peng, and Heng Ji. Eliminating position bias of language models: A mechanistic approach. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2407.01100, 2024c.
Sean Welleck, Ilia Kulikov, Stephen Roller, Emily Dinan, Kyunghyun Cho, and Jason Weston.
  Neural text generation with unlikelihood training. In International Conference on Learning
  Representations, 2020.
Fan Wu, Emily Black, and Varun Chandrasekaran. Generative monoculture in large language models.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2407.02209, 2024.
Haoran Xu, Amr Sharaf, Yunmo Chen, Weiting Tan, Lingfeng Shen, Benjamin Van Durme, Kenton
  Murray, and Young Jin Kim. Contrastive preference optimization: Pushing the boundaries of LLM
  performance in machine translation. ArXiv, abs/2401.08417, 2024.
Jing Xu, Andrew Lee, Sainbayar Sukhbaatar, and Jason Weston. Some things are more cringe than
   others: Preference optimization with the pairwise cringe loss. arXiv preprint arXiv:2312.16682,
   2023.
Rui Yang, Ruomeng Ding, Yong Lin, Huan Zhang, and Tong Zhang. Regularizing hidden states
  enables learning generalizable reward model for llms, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/
  abs/2406.10216.
Jiangyan Yi, Jianhua Tao, Zhengkun Tian, Ye Bai, and Cunhang Fan. Focal loss for punctuation
   prediction. In Interspeech, pp. 721–725, 2020.
Hongyi Yuan, Zheng Yuan, Chuanqi Tan, Wei Wang, Songfang Huang, and Fei Huang. RRHF: Rank
  responses to align language models with human feedback. In NeurIPS, 2023.
Susan Zhang, Stephen Roller, Naman Goyal, Mikel Artetxe, Moya Chen, Shuohui Chen, Christopher
  Dewan, Mona Diab, Xian Li, Xi Victoria Lin, et al. Opt: Open pre-trained transformer language
  models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2205.01068, 2022.
Yao Zhao, Rishabh Joshi, Tianqi Liu, Misha Khalman, Mohammad Saleh, and Peter J. Liu. SLiC-HF:
  Sequence likelihood calibration with human feedback. ArXiv, abs/2305.10425, 2023.
Chujie Zheng, Ziqi Wang, Heng Ji, Minlie Huang, and Nanyun Peng. Weak-to-strong extrapolation
  expedites alignment. arXiv preprint arXiv:2404.16792, 2024.
Rui Zheng, Shihan Dou, Songyang Gao, Yuan Hua, Wei Shen, Binghai Wang, Yan Liu, Senjie Jin,
  Qin Liu, Yuhao Zhou, et al. Secrets of RLHF in large language models part I: PPO. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2307.04964, 2023.
Daniel M Ziegler, Nisan Stiennon, Jeffrey Wu, Tom B Brown, Alec Radford, Dario Amodei, Paul
  Christiano, and Geoffrey Irving. Fine-tuning language models from human preferences. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:1909.08593, 2019.


                                                15
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A     P ROOFS AND D ERIVATIONS
A.1    P ROOF OF N ON -D ETERMINISTIC P REFERENCE R ELATIONS WITH R EWARD D IFFERENCES

Proof. From Munos et al. (2023), we assume the preference relation is antisymmetric: P (y1 ≻ y2 ) =
1 − P (y2 ≻ y1 ). Thus, under non-deterministic preference relations, P (yw ≻ yl ) ≈ P (yl ≻ yw ).
Since the true preference distribution p∗ is latent and unobserved, we consider the expectation over
the subset of non-deterministic samples Dnd ⊂ Dpref and express this preference relation using a
Bradley-Terry (BT) (Bradley & Terry, 1952) formulation.
Given this , the probability of preferring response yw over yl given context x is expressed as:
              E(x,yw ,yl )∼Dnd [P (yw ≻ yl | x)] = E(x,yw ,yl )∼Dnd [σ(r(x, yw ) − r(x, yl ))],       (7)
where σ(·) denotes the sigmoid function, and r(x, yw ) and r(x, yl ) represent the implicit rewards
for the winning and losing responses, respectively. Recall that the BT reward formulation under the
broad Plackett-Luce family models (Plackett, 1975) is characterized by underspecification. As such,
it does not impose restrictions on the reward function form, provided it satisfies equivalence relations,
i.e., rewards are defined up to a prompt-dependent shift (Definition 1 in Rafailov et al. (2024)).
Consequently, the expected reward differences still adhere to Proposition 1 without necessarily having
BT-motivated DPO’s implicit reward formulation.
Now, writing the complementary preference probability relation as:
         E(x,yw ,yl )∼Dnd [P (yl ≻ yw | x)] = E(x,yw ,yl )∼Dnd [1 − σ(r(x, yw ) − r(x, yl ))] ,      (8)
With some algebra, this can be conveniently rewritten as:
                                                                   −(r(x,yw )−r(x,yl ))
                                                                    e
           E(x,yw ,yl )∼Dnd [P (yl ≻ yw | x)] = E(x,yw ,yl )∼Dnd                            .        (9)
                                                                  1 + e−(r(x,yw )−r(x,yl ))
Given the non-deterministic preference, where P (yw ≻ yl ) ≈ P (yl ≻ yw ), equating the expected
probabilities yields:
                                                                      −∆r
                                          1                            e
                     E(x,yw ,yl )∼Dnd      −∆r
                                                 = E(x,yw ,yl )∼Dnd           ,             (10)
                                        1+e                          1 + e−∆r
where ∆r = r(x, yw ) − r(x, yl ).
Solving this relation under the assumption that ∆r ∈ (−∞, ∞), we get:
            E(x,yw ,yl )∼Dnd [1] = E(x,yw ,yl )∼Dnd e−∆r

                                                           ⇒ E(x,yw ,yl )∼Dnd [∆r] ≈ 0.             (11)

Thus, for non-deterministic preferences, the expected reward difference E[∆r] ≈ 0, indicating that
the implicit rewards r(x, yw ) and r(x, yl ) are nearly equal, under the expectation, where equality
naturally holds at the sample level.

A.2    P ROOF OF L EMMA 1 A AND 1 B

Proof. Let us rewrite the Bradley-Terry preference probability equation in terms of the DPO implicit
rewards. The BT model specifies this probability of preferring yw over yl as:

                           P (yw ≻ yl | x) = σ(r∗ (x, yw ) − r∗ (x, yl ))                           (12)
where the rewards can be rewritten in term of the DPO implicit rewards r̂w and r̂l as:

                                                                     
                                πθ∗ (yw | x)            πθ∗ (yl | x) 
      P (yw ≻ yl | x) = σ 
                          β log πref (yw | x) − β log πref (yl | x) 
                                                                                                   (13)
                            |      {z         } |          {z       }
                                  (r̂ )                   (r̂l )
                                  w
                                  πθ∗ (yw | x)πref (yl | x)
                      = σ β log                                                                     (14)
                                  πθ∗ (yl | x)πref (yw | x)
                                  πθ∗ (y | x)πref (y ′ | x)

                      = σ β log                                  , ∀(x, y, y ′ ) ∈ Dnd ⊂ Dpref      (15)
                                  πθ∗ (y ′ | x)πref (y | x)


                                                   16
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


where the above equation holds for all ∀(x, y, y ′ ) ∈ Dpref , since DPO does not distinguish between
the nature of the true preference relations in estimating the true preference probabilities, assuming
(y, y ′ ) appear as preferred and dispreferred responses respectively for any context x. Since this
RHS of Eq. 15 is simply the sigmoided difference of implicit rewards assigned by DPO to estimate
the true preference probabilities, it is straightforward to see from Proposition 1 that the RHS i.e.,
 πθ∗ (y)πref (y ′ )                            1
 πθ∗ (y ′ ) πref (y) → 1 and P (yw ≻ yl | x) ∼ 2 , as per our definition of non-deterministic preferences.
Since the reference model πref is assumed to have full support over the output space (supp(πref ) = Y)
and is not updated, without losing any generality, this implies that ππθθ∗∗(y(y)
                                                                               ′ ) must remain close to 1 to
                                      ′
satisfy this constraint ( ππθθ∗∗ (y)  πref (y )
                                 (y ′ )πref (y) → 1) in which case the policy tends to underfit the preference
distribution since the preference signals are weak and policy cannot distinguish between the preferred
and the dispreferred response.
Similar to Azar et al. (2023)’s argument, we can argue here that in this case when true preference
probabilities are ∼ 12 , i.e., non-deterministic, DPO’s empirical reward difference estimates actually
tend toward one which leads to underfitting of the optimal policy πθ∗ during alignment. Indeed, in
this case, the β parameter does not provide any additional regularization effect to prevent policy
underfitting especially under finite data. This completes the proof of Lemma 1a.

We can similarly prove Lemma 1b in the case when |Dnd | ≪ N where N is assumed to be finite. In
this case, in a similar vein as Azar et al. (2023), there is more likelihood that DPO sigmoided reward
difference estimates are 1, i.e., r∗ (x, yw ) − r∗ (x, yl ) → ∞.
As such, from Eq. 12, it is straightforward to see that the term

                                              πθ∗ (y | x)πref (y ′ | x)

                                   log                                        →∞
                                              πθ∗ (y ′ | x)πref (y | x)
in Eq. 15. This implies that
                                          πθ∗ (y | x)πref (y ′ | x)
                                                                    → ∞.
                                          πθ∗ (y ′ | x)πref (y | x)

A.3    P ROOF OF L EMMA 1 C

Proof. Our proof follows the argumentation in Fisch et al. (2024). Assume for now that all preference
samples (y, y ′ ) ∈ Dpref , including non-deterministic preference pairs, are mutually exclusive. Then,
for the DPO objective (Eq. 3) to be minimized, each θy must correspond uniquely to y, where θy are
the optimal parameters that minimize the DPO objective in each such disjoint preference pair. This
implies that DPO objective over Dpref is convex in the set Λ = {λ1 , . . . , λn }, where
                                                 (i)       (i)
                                                               !
                                            πθ (yw )πref (yl )
                               λi = β log        (i)       (i)
                                                                 , ∀i ∈ N                          (16)
                                            πθ (yl )πref (yw )

Now, consider the non-deterministic preference samples indexed by j, which belong to the set
Dnd ⊂ Dpref . Let j ∈ {k + 1, . . . , N } with the assumption k ≫ (N − k). Under the mutual
exclusivity assumption, Eq. 16 must also hold true for the non-deterministic preference samples.
Consequently, we can rewrite Eq. 16 as:

                                                 (j)             (j)
                                                                              !
                                          πθ (yw | x)πref (yl          | x)
                        λj = β log               (j)             (j)
                                                                                  ,   ∀j ∈ Dnd           (17)
                                          πθ (yl       | x)πref (yw | x)
More specifically, for every j, the following holds at the limit for the DPO objective to converge:
                                              lim − log (σ (λj )) = 0,                                   (18)
                                           λj →∞


which implies that Λ∗ = {∞}N induces a set of global minimizers of the DPO objective that includes
θ∗ that are optimal for the set of non-deterministic preference samples, while inducing a parallel set
of θ∗ at convergence for deterministic samples.


                                                           17
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Consequently, all global minimizers θ∗ including those optimal on the non-deterministic samples
must satisfy
                                          (j)       (j)
                                     πθ (yw )πref (yl )
                                 log      (j)       (j)
                                                        = ∞.                               (19)
                                     πθ (yl )πref (yw )

Since 0 < πref (y) < 1 for all y, θ∗ must satisfy
                                                          (j)
                                                    πθ∗ (yw )
                                                          (j)
                                                                    = ∞,                                             (20)
                                                    πθ∗ (yl )
                  (j)                      (j)                                                (j)                     (j)
implying πθ∗ (yl ) = 0 and πθ∗ (yw ) > 0 for all i ∈ N , given that πθ∗ (yw ) ≤ 1 for any yw .
Alternatively, let us define the complement of the aggregated representation of all the dispreferred
            (j)
responses yl i.e., ϕ(yl )c , where ϕ(yl ) is the aggregation function. We thereby have,

                                                                           (j)
                                  ϕ(yl ) = {y : ∃j ∈ N such that yl              = y},                               (21)

Under these conditions, it is clear that πθ∗ must assign the entire remaining probability mass to ϕ(yl )
as given below,
                                                   X
                                  πθ∗ (C(yl )) =        πθ∗ (y) = 0                                (22)
                                                         y∈ϕ(yl )

                                                       =⇒ πθ∗ (ϕ(yl )c ) = 1.                                        (23)
This completes the proof of Lemma 1c and thus Lemma 1.



A.4    P ROOF OF L EMMA 2

Proof. Let us first rewrite the e-DPO objective over the preference dataset Dpref and examine how
the optimal policy πθ behaves upon convergence of this objective. For simplicity, we only consider
the point-wise reward based distillation of the e-DPO formulation and do not consider ensembles of
rewards. Additionally, note that the e-DPO objective does not require preference labels and can apply
to any response pair.

                                          "                                                                 2 #
          ∗                                     ∗               ∗              πθ (y1 | x)πref (y2 | x)
Ldistill (r , πθ ) = E(x,y1 ,y2 )∼Dpref        r (x, y1 ) − r (x, y2 ) − β log
                                                                               πθ (y2 | x)πref (y1 | x)
                                                                                                                     (24)
                                     "                                                                                2 #
                                                                                 πθ (y1 | x)         πref (y1 | x)
                  = E(x,y1 ,y2 )∼ρ        r∗ (x, y1 ) − r∗ (x, y2 ) − β log                  + β log                        .
                                                                                 πθ (y2 | x)         πref (y2 | x)
                                                                                                                     (25)

As πθ converges to the optimal policy πθ∗ , the distillation objective Ldistill should ideally approach
zero and can be expressed as,
                                     lim Ldistill (r∗ , πθ ) = 0
                                            πθ →πθ∗

With some slight algebraic rearrangement and substituting the optimal policy πθ∗ for πθ at conver-
gence, we get:

                                                           πθ∗ (y1 | x)         πref (y1 | x)
                     r∗ (x, y1 ) − r∗ (x, y2 ) = β log                  − β log               .
                                                           πθ∗ (y2 | x)         πref (y2 | x)
Since (y1 , y2 ) represents any response pairs without requiring them to be preference labels, we can
substitute them with (y, y ′ ) ∈ Dnd ⊂ Dpref , where y = yw and y ′ = yl . Without losing any generality,


                                                           18
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


we can now rewrite the above equation as,

                                                    πθ∗ (y | x)              πref (y | x)
                    r∗ (x, y) − r∗ (x, y ′ ) = β log      ′
                                                                  − β log                                         (26)
                                                    πθ∗ (y | x)             πref (y ′ | x)
                                                                          ′

                                                      πθ∗ (y | x)πref (y | x)
                                            = β log                                                               (27)
                                                      πθ∗ (y ′ | x)πref (y | x)

Now,  recall from ′our proof of Lemma 1b where we show that′ the RHS term of the above equation
           (y|x)πref (y |x)                                        ref (y |x)
log ππθθ∗∗ (y ′ |x)π (y|x)
                    ref
                            → ∞, which implies that ππθθ∗∗ (y|x)π
                                                           (y ′ |x)πref (y|x) → ∞. Indeed, when |Dnd | ≪ N
where N is finite, unregularized scalar reward estimates of the true preference probabilities can in
fact grow exceedingly large in the absence of any other regularization parameters, since β by its own
does not provide enough regularization as shown in our proof of Lemma 1a. Interestingly, similar
arguments have also been made in previous works (Azar et al., 2023). The rest of this proof follows
the same argumentation starting Eq. 19 assuming 0 < πref (y) < 1.
This completes the proof of Lemma 2.


A.5    G RADIENT D ERIVATION OF THE F OCAL -S OFTENED L OG -O DDS U NLIKELIHOOD L OSS

In this section, we derive and analyze DRDO loss gradient and offer insights into how to compared
supervised alignment objectives such as DPO (Rafailov et al., 2023). Note that we do not analyze
the reward distillation component here since it does not directly interact with the focal-softened
contrastive log-"unlikelihood" term in training and since it is naturally convex considering its a
squared term. Let us first rewrite our full DRDO loss, as:


                                                   "
                                                                                                       2
                Lkd (r∗ , πθ ) = E(x,y1 ,y2 )∼Dpref (r∗ (x, y1 ) − r∗ (x, y2 ) − (r̂1 − r̂2 ))
                                                    |                   {z                    }
                                                                  Reward Difference
                                                                          #
                                               γ          πθ (yw | x)
                                 − α(1 − pw ) log                              ,                                  (28)
                                                        1 − πθ (yl | x)
                                   |                  {z                  }
                                           Contrastive Log-"unlikelihood"



where pw = σ(zw − zl ) = 1+e−(z1 w −zl ) and quantifies the student policy’s confidence in correctly
assigning the preference from zw = log πθ (yw | x) and zl = log πθ (yl | x), or the log-probabilities
of the winning and losing responses, respectively.
Without the expectation, consider only the focal-softened log-odds unlikelihood loss given by:


                                                                πθ (yw | x)
                                −α · (1 − pw )γ · log                               ,                             (29)
                                                              1 − πθ (yl | x)


Taking the gradient of this term with respect to the model parameters θ and using σ ′ (x) =
σ(x) (1 − σ(x)), we derive:



                                    γ−1                                                       πθ (yw | x)
           ∇θ Lkd = αγ(1 − pw )       pw (1 − pw )(∇θ zw − ∇θ zl ) · log                                          (30)
                                                                                            1 − πθ (yl | x)

                                   γ   ∇θ πθ (yw | x)    ∇θ πθ (yl | x)
                      − α(1 − pw )                    +                    .                                      (31)
                                        πθ (yw | x)     1 − πθ (yl | x)


                                                       19
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                        γ                                           πθ (yw | x)
                 ∇θ Lkd = αγ(1 − pw ) pw (∇θ zw − ∇θ zl ) · log                                         (32)
                                                                                  1 − πθ (yl | x)
                                                                                           
                                           ∇ π (y | x)    ∇θ πθ (yl | x) 
                                           θ θ w
                            − α(1 − pw )γ               +                 .                           (33)
                                                                           
                                           πθ (yw | x)    1 − πθ (yl | x) 
                                           |     {z     } |     {z       }
                                                increase πθ (yw |x)       decrease πθ (yl |x)


While this above equation might appear rather cumbersome, notice that in preference learning in
language models, the output token space Y is exponentially large. Additionally, in typical bandit
settings, we consider the entire response itself as the action (summation of log probabilities). Since
the modulating term 0 ≤ (1 − pw )γ ≤ 1 and α is typically small ∼ 0.1 (Lin et al., 2018; Yi et al.,
2020) compared to gradients appearing in likelihood terms appearing above, we can conveniently
ignore the first term for the gradient analysis.
Simplifying the above equation, we get
                                                                                           
                                      ∇ π (y | x)    ∇θ πθ (yl | x) 
                                      θ θ w
                        −α(1 − pw )γ               +                 .                                (34)
                                                                      
                                      πθ (yw | x)    1 − πθ (yl | x) 
                                      |     {z     } |     {z       }
                                            increase πθ (yw |x)       decrease πθ (yl |x)


We can now draw some insights and direct comparisons of our approach with Direct Preference
Optimization (DPO) (Rafailov et al., 2023). As in most contrastive preference learning gradient
terms (Rafailov et al., 2023; Hong et al., 2024; Xu et al., 2024; Meng et al., 2024; Ethayarajh et al.,
2024), the term ∇πθθπ(y
                     θ (yw |x)
                        w |x)
                               in Eq. 34 amplifies the gradient when πθ (yw | x) is low, driving up the
likelihood of the preferred response yw . Similarly, ∇ θ πθ (yl |x)
                                                     1−πθ (yl |x) penalizes overconfidence in incorrect
completions yl when pw is low, encouraging the model to hike preferred response likelihood while
discouraging dispreferred ones.
The key insight here is that the modulating term, (1 − pw )γ , strategically amplifies corrections for
difficult examples where the probability pw of the correct (winning) response is low. Intuitively,
unlike DPO’s fixed β that is applied across the whole training dataset, this modulating term amplifies
gradient updates when preference signals are weak (pw ≈ 0.5) and tempering updates when they are
strong (pw ≈ 1), thus ensuring robust learning across varying preference scenarios. Intuitively, when
(pw ≈ 1), the model is already confident of its decision since pw remains high, indicating increased
model confidence for deterministic preferences. In contrast, when pw is small, (1 − pw ) remains near
1, and the term (1 − pw )γ retains significant magnitude, especially for larger values of γ. This allows
πθ in DRDO to learn from both deterministic and non-deterministic preferences, effectively blending
reward alignment with preference signals to guide optimization.
For a deeper intuition, consider the case where the true preference probabilities from p∗ (x, y) ∼ 12 .
In this case, since non-deterministic preference samples are typically low, from Proposition 1, DPO
would assign zero difference in its implicit rewards, especially for finite preference data. Then as
Lemma 1(a) suggests, DPO gradients would effectively be nullified, regardless of β since the its
reward difference range ∈ (−∞, +∞). In this case as πθ cannot distinguish between the preference
pair and, in turn, effectively misses out on the preference information for such samples.
On the other hand, for |Dnd | ≪ N , if πθ in DPO estimates the true preference close to 1 where p̂ = 1,
as Lemma 1(b) suggests, the empirical policy would assign very high probabilities to tokens that do
not even appear in the data. This leads to a surprising combination of both underfitting and overfitting,
except the overfitting here results in DPO policy generating tokens that are irrelevant to the context.
However, as Lemma 2 suggests, e-DPO does not directly face this limitation during training, but the
degeneracy manifests upon convergence. Under the same conditions, the DRDO loss still operates
at a sample level because if the DRDO estimate of p∗ (via pw ) is close to its true value of ∼ 21 , the
modulating factor ensures that gradients do not vanish. This allows DRDO to continue learning
from such samples until convergence when winning and losing probabilities are pushed further apart


                                                      20
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                πθ (yw |x)
(Fig. 2). Intuitively, the log 1−π  θ (yl |x)
                                                term is minimized precisely under this condition where the
modulating term is also close to zero.

    DRDO Algorithm
                                                (i) (i)
    Input: Preference dataset Dpref = {(x(i) , yw , yl )}N
                                                         i=1 , initialized policy model with reward
    head πθ,θ′ ← SFT(θ) ⊕ rθ′ .
    Output: Optimized model parameters θ in policy πθ .

    1. Train Oracle rϕ with loss LO (rϕ , Dpref ) (see Eq. 5).
    2. For t = 1, . . . , T :
                                (i) (i)
        (a) For each (x(i) , yw , yl ) in Dpref :
                                          (i)                        (i)
                              ∗
            i. Compute r1 = rϕ (x(i) , yw ) and r2∗ = rϕ (x(i) , yl ).
                                           (i)                         (i)
            ii. Compute r̂1 = rθ′ (x(i) , yw ) and r̂2 = rθ′ (x(i) , yl ).
            iii. Compute knowledge distillation loss:
                                                   "                                                                                  !#
                                                                                                               (i)
                                                          ∗    ∗                2           γ             πθ (yw   | x(i) )
       Lkd (r ∗ , πθ ) = E       (i) (i)                 r1 − r2 − (r̂1 − r̂2 ) − α(1 − pw ) log                                           .
                         (x(i) ,yw ,y    )∼Dpref                                                                     (i)
                                     l                 |           {z           }                     1 − πθ (yl           | x(i) )
                                                             Reward Difference    |                   {z                              }
                                                                                          Contrastive Log-"unlikelihood"

           iv. Update πθ,θ′ using Lkd .
    3. Return: Aligned policy πθ .

Table 5: DRDO Algorithm steps. We start off with the preference dataset and an SFT-trained policy initialized
with an additional linear head parameterized by θ′ . Once our oracle is trained, we compute both estimated
rewards for each response (y) from the initial policy (r̂) as well as from the oracle (r∗ ). We then use Lkd to
update both θ and θ′ in πθ resulting in our DRDO aligned policies.



B     F URTHER N OTES ON E XPERIMENTAL S ETUP

We provide the following additional explanatory notes regarding the experimental setup:

         • For non-deterministic and nuanced preferences, note that although we fine-tune
           all approaches (including DRDO) on https://huggingface.co/datasets/
           CarperAI/openai_summarize_tldr, every baseline we use is policy-aligned with
           only the training data within Dall , Dhc,he and Dℓc,ℓe for a direct comparison.
         • Pal et al. (2024) assume non-determinism of preferences to be correlated to edit-distances
           between pairwise-samples, but we do not make sure assumptions and consider both the true
           (oracle) rewards and edit-distances between pairs to verify the robustness of our method. Pal
           et al. (2024)’s theoretical framework brings insights on DPO’s suboptimality assumes small
           edit distance between pairwise samples and they empirically show this primarily for math
           and reasoning based tasks. In contrast, our evaluation framework is more general in the sense
           that we consider both the oracle reward difference as well as edit distance in addressing
           DPO’s limitations in learning from non-deterministic preferences and we evaluate on a more
           diverse set of prompts apart from math and reasoning tasks.
         • For reward distillation w.r.t to model size, the version of Ultrafeedback we
           used can be found at https://huggingface.co/datasets/argilla/
           ultrafeedback-binarized-preferences-cleaned.
         • For SFT on both experiments, use the TRL library implementation (https://
           huggingface.co/docs/trl/en/sft_trainer) for SFT training on all initial
           policies for all baselines.

B.1     C HOICE OF E VALUATION DATASETS

As mentioned in Sec. 5, our experiments were designed to balance robustness and thoroughness with
research budget constraints, and to account for properties of the task being evaluated relative to the
data. The rationale for evaluating DRDO’s robustness to non-deterministic or ambiguous preferences


                                                                   21
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


is straightforward: the TL;DR dataset is annotated with human confidence labels, which enables the
creation of the Dhc,he and Dℓc,ℓe splits requires to test the different non-determinism settings.
Testing the effect of model size on reward distillation does not require human confidence labels,
and as the TL;DR training data size is 1.3M rows, testing distillation across 5 models became
computationally intractable given available resources. Thus we turned to Ultrafeedback, which at
a train size of 61.1k rows made this experiment much more feasible. Additionally, Ultrafeedback
is rather better suited to the preference distillation problem because Ultrafeedback was specifically
annotated and cleaned (Cui et al., 2024), for the purposes of evaluating open source models for
distillation. Ultrafeedback also provides a high quality dataset with GPT-4 or scores on both
straighforward summarization instruction following and multiple preference dimensions such as
honesty, truthfulness, and helpfulness. Previous work like Zephyr (Tunstall et al., 2023) utilize this
dataset for evaluating preference distillation. However, their method is more of a data-augmentation
method and does not provide any novel distillation algorithms for preferences since they use the DPO
loss but with cleaner and diverse feedback data. They only test student models of ∼7B parameters,
which are still relatively large models that require additional compute for training without including
some form of PEFT. As such, Ultrafeedback is best suited to evaluate distillation-based methods and
our novel contribution in this area included evaluation of smaller distilled models.



B.2    TL;DR S UMMARIZATION DATASET S PLITS



Table 6: Mean confidence and normalized edit distance statistics our TL;DR preference generalization experi-
ment.

                Split      Conf (Mean)       Edit Dist (Mean)       Train     Validation
                Dall            5.01                0.12            44,709       86,086
                Dhc,he          7.31                0.15            10,136        1,127
                Dℓc,ℓe          2.67                0.09            10,000        1,112



Table 6 shows the mean confidence and normalized edit distance statistics in the TL;DR dataset
which we used to compute the deterministic and non-determinisitic splits. Dall represents the full
data (Stiennon et al., 2020). Dhc,he and Dℓc,ℓe represent subsets created by splitting at the 50th
percentile of human labeler confidence and edit distance values. The range of labeler confidence
values for the full training data range is [1, 9]. Additionally, segmenting the training data based on the
combination of confidence and edit distance thresholds do not make the splits roughly half of the
full training data. This is because there are many samples that do not simultaneously satisfy the 50th
percentile threshold for each metric. In reality, this choice is intentional to more robustly evaluate
DRDO under more difficult preference data settings. Additionally, previous theoretical as well as
empirical work (Pal et al., 2024) has shown that supervised methods like DPO fail to learn optimal
policies when the token-level similarity is high in the preference pairs, especially in the beginning
of the response. Therefore, we apply this combined thresholding for all our experiments on TL;DR
summarization dataset.



C     P REFERENCE L IKELIHOOD A NALYSIS

Fig. 4 shows preference optimization method performance vs. training steps, according to Bradley-
Terry (BT) implicit reward accuracies (Fig. 4a), Oracle reward advantage (Fig. 4b), preferred log-
probabilities (Fig. 4c) and dispreferred log-probabilities (Fig. 4d). Although all baselines show
roughly equal performance in increasing the likelihood of preferred responses (yw ), DRDO is
particularly efficient in penalizing dispreferred responses (yl ) as Fig. 4d suggests.


                                                    22
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                      (a)                                                       (b)


                      (c)                                                       (d)

Figure 4: Top: DRDO performance evolution during OPT 1.3B training compared to DPO and e-DPO on the
evaluation set of Ultrafeedback (Cui et al., 2024), and randomly sampled generations to compute the reward
advantage against the preferred reference generations.


D    H YPERPARAMETERS

           Table 7: Model Configuration and Full set of hyperparameter used for DRDO Training

                   Parameter                                       Default Value
                   learning_rate                                      5e-6
                   lr_scheduler_type                                 cosine
                   weight_decay                                       0.05
                   optimizer_type                              paged_adamw_32bit
                   loss_type                                         DRDO
                   per_device_train_batch_size                         12
                   per_device_eval_batch_size                          12
                   gradient_accumulation_steps                          4
                   gradient_checkpointing                             True
                   gradient_checkpointing_use_reentrant               False
                   max_prompt_length                                   512
                   max_length                                         1024
                   max_new_tokens                                      256
                   max_steps                                            20
                   logging_steps                                         5
                   save_steps                                          200
                   save_strategy                                        no
                   eval_steps                                            5
                   log_freq                                              1
                   α                                                   0.1
                   γ                                                    2


We only use full-parameter training for all our policy models. We train all our student policies
for 1k steps with an effective batch size of 64, after applying an gradient accumulation step of 4.


                                                   23
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Specifically, both OPT series and Phi-3-Mini-4K-Instruct model were optimized using DeepSpeed
ZeRO 2 (Rasley et al., 2020) for faster training. All models were trained on 2 NVIDIA A100 GPUs,
except for certain runs that were conducted on an additional L40 gpu. For the optimizer, we used
AdamW (Loshchilov et al., 2017) and paged AdamW (Dettmers et al., 2024) optimizers with learning
rates that were linearly warmed up with a cosine-scheduled decay. For both datasets, we filter for
prompt and response pairs that are < 1024 tokens after tokenization. This allows the policies enough
context for coherent generation. Apart from keeping compute requirement reasonable, this avoids
degeneration during inference since we force the model to only generate upto 256 new tokens not
including the prompt length in the maximum token length.
For our DRDO approach, we sweep over α ∈ {.1, 1} and γ ∈ {0, 1, 2, 5} but found the most optimal
combination to be α = 0.1 and γ = 2, since a higher γ tends to destabilize training due to the larger
penalties induced on DRDO loss. This is consistent with optimal γ values found in the literature,
albeit for different tasks (Yi et al., 2020; Lin et al., 2018). For Oracle trained for DRDO, we use the
same batch size as for policy training with a slightly larger learning rate of 1e-5 and train for epoch.
For consistency, we use a maximum length of 1024 tokens after filtering for pairs with prompt and
responses < 1024 tokens. For all SFT training, we use the TRL library8 with a learning rate of 1e-5
with a cosine scheduler and 100 warmup steps.
For the DPO baselines, we found the implementation in DPO Trainer9 For optimal parameter selection,
we sweep over β ∈ {.1, 0.5, 1, 10} but we found the default value of β = 0.1 to be most optimal
based on the validation sets during training. Also, we found the default learning rate of 5e-6 to be
optimal after validation runs. For e-DPO, we restrict the number of reward ensembles to 3 but use the
same Oracle training hyperparameters mentioned above.
Table 7 provides a full list of model configurations and hyperparameters used during trainng of
DRDO models.

E       W IN -R ATE E VALUATION P ROMPT F ORMATS
Fig. 6 and Fig. 7 show the prompt format used for GPT-4o evaluation of policy generations compared
to human summaries provided in the evaluation data of Reddit TL;DR (CNN Daily Articles). Fig. 6
specifically provides the human-written summaries as reference in GPT’s evaluation of the baselines.
In contrast, Fig. 7 shows the prompt that was used to evaluate policy generated summaries in direct
comparison to human-written summaries. Note that in both prompts, we swap order of provided
summaries to avoid any positional bias in GPT-4o’s automatic evaluation.

E.1     F URTHER ABLATIONS USING GPT-4 O AS ORACLE

For a more robust evaluation using a much more high-capacity oracle (GPT-4o), we randomly
sampled 40 prompts from the CNN daily test set and compute win-rates and reward margins of
samples generated with a top-p of 0.8 and T=0.7 for all baselines vs. DRDO policies trained on
Reddit TL;DR. We use the Phi-3-Mini-4K-Instruct model for this experiment. We include the IPO
baseline (Azar et al., 2024) with β = 0.1 (or τ in their paper), the baselines without the distillation
(shown as DRDO (-R)) and contrastive component (shown as DRDO (-C)). Additionally, we include
the baseline where reward distillation term in DRDO is replaced by the DPO loss but keep the
contrastive log-unlikelihood component (shown as DPO (-C)). Tab. 8 shows results of this experiment.
Note that due to compute constraints, we only train these policies from the SFT checkpoint for 500
steps with an effective batch size of 128. For the reward estimates using GPT-4o, we only add one
additional condition to the prompt shown in Fig. 5 to get scalar rewards (between 0 and 1). Fig. 8
provides the prompt format used for this experiment.

E.2     DRDO P ERFORMANCE VS E XTENT OF O UT- OF - DISTRIBUTION DATA

In order to comprehensively evaluate DRDO’s performance against baseline methods under increasing
out-of-distribution (OOD) conditions, we randomly sample 1,000 prompts from the CNN/DailyMail
    8
     https://huggingface.co/docs/trl/en/sft_trainer
    9
     https://huggingface.co/docs/trl/main/en/dpo_trainer to be the most stable and
build off most of our DRDO training pipline and configuration files based on their trainer.


                                                  24
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


 Comparison                WR A (%)      WR B (%)        Reward A    Reward B      Margin A     Margin B
 DRDO vs. DRDO (-R)           85.0           15.0        0.24±0.26    0.07±0.08    0.22±0.22    0.09±0.04
 DRDO vs. DRDO (-C)           90.0           10.0        0.25±0.23    0.05±0.07    0.23±0.22    0.06±0.03
 DRDO vs. IPO                 65.0           35.0        0.21±0.17    0.21±0.24    0.09±0.08    0.16±0.16
 DRDO vs. DPO (-C)            80.0           20.0        0.18±0.16    0.14±0.15    0.11±0.08    0.22±0.21

Table 8: DRDO policies (shown as A) compared against various baselines (shown as B)–win-rates (WR) are
computed using average of reward comparison for each sample and then averaged. Margins are computed using
the difference of rewards.

dataset and segment these prompts into bins of 50 tokens based on prompt-token counts, spanning the
full range of token lengths. Since the CNN/DailyMail dataset represents a previously unseen input
distribution, this evaluation effectively measures the OOD generalization capabilities of the policies
as prompt lengths (and corresponding news article lengths) increase. For this automatic evaluation,
we use GPT-4o as a high-capacity judge, consistent with Sec. 5 (prompt used is shown in Fig. 6). For
response sampling, we use top-p of 0.8 and temperature of 0.7 for DRDO and all baselines. The
trends in Fig. 5 suggest that as OOD composition (with prompt-token lengths as proxy) increases, on
average DRDO policies tend to have relatively larger win-rates compared to shorter prompts over
baselines like DPO and e-DPO. In contrast, we find that DPO and e-DPO win-rates tend to decrease
with increase in prompt-lengths.


Figure 5: Comparison of win-rates as a function of the extent of out-of-distribution (OOD) data on the CNN
daily article dataset. Win-rates (y-axis) of DRDO vs DPO and e-DPO (top) and competitor win-rates (bottom)
are plotted against the increasing prompt lengths (number of tokens) over 1000 randomly sampled prompts for
evaluation. DRDO is more robust to OOD settings, on average, compared to baselines like DPO and e-DPO as
seen in the upward trend in win-rates over prompt-tokens.



F    C OMPUTATIONAL E FFICIENCY
e-DPO requires training reward ensembles to form a confidence set for training the policy. In our
experiments, we use 3 reward models to construct this set which makes it roughly thrice as expensive
as DRDO training. Like DPO, e-DPO requires a separate reference model to be kept in memory,


                                                    25
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                         Figure 6: Prompt format for Reddit TL;DR (CNN Daily)


                         Figure 7: Prompt format for Reddit TL;DR (CNN Daily)

further increasing compute requirements. DRDO, on the other hand, only requires a trained oracle
for distillation. The expected oracle rewards can be precomputed once and a separate reference
model does not need to be kept in memory (as shown in Eq. 6). During training, DRDO does
require one additional linear head on top of the base LM to predict the reward estimates. This adds a
negligible 0.003% more trainable parameters (relative to the language modeling head of base LM
Phi-3-Mini-4K-Instruct). During inference, DRDO trained policies do not require this head.

G    DRDO VS P LURALISTIC P REFERENCES

In certain circumstances, non-deterministic preferences, as reflected in low labeler confidence or equal
rewards, could be a consequence of innate pluralistic tendencies of human preferences. However,
DRDO is not motivated directly by pluralistic preferences, where there are multiple annotations (or
preferences) for a single (x, y1 , y2 ), but by the diversity of preference strength for paired samples.


                                                  26
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


     Summarization GPT-4o win rate prompt (C).
     Which of the following summaries do a better job of summarizing the most
     important points in the given forum post, without including unimportant
     or irrelevant details? Make your decision while referring to the reference
     (human-written) summary. A good summary is both precise and concise.
     Post:
     <post>
     Reference Summary:
     <golden summary>
     Summary A:
     <Summary A>
     Summary B:
     <Summary B>
     FIRST, provide a one-sentence comparison of the two summaries, explaining
     which you prefer and why.
     SECOND, on a new line, state only "A" or "B" to
     indicate your choice. Your response should use the format:
     THIRD, on a new line, provide your ratings (a real reward score between 0 to 1 where 1 is
     highest and 0 is lowest in quality) for the summaries.
     Comparison: <one-sentence comparison and explanation>
     Preferred: <"A" or "B">
     Score for Summary A: <score>
     Score for Summary B: <score>


                                Figure 8: Prompt format for Reddit TL;DR

Typically, pluralistic approaches require multiple reward models (rewarded soups Ramé et al. (2023),
e-DPO Fisch et al. (2024), MaxMin-RLHF Chakraborty et al., or conditioned policy Wang et al.
(2024b)) to model such preferences. This is computationally expensive and assumes rewards over
multiple dimensions can be linearly interpolated. We do not make any such assumptions: 1) our
main argument is that non-deterministic preferences likely constitute a non-trivial amount of paired
samples in popular preference datasets and as such, DRDO provides an efficient alignment method
under such conditions. 2) our only strong assumption in the modeling is that the Oracle reward
model, given sufficient data, should reasonably approximate human preferences using any standard
reward-modeling approach. Furthermore, given such an oracle, we directly regress on the rewards
and, unlike e-DPO, do not need to find additional optimal parameters like β in the regression or
confidence set in policies or reward model ensembles. Thus our DRDO approach does not need to
learn a variety of models each unique to specific viewpoints expressed in the data, and thus our results
that best the competitor baselines reflect that we are able to fit better to non-deterministic preferences
while still maintaining an ability to fit to deterministic preferences and the data distribution at large.


H    S ENSITIVITY OF DRDO’ S γ VS DPO’ S β W. R . T KL- DIVERGENCE OVER
     SFT MODEL

We ran an additional experiment to compare the sensitivity of model-specific hyperparameters
(DRDO’s γ vs DPO’s β). Keeping α as 0.1 for all DRDO policies, we compute the KL-divergence
during training on sampled generations on 40 randomly sampled evaluation prompts in the held-
out set of Ultrafeedback with top-p of 0.8 and temperature of 0.7 with various γ values in DRDO
(α = 0.1) and with different KL-β values in DPO using the SFT-trained Phi-3-Mini-4K-Instruct
model. Tab. 9 shows expected KL-divergence (averaged over tokens) over the 40 completions at every
100 steps of training. The expected reward accuracies (win-rates) over the SFT model completions
with the same hyperparameters over these samples (after 400 training steps) are shown in Tab. 10
below.


                                                   27
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


These results suggest that while DRDO does not explicitly regularize its policy wrt reference-model
based KL regularization, it still outperforms DPO in oracle-assigned expected reward accuracies
(win-rates) on sampled generations as long as the γ parameter is carefully chosen. In particular, as
previously observed in Meng et al. (2024); Rafailov et al. (2024) , smaller β in DPO tends to increase
KL-divergence with respect to the baseline SFT model. However, a relatively larger KL divergence
in DRDO on average does not necessarily impede preference learning but larger γ values tend to
degrade expected rewards.

    Step    DRDO (γ = 5)      DRDO (γ = 2)       DRDO (γ = 1)      DPO (β = 0.01)      DPO (β = 0.1)
    100          0.63               0.44              0.82               0.64                0.38
    200          0.35               1.51              1.67               0.81                0.39
    300          0.59               1.67              1.82               1.17                0.42
    400          0.64               1.63              1.71               1.35                0.44

Table 9: KL-divergence during training on sampled generations on 40 randomly sampled evaluation prompts
in the held-out set of Ultrafeedback with top-p of 0.8 and temperature of 0.7 with various γ values in DRDO
(α = 0.1) and with different KL-β values in DPO using the Phi-3-Mini-4K-Instruct model.


                            Model                Expected Oracle Reward
                            DPO (β = 0.1)            0.775 (± 0.42)
                            DPO (β = 0.01)           0.675 (± 0.47)
                            DRDO (γ = 1)             0.750 (± 0.44)
                            DRDO (γ = 2)             0.825 (± 0.38)
                            DRDO (γ = 5)             0.600 (± 0.50)

Table 10: DRDO vs DPO expected reward accuracies (win-rates) over the SFT-model completions computed
using the OPT 1.3B oracle model.

As for the exponential parameter γ, γ = 2 appears to be a reasonable choice, as previously found in
in Lin et al. (2018); Yi et al. (2020) in the focal loss literature. A larger γ can harshly penalize the
loss when the policy is uncertain (pw << 1 ) while a smaller γ = 0 may not adequately penalize
and impact its adaptive nature. In our experiments including the above experiment, we find that
the optimal reward is achieved for γ = 2 while too low or too high a γ can affect performance as
seen in Tab. 10 . Note that, although we find γ = 2 to be optimal across datasets, a reasonable way
to find the right γ would vary case by case–if the baseline policy at the start of alignment training
has not undergone or in off-policy settings, a lower γ could be ideal since a higher γ might apply
harsher penalties in this case. However, if the policy is initialized with SFT model (as in DRDO) or
in on-policy (where pw is likely to be higher already) alignment settings, a higher γ could be optimal.
In practice though, empirical validation on a held-out set can be an efficient alternative, similar to
how an optimal β can be determined in algorithms like DPO.


                                                    28
