Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A DAPTIVE Q-N ETWORK : O N - THE - FLY TARGET
S ELECTION FOR D EEP R EINFORCEMENT L EARNING
                   Théo Vincent1,2,∗ Fabian Wahren1,2 Jan Peters1,2,3
                           Boris Belousov1 Carlo D’Eramo2,3,4
         1
           DFKI GmbH, SAIROL 2 Department of Computer Science, TU Darmstadt
    3
      Hessian.ai, TU Darmstadt 4 Center for AI and Data Science, University of Würzburg

                                              A BSTRACT
            Deep Reinforcement Learning (RL) is well known for being highly sensitive to
            hyperparameters, requiring practitioners substantial efforts to optimize them for
            the problem at hand. This also limits the applicability of RL in real-world scenar-
            ios. In recent years, the field of automated Reinforcement Learning (AutoRL) has
            grown in popularity by trying to address this issue. However, these approaches
            typically hinge on additional samples to select well-performing hyperparameters,
            hindering sample-efficiency and practicality. Furthermore, most AutoRL meth-
            ods are heavily based on already existing AutoML methods, which were orig-
            inally developed neglecting the additional challenges inherent to RL due to its
            non-stationarities. In this work, we propose a new approach for AutoRL, called
            Adaptive Q-Network (AdaQN), that is tailored to RL to take into account the non-
            stationarity of the optimization procedure without requiring additional samples.
            AdaQN learns several Q-functions, each one trained with different hyperparam-
            eters, which are updated online using the Q-function with the smallest approx-
            imation error as a shared target. Our selection scheme simultaneously handles
            different hyperparameters while coping with the non-stationarity induced by the
            RL optimization procedure and being orthogonal to any critic-based RL algorithm.
            We demonstrate that AdaQN is theoretically sound and empirically validate it in
            MuJoCo control problems and Atari 2600 games, showing benefits in sample-
            efficiency, overall performance, robustness to stochasticity and training stability.
            Our code is available at https://github.com/theovincent/AdaDQN .


1       I NTRODUCTION
Deep Reinforcement Learning (RL) has proven effective at solving complex sequential decision
problems in various domains (Mnih et al., 2015; Haarnoja et al., 2018; Silver et al., 2017). De-
spite their success in many fields, deep RL algorithms suffer from brittle behavior with respect to
hyperparameters (Mahmood et al., 2018; Henderson et al., 2018). For this reason, the field of au-
tomated Reinforcement Learning (AutoRL) (Parker-Holder et al., 2022) has gained popularity in
recent years. AutoRL methods aim to optimize the hyperparameter selection so that practitioners
can avoid time-consuming hyperparameter searches. AutoRL methods also seek to minimize the
number of required samples to achieve reasonable performances so that RL algorithms can be used
in applications where a limited number of interactions with the environment is possible. AutoRL is
still in its early stage of development, and most existing methods adapt techniques that have been
shown to be effective for automated Machine Learning (AutoML) (Hutter et al., 2019; Falkner et al.,
2018). However, RL brings additional challenges that have been overlooked till now, despite notori-
ously requiring special care (Igl et al., 2021). For example, due to the highly non-stationary nature of
RL, it is unlikely that a static selection of hyperparameters works optimally for a given problem and
algorithm (Mohan et al., 2023). This has led to the development of several techniques for adapting
the training process online to prevent issues like local minima (Nikishin et al., 2022; Sokar et al.,
2023), lack of exploration (Klink et al., 2020), and catastrophic forgetting (Kirkpatrick et al., 2017).
In this work, we focus on the line of work in the AutoRL landscape that aims at dynamically chang-
ing the hyperparameters during training to achieve good performances from scratch as opposed to
approaches that aim at finding promising static hyperparameters to use in a sub-sequent training.
    ∗
        Correspondance to: theo.vincent@dfki.de


                                                     1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                _         Q-Network
                             _      _                          Adaptive
                                                               _        Q-Network (ours)
               ΓQ0       Q1|ΓQ1 Q2|ΓQ2              ...       ΓQ0 Q1         Q2        ...
                _            _      _                                            _
               ΓQ0       Q1|ΓQ1 Q2|ΓQ2              ...             Q1       Q2|ΓQ2 ...
                _            _      _                                    _
               ΓQ0       Q1|ΓQ1 Q2|ΓQ2              ...             Q1|ΓQ1 Q2          ...

Figure 1: Left: Each line represents a training of Q-Network (QN) with different hyperparameters.
Right: At the ith target update, Adaptive Q-Network (AdaQN) selects the network Qi (highlighted
with a crown) that is the closest to the previous target ΓQ̄i−1 , where Γ is the Bellman operator.

We introduce a novel approach for AutoRL to improve the effectiveness of learning algorithms by
coping with the non-stationarities of the RL optimization procedure. Our investigation stems from
the intuition that the effectiveness of each hyperparameter selection changes dynamically after each
training update. Building upon this observation, we propose to adaptively select the best-performing
hyperparameters configuration to carry out Bellman updates. To highlight this idea, we call our ap-
proach Adaptive Q-Network (AdaQN). In practice, AdaQN uses an ensemble of Q-functions, trained
with different hyperparameters, and selects the one with the smallest approximation error (Schaul
et al., 2015; D’Eramo & Chalvatzaki, 2022) to be used as a shared target for each Bellman update.
By doing this, our method considers several sets of hyperparameters at once each time the station-
arity of the optimization problem breaks, i.e., at each target update (Figure 1). In the following,
we provide a theoretical motivation for our selection mechanism and then, we empirically validate
AdaQN in MuJoCo control problems and Atari 2600 games, showing that it has several advantages
over carrying out individual runs with static hyperparameters. Importantly, by trading off different
hyperparameters configurations dynamically, AdaQN not only can match the performance of the
best hyperparameter selection at no cost of additional samples, but can also reach superior overall
performance than any individual run. Finally, we compare AdaQN against strong AutoRL baselines
and evince AdaQN’s superiority in finding good hyperparameters in a sample-efficient manner.

2       P RELIMINARIES
We consider discounted Markov decision processes (MDPs) defined as M = ⟨S, A, P, R, γ⟩,
where S and A are measurable state and action spaces, P : S × A → ∆(S)1 is a transition
kernel, R : S × A → R is a reward function, and γ ∈ [0, 1) is a discount factor (Puterman,
1990).
    P∞A policy     is a function π : S → ∆(A), inducing an action-value function Qπ (s, a) ≜
            t
Eπ [ t=0 γ R(st , at )|s0 = s, a0 = a] that gives the expected discounted cumulative return execut-
ing action a in state s, following policy π thereafter. The objective is to find an optimal policy
π ∗ = arg maxπ V π ( · ), where V π ( · ) = Ea∼π( · ) [Qπ ( · , a)]. Approximate value iteration (AVI)
and approximate policy iteration (API) are two paradigms to tackle this problem (Sutton & Barto,
1998). While AVI aims at estimating the optimal action-value function Q∗ , i.e., the action-value
function of the optimal policy, API is a two-step procedure that alternates between Approximate
policy evaluation (APE), a method to evaluate the action-value function Qπ of the current policy π,
and policy improvement, which updates the current policy by taking greedy actions on Qπ .
Both AVI and APE aim to solve a Bellman equation, whose solution is Q∗ for AVI and Qπ for APE.
Those solutions are the fixed point of a Bellman operator Γ, where Γ is the optimal Bellman operator
Γ∗ for AVI, and the Bellman operator Γπ for APE. For a Q-function Q, a state s and an action a,
Γ∗ Q(s, a) = r+γEs′ ∼P(s,a) [maxa′ Q(s′ , a′ )] and Γπ Q(s, a) = r+γEs′ ∼P(s,a),a′ ∼π(s′ ) [Q(s′ , a′ )].
Γ∗ and Γπ are γ-contraction mapping in the infinite norm. Because of this, these two methods re-
peatedly apply their respective Bellman operator, starting from a random Q-function. The fixed point
theorem ensures that each iteration is closer to the fixed point of the respective Bellman equation.
Hence, the more Bellman iterations are performed, the closer the Q-function will be to the desired
one. In model-free RL, Γ∗ and Γπ are approximated by their empirical version that we note Γ̂ with-
out distinguishing between AVI and APE since the nature of Γ̂ can be understood from the context.
We denote Θ, the space of Q-functions parameters. In common Q-Network (QN) approaches, given
a fixed vector of parameters θ̄ ∈ Θ, another vector of parameters θ is learned to minimize
                                LQN (θ|θ̄, s, a, r, s′ ) = (Γ̂Qθ̄ (s, a) − Qθ (s, a))2               (1)
    1
        ∆(X ) denotes the set of probability measures over a set X .


                                                          2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


for a sample (s, a, r, s′ ). Qθ̄ is usually called the target Q-function because it is used to compute the
target Γ̂Qθ̄ while Qθ is called the online Q-function. We refer to this step as the projection step since
the Bellman iteration ΓQθ̄ is projected back into the space of Q-functions that can be represented by
our function approximations. The target parameters θ̄ are regularly updated to the online parameters
θ so that the following Bellman iterations are learned. This step is called the target update. We note
θ̄i the target parameters after the ith target update. In this work, at each target update i, we aim at
finding the best hyperparameters ζi characterizing the learnable parameters θi , such that
                         ζi = arg max J(θi ) s.t. θi ∈ arg min f (θ; ζ, θ̄i−1 ),                      (2)
                                   ζ                        θ

where J is the cumulative discounted return and f is the objective function of the learning process.

3    R ELATED WORK
Methods for AVI or APE (Mnih et al., 2015; Dabney et al., 2018; Haarnoja et al., 2018; Bhatt et al.,
2024) are highly dependent on hyperparameters (Henderson et al., 2018; Andrychowicz et al., 2020;
Engstrom et al., 2019). AutoRL tackles this limitation by searching for effective hyperparameters.
We follow the categorization of AutoRL methods presented in Parker-Holder et al. (2022) to posi-
tion our work in the AutoRL landscape. Contrary to AdaQN, many approaches consider optimizing
the hyperparameters through multiple trials. A classic approach is to cover the search space with a
grid search or a random search (Hutter et al., 2019; Bergstra & Bengio, 2012). Some other methods
use Bayesian optimization to guide the search in the space of hyperparameters (Chen et al., 2018;
Falkner et al., 2018; Nguyen et al., 2020; Shala et al., 2022), leveraging the information collected
from individual trials. Those methods tackle the problem of finding the best set of hyperparameters
but do not consider changing the hyperparameters during a single trial, which would be more ap-
propriate for handling the non-stationarities inherent to the RL problem. To this end, evolutionary
approaches have been developed (Stanley et al., 2009; Jaderberg et al., 2019; Awad et al., 2021),
where the best elements of a population of agents undergo genetic modifications during training. As
an example, in SEARL (Franke et al., 2021), a population of agents is first evaluated in the environ-
ment. Then, the best-performing agents are selected, and a mutation process is performed to form the
next generation of agents. Finally, the samples collected during evaluation are taken from a shared
replay buffer to train each individual agent, and the loop repeats. Even if selecting agents based on
their performance in the environment seems reasonable, we argue that it hinders sample-efficiency
since exploration in the space of hyperparameters might lead to poorly performing agents. More-
over, if poorly performing agents are evaluated, low-quality samples will then be stored in the replay
buffer and used later for training, which could lead to long-term negative effects. This is why we
propose to base the selection mechanism on the approximation error, which does not require addi-
tional interaction with the environment. Other methods have considered evaluating the Q-functions
offline (Tang & Wiens, 2021). Most approaches consider the Bellman error ∥ΓQi − Qi ∥ instead of
the approximation error ∥ΓQi−1 − Qi ∥, where Qi is the Q-function obtained after i Bellman itera-
tions (Farahmand & Szepesvári, 2011; Zitovsky et al., 2023). However, this approach considers the
empirical estimate of the Bellman error which is a biased estimate of the true Bellman error (Baird,
1995). Lee et al. (2022) propose to rely on the approximation error to choose between two different
classes of functions in an algorithm called ModBE. AdaQN differs from ModBE since ModBE does
not adapt the hyperparameters at each Bellman iteration but instead performs several training steps
before comparing two classes of functions. Furthermore, the use of the approximation error can be
theoretically justified by leveraging Theorem 3.4 from Farahmand (2011), as shown in Section 4.
Meta-gradient reinforcement learning (MGRL) also optimizes the hyperparameters during train-
ing (Finn et al., 2017; Zahavy et al., 2020; Flennerhag et al., 2021). However, while MGRL fo-
cuses on tuning the target to ease the optimization process, AdaQN uses diverse online networks
to overcome optimization hurdles. This shift in paradigm leads AdaQN to avoid some of MGRL’s
shortcomings: AdaQN can work with discrete hyperparameters (e.g., optimizer, activation function,
losses, or neural architecture), only requires first-order approximation, and does not suffer from non-
stationarities when hyperparameters are updated since each online network is trained with respect to
its own hyperparameters (Xu et al., 2018). Finally, AdaQN fits best in the ”Blackbox Online Tun-
ing” cluster even if most methods in this cluster focus on the behavioral policy (Schaul et al., 2019;
Badia et al., 2020) or build the hyperparameters as functions of the state of the environment (Sutton
& Singh, 1994; White & White, 2016). For example, Riquelme et al. (2019) develop a method called


                                                    3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


adaptive TD that selects between the TD-update or the Monte-Carlo update depending on whether
the TD-update belongs to a confidence interval computed from several Monte-Carlo estimates.

4    A DAPTIVE TEMPORAL - DIFFERENCE TARGET SELECTION
Notoriously, when the AVI/APE projection step described in Section 2 is carried out for non-linear
function approximation together with off-policy sampling, convergence to the fixed point is no
longer guaranteed. Nevertheless, well-established theoretical results in AVI relate the approxima-
tion error ∥ΓQθ̄i−1 − Qθ̄i ∥ at each target update i to the performance loss ∥Q∗ − QπN ∥, i.e., the
distance between the Q-function at timestep N during the training and the optimal one Q∗ . For a
fixed number of Bellman iterations N , Theorem 3.4 from Farahmand (2011), stated in Appendix A,
demonstrates that the performance loss is upper bounded by a term that decreases when the sum of
                      PN
approximation errors i=1 ∥ΓQθ̄i−1 − Qθ̄i ∥ decreases, i.e., every projection step improves. Hence,
minimizing the sum of approximation errors is crucial to get closer to the fixed point. However, due
to the complexity of the landscape of the empirical loss LQN (Mohan et al., 2023), using fixed hy-
perparameters to minimize each approximation error ∥ΓQθ̄i−1 − Qθ̄i ∥ is unlikely to be effective and
can, in the worst case, lead to local minima (Nikishin et al., 2022; Sokar et al., 2023) or diverging
behaviors (Baird, 1995).
In this work, we tackle this problem by introducing a method that can seamlessly handle multiple
hyperparameters in a single AVI/APE training procedure to speed up the reduction of the perfor-
mance loss described above, compared to a fixed hyperparameter selection. This method, which we
call Adaptive Q-Network (AdaQN), learns several online networks trained with different hyperpa-
rameters. Crucially, to cope with the non-stationarity of the RL procedure, at each target update,
the online network with the lowest approximation error and thus the lowest performance loss, is
selected as a shared target network used to train all the online networks. This results in moving all
the networks of the ensemble towards the one that is currently the closest to the fixed point, thus
benefiting from the heterogeneous ensemble to speed up learning.
We denote (θk )K   k=1 the parameters of the online networks and θ̄i the parameters of the shared target
network after the ith target update. To minimize the ith approximation error, the optimal choice for
θ̄i given θ̄i−1 , is the index of the closest online network from the target ΓQθ̄i−1 :

                           θ̄i ← θψ where ψ = arg min ∥ΓQθ̄i−1 − Qθk ∥22,ν ,                          (3)
                                               k∈{1,...,K}

where ν is the distribution of state-action pairs in the replay buffer. Note that Equation (3) contains
the true Bellman operator Γ which is not known. Instead, we propose to rely on the value of the
empirical loss to select the next target network:
                                                      X
                θ̄i ← θψ where ψ = arg min                    LQN (θk |θ̄i−1 , s, a, r, s′ ),       (4)
                                       k∈{1,...,K}
                                                     (s,a,r,s′ )∈D

where D is the replay buffer. Theorem 4.1 shows under which condition the selected index in
Equation (4) is the same as the one in Equation (3). Importantly, this condition is valid when the
dataset is infinite and the samples are generated from the true distribution. Indeed, the empirical
Bellman operator is unbiased w.r.t. the true Bellman operator. The proof, inspired by the bias-
variance trade-off in supervised learning, can be found in Appendix A.
Theorem 4.1. Let (θk )K   k=1 ∈ Θ
                                   K
                                     and θ̄ ∈ Θ be vectors of parameters representing K + 1 Q-
                               ′
functions. Let D = {(s, a, r, s )} be a set of samples. Let ν be the distribution represented by the
state-action pairs present in D. We note Ds,a = {(r, sh′ )|(s, a, r, si′ ) ∈ D}, ∀(s, a) ∈ D.
If for every state-action pair (s, a) ∈ D, E(r,s′ )∼Ds,a Γ̂Qθ̄ (s, a) = ΓQθ̄ (s, a), then we have
                                                            X
               arg min ||ΓQθ̄ − Qθk ||22,ν = arg min                  LQN (θk |θ̄, s, a, r, s′ ).
             k∈{1,...,K}                      k∈{1,...,K}
                                                             (s,a,r,s′ )∈D


Key to our approach is that each vector of parameters θk can be trained with a different optimizer,
learning rate, architecture, activation function, or any other hyperparameter that only affects its train-
ing. By cleverly selecting the next target network from a set of diverse online networks, AdaQN has


                                                      4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Algorithm 1 Adaptive Deep Q-Network (AdaDQN). Modifications to DQN are marked in purple.
 1: Initialize K online parameters (θ k )K
                                         k=1 , and an empty replay buffer D. Set ψ = 0 and θ̄ ← θ
                                                                                                  ψ

      the target parameters. Set the cumulative losses Lk = 0, for k = 1, . . . , K.
 2: repeat
 3:   Set ψ b ∼ U{1, . . . , K} w.p. ϵb and ψ b = ψ w.p. 1 − ϵb .
 4:   Take action at ∼Sϵ-greedy(Qθψb (st , ·)); Observe reward rt , next state st+1 .
 5:   Update D ← D {(st , at , rt , st+1 )}.
 6:   every G steps
 7:     Sample a mini-batch B = {(s, a, r, s′ )} from D.
 8:     Compute the shared target y ← r + γ maxa′ Qθ̄ (s′ , a′ ).
 9:     for k = 1, ..., K do
                                                                             2
           Compute the loss w.r.t θk , LkQN = (s,a,r,s′ )∈B (y − Qθk (s, a)) .
                                                P
10:
11:         Update Lk ← Lk + LkQN .
12:         Update θk using its specific optimizer and learning rate from ∇θk LkQN .
13:     every T steps
14:       Update ψ ← arg mink Lk ; Lk ← 0, for k ∈ {1, . . . , K}.
15:       Update the target network with θ̄ ← θψ .


a higher chance of overcoming the typical challenges of optimization presented earlier. Importantly,
we prove that AdaQN is guaranteed to converge to the optimal action-value function with probability
1 in a tabular setting in Appendix A.1.
4.1 A LGORITHMIC IMPLEMENTATION
Multiple algorithms can be derived from our formulation. Algorithm 1 shows an adaptive version
of Deep Q-Network (DQN, Mnih et al. (2015)) that we call Adaptive Deep Q-Network (AdaDQN).
Similarly, Adaptive Soft Actor-Critic (AdaSAC), presented in Algorithm 2, is an adaptive version of
Soft Actor-Critic (SAC, Haarnoja et al. (2018)). In SAC, the target network is updated using Polyak
averaging (Lillicrap et al., 2015). Therefore, we consider K target networks (θ̄k )K      k=1 . Each target
network θ̄k is updated from its respective online network θk , as shown in Line 11 of Algorithm 2.
However, each online network is trained w.r.t. a shared target chosen from a single target that comes
from the set of K target networks. Similarly to the strategy presented in Equation (4), after the ith
target update, the shared target network is chosen as
                                                    X
                 θ̄i ← θ̄ψ where ψ = arg min                LQN (θk |θ̄i−1 , s, a, r, s′ ).             (5)
                                        k∈{1,...,K}
                                                      (s,a,r,s′ )∈D
Multiple online networks enable to choose which network to use to sample actions in a value-based
setting (see Line 3 of Algorithm 1) and which network is selected to train the actor in an actor-
critic setting (see Line 13 of Algorithm 2). This choice is related to the behavioral policy, thus, we
choose the same strategy in both settings. Intuitively, the optimal choice would be to pick the best-
performing network; however, this information is not available. More importantly, only exploring
using the best-performing network could lead the other online networks to learn passively (Sec-
tion 5.1). This would make the performances of the other networks drop (Ostrovski et al., 2021),
making them useless for the rest of the training. Inspired by ϵ-greedy policies commonly used in
RL for exploration, we select a random network with probability ϵb and select the online network
corresponding to the selected target network (as a proxy for the best-performing network) with prob-
ability 1 − ϵb . We use a linear decaying schedule for ϵb . Finally, at each target update, the running
loss accumulated after each gradient step is used instead of the loss computed over the entire dataset.

5     E XPERIMENTS
We first evaluate our method when hyperparameters are selected from a finite space. This setting is
relevant when the RL practitioner has a good understanding of most hyperparameters and only hes-
itates among a few ones. We compare AdaQN to an exhaustive grid search where both approaches
have access to the same sets of hyperparameters. This allows us to see how AdaQN performs com-
pared to the best static set of hyperparameters. Additionally, we focus on sample efficiency; thus,
the environment steps used for tuning the hyperparameters are also accounted for when reporting
the results. This is why, for reporting the grid search results, we multiply the number of interactions


                                                       5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                       DQN [200, 200]        DQN [50, 50]             AdaDQN               RandDQN
                       DQN [100, 100]        DQN [25, 25]             AdaDQN, b = 0        AdaDQN-max
                       200

          IQM Return
                         0
                       200
                             0     1    2       3     4           0       1    2       3   4
                                        Env steps           1e5                Env steps        1e5
Figure 2: On-the-fly architecture selection on Lunar Lander. All architectures contain two hidden
layers. The number of neurons in each layer is indicated in the legend. Left: AdaDQN yields a
better AUC than every DQN run. Right: Ablation on the behavioral policy and on the strategy to
select the target network used to compute the target. Each version of AdaDQN uses the 4 presented
architectures. The strategy presented in Equation (4) outperforms the other considered strategies.

of the best achieved performance by the number of individual trials, as advocated by Franke et al.
(2021). We also report the average performance over the individual runs as the performance that
a random search would obtain in expectation. Then, we evaluate our method in a second setting
for which the hyperparameter space is infinite. This setting corresponds to the more general case
where the RL practitioner has to select hyperparameters for a new environment, having limited in-
tuitions for most hyperparameters. We compare AdaQN to SEARL (Franke et al. (2021) presented
in Section 3), which is specifically designed for this setting, DEHB (Awad et al., 2021), which is
a black box optimizer that has been shown to be effective for RL (Eimer et al., 2023), and random
search, which remains a very challenging baseline for hyperparameter optimization. In both settings,
the remaining hyperparameters are kept unchanged. Appendix B describes all the hyperparameters
used for the experiments along with the description of the environment setups and evaluation proto-
cols. The code is based on the Stable Baselines implementation (Raffin et al., 2021) and Dopamine
RL (Castro et al., 2018)2 .
Performance metric. As recommended by Agarwal et al. (2021), we show the interquartile mean
(IQM) along with shaded regions showing pointwise 95% percentile stratified bootstrap confidence
intervals. IQM trades off the mean and the median where the tail of the score distribution is removed
on both sides to consider only 50% of the runs. We argue that the final score is not enough to
properly compare RL algorithms since methods that show higher initial performances are better
suited for real-world experiments compared to methods that only show higher performances later
during training. This is why we also analyze the performances with the Area Under the Curve (AUC)
that computes the integral of the IQM along the training. We also report the worst-performing seed
to analyze the robustness of AdaQN w.r.t. stochasticity and highlight AdaQN’s stability against
hyperparameter changes. We use 20 seeds for Lunar Lander (Brockman et al., 2016), 9 seeds for
MuJoCo (Todorov et al., 2012), and 5 seeds for Atari (Bellemare et al., 2013).
5.1      A PROOF OF CONCEPT
We consider 4 different architectures for AdaDQN and compare their performances to the individ-
ual runs in Figure 2 (left). The 4 architectures are composed of two hidden layers, with the number
of neurons indicated in the legend. Interestingly, AdaDQN outperforms the best individual archi-
tecture, meaning that by selecting different architectures during the training, AdaDQN better copes
with the non-stationarities of the optimization procedure. Figure 2 (right) shows the performances
for AdaDQN along with a version of AdaQN where ϵb = 0 during the training (AdaDQN ϵb = 0),
i.e. actions are always sampled for the online network that was chosen for computing the target.
This variant of AdaQN performs similarly to the best individual run but underperforms compared to
AdaDQN because it suffers from passive learning as explained in Section 4.1. Additionally, we eval-
uate a version where the target network is selected randomly from the set of online networks, calling
this variant RandDQN. This version is similar to the way the target is computed in REDQ (Chen
et al., 2020). While sampling uniformly from similar agents yields better performance, as shown in
Chen et al. (2020), this strategy suffers when one agent is not performing well. In our case, DQN
[25, 25] harms the overall performance. Finally, taking the maximum instead of the minimum to
select the target (AdaDQN-max) performs as badly as the worst available agent (i.e., DQN [25, 25]).
   2
       The code is available in the supplementary material and will be made open source upon acceptance.


                                                            6
      Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                             DQN [200, 200]               DQN [100, 100]               DQN [50, 50]                    DQN [25, 25]
                                                   AdaDQN                             AdaDQN, b = 0                      AdaDQN-max


                             Action Target
                                        0      1    2 3           4         0         1    2 3        4          0   1      2 3 4
                                                   Env steps          1e5                 Env steps        1e5             Env steps 1e5
      Figure 3: Distribution of the selected hyperparameters for the target network (top) and for the be-
      havioral policy (bottom) across all seeds. Left: AdaDQN mainly selects the hyperparameter that
      performs best when evaluated individually. Middle: AdaDQN with ϵb = 0 also focuses on the best
      individual architecture but does not use all available networks for sampling actions, which lowers
      its performance. Right: AdaDQN-max is a version of AdaDQN where the minimum operator is
      replaced by the maximum operator for selecting the following target network.

                              AdaSAC                                  Random search                         Grid search                         RandSAC
                              Worst seed - AdaSAC                     Worst seed - Random search            Worst seed - Grid search
IQM SAC Norm return


                                                                                                                                                      best
                      1.25
                      1.00
                      0.75
                      0.50
                      0.25                                                                                                                            worst
                                  104                   105                     106                107 0         1       2       3        4       5
                                                               Env Steps                                                 Env Steps             1e5
      Figure 4: On-the-fly hyperparameter selection on MuJoCo. The 16 sets of hyperparameters are
      the elements of the Cartesian product between the learning rates {0.0005, 0.001}, the optimizers
      {Adam, RMSProp}, the critic’s architectures {[256, 256], [512, 512]} and the activation functions
      {ReLU, Sigmoid}. Left: AdaSAC is more sample-efficient than random search and grid search.
      Right: AdaSAC yields a better AUC than every SAC run while having a greater final score than 13
      out of 16 SAC runs. The shading of the dashed lines indicates their ranking for the AUC metric.


      In Figure 3 (top), we analyze the distribution of the selected hyperparameters for the target network
      across all seeds along the training. Importantly, AdaDQN does not always select the architecture that
      performs the best when trained individually, as the network DQN [100, 100] is sometimes chosen in-
      stead of DQN [200, 200]. On the right, AdaDQN-max mainly selects DQN [25, 25], which explains
      its poor performance. The gap in performance between AdaDQN and AdaDQN with ϵb = 0 can be
      understood by the bottom row of the figure. It shows the distribution of the selected hyperparameters
      for sampling the actions. Setting ϵb = 0 forces the networks not selected for computing the target
      to learn passively (the top and bottom bar plots are the same for AdaDQN with ϵb = 0). On the
      contrary, AdaDQN benefits from a better exploration at the beginning of the training (the bottom bar
      plot is more diverse than the top one at the beginning of the training).

      5.2                     C ONTINUOUS CONTROL : M U J O C O ENVIRONMENTS

      We evaluate AdaSAC for a wider choice of hyperparameters on 6 MuJoCo environments. We con-
      sider selecting from 16 sets of hyperparameters. Those sets form the Cartesian product between
      the learning rates {0.0005, 0.001}, the optimizers {Adam, RMSProp}, the critic’s architectures
      {[256, 256], [512, 512]} and the activation functions {ReLU, Sigmoid}. This sets K to 24 = 16.
      The values of the hyperparameters were chosen to be representative of common choices made when
      tuning by hand a SAC agent. In Figure 4 (left), we compare AdaSAC with a grid search per-
      formed on the 16 set of hyperparameters. AdaSAC is an order of magnitude more sample efficient
      than grid search and outperforms random search all along the training. Notably, AdaSAC’s worst-
      performing seed performs on par with the random search approach while greatly outperforming the
      worst-performing seed of the grid search. In Figure 4 (right), we show AdaSAC’s performance
      along with the individual performance of each set of hyperparameters. AdaSAC yields the highest


                                                                                            7
   Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                 AdaSAC                    RandSAC
                 1e3       Hopper                    1e3         Ant                               HalfCheetah
                                                                                     1.0 1e4
IQM return
             3                                   5
             2                                                                       0.5
             1                                                                                                             Best
                                                 0
       Target



                 1e3       Walker2d                  1e3       Humanoid                    1e5 HumanoidStandup
             4                               5.0                                     1.5
IQM return


             2                               2.5                                     1.0
       Target


                                                                                                                           Worst
                       1   2      3    4     5             1   2      3      4     5           1    2      3     4     5
                           Env Steps       1e5                 Env Steps         1e5                Env Steps        1e5
   Figure 5: Per environment IQM return when AdaSAC and RandSAC select from the 16 sets of
   hyperparameters described in Figure 4. Below each performance plot, a bar plot presents the dis-
   tribution of hyperparameters selected for the target network across all seeds. AdaSAC outperforms
   RandSAC and most individual run by designing non-trivial hyperparameter schedules.


   AUC metric while outperforming 13 out of the 16 individual runs in terms of final performance.
   Interestingly, AdaSAC reaches the performance of vanilla SAC in less than half of the samples. We
   also show the performance of RandSAC, for which a random target network is selected to compute
   the target instead of following the strategy presented in Equation (5). For clarity, the labels of the 16
   individual runs are not shown. They are available in Figure 11 of Appendix D.1.
   We now analyze which set of hyperparameters AdaSAC selects to compute the target. For each envi-
   ronment, we show in Figure 5 the performances of each hyperparameter when trained individually,
   AdaSAC and RandSAC performances. Below each performance plot, we report the distribution of
   hyperparameters selected to compute the target across all seeds. Overall, the selected networks are
   changing during the training, which indicates that the loss is not always minimized by the same set of
   hyperparameters. This supports the idea of selecting the target network based on Equation (4). Fur-
   thermore, the selected networks are not the same across the different environments. This shows that
   AdaSAC designs non-trivial hyperparameter schedules that cannot be handcrafted. On Humanoid,
   selecting the network corresponding to the best-performing agent leads to similar performances to
   the best-performing agents when trained individually. On HumanoidStandup, the selection strategy
   avoids selecting the worst-performing agents. This is why AdaSAC outperforms RandSAC, which
   blindly selects agents. HalfCheetah is the only environment where RandSAC slightly outperforms
   AdaSAC. AdaSAC still yields a better final performance than 6 of the individual runs. Finally, on
   Hopper and Walker2d, AdaSAC outperforms every individual run for the AUC metric by mainly
   selecting hyperparameters that are not performing well when trained individually. The ability of
   AdaSAC to adapt the hyperparameters at each target update enables it to better fit the targets, which
   yields better performances.
   Ablations. We evaluate AdaSAC against random search and grid search in 4 different scenarios
   where only one hyperparameter changes. The results presented in Appendices D.2, D.3, D.4, and
   D.5 show that AdaSAC is robust to variations of the hyperparameters. We first give 4 architectures
   of different capacities as input. Then, we run AdaSAC with 3 different learning rates, and we also
   run another study where AdaSAC is given 3 different optimizers. In each case, AdaSAC matches
   the best-performing individual runs while successfully ignoring the worst-performing sets of hy-
   perparameters. Finally, we evaluate AdaSAC with 3 different activation functions given as input.
   This time, AdaSAC outperforms 2 out of the 3 individual runs. Interestingly, RandSAC seems to
   suffer more in that setting by only outperforming the worst-performing individual run. This further
   demonstrates that the strategy presented in Equation (4) is effective.

   5.3            V ISION - BASED CONTROL : ATARI 2600

   We provide an additional experiment on 3 games of the Atari benchmark. Similarly to the ablation
   study made on the MuJoCo benchmark, we conclude, in light of Figure 6, that AdaDQN performs on


                                                                   8
      Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                      Activation function                    Architecture                                               Adam's epsilon
IQM Human Norm Score
                                          AdaDQN     Tanh              AdaDQN                [44, 52, 64, 512]                         AdaDQN             Adam: 1.5e-6
                                          ReLU       Sigmoid           [32, 64, 64, 512]     [46, 46, 46, 714]                          Adam: 1.5e-4      Adam: 1.5e-8
                                                                 1
                        0.5                                                                                      1
                        0.0
                        0.5
                        Target                                   0                                               0

                                 1     10    20       30      40 1   10    20       30      40 1   10    20       30      40
                                     Num Frames (in millions)      Num Frames (in millions)      Num Frames (in millions)
      Figure 6: On-the-fly hyperparameter selection on 3 Atari games. AdaDQN performs similarly to
      the best individual hyperparameters when selecting from 3 activation functions (left), 3 architectures
      (middle), or 3 different values of Adam’s epsilon parameter (right). Below each performance plot, a
      bar plot presents the distribution of the hyperparameters selected for computing the target.

                                       AdaDQN                                              DEHB
                                       SEARL - max             SEARL - min                 Random search                                    High target freq
                                                                                                                                             High HP freq
                       1.0 Budget: 40M
IQM Human Norm Score


                                                                                                                                           0.58


                                                                                                                                                                    High target freq
                                                                                                                     Low target freq
                                                                                                                      High HP freq


                                                                                                                                                                     Low HP freq
                                                                                                                                                   0.14
                       0.5


                       0.0
                             1               40            80               120                    160                                       Low target freq
                                                      Num Frames (in millions)                                                                Low HP freq

      Figure 7: On-the-fly hyperparameter selection on 6 Atari games. Each method has to find well-
      performing hyperparameters in a very challenging hyperparameter space composed of 18 activation
      functions, 24 optimizers, 4 losses, a wide range of learning rates, and fully parameterizable archi-
      tectures. Left: AdaDQN outperforms SEARL, random search, and grid search in the limited budget
      of 40M frames and keeps increasing its performance afterward. Right: AdaDQN is robust to hyper-
      parameter changes. Each axis of the radar plot shows the performances at 40M frames.


      par with the best-performing hyperparameter when the space of hyperparameters is composed of dif-
      ferent activation functions (left), architectures (middle) or different values of Adam’s epsilon param-
      eter (right). This means that random search and grid search underperform compared to AdaDQN.
      Importantly, the common hyperparameters used for DQN (in orange) are not the best-performing
      ones in all settings, which motivates using Auto RL. Below each performance plot, we report the
      distribution of the hyperparameters selected for computing the target. Remarkably, AdaDQN never
      selects Sigmoid activations, which perform poorly when evaluated individually. Interestingly, for
      the ablation study on the architecture and Adam’s epsilon parameter, AdaDQN uses all available hy-
      perparameters when they perform equally well. We note that, despite not being often tuned, Adam’s
      epsilon parameter plays a role in yielding high returns as observed in Obando-Ceron et al. (2024).
      Figure 20 reports the decomposition of Figure 6 into the 3 considered Atari games.

      5.4                        I NFINITE HYPERPARAMETER SPACES

      We now focus on a setting in which the space of hyperparameters is infinite. We design a wide space
      of hyperparameters to come closer to the goal of removing the need for prior knowledge about the
      algorithm and environment. The hyperparameter space, presented in Table 4, comprises 18 acti-
      vation functions, 24 optimizers, 4 losses, a wide range of learning rates, and fully parameterizable
      architectures. We let SEARL and AdaDQN train 5 neural networks in parallel. Figure 9 shows how
      AdaDQN and SEARL differ. To generalize AdaQN to infinite hyperparameter spaces, we replace
      the RL training step in SEARL’s pipeline with the one described in Section 4, and the approximation
      errors are used as fitness values instead of the online evaluation of each network. The exploitation
      and exploration steps remain identical. We fix a budget of 40M frames on 6 games of the Atari
      benchmark. We reduce the budget to 30M frames for random search to favor more individual trials,


                                                                                  9
      Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                         AdaDQN             Meta-Gradient DQN

IQM Human Norm Score
                                       BattleZone     0.995                                  Freeway
                                                                                1.0                          1.000
                       0.50                                                                                  0.995
                                                      0.990                     0.5
                       0.25                                                                                  0.990
                       0.00                            0.985                  0.0                             0.985
                              1   10      20    30   40      1 10 20 30 40        1     10      20     30   40      1 10 20 30 40
                                                                  Num Frames (in millions)
      Figure 8: On-the-fly discount factor selection on 2 Atari games. AdaDQN and Meta-gradient DQN
      perform similarly. On the right of each performance plot, we report the evolution of the discount
      factor selected by AdaDQN and Meta-gradient DQN.
      6 in total, as the hyperparameter space is large. Finally, we let DEHB benefit from its multi-fidelity
      component by allowing a varying budget from 20M to 40M frames. We report the maximum return
      observed since the beginning of the training for each seed of random search and DEHB. As every
      network is evaluated in SEARL, we report the maximum and minimum return observed at each
      evaluation step (SEARL - max and SEARL - min).
      In Figure 7 (left), at 40M frames, AdaDQN outperforms SEARL and matches the end performance
      of random search and DEHB. When trained for longer, AdaDQN continues to increase its perfor-
      mance and outperforms random search and DEHB before reaching 100M frames. We argue that
      SEARL’s low performance is largely explained by the fact that many environment iterations are
      wasted by poorly performing networks (see SEARL - min), which also affects the other networks as
      the replay buffer is shared among them. Instead, AdaDQN only uses the networks that have a low
      training loss. Random search and DEHB usually require many environment interactions to perform
      well. We believe that having a wide hyperparameter space exacerbates this phenomenon. Figure 7
      (right) highlights AdaDQN’s robustness w.r.t. its hyperparameters. Notably, AdaDQN reaches a
      higher IQM return than SEARL in the 4 considered settings at 40M frames. Figure 21 and 22 show
      the individual game performances. Figure 23 reports the evolution of the hyperparameters during
      AdaDQN’s training for one seed on Pong. Interestingly, the performances increase (green back-
      ground) when the network trained on the Huber loss with ReLU activations and Adam optimizer is
      selected as target network.
      AdaQN can also be used to select the target hyperparameters. We propose to select from differ-
      ent discount factors sampled in [0.985, 0.995]. We consider K = 5 online networks and com-
      pare AdaDQN against Meta-gradient reinforcement learning (MGRL, Xu et al. (2018)). The cross-
      validated discount factor of MGRL is set at 0.99, and the same discount factor is considered when
      selecting the next target network in AdaQN. Figure 8 shows that the two approaches reach similar
      performances on 2 Atari games. Nevertheless, we recall that AdaQN differs from MGRL in many
      points (see Section 3). Crucially, it is not limited to continuous and differentiable hyperparameters.

      6                   D ISCUSSION AND CONCLUSION
      We have introduced Adaptive Q-Network (AdaQN), a new method that trains an ensemble of diverse
      Q-networks w.r.t. a shared target, selected as the target network corresponding to the most accurate
      online network. We demonstrated that AdaQN is theoretically sound and we devised its algorithmic
      implementation. Our experiments show that AdaQN outperforms competitive AutoRL baselines in
      terms of sample efficiency, final performance, and robustness.
      Limitations. Our work focuses on the agent’s hyperparameters; thus, environment’s properties,
      e.g., reward, cannot be handled by AdaQN. Nevertheless, an off-the-shelf AutoRL algorithm can be
      combined with AdaQN to handle these properties. Moreover, since AdaQN considers multiple Q-
      functions in the loss, the training time and memory requirements increase. We provide an analysis in
      Appendix C to show that this increase remains reasonable compared to the gain in performance and
      sample-efficiency. We stress that, in theory, the computations can be parallelized so that the adaptive
      version of an algorithm requires the same amount of time as its original algorithm. The additional
      ”for loop” in Line 9 of Algorithm 1 and the one in Line 7 of Algorithm 2 can be run in parallel as
      long as enough parallel processing capacity is available, as it is common in modern GPUs. Finally,
      instead of selecting one Q-function for computing the target, future works could consider a mixture
      of Q-functions learned with different hyperparameters as presented in Seyde et al. (2022).


                                                                           10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This work was funded by the German Federal Ministry of Education and Research (BMBF) (Project:
01IS22078). This work was also funded by Hessian.ai through the project ’The Third Wave of Ar-
tificial Intelligence – 3AI’ by the Ministry for Science and Arts of the state of Hessen, by the grant
“Einrichtung eines Labors des Deutschen Forschungszentrum für Künstliche Intelligenz (DFKI) an
der Technischen Universität Darmstadt”, and by the Hessian Ministry of Higher Education, Re-
search, Science and the Arts (HMWK).

C ARBON I MPACT
As recommended by Lannelongue & Inouye (2023), we used GreenAlgorithms (Lannelongue et al.,
2021) and ML CO2 Impact (Lacoste et al., 2019) to compute the carbon emission related to the
production of the electricity used for the computations of our experiments. We only consider the
energy used to generate the figures presented in this work and ignore the energy used for preliminary
studies. The estimations vary between 1.30 and 1.53 tonnes of CO2 equivalent. As a reminder,
the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change advocates a carbon budget of 2 tonnes of CO2
equivalent per year per person.

R EFERENCES
Rishabh Agarwal, Max Schwarzer, Pablo Samuel Castro, Aaron C Courville, and Marc Bellemare.
  Deep reinforcement learning at the edge of the statistical precipice. In Advances in Neural Infor-
  mation Processing Systems, 2021.
Matthew Aitchison, Penny Sweetser, and Marcus Hutter. Atari-5: Distilling the arcade learning
 environment down to five games. In International Conference on Machine Learning, 2023.
Marcin Andrychowicz, Anton Raichuk, Piotr Stańczyk, Manu Orsini, Sertan Girgin, Raphaël
 Marinier, Leonard Hussenot, Matthieu Geist, Olivier Pietquin, Marcin Michalski, et al. What
 matters for on-policy deep actor-critic methods? a large-scale study. In International Conference
 on Learning Representations, 2020.
Noor Awad, Neeratyoy Mallik, and Frank Hutter. Dehb: Evolutionary hyberband for scalable,
  robust and efficient hyperparameter optimization. In International Joint Conference on Artificial
  Intelligence, 2021.
Adriá Puigdoménech Badia, Bilal Piot, Steven Kapturowski, Pablo Sprechmann, Alex Vitvitskyi,
  Zhaohan Daniel Guo, and Charles Blundell. Agent57: Outperforming the atari human benchmark.
  In International Conference on Machine Learning, 2020.
Leemon Baird. Residual algorithms: Reinforcement learning with function approximation. In
  Machine Learning, 1995.
Marc G Bellemare, Yavar Naddaf, Joel Veness, and Michael Bowling. The arcade learning environ-
 ment: An evaluation platform for general agents. In Journal of artificial intelligence research,
 2013.
James Bergstra and Yoshua Bengio. Random search for hyper-parameter optimization. In Journal
  of Machine Learning Research, 2012.
A Bhatt, D Palenicek, B Belousov, Max Argus, Artemij Amiranashvili, Thomas Brox, and J Peters.
  Crossq: Batch normalization in deep reinforcement learning for greater sample efficiency and
  simplicity. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2024.
Greg Brockman, Vicki Cheung, Ludwig Pettersson, Jonas Schneider, John Schulman, Jie Tang, and
  Wojciech Zaremba. Openai gym. In arXiv preprint arXiv:1606.01540, 2016.
Pablo Samuel Castro, Subhodeep Moitra, Carles Gelada, Saurabh Kumar, and Marc G.
  Bellemare.       Dopamine: A Research Framework for Deep Reinforcement Learning.
  http://arxiv.org/abs/1812.06110, 2018.


                                                 11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Xinyue Chen, Che Wang, Zijian Zhou, and Keith W Ross. Randomized ensembled double q-
  learning: Learning fast without a model. In International Conference on Learning Represen-
  tations, 2020.
Yutian Chen, Aja Huang, Ziyu Wang, Ioannis Antonoglou, Julian Schrittwieser, David Silver, and
  Nando de Freitas. Bayesian optimization in alphago. In arXiv preprint arXiv:1812.06855, 2018.
Will Dabney, Georg Ostrovski, David Silver, and Rémi Munos. Implicit quantile networks for
 distributional reinforcement learning. In International Conference on Machine Learning, 2018.
Carlo D’Eramo and Georgia Chalvatzaki. Prioritized sampling with intrinsic motivation in multi-
  task reinforcement learning. In International Joint Conference on Neural Networks, 2022.
Theresa Eimer, Marius Lindauer, and Roberta Raileanu. Hyperparameters in reinforcement learning
  and how to tune them. In International Conference on Machine Learning, 2023.
Logan Engstrom, Andrew Ilyas, Shibani Santurkar, Dimitris Tsipras, Firdaus Janoos, Larry
  Rudolph, and Aleksander Madry. Implementation matters in deep rl: A case study on ppo and
  trpo. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2019.
Stefan Falkner, Aaron Klein, and Frank Hutter. Bohb: Robust and efficient hyperparameter opti-
  mization at scale. In International Conference on Machine Learning, 2018.
Amir-massoud Farahmand. Regularization in reinforcement learning. PhD thesis, University of
 Alberta, 2011.
Amir-massoud Farahmand and Csaba Szepesvári. Model selection in reinforcement learning. In
 Machine learning, 2011.
Chelsea Finn, Pieter Abbeel, and Sergey Levine. Model-agnostic meta-learning for fast adaptation
  of deep networks. In International Conference on Machine Learning, 2017.
Sebastian Flennerhag, Yannick Schroecker, Tom Zahavy, Hado van Hasselt, David Silver, and Satin-
  der Singh. Bootstrapped meta-learning. In International Conference on Learning Representa-
  tions, 2021.
Jörg K.H. Franke, Gregor Koehler, André Biedenkapp, and Frank Hutter. Sample-efficient auto-
   mated deep reinforcement learning. In International Conference on Learning Representations,
   2021.
Tuomas Haarnoja, Aurick Zhou, Pieter Abbeel, and Sergey Levine. Soft actor-critic: Off-policy
  maximum entropy deep reinforcement learning with a stochastic actor. In International Confer-
  ence on Machine Learning, 2018.
Peter Henderson, Riashat Islam, Philip Bachman, Joelle Pineau, Doina Precup, and David Meger.
  Deep reinforcement learning that matters. In Association for the Advancement of Artificial Intel-
  ligence, 2018.
Frank Hutter, Lars Kotthoff, and Joaquin Vanschoren (eds.). Automated Machine Learning - Meth-
  ods, Systems, Challenges. Springer, 2019.
Maximilian Igl, Gregory Farquhar, Jelena Luketina, JW Böhmer, and Shimon Whiteson. Transient
 non-stationarity and generalisation in deep reinforcement learning. In International Conference
 on Learning Representations, 2021.
Max Jaderberg, Wojciech M. Czarnecki, Iain Dunning, Luke Marris, Guy Lever, Antonio Garcia
 Castañeda, Charles Beattie, Neil C. Rabinowitz, Ari S. Morcos, Avraham Ruderman, Nico-
 las Sonnerat, Tim Green, Louise Deason, Joel Z. Leibo, David Silver, Demis Hassabis, Ko-
 ray Kavukcuoglu, and Thore Graepel. Human-level performance in 3d multiplayer games with
 population-based reinforcement learning. In Science, 2019.
Maxwell Elliot Jaderberg, Wojciech Czarnecki, Timothy Frederick Goldie Green, and
 Valentin Clement Dalibard. Population based training of neural networks. In US Patent, 2023.


                                                12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


James Kirkpatrick, Razvan Pascanu, Neil Rabinowitz, Joel Veness, Guillaume Desjardins, Andrei A
  Rusu, Kieran Milan, John Quan, Tiago Ramalho, Agnieszka Grabska-Barwinska, et al. Overcom-
  ing catastrophic forgetting in neural networks. In National Academy of sciences, 2017.

Pascal Klink, Carlo D’Eramo, Jan R Peters, and Joni Pajarinen. Self-paced deep reinforcement
  learning. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2020.

Alexandre Lacoste, Alexandra Luccioni, Victor Schmidt, and Thomas Dandres. Quantifying the
  carbon emissions of machine learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1910.09700, 2019.

Qingfeng Lan, Yangchen Pan, Alona Fyshe, and Martha White. Maxmin q-learning: Controlling the
  estimation bias of q-learning. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2020.

Loı̈c Lannelongue and Michael Inouye. Carbon footprint estimation for computational research.
  Nature Reviews Methods Primers, 2023.

Loı̈c Lannelongue, Jason Grealey, and Michael Inouye. Green algorithms: quantifying the carbon
  footprint of computation. Advanced Science, 2021.

Jonathan N Lee, George Tucker, Ofir Nachum, Bo Dai, and Emma Brunskill. Oracle inequalities for
  model selection in offline reinforcement learning. In Advances in Neural Information Processing
  Systems, 2022.

Timothy P Lillicrap, Jonathan J Hunt, Alexander Pritzel, Nicolas Heess, Tom Erez, Yuval Tassa,
  David Silver, and Daan Wierstra. Continuous control with deep reinforcement learning. In arXiv
  preprint arXiv:1509.02971, 2015.

Ilya Loshchilov and Frank Hutter. Decoupled weight decay regularization. In International Confer-
   ence on Learning Representations, 2018.

Marlos C Machado, Marc G Bellemare, Erik Talvitie, Joel Veness, Matthew Hausknecht, and
 Michael Bowling. Revisiting the arcade learning environment: Evaluation protocols and open
 problems for general agents. In Journal of artificial intelligence research, 2018.

A. Rupam Mahmood, Dmytro Korenkevych, Gautham Vasan, William Ma, and James Bergstra.
  Benchmarking reinforcement learning algorithms on real-world robots. In Conference on Robot
  Learning, 2018.

Brad L Miller, David E Goldberg, et al. Genetic algorithms, tournament selection, and the effects of
  noise. Complex systems, 1995.

Volodymyr Mnih, Koray Kavukcuoglu, David Silver, Andrei A Rusu, Joel Veness, Marc G Belle-
  mare, Alex Graves, Martin Riedmiller, Andreas K Fidjeland, Georg Ostrovski, et al. Human-level
  control through deep reinforcement learning. In Nature, 2015.

Aditya Mohan, Carolin Benjamins, Konrad Wienecke, Alexander Dockhorn, and Marius Lindauer.
  Autorl hyperparameter landscapes. In International Conference on Automated Machine Learning,
  2023.

Vu Nguyen, Sebastian Schulze, and Michael A Osborne. Bayesian optimization for iterative learn-
  ing. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2020.

Evgenii Nikishin, Max Schwarzer, Pierluca D’Oro, Pierre-Luc Bacon, and Aaron Courville. The
  primacy bias in deep reinforcement learning. In International Conference on Machine Learning,
  2022.

Johan Obando-Ceron, João GM Araújo, Aaron Courville, and Pablo Samuel Castro. On the consis-
  tency of hyper-parameter selection in value-based deep reinforcement learning. In Reinforcement
  Learning Conference, 2024.

Georg Ostrovski, Pablo Samuel Castro, and Will Dabney. The difficulty of passive learning in deep
  reinforcement learning. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2021.


                                                13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Jack Parker-Holder, Raghu Rajan, Xingyou Song, André Biedenkapp, Yingjie Miao, Theresa Eimer,
  Baohe Zhang, Vu Nguyen, Roberto Calandra, Aleksandra Faust, et al. Automated reinforcement
  learning (autorl): A survey and open problems. In Journal of Artificial Intelligence Research,
  2022.
Martin L Puterman. Markov decision processes. Handbooks in Operations Research and Manage-
 ment Science, 1990.
Antonin Raffin, Ashley Hill, Adam Gleave, Anssi Kanervisto, Maximilian Ernestus, and Noah Dor-
  mann. Stable-baselines3: Reliable reinforcement learning implementations. In Journal of Ma-
  chine Learning Research, 2021.
Carlos Riquelme, Hugo Penedones, Damien Vincent, Hartmut Maennel, Sylvain Gelly, Timothy A
  Mann, Andre Barreto, and Gergely Neu. Adaptive temporal-difference learning for policy evalua-
  tion with per-state uncertainty estimates. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
  2019.
Tom Schaul, John Quan, Ioannis Antonoglou, and David Silver. Prioritized experience replay. In
  arXiv preprint arXiv:1511.05952, 2015.
Tom Schaul, Diana Borsa, David Ding, David Szepesvari, Georg Ostrovski, Will Dabney, and Simon
  Osindero. Adapting behaviour for learning progress. In arXiv preprint arXiv:1912.06910, 2019.
Tim Seyde, Wilko Schwarting, Igor Gilitschenski, Markus Wulfmeier, and Daniela Rus. Strength
  through diversity: Robust behavior learning via mixture policies. In Conference on Robot Learn-
  ing, 2022.
Gresa Shala, André Biedenkapp, Frank Hutter, and Josif Grabocka. Gray-box gaussian processes
  for automated reinforcement learning. In International Conference on Learning Representations,
  2022.
David Silver, Julian Schrittwieser, Karen Simonyan, Ioannis Antonoglou, Aja Huang, Arthur Guez,
  Thomas Hubert, Lucas Baker, Matthew Lai, Adrian Bolton, et al. Mastering the game of go
  without human knowledge. In Nature, 2017.
Ghada Sokar, Rishabh Agarwal, Pablo Samuel Castro, and Utku Evci. The dormant neuron phe-
  nomenon in deep reinforcement learning. In International Conference on Machine Learning,
  2023.
Kenneth O. Stanley, David B. D’Ambrosio, and Jason Gauci. A hypercube-based encoding for
  evolving large-scale neural networks. In Artificial Life, 2009.
Richard S. Sutton and Andrew G. Barto. Reinforcement learning: An introduction. MIT Press,
  1998.
Richard S Sutton and Satinder P Singh. On step-size and bias in temporal-difference learning. In
  Yale Workshop on Adaptive and Learning Systems, 1994.
Shengpu Tang and Jenna Wiens. Model selection for offline reinforcement learning: Practical con-
  siderations for healthcare settings. In Machine Learning for Healthcare Conference, 2021.
Emanuel Todorov, Tom Erez, and Yuval Tassa. Mujoco: A physics engine for model-based control.
  In International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems, 2012.
Théo Vincent, Daniel Palenicek, Boris Belousov, Jan Peters, and Carlo D’Eramo. Iterated q-
  network: Beyond one-step bellman updates in deep reinforcement learning. Transactions on
  Machine Learning Research, 2025.
Martha White and Adam White. A greedy approach to adapting the trace parameter for temporal
 difference learning. In International Conference on Autonomous Agents and Multiagent Systems,
 2016.
Zhongwen Xu, Hado P van Hasselt, and David Silver. Meta-gradient reinforcement learning. In
  Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2018.

                                               14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Tom Zahavy, Zhongwen Xu, Vivek Veeriah, Matteo Hessel, Junhyuk Oh, Hado van Hasselt, David
  Silver, and Satinder Singh. A self-tuning actor-critic algorithm. In Advances in Neural Informa-
  tion Processing Systems, 2020.
Joshua P Zitovsky, Daniel De Marchi, Rishabh Agarwal, and Michael Rene Kosorok. Revisiting
  bellman errors for offline model selection. In International Conference on Machine Learning,
  2023.


                                               15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A     T HEOREM STATEMENTS AND PROOFS

Theorem 3.4 from Farahmand (2011). Let N ∈ N∗ , and ρ, ν two probability measures on S × A.
For any sequence (θ̄i )N
                       i=0 ∈ Θ
                               N +1
                                    where Rγ depends on the reward function and the discount
factor, we have
                                                                                                                              21
            ∗       πN                                                              PN     2r  ∗               2
      ∥Q − Q             ∥1,ρ ≤ CN,γ,Rγ + inf F (r; N, ρ, γ)                          i=1 αi ∥Γ Qθ̄i−1 − Qθ̄i ∥2,ν
                                                   r∈[0,1]


where CN,γ,Rγ , F (r; N, ρ, γ), and (αi )N                          N
                                         i=0 do not depend on (θ̄i )i=0 . πN is a greedy policy com-
puted from QθN .


Theorem 4.1. Let (θk )K  k=1 ∈ Θ
                                   K
                                      and θ̄ ∈ Θ be vectors of parameters representing K + 1 Q-
functions. Let D = {(s, a, r, s′ )} be a set of samples. Let ν be the distribution represented by the
state-action pairs present in D. We note Ds,a = {(r, sh′ )|(s, a, r, si′ ) ∈ D}, ∀(s, a) ∈ D.
If for every state-action pair (s, a) ∈ D, E(r,s′ )∼Ds,a Γ̂Qθ̄ (s, a) = ΓQθ̄ (s, a), then we have
                                                                                  X
                  arg min ||ΓQθ̄ − Qθk ||22,ν = arg min                                       LQN (θk |θ̄, s, a, r, s′ ).
                k∈{1,...,K}                                  k∈{1,...,K}
                                                                              (s,a,r,s′ )∈D


Proof. Let (θk )K            K
                 k=1 ∈ Θ and θ̄ ∈ Θ be vectors of parameters representing K + 1 Q-functions. Let
                  ′
D = {(s, a, r, s )} be a set of samples. Let ν be the distribution of the state-action pairs present in
D. In this proof, we note Γ̂ as Γ̂r,s′ to stress its dependency on the reward r and the next state s′ . For
every state-action pair (s, a) in D, we define the set Ds,a = {(r, s′ )|(s, a, r, s′ ) ∈ D} and assume
that E(r,s′ )∼Ds,a [Γ̂r,s′ Qθ̄ (s, a)] = ΓQθ̄ (s, a). Additionally, we note M the cardinality of D, Ms,a
the cardinality of Ds,a and D̊ the set of unique state-action pairs in D. We take k ∈ {1, . . . , K} and
write
    X                                      X                                           2
             LQN (θk |θ̄, s, a, r, s′ ) =               Γ̂r,s′ Qθ̄ (s, a) − Qθk (s, a)
(s,a,r,s′ )∈D                                    (s,a,r,s′ )∈D
                                                     X                                                                          2
                                             =                       Γ̂r,s′ Qθ̄ (s, a) − ΓQθ̄ (s, a) + ΓQθ̄ (s, a) − Qθk (s, a)
                                                 (s,a,r,s′ )∈D
                                                     X                                               2
                                             =                       Γ̂r,s′ Qθ̄ (s, a) − ΓQθ̄ (s, a)
                                                 (s,a,r,s′ )∈D
                                                 X                                              2
                                         +                 (ΓQθ̄ (s, a) − Qθ̄k (s, a))
                                           (s,a,r,s′ )∈D
                                                 X
                                        +2                     Γ̂r,s′ Qθ̄ (s, a) − ΓQθ̄ (s, a) (ΓQθ̄ (s, a) − Qθk (s, a)).
                                           (s,a,r,s′ )∈D


The second last equation is obtained by introducing the term ΓQθ̄ (s, a) and removing it. The last
equation is obtained by developing the previous squared term. Now, we study each of the three
terms:

                                                                    2
                                    Γ̂r,s′ Qθ̄ (s, a) − ΓQθ̄ (s, a) is independent of θk
            P
        •       (s,a,r,s′ )∈D

                                                                     2
                                                                         equal to M × ||ΓQθ̄ − Qθk ||22,ν by definition of ν.
            P
        •       (s,a,r,s′ )∈D (ΓQθ̄ (s, a) − Qθ k (s, a))


                                                                     16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


       •
                   X
                                  Γ̂r,s′ Qθ̄ (s, a) − ΓQθ̄ (s, a) (ΓQθ̄ (s, a) − Qθk (s, a))
              (s,a,r,s′ )∈D
                                                                                                           
                    X                X
               =                                 Γ̂r,s′ Qθ̄ (s, a) − ΓQθ̄ (s, a) (ΓQθ̄ (s, a) − Qθk (s, a)) = 0
                   (s,a)∈D̊    (r,s′ )∈Ds,a


           since, for every (s, a) ∈ D̊,
              X
                        Γ̂r,s′ Qθ̄ (s, a) − ΓQθ̄ (s, a) = Ms,a E(r,s′ )∼Ds,a [Γ̂r,s′ Qθ̄ (s, a)] − ΓQθ̄ (s, a) = 0,
           (r,s′ )∈Ds,a

           the last equality holds from the assumption.

Thus, we have
             X
                             LQN (θk |θ̄, s, a, r, s′ ) = constant w.r.t θk + M × ||ΓQθ̄ − Qθk ||22,ν
             (s,a,r,s′ )∈D

This is why
                                    X
                arg min                       LQN (θk |θ̄, s, a, r, s′ ) = arg min ||ΓQθ̄ − Qθk ||22,ν .
              k∈{1,...,K}                                               k∈{1,...,K}
                              (s,a,r,s′ )∈D


A.1    C ONVERGENCE OF A DAQN

In this section, we consider a tabular version of AdaQN in a finite MDP where the discount fac-
tor γ < 1. Our goal is to prove the convergence of AdaQN to the optimal action-value function
by adapting the proof of Theorem 2 in Lan et al. (2020). Without modification, the Generalized
Q-learning framework (Lan et al., 2020) does not comprise AdaQN. Indeed, while the target com-
putation of the Generalized Q-learning framework (Equation (3) in Lan et al. (2020)) only depends
on a fixed history length, AdaQN’s target computation (Equation (4)) depends on ψ, the index of the
selected network used for computing the target, which is defined from the entire history of the algo-
rithm. This is why, in the following, we first present the modifications brought to the Generalized
Q-learning framework before proving the convergence.
We color in blue the modifications brought to the Generalized Q-learning framework. Using the
same notation as in Equations (15) and (16) in Lan et al. (2020), for a state s, an action a, and at
timestep t, the new update rule is
   Qis,a (t + 1) ← Qis,a (t) + αs,a
                                i
                                    (t) Fs,a (Q(t), ψ(t)) − Qis,a (t) + ωs,a (t) , ∀i ∈ {1, .., N }, (6)


where ψ(t) ∈ {1, .., N } is F(t)-measurable and

                                              GQ,ψ(t)         GQ,ψ(t)
             ωs,a (t) = rs,a − E[rs,a ] + γ Qf (s,a) (t) − E[Qf (s,a) (t)|F(t)] .                                   (7)

We recall that in Lan et al. (2020), Q ∈ RmnN K where m is the cardinality of S, n the cardinality
of A, N is the population size, and K is the history length where Qi,j    s,a (t) is the component corre-
sponding to the ith element of the population at timestep t − j for state s and action a. F(t) is the
                                                                                          i
σ-algebra representing the history of the algorithm during the first t iterations. αs,a     (t) is the step
size and f (s, a) is a random successor state starting from state s after executing action a. We define,
for i ∈ {1, .., N }, Fs,a (Q, i) = E[rs,a ] + γE[QGQ,i              GQ,i
                                                  f (s,a) ], where Qs     = G(Qs , i).
For AdaQN, ψ(t) represents the index of the selected target at timestep t. Following Equa-
                                                  GQ,ψ(t−1)
tion (4), ψ(t) = arg mini ∥E[rs,a ] + γE[Qf (s,a)           ] − Qi,0 ∥2 , with ψ(0) = 0, and for i ∈
{1, .., N }, G(Qs , i) = maxa Qi,0
                               s,a . It is clear that ψ(t) is F(t)-measurable.


                                                              17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


We now verify that Assumptions 1, 2, 3, 4, and 6 in Lan et al. (2020), needed to prove the con-
vergence according to Theorem 5 in Lan et al. (2020), hold for AdaQN. Assumption 1 holds as
                                                                                             ′ i,j
∀Q, Q′ ∈ RnN K , ι, ι′ ∈ {1, .., N }, we have |G(Q, ι) − G(Q′ , ι′ )| ≤ maxa,i,j |Qi,j
                                                                                    a − Q a |. As-
sumptions 3, 4, and 6 also hold as the modification of the target computation does not influence their
validity. We point out that the constraint that ψ(t) is F(t)-measurable is used to verify that ωs,a (t)
is F(t + 1)-measurable for all state s and action a. This validates Assumption 4 (ii). Therefore, by
defining the step sizes such that Assumption 2 holds, AdaQN converges to the optimal action-value
function with probability 1.

B     A LGORITHMS AND HYPERPARAMETERS
Algorithm 2 Adaptive Soft Actor-Critic (AdaSAC). Modifications to SAC are marked in purple.
 1: Initialize the policy parameters ϕ, K online parameters (θ k )K
                                                                  k=1 , and an empty replay buffer D.
    For k = 1, . . . , K, set the target parameters θ̄k ← θk and the cumulative losses Lk = 0. Set
    ψ1 = 0 and ψ2 = 1 the indices to be selected for computing the target.
 2: repeat                                                                    S
 3:   Take action at ∼ πϕ (·|st ); Observe reward rt , next state st+1 ; D ← D {(st , at , rt , st+1 )}.

 4:   for UTD updates do
 5:     Sample a mini-batch B = {(s, a, r, s′ )} from D.
 6:     Compute the shared target

              y ←r+γ         min Qθ̄k (s , a ) − α log πϕ (a |s ) , where a′ ∼ πϕ (·|s′ ).
                                            ′ ′             ′ ′
                               k∈{ψ1 ,ψ2 }


 7:     for k = 1, ..., K do
                                                                                     2
           Compute the loss w.r.t θk , LkQN = (s,a,r,s′ )∈B (y − Qθk (s, a)) .
                                                  P
 8:
 9:        Update Lk ← (1 − τ )Lk + τ LkQN .
10:        Update θk using its specific optimizer and learning rate from ∇θk LkQN .
11:        Update the target networks with θ̄k ← τ θk + (1 − τ )θ̄k .
12:     Set ψ1 and ψ2 to be the indexes of the 2 lowest values of L.
13:   Set (ψ1b , ψ2b ) ∼ DistinctU{1, . . . , K} w.p ϵb and (ψ1b , ψ2b ) = (ψ1 , ψ2 ) w.p 1 − ϵb .
14:   Update ϕ with gradient ascent using the loss
                                min          Qθk (s, a) − α log πϕ (a|s), a ∼ πϕ (·|s)
                             k∈{ψ1b ,ψ2b }



B.1   E XPERIMENTAL SETUP

All environments are generated from the Gymansium library (Brockman et al., 2016). For the Atari
experiments, we build our codebase on Vincent et al. (2025) which mimics the implementation
choices made in Dopamine RL (Castro et al., 2018). Dopamine RL follows the training and eval-
uation protocols recommended by Machado et al. (2018). Namely, we use the game over signal to
terminate an episode instead of the life signal. The input given to the neural network is a concatena-
tion of 4 frames in grayscale of dimension 84 by 84. To get a new frame, we sample 4 frames from
the Gym environment configured with no frame-skip, and we apply a max pooling operation on the
2 last grayscale frames. We use sticky actions to make the environment stochastic (with p = 0.25).
The performance is the one obtained during training. We consider a different behavioral policy for
the experiment with an infinite hyperparameter space. Instead of taking an ϵ-greedy policy param-
eterized by ϵb as explained in Section 4.1, we sample each action from a probability distribution
that is inversely proportional to the current loss value. That way, the problem of passive learning is
further mitigated since the second or third most accurate networks will have a higher probability of
being selected to sample actions. Importantly, when AdaDQN selects between different losses, the
comparison is made between the values of the L2 losses even if the backpropagation is performed
with another loss. The 3 Atari games in the experiments of Section 5.3 are chosen from the 5 games
presented in Aitchison et al. (2023). The 6 Atari games in the experiments of Section 5.4 are chosen
from Franke et al. (2021).


                                                       18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


AdaDQN
                          Learn all Q i _
                       to be closer to Q        After M Compute the approximation  _
                                  _
                    Every T steps Q ←Q           steps  error fi of each Qi w.r.t. Q
                                     _ ψ
                  where ψ = argmin ∥ΓQ - Qi ∥                                               Exploit
                                i
  Initialize                                                                                 and
    all Qi                                                                                  explore
                         Learn each Q_i                                                     using fi
                       to be closer to Qi       After M    Compute the performance
                                   _             steps          fi of each Qi
                     Every T steps Qi ←Qi

 SEARL

Figure 9: AdaDQN and SEARL pipelines. AdaDQN and SEARL share the same exploitation and
exploration strategies. They only differ in the way the Q-functions are trained and in the nature of
the fitness value fi . In both algorithms, the exploitation and exploration phase is performed every
M steps. It is referred to as the hyperparameter frequency (HP freq) in Figures 7 and 22.

AdaQN - SEARL comparison. The exploitation strategy of SEARL and AdaDQN is based on a
tournament selection with elitism (Miller et al., 1995). The tournament comprises K − 1 steps for
a population of K networks. At each step, 3 networks are sampled uniformly without replacement,
and the network with the best fitness value fi is qualified to populate the next generation. The last
spot is reserved for the network with the best fitness value across the entire population. Then, every
network present more than twice in the population undergoes a mutation operation. This is the
exploration phase. One mutation operation out of the 5 operations we consider (architecture change,
activation function change, loss change, optimizer change, and learning rate change) is chosen with
equal probability. When the architecture is changed, one of the following operations is selected {±1
CNN layer, ±4 CNN channels, ±1 kernel size, ±1 CNN stride, ±1 MLP layer, ±16 MLP neurons}
with probability [0.1, 0.4  0.4 0.4
                        3 , 3 , 3 , 0.1, 0.4]. Those probabilities are not tuned. They are set by hand
so that the number of layers of the CNN and MLP do not change too often. If the hyperparameter
goes outside the search space described in Table 4, the value is clipped to the boundary. In every
case, the network weights are preserved as much as possible. This means that when the architecture
changes, only the new weights that were not present before the mutation operation are generated.
We choose to reset the optimizer each time a network undergoes a genetic modification. Instead of
an elitism mechanism, we investigated, on Lunar Lander, a truncation mechanism (Jaderberg et al.,
2023) where the 20% most accurate networks are selected for the next generation. The performances
are similar to the ones obtained with the elitism mechanism. We also tried to reset the weights after
each generation. This did not lead to performance improvements. Therefore, we kept the proposed
pipeline as close to SEARL as possible.
SEARL evaluates each network’s return empirically to estimate its performance. We set the min-
imum number of environment steps to evaluate each network to M divided by the number of net-
works in the population so that at least M new samples are collected in the replay buffer. This
also synchronizes the frequency at which the hyperparameters are updated with AdaDQN. SEARL
network weights are updated every 4 training step, similarly to AdaDQN (G = 4 in Table 4).
AdaQN - Meta-gradient RL comparison. The experiment comparing AdaDQN to Meta-gradient
DQN is made with the default hyperparameters of DQN. Each network of AdaDQN is trained with
a different discount factor, and the comparison between online networks is made by computing the
approximation error parameterized by a cross-validated discount factor γ̄. The optimizer used for the
outer loss of Meta-gradient DQN is Adam with a learning rate of 0.001 as in the original paper (Xu
et al., 2018). Similarly to Xu et al. (2018), we set the size of the discount factor’s embedding space
to 16.
B.2 E VALUATION PROTOCOL

The reported performance of the individual runs of DQN and SAC as well as AdaDQN, AdaDQN
with ϵb = 0, RandDQN, AdaDQN-max, AdaSAC, RandSAC, and Meta-Gradient DQN are the


                                                 19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


raw performance obtained during training aggregated over seeds and environments. The reported
performances of the other methods require some post-processing steps to account for the way they
operate. In the following, for a hyperparameter k and after t environment steps, we note si,j    k (t)
the return obtained during training for a task i and a seed j. Additionally, we note K the number
of hyperparameters considered for the specific setting. For the finite search space setting, we first
compute all possible individual runs (Figure 4 (right)) and, in Figure 4 (left), we derive:
       • Grid search as the IQM of the best individual hyperparameters across each task at each
         timestep t. We scale horizontally the IQM to the right by the number of individual runs
         to account for the environment steps taken by all individual runs. Indeed, we first identify
         the hyperparameter ki∗ (t) with the highest IQM for each task i at each timestep t: ki∗ (t) =
         arg max IQMj (si,j                                                            i,j
                          k (t)). Then, we report IQMgrid search (t × K) = IQMi,j (sk∗ (t) (t)).
                                                                                       i

        • Random search as the empirical average over all individual runs. We approximate the em-
          pirical average using Monte Carlo sampling for the possible sequence of hyperparameters.
          This corresponds to the expected performance of what a random search would look like if
          only one individual trial were attempted sequentially.
In the infinite search space setting (Figure 7 (left)), we report the following algorithm:
        • Random search & DEHB: to make random search and DEHB more competitive in this
          setting, we keep the samples collected by the previous individual trials when a new trial
          starts. This means that, for each task and each seed, random search and DEHB generate a
          sequence of returns over 180M environment interactions. From this sequence, we compute
          a running maximum over timesteps. Finally, we compute the IQM over seeds and tasks. In
          detail, the score used for computing the IQM is maxt′ ≤t si,j     ′
                                                                        k (t ).
       • SEARL: SEARL has the specificity of periodically evaluating every Q-network of its pop-
         ulation. Each time every Q-network is evaluated, we use the best return to compute the
         IQM of SEARL-max (maxk∈{1,..,K} si,jk (t)) and the worst return to compute the IQM of
         SEARL-min (mink∈{1,..,K} si,j
                                    k  (t)).
                                                Table 2: Summary of all fixed hyperparameters
Table 1: Summary of all fixed hyperparameters for the MuJoCo experiments (see Section 5.2).
used for the Lunar Lander experiments (see Sec-
tion 5.1).                                                 Shared across all algorithms
                                                    Discount factor γ                    0.99
            Shared across all algorithms            Horizon                              1000
     Discount factor γ                    0.99      Initial replay buffer size           5000
     Horizon                             1000       Replay buffer size                    106
     Initial replay buffer size          1000       Batch Size                            256
     Replay buffer size                    104      Target update rate τ                0.005
     Batch Size                             32      UTD                                     1
     Target update frequency T             200      Actor’s activation function        ReLU
     Training frequency G                    1      Actor’s learning rate               0.001
     Activation function                ReLU        Actor’s optimizer                  Adam
     Learning rate                   3 × 10−4       Actor’s architecture             256, 256
     Optimizer                          Adam        Policy delay                            1
     Loss                                   L2                     Vanilla SAC
     Starting ϵ                              1      Critic’s activation function       ReLU
     Ending ϵ                             0.01      Critic’s learning rate              0.001
     Linear decay duration of ϵ          1000       Critic’s optimizer                 Adam
                     AdaDQN                         Critic’s architecture            256, 256
     Starting ϵb                             1                       AdaSAC
     Ending ϵb                            0.01      Starting ϵb                             1
     Linear decay duration of ϵb Until end          Ending ϵb                            0.01
                                                    Linear decay duration of ϵb Until end


                                                 20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                  Table 4: Summary of all hyperparameters used for
                                                  the Atari experiments with an infinite hyperparameter
                                                  space (see Section 5.4).

                                                               Shared across all algorithms
                                                    Discount
                                                                                                   0.99
                                                    factor γ
                                                    Horizon                                      27000
                                                    Full action
                                                                                                    No
                                                    space
                                                    Reward
                                                                                           clip(−1, 1)
Table 3: Summary of all fixed hyperparame-          clipping
ters used for the Atari experiments with a fi-      Initial replay
                                                                                                 20000
nite hyperparameter space (see Section 5.3).        buffer size
                                                    Replay
                                                                                                    106
         Shared across all algorithms               buffer size
 Discount factor γ                        0.99      Batch Size                                       32
 Horizon                               27000        Training
                                                                                                       4
 Full action space                          No      frequency G
 Reward clipping                 clip(−1, 1)        Starting ϵ                                         1
 Initial replay buffer size            20000        Ending ϵ                                       0.01
                                                    Linear decay
 Replay buffer size                        106                                                  250000
                                                    duration of ϵ
 Batch Size                                 32
 Target update frequency T               8000                      Hyperparameter space
 Training frequency G                         4                                {CELU, ELU, GELU,
 Learning rate                      5 × 10−5                              Hard Sigmoid, Hard SiLU,
 Optimizer                              Adam                                Hard tanh, Leaky ReLU,
                                                      Activation
 Loss                                       L2                           Log-Sigmoid, Log-Softmax,
                                                       function
 Starting ϵ                                   1                              ReLU, SELU, Sigmoid,
 Ending ϵ                                 0.01                             SiLU, Soft-sign, Softmax,
 Linear decay duration of ϵ           250000                            Softplus, Standardize, Tanh}
                                                    Learning rate
                 Vanilla DQN                                                             [10−6 , 10−3 ]
                                                    (in log space)
 Activation function                    ReLU
                                                                              {AdaBelief, AdaDelta,
 ϵAdam                           1.5 × 10−4                                     AdaGrad, AdaFactor,
 CNN n layers                                 3                                      Adam, Adamax,
 CNN channels                     [32, 64, 64]                                   AdamaxW, AdamW,
 CNN kernel size                      [8, 4, 3]                                 AMSGrad, Fromage,
 CNN stride                           [4, 2, 1]     Optimizer                       Lamb, Lars, Lion,
 MLP n layers                                 1                                    Nadam, NadamW,
 MLP n neurons                             512                                Noisy SGD, Novograd,
                  AdaDQN                                                    Optimistic GD, RAdam,
 Starting ϵb                                  1                                     RMSProp, RProp,
 Ending ϵb                                0.01                                      SGD, SM3, Yogi}
 Linear decay duration of ϵb        Until end       Loss                  {Huber, L1, L2, Log cosh}
                                                    CNN n layers                                  J1, 3K
                                                    CNN n channels                             J16, 64K
                                                    CNN kernel size                               J2, 8K
                                                    CNN stride                                    J2, 5K
                                                    MLP n layers                                  J0, 2K
                                                    MLP n neurons                            J25, 512K
                                                                    Different Settings
                                                    High target freq                        T = 8000
                                                    Low target freq                         T = 4000
                                                    High HP freq                          M = 80000
                                                    Low HP freq                           M = 40000


                                                   21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


C                      T RAINING TIME AND MEMORY REQUIREMENTS
We address time complexity by reporting the performances obtained in Section 5.2 and 5.4 with the
clock time as the horizontal axis in Figure 10. On the left, AdaSAC still outperforms grid search
but is slower than random search as AdaQN carries out several networks in parallel. We stress
that this experiment is designed to demonstrate the capabilities of AdaSAC when a high number of
hyperparameters is considered. When the number of network decreases to 5, AdaQN becomes more
competitive against random search as Figure 10 (right) testifies. In this case, AdaDQN outperforms
all baselines in terms of training time and sample efficiency. We point out that Meta-gradient DQN,
evaluated in Section 5.4, is 4% slower to run than AdaDQN. Finally, we recall that, in this work, the
main focus is on sample-efficiency, as it is the predominant bottleneck in practical scenarios.
Concerning the memory requirements, AdaSAC uses an additional 300Mb from the vRAM for the
MuJoCo experiments presented in Section 5.2 compared to SAC. AdaDQN uses 200Mb more from
the vRAM than random search for the Atari experiments presented in Section 5.4. We argue that
those increases remain small compared to the benefit brought by AdaQN.

                        AdaSAC                    Worst seed - AdaSAC                                            AdaDQN                    DEHB
                        Random search             Worst seed - Random search                                     SEARL - max               Random search
                        Grid search               Worst seed - Grid search                                       SEARL - min
                                                                                                         1.0
                                                                                  IQM Human Norm Score
 IQM SAC Norm return


                       1.25
                       1.00
                       0.75                                                                              0.5
                       0.50
                       0.25                                                                              0.0
                              0.0       8.0       16.0       24.0         33.0                             0.0    5.0        10.0       15.0     20.0
                                          Clock time (in hours)                                                         Clock time (in hours)
Figure 10: Performances observed in Section 5.2 (left) and Section 5.4 (right) according to the train-
ing time. When evaluated with a high number of hyperparameters to consider in parallel, AdaQN
suffers from a slower training time but is still faster than grid search. When the number of hyperpa-
rameters is reasonable (≈ 5), AdaQN is competitive against all baselines.
D                       A DDITIONAL EXPERIMENTS
D.1                      O N - THE - FLY HYPERPARAMETER SELECTION ON M U J O C O

                                    SAC learning rate: 0.001, optimizer: Adam, architecture: 512, 512, activation fn: ReLU
                                    SAC learning rate: 0.0005, optimizer: Adam, architecture: 256, 256, activation fn: ReLU
                                    SAC learning rate: 0.001, optimizer: Adam, architecture: 512, 512, activation fn: Sigmoid
                                    SAC learning rate: 0.0005, optimizer: Adam, architecture: 512, 512, activation fn: ReLU
                                    SAC learning rate: 0.001, optimizer: Adam, architecture: 256, 256, activation fn: Sigmoid
                                    SAC learning rate: 0.0005, optimizer: Adam, architecture: 512, 512, activation fn: Sigmoid
                                    SAC learning rate: 0.0005, optimizer: RMSProp, architecture: 256, 256, activation fn: ReLU
                                    SAC learning rate: 0.0005, optimizer: RMSProp, architecture: 512, 512, activation fn: ReLU
                                    SAC learning rate: 0.001, optimizer: RMSProp, architecture: 512, 512, activation fn: Sigmoid
                                    SAC learning rate: 0.0005, optimizer: Adam, architecture: 256, 256, activation fn: Sigmoid
                                    SAC learning rate: 0.001, optimizer: RMSProp, architecture: 256, 256, activation fn: ReLU
                                    vanilla SAC learning rate: 0.001, optimizer: Adam, architecture: 256, 256, activation fn: ReLU
                                    SAC learning rate: 0.001, optimizer: RMSProp, architecture: 256, 256, activation fn: Sigmoid
                                    SAC learning rate: 0.001, optimizer: RMSProp, architecture: 512, 512, activation fn: ReLU
                                    SAC learning rate: 0.0005, optimizer: RMSProp, architecture: 512, 512, activation fn: Sigmoid
                                    SAC learning rate: 0.0005, optimizer: RMSProp, architecture: 256, 256, activation fn: Sigmoid
Figure 11: Exhaustive legend of Figure 4 showing the ranking by AUC of the 16 considered sets
of hyperparameters. Interestingly, the ranking does not follow a predictable order, as there is no
clear ordering between each hyperparameter. Importantly, the ranking changes between MuJoCo
environments, justifying the usage of AdaSAC, which adapts the hyperparameter schedule for each
environment and each seed.
                                                                             22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


D.2                       O N - THE - FLY ARCHITECTURE SELECTION ON M U J O C O

                          AdaSAC                            Random search                              Grid search                               RandSAC
 IQM SAC Norm return      Worst seed - AdaSAC               Worst seed - Random search                 Worst seed - Grid search

                       1.00
                       0.75
                       0.50
                       0.25
                                 104                      105                         106              0          1         2      3         4        5
                                                          Env Steps                                                        Env Steps               1e5
                SAC architecture: 256, 256, 256           SAC architecture: 256, 256, 256, 256       SAC architecture: 256, 256        SAC architecture: 256

Figure 12: On-the-fly architecture selection on MuJoCo. All architectures contain hidden layers
with 256 neurons. The architectures are indicated in the legend. Left: AdaSAC is more sample-
efficient than grid search. Right: AdaSAC yields similar performances as the best-performing
architectures. RandSAC and AdaSAC are on par.


                        AdaSAC                            SAC architecture: 256, 256                               SAC architecture: 256, 256, 256
                        RandSAC                           SAC architecture: 256                                    SAC architecture: 256, 256, 256, 256
                          1e3             Hopper                  1e3           Ant                               1e4 HalfCheetah
       IQM return


                        3                                                                                   1.0
                        2                                       2.5
                        1                                                                                   0.5
                                                                0.0
                       Target


                                1e3       Walker2d                    1e3       Humanoid                          1e5 HumanoidStandup
                                                                5.0                                        1.50
       IQM return


                          4
                          2                                     2.5                                        1.25
                       Target


                                      1    2     3    4     5               1     2     3        4     5               1      2     3       4      5
                                          Env Steps       1e5                    Env Steps           1e5                     Env Steps           1e5
Figure 13: Per environment return of AdaSAC and RandSAC when 4 different architectures are
given as input. Below each performance plot, a bar plot presents the distribution of the hyperpa-
rameters selected for computing the target across all seeds. AdaSAC effectively ignores the worst-
performing architecture (256) while actively selecting the best-performing architecture. Interest-
ingly, in HumanoidStandup, despite not performing well, AdaSAC selects the architecture 256, 256,
which is the best-performing-architecture.


                                                                                   23
   Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


   D.3                       O N - THE - FLY LEARNING RATE SELECTION ON M U J O C O

                            AdaSAC                         Random search                               Grid search                           RandSAC
    IQM SAC Norm return     Worst seed - AdaSAC            Worst seed - Random search                  Worst seed - Grid search

                          1.00
                          0.75
                          0.50
                          0.25
                                 104                       105                          106            0         1      2      3         4          5
                                                          Env Steps                                                    Env Steps                 1e5
                                        SAC learning rate: 0.001           SAC learning rate: 0.0005          SAC learning rate: 0.005
   Figure 14: On-the-fly learning rate selection on MuJoCo. The space of hyperparameters is com-
   posed of 3 different learning rates. Left: AdaSAC is more sample-efficient than random search and
   grid search. Right: AdaSAC yields performances slightly above the best-performing learning rate.
   RandSAC and AdaSAC are on par.


                                 AdaSAC                            SAC learning rate: 0.001                            SAC learning rate: 0.0005
                                 RandSAC                           SAC learning rate: 0.005
                           1e3         Hopper                       1e3           Ant                            1e4       HalfCheetah
IQM return


                    3                                                                                      1.0
                    2                                         2.5
                                                                                                           0.5
                    1
                                                              0.0
         Target


                           1e3         Walker2d                      1e3        Humanoid                         1e5 HumanoidStandup
                                                              5.0
IQM return


                    4                                                                                      1.5
                    2                                         2.5
                                                                                                           1.0
         Target


                                  1    2      3       4     5              1     2      3        4       5             1    2      3         4      5
                                       Env Steps          1e5                    Env Steps             1e5                  Env Steps             1e5
   Figure 15: Per environment return of AdaSAC and RandSAC when 3 different learning rates are
   given as input. Below each performance plot, a bar plot presents the distribution of the hyperpa-
   rameters selected for computing the target across all seeds. AdaSAC creates a custom learning rate
   schedule for each environment and each seed. Interestingly, this schedule seems to choose a low
   learning rate at the beginning of the training before increasing it later during the training.


                                                                                  24
   Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


   D.4                       O N - THE - FLY OPTIMIZER SELECTION ON M U J O C O

                            AdaSAC                      Random search                        Grid search                          RandSAC
    IQM SAC Norm return     Worst seed - AdaSAC         Worst seed - Random search           Worst seed - Grid search

                          1.00
                          0.75
                          0.50
                          0.25
                                 104                    105                       106        0         1      2      3        4          5
                                                       Env Steps                                             Env Steps                1e5
                                         SAC optimizer: AdamW          SAC optimizer: Adam         SAC optimizer: RMSProp
   Figure 16: On-the-fly optimizer selection on MuJoCo. The space of hyperparameters is com-
   posed of 3 different optimizers. Left: AdaSAC is more sample-efficient than random search
   and grid search. Right: AdaSAC yields similar performances as the best-performing optimizer
   (AdamW, Loshchilov & Hutter (2018)). RandSAC and AdaSAC are on par.


                                 AdaSAC                      SAC optimizer: Adam                             SAC optimizer: RMSProp
                                 RandSAC                     SAC optimizer: AdamW
                           1e3         Hopper                 1e3           Ant                        1e4       HalfCheetah
                                                                                                 1.0
IQM return


                    3
                    2                                      2.5
                    1                                                                            0.5
                                                           0.0
         Target


                           1e3         Walker2d                  1e3       Humanoid                    1e5 HumanoidStandup
                                                           5.0                                   1.5
IQM return


                    4
                    2                                      2.5
                                                                                                 1.0
         Target


                                  1    2      3    4     5             1    2      3     4     5             1    2      3        4      5
                                       Env Steps       1e5                  Env Steps        1e5                  Env Steps            1e5
   Figure 17: Per environment return of AdaSAC and RandSAC when 3 different optimizers are given
   as input. Below each performance plot, a bar plot presents the distribution of the hyperparameters
   selected for computing the target across all seeds. AdaSAC effectively ignores RMSProp, which
   performs poorly in most environments.


                                                                             25
   Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


   D.5                       O N - THE - FLY ACTIVATION FUNCTION SELECTION ON M U J O C O

                            AdaSAC                        Random search                           Grid search                             RandSAC
    IQM SAC Norm return     Worst seed - AdaSAC           Worst seed - Random search              Worst seed - Grid search

                          1.00
                          0.75
                          0.50
                          0.25
                                 104                      105                        106          0         1      2      3           4          5
                                                         Env Steps                                                Env Steps                   1e5
                                       SAC activation fn: ReLU          SAC activation fn: Sigmoid          SAC activation fn: Tanh
   Figure 18: On-the-fly activation function selection on MuJoCo. The space of hyperparameters is
   composed of 3 different activation functions. Left: AdaSAC is more sample-efficient than random
   search and grid search. Right: AdaSAC performs slightly below the best-performing activation
   function. In this setting, RandSAC suffers from the fact that a network with Tanh activation functions
   is selected as the target network one-third of the time.


                              AdaSAC                             SAC activation fn: ReLU                              SAC activation fn: Tanh
                              RandSAC                            SAC activation fn: Sigmoid
                           1e3      Hopper                       5 1e3
                                                                                 Ant                        1e3       HalfCheetah
IQM return


                    3
                    2                                                                                 7.5
                    1                                                                                 5.0
                                                                 0                                    2.5
         Target


                    4 1e3
                                       Walker2d              5.0 1e3
                                                                             Humanoid                       1e5 HumanoidStandup
IQM return


                                                                                                      1.5
                    2                                        2.5
                                                                                                      1.0
         Target


                                 1     2      3      4     5            1     2      3        4     5             1     2      3          4      5
                                       Env Steps         1e5                  Env Steps           1e5                   Env Steps              1e5
   Figure 19: Per environment return of AdaSAC and RandSAC when 3 different activation functions
   are given as input. Below each performance plot, a bar plot presents the distribution of the hy-
   perparameters selected for computing the target across all seeds. Remarkably, AdaSAC selects the
   Sigmoid activation function in environments where this activation function seems beneficial (Ant,
   HalfCheetah, and Walker2d), while it does not select the Sigmoid activation function in environ-
   ments where the individual run performs poorly (Humanoid and HumanoidStandup).


                                                                               26
      Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


      D.6                        O N - THE - FLY HYPERPARAMETER SELECTION ON ATARI

                                                          On-The-Fly activation function selection on Atari
                                                                  AdaDQN           ReLU            Tanh         Sigmoid
                                        BattleZone                               DoubleDunk                                       NameThisGame
                       0.5                                         2.5                                             0.5
                                                                   0.0
                       0.0                                         2.5                                             0.0
                        Target


                                                               On-The-Fly architecture selection on Atari
IQM Human Norm Score


                                                     AdaDQN        [32, 64, 64, 512]           [44, 52, 64, 512]             [46, 46, 46, 714]
                                        BattleZone                               DoubleDunk                                       NameThisGame
                       0.5                                         2.5
                                                                                                                   0.5
                                                                   0.0                                             0.0
                       0.0
                        Target


                                                              On-The-Fly Adam's epsilon selection on Atari
                                                       AdaDQN            Adam: 1.5e-4            Adam: 1.5e-6                Adam: 1.5e-8
                                        BattleZone                               DoubleDunk                                       NameThisGame
                       0.5                                           5                                             0.5
                       0.0                                           0                                             0.0
                        Target


                              1     10    20       30      40            1     10    20       30      40                 1       10    20       30      40
                                  Num Frames (in millions)                   Num Frames (in millions)                          Num Frames (in millions)
      Figure 20: AdaDQN performs similarly to the best individual hyperparameters when selecting from
      3 activation functions (left), 3 architectures (middle), or 3 different values of Adam’s epsilon param-
      eter (right). Below each performance plot, a bar plot presents the distribution of the hyperparameters
      selected for computing the target.


                                                 AdaDQN              SEARL                  DEHB                   Random search
                                         BattleZone                                     Boxing                                           Enduro
                                       Budget: 40M                   5           Budget: 40M                                        Budget: 40M
                       0.50                                                                                          1
IQM Human Norm Score


                       0.25                                          0
                       0.00                                          5                                               0
                                           Freeway                                      Pong                                          RoadRunner
                                       Budget: 40M                               Budget: 40M                                        Budget: 40M
                                                                                                                     4
                        1.0                                        1.0
                        0.5                                        0.5                                               2
                        0.0                                        0.0                                               0
                              1      40    80      120 160               1     40    80      120 160                     1       40    80      120 160
                                    Num Frames (in millions)                  Num Frames (in millions)                          Num Frames (in millions)
      Figure 21: Per game performances of AdaDQN and the baselines when the space of hyperparameters
      is infinite. We believe that the wide range of returns is due to the fact that the hyperparameter space
      is large. Nevertheless, AdaDQN reaches higher IQM returns than SEARL on all games except on
      BattleZone, where only one seed performs well.


                                                                                       27
       Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                                       BattleZone                                                                                 Boxing                                                                         Enduro
                                                                       High target freq                                                                     High target freq                                                                High target freq
                                                                        High HP freq                                                                         High HP freq                                                                    High HP freq

                                                                     0.08                                                                                 1.25                                                                            0.40


                                                                                                                    High target freq


                                                                                                                                                                                                     High target freq


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           High target freq
                                                                                                                                                             0.11

                                                   Low target freq


                                                                                                                                       Low target freq


                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Low target freq
                                                    High HP freq


                                                                                                                                        High HP freq


                                                                                                                                                                                                                         High HP freq
                                                                         0.02


                                                                                                                     Low HP freq


                                                                                                                                                                                                      Low HP freq


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Low HP freq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        0.09


                                                                       Low target freq                                                                      Low target freq                                                                 Low target freq
                                                                        Low HP freq                                                                          Low HP freq                                                                     Low HP freq

                                                                               AdaDQN                                                                      SEARL - max                                                            SEARL - min
                                                                        Freeway                                                                              Pong                                                                    RoadRunner
                                                                       High target freq                                                                     High target freq                                                                High target freq
                                                                        High HP freq                                                                         High HP freq                                                                    High HP freq

                                                                     1.07                                                                                 0.91                                                                            1.46
                                                                                                                    High target freq


                                                                                                                                                                                                     High target freq


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           High target freq
                                                                        0.76
                                                   Low target freq


                                                                                                                                       Low target freq


                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Low target freq
                                                    High HP freq


                                                                                                                                        High HP freq


                                                                                                                                                                                                                         High HP freq
                                                                                                                     Low HP freq


                                                                                                                                                                                                      Low HP freq


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Low HP freq
                                                                                                                                                                                   0.04                                                                 0.18


                                                                       Low target freq                                                                      Low target freq                                                                 Low target freq
                                                                        Low HP freq                                                                          Low HP freq                                                                     Low HP freq

       Figure 22: Per game performances of AdaDQN and SEARL at 40M frames for different algorithm’s
       hyperparameter values. As each online network is evaluated in SEARL, we report the maximum
       and minimum observed return (SEARL - min and SEARL - max). Remarkably, AdaDQN’s per-
       formances are always above the minimum performances of SEARL. In 4 out of the 6 considered
       games, AdaDQN outperforms SEARL maximum return on all considered settings. High target freq
       corresponds to T = 8000 and low target freq corresponds to T = 4000. HP freq is noted M in
       Figure 9, the high value is M = 80000 and the low value is M = 40000.


                                                                                                                                                         AdaDQN on Pong
                                                         Target network                                           Online networks                                                  Performances are low                                       Performances are increasing
                                                                                                                                                                                                   1e 4
                                                                               CNN stride CNN n channels


                                            3                                                               27                                                                                                                                               Log cosh
MLP n layers CNN kernel size CNN n layers


                                                                                                                                                             Learning rate


                                                                                                            25                                                                                                                                                     L2
                                                                                                                                                                                          2.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Loss


                                            2                                                               23
                                                                                                            21                                                                                                                                                     L1

                                            1                                                               19                                                                            0.0                                                                   Huber
                                                                                                                                                                                           Tanh                                                                   Yogi
                                            3                                                                5                                                                       Standardize                                                                 SM3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 SGD
                                                                                                                                                                                        Softplus                                                               RProp
                                                                                                                                                                                        Softmax                                                             RMSProp
                                                                                                            4                                                                                                                                                 RAdam
                                                                                                                                                             Activation function


                                                                                                                                                                                       Soft-sign
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Optimistic GD
                                                                                                                                                                                           SiLU                                                             Novograd
                                                                                                                                                                                        Sigmoid                                                           Noisy SGD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Optimizer


                                                                                                                                                                                          SELU                                                               NadamW
                                            2                                                                3                                                                            ReLU
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Nadam
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Lion
                                                                                                                                                                                   Log-Softmax                                                                    Lars
                                            2                                                              254                                                                                                                                                  Lamb
                                                                               MLP n neurons


                                                                                                                                                                                   Log-Sigmoid                                                               Fromage
                                                                                                                                                                                    Leaky ReLU                                                              AMSGrad
                                                                                                           226                                                                         Hard tanh
                                                                                                                                                                                      Hard SiLU
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              AdamW
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           AdamaxW
                                            1                                                              198                                                                     Hard Sigmoid
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Adamax
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Adam
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            AdaFactor
                                                                                                           170                                                                            GELU
                                                                                                                                                                                           ELU
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             AdaGrad
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             AdaDelta
                                            0                                                              142                                                                            CELU                                                              AdaBelief

                                                0 10 20 30 40                                                    0 10 20 30 40           0 10 20 30 40                                                                                                                   0 10 20 30 40
                                                                                                                        Num Frames (in millions)
       Figure 23: Evolution of AdaDQN’s hyperparameters along the training for one seed on Pong. While
       the online networks explore a vast portion of the hyperparameter space, the target network focuses
       on a few values.


                                                                                                                                                                               28
