Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


C AN LLM S U NDERSTAND T IME S ERIES A NOMALIES ?
 Zihao Zhou                                          Rose Yu
 Dept of Computer Science and Engineering            Dept of Computer Science and Engineering
 University of California, San Diego                 University of California, San Diego
 La Jolla, CA 92093, USA                             La Jolla, CA 92093, USA
 ziz244@ucsd.edu                                     roseyu@ucsd.edu



                                           A BSTRACT

         Large Language Models (LLMs) have gained popularity in time series forecast-
         ing, but their potential for anomaly detection remains largely unexplored. Our
         study investigates whether LLMs can understand and detect anomalies in time
         series data, focusing on zero-shot and few-shot scenarios. Inspired by conjec-
         tures about LLMs’ behavior from time series forecasting research, we formu-
         late key hypotheses about LLMs’ capabilities in time series anomaly detection.
         We design and conduct principled experiments to test each of these hypotheses.
         Our investigation reveals several surprising findings about LLMs for time series:
         (1) LLMs understand time series better as images rather than as text, (2) LLMs
         do not demonstrate enhanced performance when prompted to engage in explicit
         reasoning about time series analysis. (3) Contrary to common beliefs, LLMs’
         understanding of time series does not stem from their repetition biases or arith-
         metic abilities. (4) LLMs’ behaviors and performance in time series analysis vary
         significantly across different models. This study provides the first comprehen-
         sive analysis of contemporary LLM capabilities in time series anomaly detection.
         Our results suggest that while LLMs can understand trivial time series anomalies,
         we have no evidence that they can understand more subtle real-world anomalies.
         Many common conjectures based on their reasoning capabilities do not hold. All
         synthetic dataset generators, final prompts, and evaluation scripts have been made
         available in https://github.com/rose-stl-lab/anomllm.


1   I NTRODUCTION

The remarkable progress in large language models (LLMs) has led to their application in various
domains, including time series analysis. Recent studies have demonstrated LLMs’ potential as zero-
shot and few-shot learners in tasks such as forecasting and classification (Gruver et al., 2023; Liu
et al., 2024c). However, the effectiveness of LLMs in time series analysis remains a subject of
debate. While some researchers argue that LLMs can leverage their pretrained knowledge to un-
derstand time series patterns (Gruver et al., 2023), others suggest that simpler models can match or
outperform LLMs (Tan et al., 2024).
This debate raises a fundamental question: Do LLMs truly understand time series? To address this
question, we must look beyond models’ predictive performance. Forecasting typically hinges on
metrics like MSE, which can overlook deeper model understanding. A model that simply outputs
a nearly constant line might still achieve a passable MSE but reveals little about its capacity to
interpret dynamics. Shifting our focus to anomaly detection changes the game: it forces LLMs to
pinpoint irregular behavior and thus tests whether they grasp the underlying patterns, not just how
well they extrapolate an average.
In this paper, we present the first comprehensive investigation into LLMs’ understanding of time
series data through the lens of anomaly detection. We focus on state-of-the-art LLMs and mul-
timodal LLMs (M-LLMs) across different anomaly types under controlled conditions. Our eval-
uation strategy incorporates multimodal inputs (textual and visual representations of time series),
various prompting techniques, and structured output formats. The results are quantitatively assessed
using the affinity F1 score. We provide empirical evidence to challenge existing conjectures and


                                                 1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


claims about LLMs’ time series understanding. Our findings reveal a more nuanced understanding
of LLMs’ capabilities and limitations in time series data, including:

• Visual Advantage: LLMs perform significantly better in anomaly detection when processing
  time series data as images rather than text tokens.
• Limited Reasoning: LLMs do not benefit from chain-of-thought reasoning when analyzing time
  series data. Their performance often decreases when prompted to explain their reasoning.
• Alternative Processing Mechanisms: Contrary to common beliefs, LLMs’ understanding of
  time series does not stem from their repetition biases or arithmetic abilities, challenging prevailing
  assumptions about how these models process numerical data.
• Model Heterogeneity: Time series understanding and anomaly detection capabilities differ across
  various LLM architectures, highlighting the importance of model selection.

In summary, while LLMs can detect simple anomalies, their abilities to understand and reason about
numerical time series are considerably limited. Our research calls for more caution in applying
LLMs to time series and for controlled studies to examine LLMs’ behavior for other data modalities.

2   R ELATED W ORK
LLMs for Time Series Analysis. LLMs have been applied to various time series analysis tasks,
with recent literature establishing strong claims about their capabilities. Gruver et al. (2023) showed
that LLMs such as GPT-3 and LLaMA-2 possess broad pattern extrapolation capabilities, enabling
zero-shot time series forecasting by encoding time series as strings of numerical digits and achieving
comparable performance to purpose-built models. Building on these claims, Liu et al. (2024c) pro-
posed a Cross-Modal LLM Fine-Tuning framework, suggesting that LLMs can provide interpretable
predictions while addressing the distribution discrepancy between textual and temporal input tokens
in multivariate time series forecasting. Liu et al. (2024b) introduced Time-MMD, a multi-domain,
multimodal time series dataset for LLM finetuning. For anomaly detection, Liu et al. (2024a) pro-
posed AnomalyLLM, a knowledge distillation-based approach using GPT-2 as the teacher network.
Zhang et al. (2024) provided a comprehensive survey of LLM applications in time series analysis.
In the financial domain, Wimmer & Rekabsaz (2023) used vision language models, i.e., CLIP, but
not M-LLMs to process visualizations of stock data for market change prediction.
However, these prevailing beliefs about LLMs’ pattern extrapolation capabilities and interpretable
predictions remain controversial. Zeng et al. (2023) argued that the permutation-invariant nature of
self-attention mechanisms may lead to loss of critical temporal information. Tan et al. (2024) found
that removing the LLM component or replacing it with a basic attention layer often improved per-
formance in popular LLM-based forecasting methods, challenging the assumed benefits of LLMs’
pattern recognition abilities. The interpretability of LLMs in time series analysis remains a chal-
lenge, as their reasoning capabilities are often opaque and difficult to interpret.

Time Series Anomaly Detection. Time series anomaly detection is a critical task in various do-
mains, including finance, healthcare, and cybersecurity. Traditional methods rely on statistical tech-
niques, while recent work has focused on developing deep learning-based approaches (Audibert
et al., 2022; Chen et al., 2022; Tuli et al., 2022). Audibert et al. (2022) compared conventional,
machine-learning-based, and deep neural network methods, finding that no family of methods con-
sistently outperforms the others. Chen et al. (2022) proposed a deep variational graph convolutional
recurrent network for multivariate time series anomaly detection. Tuli et al. (2022) introduced a
transformer-based anomaly detection model with adversarial training and meta-learning.
However, recent studies have highlighted significant flaws in current time series anomaly detection
benchmarks and evaluation practices (Wu & Keogh, 2021; Huet et al., 2022; Sarfraz et al., 2024).
Wu & Keogh (2021) argued that popular benchmark datasets suffer from major flaws like triviality
and mislabeling, potentially creating an illusion of progress in the field. Huet et al. (2022) pointed
out that the classical F1 score fails to reflect approximate but non-overlapping detections, which
are common in time series. Sarfraz et al. (2024) criticized the persistent use of flawed evaluation
metrics and inconsistent benchmarking practices, suggesting that complex deep learning models
may not offer significant improvements over simpler baselines in the semi-supervised setting.


                                                   2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


One reason for using deep learning models in time series anomaly detection is their ability to bring
prior knowledge on what constitutes normal behavior from pretraining on large-scale datasets. Large
language models (LLMs) may offer a promising solution due to their strong zero-shot capabilities.
However, there is currently a lack of systematic study of modern (M-)LLMs for time series anomaly
detection, which we aim to address in this work.

Multimodal LLMs (M-LLMs). Multimodal LLMs combine text with other data modalities and
have been explored in various domains, including image captioning, video understanding, and mul-
timodal translation (Lu et al., 2019; Li et al., 2019; Sun et al., 2019; Huang et al., 2019). Recent
advancements have led to more sophisticated M-LLMs, such as Qwen-VL and Phi-3-Vision, demon-
strating superior performance in visual-centric tasks and compact deployment capabilities (Bai et al.,
2023; Abdin et al., 2024). In the context of time series analysis, M-LLMs have been used to model
multimodal data, such as time series and textual information, showing promising results in fore-
casting and anomaly detection (Liu et al., 2021). However, there is a notable absence of research
applying M-LLMs to time series data presented as visual inputs, even though humans often detect
time series anomalies through visual inspection. This gap is particularly significant given that time
series data can be represented in different modalities (e.g., numerical, textual, or visual) without los-
ing substantial new information. Consequently, time series analysis presents a unique opportunity
to evaluate M-LLMs’ ability to understand and process the same underlying data across different
representational formats.


3     T IME S ERIES A NOMALY D ETECTION : D EFINITION AND C ATEGORIZATION

We begin by defining time series anomaly detection and categorizing different types of anomalies.

3.1   A NOMALY D EFINITION

We consider time series X := {x1 , x2 , . . . , xT } collected at regular intervals, where xt is the feature
scalar or vector at time t, and T is the total number of time points. Anomalies are data points that
deviate significantly from the expected pattern of the time series. The expected pattern of a time
series refers to the governing function or conditional probability that the data is expected to follow,
depending on whether the system is deterministic or stochastic.
Generating function. Assume the time series generation is deterministic. A data point xt is consid-
ered an anomaly if it deviates much from the value predicted by the generating function, i.e.,
                                |xt − G(xt |xt−1 , xt−2 , . . . , xt−n )| > δ                           (1)

Conditional probability. Assume the time series generation is governed by a history-dependent
stochastic process. A data point xt is considered an anomaly if its conditional probability is below
a certain threshold ϵ, i.e.,
                                 P (xt |xt−1 , xt−2 , . . . , xt−n ) < ϵ                          (2)

An anomaly detection algorithm typically takes a time series as input and outputs either binary
labels Y := {y1 , y2 , . . . , yT } or anomaly scores {s1 , s2 , . . . , sT }. In the case of binary labels,
yt = 1 indicates an anomaly at time t, and yt = 0 indicates normal behavior. The number of
                                                                                       PT
anomalies should be much smaller than the number of normal data points, i.e., t=1 yt ≪ T .
In the case of anomaly scores, st represents the degree of anomaly at time t, with higher scores
indicating a higher likelihood of an anomaly. This likelihood can be connected to the condi-
tional probability definition, where a higher score is correlated to a lower conditional probability
P (xt |xt−1 , xt−2 , . . . , xt−n ). A threshold θ can be applied to the scores to convert them into binary
labels, where yt = 1 if st > θ and yt = 0 otherwise.
Time series anomalies can be analyzed at two levels: (1) within individual sequences, where specific
points or intervals deviate from the normal pattern, and (2) across different sequences, where entire
sequences are considered anomalous. This paper focuses on the first level, specifically detecting
anomalous intervals within individual sequences.


                                                     3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Anomalous Intervals. We define anomalies as continuous intervals of time points that de-
viate from the expected pattern. Let R be a set of anomalous time intervals: R =
{[t1start , t1end ], [t2start , t2end ], . . . , [tkstart , tkend ]} where [tistart , tiend ] represents the i-th anomalous in-
terval, with tistart and tiend being its start and end times. When tistart = tiend , the anomaly is a single
point anomaly. For a time series X = {x1 , x2 , . . . , xT }, we assign binary labels:
                                             1 if t ∈ [tistart , tiend ] for any i ∈ {1, . . . , k}

                                  yt =
                                             0 otherwise

Zero-Shot and Few-Shot Anomaly Detection. Few-shot anomaly detection involves providing
the model f with a small set of labeled examples. Given n labeled time series {(X1 , Y1 ), (X2 , Y2 ),
. . . , (Xn , Yn )}, where Yi is a series of anomaly labels for each time step in Xi , and a new unlabeled
time series Xnew , the model g predicts:
        {s1 , s2 , . . . , sT } or {y1 , y2 , . . . , yT } = g(Xnew , {(X1 , Y1 ), (X2 , Y2 ), . . . , (Xn , Yn )}),
where n is typically small (e.g., 1-5). In zero-shot anomaly detection, n = 0, i.e., the model f
is expected to identify anomalies without any labeled examples. These scenarios pose significant
challenges for deep neural nets and some traditional models that require a lot of training examples.
                                                                  Anomaly (a) Trend
3.2 A NOMALY PATTERN C LASSIFICATION

Patterns of time series anomalies can be categorized                                         (b) Frequency
into two main types based on their nature: out-of-range
anomalies which exceed normal value thresholds and
contextual anomalies which exhibit abnormal behavior                                             (c) Point
only within specific contexts (Lai et al., 2023). The con-
textual anomalies can be further divided into frequency
anomalies, trend anomalies, and contextual point anoma-                                     (d) Out-of-Range
lies. Each type presents unique characteristics and chal-
lenges for detection. By examining how LLMs recog-
nize these diverse anomaly types, we can verify whether
our hypotheses about LLMs’ understanding of time series                     Figure 1: Example time series with dif-
data hold consistently across different pattern variations.                 ferent anomaly types, with anomalous
                                                                            regions highlighted in red.
3.2.1     O UT- OF - RANGE A NOMALIES
Out-of-range anomalies are data points that lie far outside the normal range of values in a time
series. These anomalies can be detected even when the time series order is shuffled, as shown in
Figure 1(d). If a model can detect out-of-range anomalies but fails to detect contextual anomalies,
this suggests it is not using the positional information in the time series (Tan et al., 2024).

3.2.2     C ONTEXTUAL A NOMALIES
Contextual anomalies are data points or consecutive subsequences that deviate from the expected
pattern of the time series. These anomalies are only detectable when the order of the time series is
preserved. Contextual anomalies can be further divided into three subcategories:
Trend Anomalies. Trend anomalies manifest as a sudden acceleration (Figure 1(a)), deceleration,
or reversal of the established trend. These anomalies are characterized by unexpected changes in the
changing rate of the time series, detected through gradient analysis gt = (xt − xt−1 )/∆t. To reduce
noise sensitivity, smoothed gradients gtsmooth = (M At − M At−1 )/∆t are often used, where M At
is a moving average over a window of points.
Frequency Anomalies.        Frequency anomalies occur when the periodic components of a time
series deviate from the expected pattern. These anomalies are usually identified by analyzing the
frequency domain of the time series, typically using techniques like Fourier transforms. A frequency
anomaly is detected when there’s a significant shift in the dominant frequencies, see Figure 1(b).
Contextual Point Anomalies.        Contextual point anomalies occur when individual data points
deviate from the expected pattern of the time series, even while remaining within the overall regular


                                                              4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


range of values. As shown in Figure 1(c), these points are not extreme outliers but don’t fit the local
context of the time series. They may violate the smooth continuity of the data, contradict short-term
trends, or disrupt established patterns without necessarily exceeding global thresholds.

3.3     T IME S ERIES F ORECASTING VS . A NOMALY D ETECTION

As most of the literature on LLM for time series focuses on forecasting, we use the conjectures from
these works as a starting point to understand LLMs’ behavior in anomaly detection. The tasks of time
series forecasting and anomaly detection share many similarities. By definition, deterministic fore-
casting of future time steps is about learning the generating function (see Equation 1). Probabilistic
forecasting is about learning the conditional probability function (see Equation 2). Therefore, both
time series forecasting and anomaly detection rely heavily on extrapolation. In forecasting tasks,
models extrapolate past patterns to predict future values, extending the known series into unknown
territory. Similarly, anomaly detection involves extrapolating the “normal” behavior of a time series
to identify points that deviate significantly from this expected pattern.
LLMs are trained on a corpus of token sequences, {U1 , U2 , . . . , UN }, where Ui = {u1 , u2 , . . . , uLi }
and uj is a token in the vocabulary V. The model learns to autoregressively predict the next token in
the sequence given the previous tokens, i.e., P (uj+1 |u1 , u2 , . . . , uj ). The motivation for applying
LLMs to time series forecasting is often their zero-shot extrapolation capabilities (Brown et al.,
2020). The autoregressive generation of tokens and that of time series steps (in Equation 2) are
similar, and the LLMs act as an Occam’s razor to find the simplest form of G (in Equation 1)
(Gruver et al., 2023). This connection suggests that hypotheses made in LLMs for forecasting may
also apply to anomaly detection. Many such hypotheses are proposed as possible explanations for
the model’s behavior without validation from controlled studies, which motivates our investigation.

4      U NDERSTANDING LLM’ S U NDERSTANDING OF T IME S ERIES

To demystify LLMs’ anomaly detection capabilities, we take a principled approach by formulating
several scientific hypotheses. Then we build an LLM time series anomaly evaluation framework to
test each of the hypotheses.

4.1     H YPOTHESES

The following hypotheses represent a synthesis of existing literature (1-3), our own insights into
LLM behavior (4-5), and prevailing assumptions in the field that warrant closer examination (6-7).
The hypotheses cover two main aspects: LLMs’ reasoning paths (1, 3, 4) and biases (2, 5, 6, 7).
      Hypothesis 1 (Tan et al., 2024) on Chain-of-Thought (CoT) Reasoning

      LLMs do not benefit from engaging in step-by-step reasoning about time series data.

The authors claim that existing LLM methods, including zero-shot ones, do very little to use innate
reasoning. While they demonstrate that LLM methods perform similarly or worse than those without
LLMs in time series tasks, none of their experiments assess the LLMs’ reasoning capabilities.
To validate this hypothesis, we focus on the performance of one-shot and zero-shot CoT prompting,
which explicitly elicits an LLM’s reasoning abilities (Wei et al., 2022). We use terms from cognitive
science to describe the LLMs’ different behaviors with and without CoT: the reflexive mode (slow,
deliberate, and logical) and the reflective mode (fast, intuitive, and emotional) (Lieberman, 2003).
Therefore, the question becomes whether the LLMs benefit from the reflexive mode, when it thinks
slowly about the time series. If the hypothesis is false, the LLMs should perform better when they
are prompted to explain.
      Hypothesis 2 (Gruver et al., 2023) on Repetition Bias

      LLMs’ repetition bias (Holtzman et al., 2020) corresponds precisely to their ability to identify
      and extrapolate periodic structure in the time series.



                                                     5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


This hypothesis draws a parallel between LLMs’ tendency to generate repetitive tokens and their po-
tential ability to recognize periodic patterns in time series data. To validate the hypothesis, we design
an experiment where the datasets contain both perfectly periodic and noisy periodic time series. The
introduction of minor noise would disrupt the exact repetition of tokens in the input sequence, even
if the underlying pattern remains numerically approximately periodic. If the hypothesis holds, we
should observe a significant drop in performance, despite the numbers maintaining its fundamental
periodic structure. See Appendix E for formal definitions of Hypothesis 2 and 3.
   Hypothesis 3 (Gruver et al., 2023) on Arithmetic Reasoning

   LLMs’ ability to perform addition and multiplication (Yuan et al., 2023) maps onto extrapo-
   lating linear and exponential trends.

This hypothesis suggests a connection between LLMs’ arithmetic capabilities and their ability to
extrapolate simple mathematical sequences. It is argued that LLMs’ proficiency in basic arithmetic
operations, such as addition and multiplication, enables it to extend patterns like linear sequences
(e.g., x(t) = 2t) by iteratively applying the addition operation (e.g., +2). To validate the hypothesis,
we design an experiment where an LLM is specifically guided to impair its arithmetic abilities while
preserving its other linguistic and reasoning capabilities. If the hypothesis holds, we should observe
a corresponding decline in the model’s ability to predict anomalies in the trend datasets. Otherwise,
LLMs rely on alternative mechanisms for time series pattern recognition and extrapolation.
   Hypothesis 4 (Dong et al., 2024) on Visual Reasoning

   Time series anomalies can be more easily detected as visual input rather than text input.

Motivated by the fact that human analysts often rely on visual representations for anomaly detection
in time series, we hypothesize that M-LLMs, whose training data includes human expert detection
tasks, may prefer time series as images rather than raw numerical data. Similar assumption is also
proposed in recent work by Dong et al. (2024), who demonstrated that explicitly prompting LLMs to
”think visually” about time series improved their anomaly detection capabilities, even without actual
visual input. This hypothesis can be readily tested by comparing the performance of multimodal
LLMs on identical time series presented as both text and visualizations.
   Hypothesis 5 on Visual Perception Bias

   LLMs exhibit similar detection limitations to human perceptual biases, e.g., in acceleration
   perception when analyzing visual time series representations.

We hypothesize based on the growing interest in using LLMs due to their internal human-like knowl-
edge (Jin et al., 2024) and their ability to align with human cognition in complex tasks (Thomas et al.,
2023). However, humans have known cognitive limitations in detecting subtle anomalies, and recent
research suggests that LLMs may exhibit human-like cognitive biases (Opedal et al., 2024).
To validate this hypothesis, we leverage findings from human perception research. For example,
Mueller & Timney (2016) reported that humans are more sensitive to sudden changes in motion
direction or velocity (like trend reversals) than to gradual acceleration changes. We compare LLM
performance on two datasets: one featuring anomalies that revert an increasing trend to a decreasing
trend (analogous to negating constant speed), and another with anomalies that accelerate an in-
creasing trend. Both datasets would have similar prevalence rates, making them equally detectable
by traditional methods that identify gradient changes. If LLMs exhibit significantly poorer perfor-
mance in detecting acceleration anomalies compared to trend reversals, it would suggest that they
indeed suffer from similar perceptual limitations as humans.
   Hypothesis 6 on Long Context Bias

   LLMs perform better for time series with fewer tokens, even if there is information loss.

Despite recent advancements in handling long sequences, LLMs still struggle with complex, real-
world tasks involving extended inputs (Li et al., 2024). This limitation may also apply to time


                                                   6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


series analysis. To test this hypothesis, we propose an experiment comparing LLM performance on
original time series text and pooled textual representations (reduced size by interpolation). If the
hypothesis holds, we should observe performance improvement with the subsampled text.

4.2     P ROMPTING S TRATEGIES

We incorporate two main prompting techniques in our investigation: Zero-Shot and Few-Shot Learn-
ing (FSL) and Chain-of-Thought (CoT). For FSL, we examine the LLM’s ability to detect anomalies
without any examples (zero-shot) and with a small number of labeled examples (few-shot). For
CoT, we implement example in-context CoT templates, guiding the LLM through a step-by-step
reasoning process. Our template prompts the LLM to: (1) Recognize and describe the general time
series pattern (e.g., periodic waves, increasing trend) (2) Identify deviations from this pattern (3)
Determine if these deviations constitute anomalies based on the dataset’s normal behaviors.

4.2.1    I NPUT R EPRESENTATION
Visual representations of activities can enhance human analysts’ ability to detect anomalies (Riveiro
& Falkman, 2009), and the pretraining of M-LLM involves detection tasks (Bai et al., 2023). In-
spired by these facts, we infer that LLMs’ anomaly detection may benefit from visual inputs. There-
fore, we explore two primary input modalities for time series data: textual and visual representations.

Textual Representations. We examine several text encoding strategies to enhance the LLM’s
comprehension of time series data:(1) Original: Raw time series values presented as rounded space-
separated numbers. (2) CSV: Time series data formatted as CSV (index and value per line, comma-
separated), inspired by Jin et al. (2024). (3) Prompt as Prefix (PAP): Including key statistics of the
time series (mean, median, trend) along with the raw data, as suggested by Jin et al. (2023). (4)
Token per Digit (TPD): Splitting floating-point numbers into space-separated digits (e.g., 0.246 →
2 4 6) to circumvent the OpenAI tokenizer’s default behavior of treating multiple digits as a single
token, following Gruver et al. (2023). This strategy only improve the performance of models that
apply byte-pair encoding (BPE) tokenization, see Appendix C Observation 8.

Visual Representations. We utilize Matplotlib to generate visual representations of the time series
data. These visualizations are then provided to multimodal LLMs capable of processing image
inputs. Since LLMs have demonstrated strong performance on chart understanding tasks (Shi et al.,
2024), they are expected to identify anomaly regions’ boundaries from the visualized time axis.=

4.2.2    O UTPUT F ORMAT
To ensure consistent and easily interpretable results, we prompt the LLM to provide a structured
output in the form of a JSON list containing anomaly ranges, e.g.,

      [{"start": 10, "end": 25}, {"start": 310, "end": 320}, ...]

This format allows for straightforward comparison with ground truth anomaly labels and facilitates
quantitative evaluation of the LLM’s performance. By employing this comprehensive set of evalua-
tions, we draw more robust conclusions about the following hypotheses.

5     E XPERIMENT
5.1     E XPERIMENT S ETUP

Models. We perform experiments using four state-of-the-art M-LLMs, two of which are open-
sourced: Qwen-VL-Chat (Bai et al., 2023) and InternVL2-Llama3-76B (Chen et al., 2024), and two
of which are proprietary: GPT-4o-mini (OpenAI, 2024) and Gemini-1.5-Flash (Google, 2024).

The language part of the models covers four LLM architectures: Qwen , LLaMA , Gemini ,
and GPT      . Since we send the text queries to M-LLMs instead of their text component, we
validated via MMLU-Pro (Wang et al., 2024) that adding a vision modality does not reduce the


                                                  7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 2: Example anomaly detection results for out-of-range anomalies. Direct thresholding with expert
knowledge yields the best result, but the LLMs can also detect the approximate ranges without priors. Isolation
Forest raises lots of false positives but still has a higher F1 than LLMs, which motivates the use of affinity F1.


model’s performance on text tasks. The validation details can be found in Appendix A.1. We have
21 prompting variants for each model, with 13 for text and 8 for vision. In controlled experiments,
for each model, we report the specific variants or the top 3 variants with the highest scores under the
condition. We label the variants with the name codes in Table 1, with details in Appendix A.4.
  Variant                            Code       Datasets. We synthesize four main datasets corre-
  0shot-text                             A      sponding to different anomaly types in Section 3.2: point,
  0shot-text-s0.3                        B      range, frequency, and trend. We add noisy versions of
  0shot-text-s0.3-calc                   C      point, frequency, and trend to test Hypothesis 2. We add
  0shot-text-s0.3-cot                    D      an acceleration-only version of the trend dataset to test
  0shot-text-s0.3-cot-csv                E      Hypothesis 5. Further details on the datasets can be found
  0shot-text-s0.3-cot-pap                F
                                                in Appendix B.
  0shot-text-s0.3-cot-tpd                G
  0shot-text-s0.3-csv                    H      We choose synthetic data instead of real-world data due
  0shot-text-s0.3-dyscalc                I      to: (1) known label quality issues in public benchmarks
  0shot-text-s0.3-pap                    J      (Wu & Keogh, 2021), (2) need for precise anomaly type
  0shot-text-s0.3-tpd                    K
                                                isolation, (3) requirement for textual anomaly descrip-
  0shot-vision                           L
  0shot-vision-calc                      M      tions to enable CoT prompting. Still, our experiments on
  0shot-vision-cot                       N      real-world Yahoo S5 dataset Laptev & Amizadeh (2015)
  0shot-vision-dyscalc                   O      (see Appendix D) show consistent findings.
  1shot-text-s0.3                        P
  1shot-text-s0.3-cot                    Q  Metrics. The LLMs generate anomalous intervals that
  1shot-vision                           R  can be converted to binary labels and do not output
  1shot-vision-calc                      S  anomaly scores. Therefore, we report precision, recall,
  1shot-vision-cot                       T  and F1-score metrics. However, these scores treat time
  1shot-vision-dyscalc                   U
                                            series as a cluster of points without temporal order and
                                            can give counterintuitive results, as illustrated in Figure
Table 1: Variants and their correspond- 2. To address this, we also report affinity precision and
ing namecodes, see Appendix A.4 for affinity recall as defined in Huet et al. (2022). We cal-
details                                     culate the affinity F1 score as the harmonic mean of affi-
precision and affi-recall, and it is the main metric we use to evaluate the hypotheses. We rely on
variants of F1 because the LLM yields discrete intervals, not an anomaly score. Metrics like Volume
Under the Surface (Paparrizos et al., 2022) require a ranking or continuous score.

Baselines. As our goal is not to propose a new anomaly de-
                                                                          trend range point


tection method but rather to test hypotheses for better under-
standing, we use simple baselines for sanity check, see Ap-
pendix C Observation 9 for direct performance comparison                                      NTQLRP TNFRLJ TNQRLA TNQLRH

with baselines. We use Isolation Forest (Liu et al., 2008) and
Thresholding.
                                                                                              NTQRLP TNFRLJ NTQRLP NTQLRH

5.2   E XPERIMENT R ESULTS
                                                                                              NTQRLB TNFRLJ NTDLRK NTQRJL
In this section, we discuss the hypotheses that align with our
                                                                          freq


observations and those we can confidently reject. Detailed
numbers can be found in Appendix D. The 0-to-1 y-axis of the
                                                                                              QTEBPH TNFRLJ QDTBPR TNQRLB
figures represents the affinity F1 score, where higher values in-
dicate better performance. We focus on the 6 key hypotheses
and defer other findings to Appendix C.                                   Figure 3: Reflexive (prompt that
                                                                          induces reasoning) / Reflective
                                                                          (prompt asks for direct answer),
                                                        8                 Top 3 Affi-F1 prompt variant per
                                                                          mode, See Table 1 for variant name
                                                                          codes.
    Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


trend range point


                                                  trend range point


                                                                                                      trend range point
                    MSCUOI MSCUOI SMCUOI MSCOUI                       UMOQPB RULJFD USRQAB MOLHBP                         B   A   B   A   B   A   B   A


                    SMCUOI MSCUOI MSCOUI MSCUOI                       SURPBQ MRLJFD NMTPQB LMSHAJ                         B   A   B   A   B   A   B   A


                    SMCUOI MSCUOI MSCOUI MSCUOI                       SURQBP UTRJFD LMNKDJ NUOJQB                         B   A   B   A   B   A   B   A
freq


                                                  freq


                                                                                                      freq
                    CSMIUO MSCUOI CSMIUO SMCUOI                       TRUBPQ RLMJKF RUSQBP RTSBHP                         B   A   B   A   B   A   B   A


    Figure 5: Calc (prompt with                       Figure 6: Vision (prompt with Figure 7: Subsampled (time se-
    correct arithmetic example) /                     visualized time series) / Text ries subsampled to be shorter)
    DysCalc (incorrect example),                      (raw numerical prompt), Top 3 / Original, 0-shot raw text vs
    Top 3 Affi-F1 variants per mode                   Affi-F1 variants per modality  30% text


                    Retained Hypothesis 1 on CoT Reasoning

                    No evidence is found that explicit reasoning prompts via CoT improve LLMs’ performance
                    in time series analysis.

    Interestingly, when we explicitly use CoT to simulate human-like reasoning about time series, the
    anomaly detection performance steadily drops across all models and anomaly types, as shown in
    Figure 3. These findings suggest that LLMs’ performance in time series anomaly detection may not
    rely on the kind of step-by-step logical reasoning that CoT prompting aims to elicit. However, this
    does not necessarily mean LLMs use no reasoning at all; rather, their approach to understanding
    time series data may differ from our expectations of explicit, human-like reasoning processes.
                    Rejected Hypothesis 2 on Repetition Bias

                    LLMs’ repetition bias does not explain their ability to identify periodic structures.

    If the hypothesis were true, we would expect that injecting
    noise would cause a much larger drop in text performance
                                                                                                    Vision


    (since the tokens are no longer repeating) than in vision per-
    formance. However, the performance drop is similar across
    both modalities, as shown in Figure 4, and the text perfor-                                                   TRLTRL RLTRLT RTNRTL RTLRLT
    mance drop is often not significant. This suggests that the
                                                                                                    Text


    LLMs’ ability to recognize textual frequency anomalies has
    other roots than their token repetitive bias.
                                                                                                                  BPQBPQ JKFJDF QBPQPB BHPBPQ

                    Rejected Hypothesis 3 on Arithmetic Reasoning
                                                                                                Figure 4: Clean (original time se-
                    The LLMs’ understanding of time series is not related                       ries) / Noisy (time series with min-
                    to its ability to perform arithmetic calculations.                          imal injected noise), Top 3 Affi-F1
                                                                                                variants per noise level
    We designed an in-context learning scenario where the LLMs’ accuracy for five-digit integer addi-
    tion drops to 12%. The details can be found in Appendix A.4 and A.5. Despite this, the LLMs’
    anomaly detection performance remains mostly consistent, as shown in Figure 5. This suggests that
    the LLMs’ anomaly detection capabilities are not directly tied to their arithmetic abilities.
                    Retained Hypothesis 4 on Visual Reasoning

                    Time series anomalies are better detected by M-LLMs as images than by LLMs as text.



                                                                                 9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Across a variety of models and anomaly types, M-LLMs are much more capable of finding anoma-
lies from visualized time series than textual time series, see Figure 6. The only exception is when
detecting frequency anomalies with proprietary models. This aligns with human preference for vi-
sual inspection of time series data.
    Rejected Hypothesis 5 on Visual Perception Bias

    The LLM’s understanding of anomalies is not consistent with human perception.

We create the “flat trend” dataset where the anomalous trend
is too subtle to be visually detected by humans but becomes                     "Flat Trend" Time Series
apparent when computing the moving average of the gradient,                    Anomaly
as shown in Figure 8. The LLMs’ performance is very similar
to the regular trend dataset, regardless of the modality. This
suggests that the LLMs do not suffer from the same limitations                       Avg Gradient
as humans when detecting anomalies.
    Retained Hypothesis 6 on Long Context Bias

    LLMs perform worse when the input time series have
    more tokens.


                                                                    Vision
We observe a consistent improvement in performance when
interpolating the time series from 1000 steps to 300 steps, as               RLNRLN TRNTRL LRNLNT TNRNRT
shown in Figure 7. Notably, the top-3 best-performing text


                                                                    Text
variants in all experiments typically apply such shortening.
This underscores the LLM’s difficulty in handling long time
                                                                             QPBQBP ABDJFD QPBKDJ QPJJQB
series, especially since the tokenizer represents each digit as a
separate token.
                                                                    Figure 8: Flat Trend (see above
                                                                    for an example) / Trend (trend may
Model Variations. Individual models exhibit distinctly dif-         reverse during anomalies), Top 3
ferent behaviors in zero-shot and few-shot anomaly detection.       Affi-F1 variants per dataset
For instance, GPT’s performance with longer sequences do not
degrade as much as other models, and models like Qwen handle visual inputs far more successfully.
Detailed comparisons and analyses of these model-specific effects are provided in Appendix C.
These observations underscore that LLMs’ performance in time series tasks can depend heavily on
factors like training data, parameter count, and fine-tuning strategies.

6   C ONCLUSION
In this paper, we conducted a comprehensive investigation into Large Language Models’ (LLMs)
understanding of time series data and their anomaly detection capabilities. Our findings challenge
several assumptions prevalent in current literature, highlighting the need for rigorous empirical val-
idation of hypotheses about LLM behavior. Our key findings include LLMs’ visual advantage,
limited reasoning, non-human-like processing, and model-specific capabilities. These insights have
important implications for the design of future LLMs and the development of anomaly detection
systems. For instance, our results suggest that LLMs do not effectively detect visual frequency
anomalies, so vision-LLM-based anomaly detection systems shall leverage Fourier analysis before
feeding the data to the LLM to improve performance. Our model-specific findings suggest that
model selection and possible ensemble methods are crucial for designing LLM-based anomaly de-
tection systems.
Our work underscores the importance of controlled studies in validating hypotheses about LLM be-
havior, cautioning against relying solely on intuition or speculation. Future research should continue
to empirically test assumptions about LLMs’ capabilities and limitations in processing complex data
types like time series.


                                                  10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
This work was supported in part by the U.S. Army Research Office under Army-ECASE award
W911NF-07-R-0003-03, the U.S. Department Of Energy, Office of Science, IARPA HAYSTAC
Program, and NSF Grants #2205093, #2146343, #2134274, CDC-RFA-FT-23-0069, DARPA AIE
FoundSci and DARPA YFA. We thank Dr. Eamonn Keogh for the helpful suggestions.

R EFERENCES
Marah Abdin, Sam Ade Jacobs, Ammar Ahmad Awan, Jyoti Aneja, Ahmed Awadallah, Hany
 Awadalla, Nguyen Bach, Amit Bahree, Arash Bakhtiari, Jianmin Bao, Harkirat Behl, Alon Ben-
 haim, Misha Bilenko, Johan Bjorck, Sébastien Bubeck, Qin Cai, Martin Cai, Caio César Teodoro
 Mendes, Weizhu Chen, Vishrav Chaudhary, Dong Chen, Dongdong Chen, Yen-Chun Chen, Yi-
 Ling Chen, Parul Chopra, Xiyang Dai, Allie Del Giorno, Gustavo de Rosa, Matthew Dixon,
 Ronen Eldan, Victor Fragoso, Dan Iter, Mei Gao, Min Gao, Jianfeng Gao, Amit Garg, Abhishek
 Goswami, Suriya Gunasekar, Emman Haider, Junheng Hao, Russell J. Hewett, Jamie Huynh,
 Mojan Javaheripi, Xin Jin, Piero Kauffmann, Nikos Karampatziakis, Dongwoo Kim, Mahoud
 Khademi, Lev Kurilenko, James R. Lee, Yin Tat Lee, Yuanzhi Li, Yunsheng Li, Chen Liang, Lars
 Liden, Ce Liu, Mengchen Liu, Weishung Liu, Eric Lin, Zeqi Lin, Chong Luo, Piyush Madan,
 Matt Mazzola, Arindam Mitra, Hardik Modi, Anh Nguyen, Brandon Norick, Barun Patra, Daniel
 Perez-Becker, Thomas Portet, Reid Pryzant, Heyang Qin, Marko Radmilac, Corby Rosset, Sam-
 budha Roy, Olatunji Ruwase, Olli Saarikivi, Amin Saied, Adil Salim, Michael Santacroce, Shi-
 tal Shah, Ning Shang, Hiteshi Sharma, Swadheen Shukla, Xia Song, Masahiro Tanaka, Andrea
 Tupini, Xin Wang, Lijuan Wang, Chunyu Wang, Yu Wang, Rachel Ward, Guanhua Wang, Philipp
 Witte, Haiping Wu, Michael Wyatt, Bin Xiao, Can Xu, Jiahang Xu, Weijian Xu, Sonali Yadav,
 Fan Yang, Jianwei Yang, Ziyi Yang, Yifan Yang, Donghan Yu, Lu Yuan, Chengruidong Zhang,
 Cyril Zhang, Jianwen Zhang, Li Lyna Zhang, Yi Zhang, Yue Zhang, Yunan Zhang, and Xiren
 Zhou. Phi-3 technical report: A highly capable language model locally on your phone. ArXiv
 preprint, abs/2404.14219, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2404.14219.
Julien Audibert, Pietro Michiardi, Frédéric Guyard, Sébastien Marti, and Maria A. Zuluaga. Do
  deep neural networks contribute to multivariate time series anomaly detection? ArXiv preprint,
  abs/2204.01637, 2022. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2204.01637.
Jinze Bai, Shuai Bai, Shusheng Yang, Shijie Wang, Sinan Tan, Peng Wang, Junyang Lin, Chang
   Zhou, and Jingren Zhou. Qwen-vl: A versatile vision-language model for understanding, lo-
   calization, text reading, and beyond. ArXiv preprint, abs/2308.12966, 2023. URL https:
   //arxiv.org/abs/2308.12966.
Tom B. Brown, Benjamin Mann, Nick Ryder, Melanie Subbiah, Jared Kaplan, Prafulla Dhari-
  wal, Arvind Neelakantan, Pranav Shyam, Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, Sandhini Agar-
  wal, Ariel Herbert-Voss, Gretchen Krueger, Tom Henighan, Rewon Child, Aditya Ramesh,
  Daniel M. Ziegler, Jeffrey Wu, Clemens Winter, Christopher Hesse, Mark Chen, Eric Sigler,
  Mateusz Litwin, Scott Gray, Benjamin Chess, Jack Clark, Christopher Berner, Sam McCan-
  dlish, Alec Radford, Ilya Sutskever, and Dario Amodei. Language models are few-shot
  learners. In Hugo Larochelle, Marc’Aurelio Ranzato, Raia Hadsell, Maria-Florina Balcan,
  and Hsuan-Tien Lin (eds.), Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 33: An-
  nual Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems 2020, NeurIPS 2020, December
  6-12, 2020, virtual, 2020. URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper/2020/hash/
  1457c0d6bfcb4967418bfb8ac142f64a-Abstract.html.
Wenchao Chen, Long Tian, Bo Chen, Liang Dai, Zhibin Duan, and Mingyuan Zhou. Deep varia-
 tional graph convolutional recurrent network for multivariate time series anomaly detection. In
 Kamalika Chaudhuri, Stefanie Jegelka, Le Song, Csaba Szepesvári, Gang Niu, and Sivan Sabato
 (eds.), International Conference on Machine Learning, ICML 2022, 17-23 July 2022, Baltimore,
 Maryland, USA, volume 162 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pp. 3621–3633.
 PMLR, 2022. URL https://proceedings.mlr.press/v162/chen22x.html.
Zhe Chen, Weiyun Wang, Hao Tian, Shenglong Ye, Zhangwei Gao, Erfei Cui, Wenwen Tong,
  Kongzhi Hu, Jiapeng Luo, Zheng Ma, Ji Ma, Jiaqi Wang, Xiaoyi Dong, Hang Yan, Hewei Guo,


                                               11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


  Conghui He, Botian Shi, Zhenjiang Jin, Chao Xu, Bin Wang, Xingjian Wei, Wei Li, Wenjian
  Zhang, Bo Zhang, Pinlong Cai, Licheng Wen, Xiangchao Yan, Min Dou, Lewei Lu, Xizhou
  Zhu, Tong Lu, Dahua Lin, Yu Qiao, Jifeng Dai, and Wenhai Wang. How far are we to gpt-
  4v? closing the gap to commercial multimodal models with open-source suites. ArXiv preprint,
  abs/2404.16821, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2404.16821.
Karl Cobbe, Vineet Kosaraju, Mohammad Bavarian, Mark Chen, Heewoo Jun, Lukasz Kaiser,
  Matthias Plappert, Jerry Tworek, Jacob Hilton, Reiichiro Nakano, Christopher Hesse, and John
  Schulman. Training verifiers to solve math word problems. ArXiv preprint, abs/2110.14168,
  2021. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2110.14168.
LMDeploy Contributors. Lmdeploy: A toolkit for compressing, deploying, and serving llm, 2023.
 URL https://github.com/InternLM/lmdeploy.
Manqing Dong, Hao Huang, and Longbing Cao. Can llms serve as time series anomaly detectors?
 ArXiv preprint, abs/2408.03475, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2408.03475.
Google. Gemini flash, 2024.       URL https://deepmind.google/technologies/gemini/
  flash/.
Nate Gruver, Marc Finzi, Shikai Qiu, and Andrew Gordon Wilson. Large language models are zero-
  shot time series forecasters. In Alice Oh, Tristan Naumann, Amir Globerson, Kate Saenko, Moritz
  Hardt, and Sergey Levine (eds.), Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 36: Annual
  Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems 2023, NeurIPS 2023, New Orleans, LA,
  USA, December 10 - 16, 2023, 2023. URL http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/
  2023/hash/3eb7ca52e8207697361b2c0fb3926511-Abstract-Conference.html.
Ari Holtzman, Jan Buys, Li Du, Maxwell Forbes, and Yejin Choi. The curious case of neural text
  degeneration. In 8th International Conference on Learning Representations, ICLR 2020, Addis
  Ababa, Ethiopia, April 26-30, 2020. OpenReview.net, 2020. URL https://openreview.net/
  forum?id=rygGQyrFvH.
Lun Huang, Jiajun Zhou, Chengqing Zhang, and Hainan Huang. Multimodal neural machine trans-
  lation with language scene graph. In Proceedings of the 57th Annual Meeting of the Association
  for Computational Linguistics, pp. 1065–1075, 2019.
Alexis Huet, José Manuel Navarro, and Dario Rossi. Local evaluation of time series anomaly
  detection algorithms. In Aidong Zhang and Huzefa Rangwala (eds.), KDD ’22: The 28th
  ACM SIGKDD Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining, Washington, DC, USA,
  August 14 - 18, 2022, pp. 635–645. ACM, 2022. doi: 10.1145/3534678.3539339. URL
  https://doi.org/10.1145/3534678.3539339.
Ming Jin, Shiyu Wang, Lintao Ma, Zhixuan Chu, James Y. Zhang, Xiaoming Shi, Pin-Yu Chen,
 Yuxuan Liang, Yuan-Fang Li, Shirui Pan, and Qingsong Wen. Time-llm: Time series forecasting
 by reprogramming large language models. ArXiv preprint, abs/2310.01728, 2023. URL https:
 //arxiv.org/abs/2310.01728.
Ming Jin, Yifan Zhang, Wei Chen, Kexin Zhang, Yuxuan Liang, Bin Yang, Jindong Wang, Shirui
 Pan, and Qingsong Wen. Position: What can large language models tell us about time series
 analysis. ArXiv preprint, abs/2402.02713, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2402.02713.
Takeshi Kojima, Shixiang Shane Gu, Machel Reid, Yutaka Matsuo, and Yusuke Iwasawa. Large lan-
  guage models are zero-shot reasoners. In Sanmi Koyejo, S. Mohamed, A. Agarwal, Danielle Bel-
  grave, K. Cho, and A. Oh (eds.), Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 35: Annual
  Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems 2022, NeurIPS 2022, New Orleans, LA,
  USA, November 28 - December 9, 2022, 2022. URL http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/
  paper/2022/hash/8bb0d291acd4acf06ef112099c16f326-Abstract-Conference.html.
Woosuk Kwon, Zhuohan Li, Siyuan Zhuang, Ying Sheng, Lianmin Zheng, Cody Hao Yu, Joseph E.
 Gonzalez, Hao Zhang, and Ion Stoica. Efficient memory management for large language model
 serving with pagedattention. In Proceedings of the ACM SIGOPS 29th Symposium on Operating
 Systems Principles, 2023.


                                               12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Chih-Yu Lai, Fan-Keng Sun, Zhengqi Gao, Jeffrey H. Lang, and Duane S. Boning. Nominal-
  ity score conditioned time series anomaly detection by point/sequential reconstruction. In Al-
  ice Oh, Tristan Naumann, Amir Globerson, Kate Saenko, Moritz Hardt, and Sergey Levine
  (eds.), Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 36: Annual Conference on Neu-
  ral Information Processing Systems 2023, NeurIPS 2023, New Orleans, LA, USA, December
  10 - 16, 2023, 2023. URL http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/
  f1cf02ce09757f57c3b93c0db83181e0-Abstract-Conference.html.
N. Laptev and S. Amizadeh. Yahoo anomaly detection dataset S5. http://webscope.sandbox.
  yahoo.com/catalog.php?datatype=s/=70, 2015.
Gen Li, Nan Duan, Yuejian Fang, Ming Gong, Daxin Jiang, and Ming Zhou. Unicoder: A universal
  encoder for text, image and video. In Proceedings of the European Conference on Computer
  Vision (ECCV), pp. 154–170, 2019.
Tianle Li, Ge Zhang, Quy Duc Do, Xiang Yue, and Wenhu Chen. Long-context llms struggle with
  long in-context learning. ArXiv preprint, abs/2404.02060, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/
  abs/2404.02060.
Matthew D. Lieberman. Reflexive and reflective judgment processes: A social cognitive neuro-
 science approach, pp. 44–67. Cambridge University Press, New York, NY, US, 2003. ISBN
 978-0-521-82248-0.
Chen Liu, Shibo He, Qihang Zhou, Shizhong Li, and Wenchao Meng. Large language model guided
  knowledge distillation for time series anomaly detection. ArXiv preprint, abs/2401.15123, 2024a.
  URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2401.15123.
Fei Tony Liu, Kai Ming Ting, and Zhi-Hua Zhou. Isolation forest. In 2008 eighth ieee international
  conference on data mining, pp. 413–422. IEEE, 2008.
Haoxin Liu, Shangqing Xu, Zhiyuan Zhao, Lingkai Kong, Harshavardhan Kamarthi, Aditya B.
  Sasanur, Megha Sharma, Jiaming Cui, Qingsong Wen, Chao Zhang, and B. Aditya Prakash.
  Time-mmd: A new multi-domain multimodal dataset for time series analysis. ArXiv preprint,
  abs/2406.08627, 2024b. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2406.08627.
Haoyi Liu, Shanghang Bai, Yuyang Shen, Xu Han, Wei Zhang, and Jiliang Gao. Multimodal trans-
  former for unaligned multimodal time series analysis. In Proceedings of the Web Conference
  2021, pp. 2990–3001, 2021.
Peiyuan Liu, Hang Guo, Tao Dai, Naiqi Li, Jigang Bao, Xudong Ren, Yong Jiang, and Shu-Tao
  Xia. Taming pre-trained llms for generalised time series forecasting via cross-modal knowledge
  distillation. ArXiv preprint, abs/2403.07300, 2024c. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2403.
  07300.
Jiasen Lu, Dhruv Batra, Devi Parikh, and Stefan Lee. Vilbert: Pretraining task-agnostic visiolin-
   guistic representations for vision-and-language tasks. In Hanna M. Wallach, Hugo Larochelle,
   Alina Beygelzimer, Florence d’Alché-Buc, Emily B. Fox, and Roman Garnett (eds.), Ad-
   vances in Neural Information Processing Systems 32: Annual Conference on Neural In-
   formation Processing Systems 2019, NeurIPS 2019, December 8-14, 2019, Vancouver, BC,
   Canada, pp. 13–23, 2019. URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper/2019/hash/
   c74d97b01eae257e44aa9d5bade97baf-Abstract.html.
Alexandra S. Mueller and Brian Timney. Visual acceleration perception for simple and complex
  motion patterns. PLoS ONE, 11(2):e0149413, 2016. ISSN 1932-6203. doi: 10.1371/journal.
  pone.0149413.
Andreas Opedal, Alessandro Stolfo, Haruki Shirakami, Ying Jiao, Ryan Cotterell, Bernhard
  Schölkopf, Abulhair Saparov, and Mrinmaya Sachan. Do language models exhibit the same
  cognitive biases in problem solving as human learners? ArXiv preprint, abs/2401.18070, 2024.
  URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2401.18070.
OpenAI. Gpt-4o mini: Advancing cost-efficient intelligence, 2024. URL https://openai.com/
  index/gpt-4o-mini-advancing-cost-efficient-intelligence/.


                                               13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


John Paparrizos, Paul Boniol, Themis Palpanas, Ruey S Tsay, Aaron Elmore, and Michael J
  Franklin. Volume under the surface: a new accuracy evaluation measure for time-series anomaly
  detection. Proceedings of the VLDB Endowment, 15(11):2774–2787, 2022.

Maria Riveiro and Göran Falkman. Interactive visualization of normal behavioral models and ex-
 pert rules for maritime anomaly detection. In Imaging and Visualization 2009 Sixth Interna-
 tional Conference on Computer Graphics, pp. 459–466, 2009. doi: 10.1109/CGIV.2009.54. URL
 https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/5298765/?arnumber=5298765.

M. Saquib Sarfraz, Mei-Yen Chen, Lukas Layer, Kunyu Peng, and Marios Koulakis. Position: Quo
 vadis, unsupervised time series anomaly detection? ArXiv preprint, abs/2405.02678, 2024. URL
 https://arxiv.org/abs/2405.02678.

Chufan Shi, Cheng Yang, Yaxin Liu, Bo Shui, Junjie Wang, Mohan Jing, Linran Xu, Xinyu Zhu,
  Siheng Li, Yuxiang Zhang, Gongye Liu, Xiaomei Nie, Deng Cai, and Yujiu Yang. Chartmimic:
  Evaluating lmm’s cross-modal reasoning capability via chart-to-code generation. ArXiv preprint,
  abs/2406.09961, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2406.09961.

Chen Sun, Austin Myers, Carl Vondrick, Kevin Murphy, and Cordelia Schmid. Videobert: A joint
  model for video and language representation learning. In 2019 IEEE/CVF International Confer-
  ence on Computer Vision, ICCV 2019, Seoul, Korea (South), October 27 - November 2, 2019, pp.
  7463–7472. IEEE, 2019. doi: 10.1109/ICCV.2019.00756. URL https://doi.org/10.1109/
  ICCV.2019.00756.

Mingtian Tan, Mike A. Merrill, Vinayak Gupta, Tim Althoff, and Thomas Hartvigsen. Are language
 models actually useful for time series forecasting? ArXiv preprint, abs/2406.16964, 2024. URL
 https://arxiv.org/abs/2406.16964.

Hua Tang, Chong Zhang, Mingyu Jin, Qinkai Yu, Zhenting Wang, Xiaobo Jin, Yongfeng Zhang,
  and Mengnan Du. Time series forecasting with llms: Understanding and enhancing model capa-
  bilities. ArXiv preprint, abs/2402.10835, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2402.10835.

Paul Thomas, Seth Spielman, Nick Craswell, and Bhaskar Mitra. Large language models can
  accurately predict searcher preferences. ArXiv preprint, abs/2309.10621, 2023. URL https:
  //arxiv.org/abs/2309.10621.

Shreshth Tuli, Giuliano Casale, and Nicholas R. Jennings. Tranad: Deep transformer networks for
  anomaly detection in multivariate time series data. ArXiv preprint, abs/2201.07284, 2022. URL
  https://arxiv.org/abs/2201.07284.

Yubo Wang, Xueguang Ma, Ge Zhang, Yuansheng Ni, Abhranil Chandra, Shiguang Guo, Weiming
  Ren, Aaran Arulraj, Xuan He, Ziyan Jiang, Tianle Li, Max Ku, Kai Wang, Alex Zhuang, Rongqi
  Fan, Xiang Yue, and Wenhu Chen. Mmlu-pro: A more robust and challenging multi-task language
  understanding benchmark. ArXiv preprint, abs/2406.01574, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/
  abs/2406.01574.

Jason Wei, Xuezhi Wang, Dale Schuurmans, Maarten Bosma, Brian Ichter, Fei Xia, Ed H. Chi,
  Quoc V. Le, and Denny Zhou. Chain-of-thought prompting elicits reasoning in large language
  models. In Sanmi Koyejo, S. Mohamed, A. Agarwal, Danielle Belgrave, K. Cho, and A. Oh
  (eds.), Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 35: Annual Conference on Neural
  Information Processing Systems 2022, NeurIPS 2022, New Orleans, LA, USA, November 28 -
  December 9, 2022, 2022. URL http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2022/hash/
  9d5609613524ecf4f15af0f7b31abca4-Abstract-Conference.html.

Christopher Wimmer and Navid Rekabsaz. Leveraging vision-language models for granular market
  change prediction. ArXiv preprint, abs/2301.10166, 2023. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/
  2301.10166.

Renjie Wu and Eamonn Keogh. Current time series anomaly detection benchmarks are flawed and
  are creating the illusion of progress. IEEE Transactions on Knowledge and Data Engineering,
  pp. 1–1, 2021. ISSN 1041-4347, 1558-2191, 2326-3865. doi: 10.1109/TKDE.2021.3112126.


                                               14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Zheng Yuan, Hongyi Yuan, Chuanqi Tan, Wei Wang, and Songfang Huang. How well do large
  language models perform in arithmetic tasks? ArXiv preprint, abs/2304.02015, 2023. URL
  https://arxiv.org/abs/2304.02015.
Ailing Zeng, Muxi Chen, Lei Zhang, and Qiang Xu. Are transformers effective for time series
  forecasting? In Brian Williams, Yiling Chen, and Jennifer Neville (eds.), Thirty-Seventh AAAI
  Conference on Artificial Intelligence, AAAI 2023, Thirty-Fifth Conference on Innovative Appli-
  cations of Artificial Intelligence, IAAI 2023, Thirteenth Symposium on Educational Advances
  in Artificial Intelligence, EAAI 2023, Washington, DC, USA, February 7-14, 2023, pp. 11121–
  11128. AAAI Press, 2023. doi: 10.1609/AAAI.V37I9.26317. URL https://doi.org/10.
  1609/aaai.v37i9.26317.
Xiyuan Zhang, Ranak Roy Chowdhury, Rajesh K. Gupta, and Jingbo Shang. Large language models
  for time series: A survey. ArXiv preprint, abs/2402.01801, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/
  abs/2402.01801.


                                               15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A     M ODEL D ETAILS

A.1   (M)LLM A RCHITECTURES AND VALIDATION

In this section, we introduce the details of the four M-LLMs investigated in the study. We focus on
resolving the performance discrepancy between those models and their text-only counterparts. The
purpose is to ensure reproducibility and justify direct comparisons between visual and text inputs.

GPT-4o mini Launched in July 2024, GPT-4o mini (OpenAI, 2024) is a cost-efficient, smaller
version of GPT-4o, designed to replace GPT-3.5, exceeding its performance at a lower cost. It
excels in mathematical and coding tasks, achieving 87.0% on MGSM (measuring math reasoning)
and 87.2% on HumanEval (measuring coding performance). The model features a 128,000-token
context window, knowledge up to October 2023, and support for text and vision in the API.
The architecture of GPT-4o is not disclosed. The GPT-4o-mini variant we used in this work is
gpt-4o-2024-08-06. Since we are sending text queries with and without images to GPT-4o, an
important thing to consider is that by adding the image, the language part of the model does not
degrade, or the OpenAI reverse proxy does not send the query to a different backend. To the best
of our knowledge, there is no prior validation study on this. We perform experiments by adding a
small, white, 10 x 10 pixels image to the text queries and run the 5-shot CoT MMLU-Pro (Wang
et al., 2024). The score without image is 61.54. The score with the image is 61.49. The scores do
not reject the hypothesis that the same model is behind different modalities.

Qwen-VL-Chat Developed by Alibaba Cloud, Qwen-VL-Chat (Bai et al., 2023) stands out as a
high-performing large vision language model designed for text-image dialogue tasks. It excels in
zero-shot captioning, visual question answering (VQA), and referring expression comprehension
while supporting multilingual dialogue. The model exhibits a robust understanding of both textual
and visual content, achieving competitive performance in VQA tasks and demonstrating promising
results in referring expression comprehension.
Qwen-VL-Chat is open-sourced. We use the model last updated on Jan 25, 2024. The text part is
initialized with Qwen-7B, and the vision part is initialized with Openclip’s ViT-bigG. We note that
the model’s MMLU performance is a lot worse than the text-only variant. Qwen-7B has an MMLU
score of 58.2, while Qwen-VL-Chat has an MMLU score of 50.7. However, it is explained in the
paper that the Qwen-7B used for initializing the text part is an intermediate version, whose MMLU
score is 49.9. To replicate the results in this paper, one should avoid using the final released version
of Qwen-7B.

Gemini-1.5-Flash Gemini-1.5-Flash is the fastest model in the Gemini family, optimized for high-
volume, high-frequency tasks and offering a cost-effective solution with a long context window. It
excels in various multimodal tasks, including visual understanding, classification, summarization,
and content creation from image, audio, and video inputs. It achieves comparable quality to other
Gemini Pro models at a significantly reduced cost.
Gemini-1.5-Flash is proprietary. We use the model variant gemini-1.5-flash-002. Similar to
GPT-4o, we validate the model by MMLU-Pro with a trivial image. The score without image is
59.12. The score with the image is 59.23. The scores do not reject the hypothesis that the same
model is behind different prompts.

Intern-VLM InternVL 2 (Chen et al., 2024) is an open-source multimodal large language model
(MLLM) designed to bridge the capability gap between open-source and proprietary commercial
models in multimodal understanding. It features a strong vision encoder using InternViT with con-
tinuous learning, dynamic high-resolution processing supporting up to 4K input, and a high-quality
bilingual dataset. The model achieves state-of-the-art results in 8 of 18 benchmarks, surpassing the
performance of some commercial models on tasks like chart understanding (Shi et al., 2024).
InternVL 2 is open-sourced, and we use the variant InternVL2-Llama3-76B last updated on July
15, 2024. The language part is initialized with Hermes-2-Theta-LLaMA3-70B, and the vision part
is initialized with InternViT-6B-448px-V1-5. It is noteworthy that Hermes-2-Theta-LLaMA3-70B
has a much worse MMLU-Pro score than the official LlaMA-3-70B-Instruct by Meta. The Hermes


                                                  16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


score is 52.78, whereas the official LLaMA score is 56.2. Therefore, it is not surprising when we
saw the score of InternVL2-Llama3-76B is 52.95 without an image and 53.26 with a trivial image.
Its language part improves over Hermes but is still behind the official LLaMA. Similar to Qwen, we
recommend avoiding using the official LLaMA for result replication.

Conclusion Overall, we show that the models’ language part does not degrade when adding im-
ages to the text queries. While some models do have a lower MMLU-Pro score when using vision,
it is due to the language part’s initialization.

A.2   M ODEL D EPLOYMENT

We use vLLM (Kwon et al., 2023) for Qwen inference and LMDeploy (Contributors, 2023) for
InternVL2 inference.

A.3   VARIANTS NAMECODE

Validating hypotheses requires prompting the LLMs in a variety of ways. Table 1 shows a compre-
hensive list of the variants and their corresponding name codes, i.e., visualization labels.

A.4   VARIANTS S PECIFICATIONS

Text / Vision The text variants prompt the LLMs with textual descriptions of the time series data,
while the vision variants use visual representations of the time series data.

Zero-shot / One-shot without CoT The one-shot variant provides the LLM with an anomaly
detection example. The answer is the correct anomaly ranges in the expected JSON format, without
additional explanation. The zero-shot variant does not provide any anomaly detection examples.
To enforce the JSON format even in the zero-shot setting, the prompt includes an example JSON
answer with spaceholders.

CoT    Stands for Chain of Thought, see Section 4.2.1.

Zero-shot CoT / One-shot CoT The zero-shot CoT variant follows the same mechanism as in
Kojima et al. (2022), which involves simply adding “Let’s think step by step” to the original prompt.
The JSON part is extracted from the output. The 1-shot CoT variant (Wei et al., 2022) involves
writing a template anomaly detection answer for each dataset, e.g.,
To detect anomalies in the provided time series data, we can look for
sudden changes or outliers in the time series pattern. Based on the
general pattern, the normal data is a periodic sine wave between -1 and
1. The following ranges of anomalies can be identified:

[{"start": 171, "end": 178}]

During those periods, the data appears to become noisy and unpredictable,
deviating from the normal periodic pattern.

PaP   Stands for Prompt-as-Prefix, see section 4.2.1.

TpD    Stands for Token-per-Digit, see section 4.2.1.

CSV    Stands for the Comma-Separated-Values format, see section 4.2.1.

DysCalc Stands for Dyscalculia. The DysCalc variant reduces the model’s ability to perform
simple arithmetic operations by in-context learning. An example context is as follows:
User: What is the value of 678678 + 123123? Do it step by step.
Assistant: According to a recent arithmetic innovation by mathematician


                                                 17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


John Smith in International Arithmetic Conference, the correct way to add
up numbers are:
1.    Lining up the digits in their place values.

      678678
      123123
      -------

2.    Add the digits directly.          The carry-over step is proven to be wrong.

      678678
      123123
      -------
      791791

3.    The correct sum is 791791.
Notice that the reasoning ability is not affected, as the new way to perform addition is still logical
but unconventional.

Calc Calc variant is the control group for the DysCalc variant. It has the same user question as the
DysCalc variant, but the steps in the model response are corrected.
...
2. **Add the ones place:            ** 9 + 3 = 12.       Write down 2 and carry-over 1.
...

S0.3 S0.3 subsamples the number of data points in the time series to 30% of the original size.
The interpolation is performed using the ‘interp1d‘ function from the SciPy library with the linear
method.

A.5    M ISCELLANEOUS

Default Prompt
Detect ranges of anomalies in this time series, in terms of the x-axis
coordinate. List one by one, in JSON format. If there are no anomalies,
answer with an empty list [].

Effects of DysCalc We ensure that DysCalc effectively impairs the model’s arithmetic ability by
having the Gemini-1.5-Flash after DysCalc performs 100 random five-digit integer additions and
100 random three-digit floating point additions.
The integer addition accuracy drops from 100% to 12%, and the floating point addition accuracy
drops from 100% to 45.0%. Meanwhile, the Calc variant maintains 100% accuracy in both cases.
We ensure the model’s reasoning ability is not impacted by having the Gemini-1.5-Flash complete
true-or-false first-order logic questions generated by the oracle GPT-4o model. Both DysCalc and
Calc variants achieve 100% accuracy.


                                                 18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


B     DATASET D ETAILS
This appendix provides detailed information about the generation of synthetic datasets used in the
anomaly detection study. Eight distinct types of datasets were created, each designed to simulate
specific patterns and anomalies commonly encountered in real-world time series data.

C OMMON PARAMETERS

All datasets share the following common parameters:

       • Number of time series per dataset: 400
       • Number of samples per time series: 1000

B.1   DATASET T YPES AND T HEIR C HARACTERISTICS

1. P OINT A NOMALIES
       • Normal data: Periodic sine wave between -1 and 1
       • Anomalies: Noisy and unpredictable deviations from the normal periodic pattern
       • Generation parameters:
           – Frequency: 0.03
           – Normal duration rate: 800.0
           – Anomaly duration rate: 30.0
           – Minimum anomaly duration: 5
           – Minimum normal duration: 200
           – Anomaly standard deviation: 0.5
       • Statistics:
           – Average anomaly ratio: 0.0320
           – Number of time series without anomalies: 117 (29.25%)
           – Average number of anomalies per time series: 1.17
           – Maximum number of anomalies in a single time series: 4
           – Average length of an anomaly: 27.26
           – Maximum length of an anomaly: 165.0


Figure 9: Example time series from the Point Anomalies dataset, with anomalies regions highlighted
in blue.


2. R ANGE A NOMALIES
       • Normal data: Gaussian noise with mean 0
       • Anomalies: Sudden spikes with values much further from 0 than the normal noise
       • Generation parameters:
           – Normal duration rate: 800.0
           – Anomaly duration rate: 20.0
           – Minimum anomaly duration: 5
           – Minimum normal duration: 10


                                               19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


           – Anomaly size range: (0.5, 0.8)
      • Statistics:
           – Average anomaly ratio: 0.0236
           – Number of time series without anomalies: 121 (30.25%)
           – Average number of anomalies per time series: 1.20
           – Maximum number of anomalies in a single time series: 5
           – Average length of an anomaly: 19.73
           – Maximum length of an anomaly: 113.0


Figure 10: Example time series from the Range Anomalies dataset, with anomalies regions high-
lighted in blue.


3. T REND A NOMALIES
      • Normal data: Steady but slowly increasing trend from -1 to 1
      • Anomalies: Data appears to either increase much faster or decrease, deviating from the
        normal trend. The probability of negating the trend is 50%.
      • Generation parameters:
           – Frequency: 0.02
           – Normal duration rate: 1700.0
           – Anomaly duration rate: 100.0
           – Minimum anomaly duration: 50
           – Minimum normal duration: 800
           – Normal slope: 3.0
           – Abnormal slope range: (6.0, 20.0)
      • Statistics:
           – Average anomaly ratio: 0.0377
           – Number of time series without anomalies: 230 (57.50%)
           – Average number of anomalies per time series: 0.42
           – Maximum number of anomalies in a single time series: 1
           – Average length of an anomaly: 88.61
           – Maximum length of an anomaly: 200.0


Figure 11: Example time series from the Trend Anomalies dataset, with anomalies regions high-
lighted in blue.


                                                 20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


4. F REQUENCY A NOMALIES
      • Normal data: Periodic sine wave between -1 and 1
      • Anomalies: Sudden changes in frequency, with very different periods between peaks
      • Generation parameters:
           – Frequency: 0.03
           – Normal duration rate: 450.0
           – Anomaly duration rate: 15.0
           – Minimum anomaly duration: 7
           – Minimum normal duration: 20
           – Frequency multiplier: 3.0
      • Statistics:
           – Average anomaly ratio: 0.0341
           – Number of time series without anomalies: 40 (10.00%)
           – Average number of anomalies per time series: 2.16
           – Maximum number of anomalies in a single time series: 7
           – Average length of an anomaly: 15.77
           – Maximum length of an anomaly: 111.0


Figure 12: Example time series from the Frequency Anomalies dataset, with anomalies regions
highlighted in blue.


5. N OISY P OINT A NOMALIES

Similar to Point Anomalies, but with added noise to the normal data.

      • Statistics:
           – Average anomaly ratio: 0.0328
           – Number of time series without anomalies: 105 (26.25%)
           – Average number of anomalies per time series: 1.13
           – Maximum number of anomalies in a single time series: 4
           – Average length of an anomaly: 28.98
           – Maximum length of an anomaly: 178.0


Figure 13: Example time series from the Noisy Point Anomalies dataset, with anomalies regions
highlighted in blue.


                                               21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Algorithm 1 Anomaly Generation Process
 1: for each dataset type do
 2:     if multivariate data needed then
 3:         Randomly select sensors to contain anomalies based on the ratio of anomalous sensors
 4:     end if
 5:     for each selected sensor do
 6:         Generate normal intervals using an exponential distribution with the normal rate
 7:         Generate anomaly intervals using an exponential distribution with the anomaly rate
 8:         Ensure minimum durations for both normal and anomaly intervals
 9:         Apply the appropriate anomaly type to the anomaly intervals:
10:         if anomaly type is point or range then
11:             Simulate the full time series
12:             Directly replace the normal data by the anomaly data / inject noise
13:         else if anomaly type is trend or frequency then
14:             Simulate region by region to ensure continuity
15:         end if
16:     end for
17:     Record the start and end points of each anomaly interval as ground truth
18: end for


6. N OISY T REND A NOMALIES
Similar to Trend Anomalies, but with added noise to the normal data.

      • Statistics:
           – Average anomaly ratio: 0.0356
           – Number of time series without anomalies: 242 (60.50%)
           – Average number of anomalies per time series: 0.40
           – Maximum number of anomalies in a single time series: 1
           – Average length of an anomaly: 90.09
           – Maximum length of an anomaly: 200.0


Figure 14: Example time series from the Noisy Trend Anomalies dataset, with anomalies regions
highlighted in blue.



7. N OISY F REQUENCY A NOMALIES
Similar to Frequency Anomalies, but with added noise to the normal data.

      • Statistics:
           – Average anomaly ratio: 0.0359
           – Number of time series without anomalies: 51 (12.75%)
           – Average number of anomalies per time series: 2.20
           – Maximum number of anomalies in a single time series: 8
           – Average length of an anomaly: 16.33
           – Maximum length of an anomaly: 96.0


                                               22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 15: Example time series from the Noisy Frequency Anomalies dataset, with anomalies re-
gions highlighted in blue.


8. F LAT T REND A NOMALIES
Similar to Trend Anomalies, but with a reduced slope, making it difficult for human eyes to detect
the anomaly without plotting the average gradient. The probability of negating the trend is 0%.
We conducted a human validation study with 5 participants detecting 20 subtle anomalies. Human
detection rate was 0/20 vs. 17.2/20 for obvious anomalies, confirming the perceptual challenge.

      • Statistics:
          – Average anomaly ratio: 0.0377
          – Number of time series without anomalies: 230 (57.50%)
          – Average number of anomalies per time series: 0.42
          – Maximum number of anomalies in a single time series: 1
          – Average length of an anomaly: 88.61
          – Maximum length of an anomaly: 200.0


Figure 16: Example time series from the Flat Trend Anomalies dataset, with anomalies regions
highlighted in blue.


9. YAHOO S5

The Webscope S5 dataset Laptev & Amizadeh (2015) is a widely-used and publicly accessible
benchmark for anomaly detection. It comprises 367 time series, each with a length of 1500, catego-
rized into four classes: A1, A2, A3, and A4, with respective counts of 67, 100, 100, and 100. Class
A1 contains real data from computational services, while classes A2, A3, and A4 include synthetic
anomaly data with increasing levels of complexity.


Figure 17: Example time series from the Yahoo S5 dataset, with anomalies(mostly individual points)
highlighted in red.


B.2   A NOMALY G ENERATION P ROCESS

The detailed algorithm is outlined in Algorithm 1.


                                                23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


C                   OTHER F INDINGS

              Hypothesis 7 on Model-Family Variations

              LLMs’ time series understanding are consistent across different model families.

This hypothesis stems from the tendency in recent literature (Tang et al., 2024; Tan et al., 2024; Zeng
et al., 2023) to generalize findings about time series understanding across all LLMs based on exper-
iments with a limited set of models, typically GPT and LLaMA variants. This approach implies that
different model families’ comprehension of time series data is universally consistent, varying pri-
marily with the number of parameters. However, unlike in NLP tasks where specific models excel in
areas like translation or mathematics (Cobbe et al., 2021), there’s a lack of understanding regarding
specialized skills in time series analysis across different LLM models. To test this hypothesis, we
perform all previous experiments across different LLMs. If the hypothesis holds, we should see
previous conclusions either consistently validated or invalidated across all models.
              Rejected Hypothesis 7 on Architecture Bias

              LLMs’ time series understanding vary significantly across different model architectures.

Our experiments reveal substantial variations in performance and behavior across different models
when analyzing time series data. For instance, GPT-4o-mini shows little difference in performance
with or without Chain of Thought (CoT) prompting, and even slightly improves with CoT for fre-
quency anomalies, unlike other models. Qwen demonstrates poor performance with text prompts
but reasonable performance with vision prompts and is most negatively affected by CoT. Gemini,
similar to GPT-4o-mini, struggles with visual frequency anomalies. InternVL2 shows a smaller gap
between vision and text performance, suggesting a more balanced approach. These diverse results
indicate that the LLMs’ capabilities in time series analysis are highly dependent on the specific
model architecture and training approach, rather than being uniform across all LLMs.
              Observation 8 on BPE tokenization
              Only OpenAI GPT with the BPE tokenization can occasionally benefits from Token-per-
              Digit representation of input.


                                    Gruver et al. (2023) claimed that common tokenization meth-
                                    ods like BPE tend to break a single number into tokens that
                                    don’t align with the digits, making arithmetic considerably
trend range point


                                    more difficult. They proposed Token-per-Digit (TPD) tok-
    G K D B G K D B G K D B G K D B enization, which breaks numbers into individual digits by nor-
                                    malization and adding spaces. They also claimed that TPD
                                    does not work on LLMs that already tokenize every digit into a
    G K D B G K D B G K D B G K D B separate token, like LLaMA. Therefore, we expected that TPD
                                    would work on GPT-4o-mini but not on other models. How-
                                    ever, the results show that TPD only improves the GPT-4o-
    G K D B G K D B G K D B G K D B mini performance on the trend dataset but not on others, as
                                    seen in Figure 18. As expected, TPD does not work with all
freq


                                    other LLMs. This suggests that TPD works as a workaround
    G K D B G K D B G K D B G K D B for BPE tokenization only in limited cases and can have neg-
                                    ative effects, which we conjecture to be due to the increased
Figure 18: TPD/Non-TPD, Two number of tokens and the model’s lack of pretraining on simi-
TPD variants vs counterparts        lar text with digits separated by spaces.


              Observation 9 on LLM Performance
              LLMs are reasonable choices for zero-shot time series anomaly detection, giving superior
              performance compared to traditional methods in many cases.



                                                          24
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


          1.00
                             Point
          0.75                                    Baseline Details. We use the Scipy implementation of Isola-
          0.50                                    tion Forest, with random state 42 and contamination set to auto.
          0.25                                    The thresholding method takes the top 2% and bottom 2% of
          0.00                                    the time series values as anomalies. This is close to the ground
                    U    R    U      M iso thr    truth anomaly ratio of 3 ∼ 4%.
          1.00
                             Range
          0.75                                    Discussions. Although our goal is not to propose yet another
          0.50                                    “new method” or to spark another debate between LLMs and
          0.25                                    traditional methods, we find that LLMs can be a reasonable
          0.00                                    choice for zero-shot time series anomaly detection in some sce-
                    S    M    N      L iso thr    narios. As suggested by Audibert et al. (2022), in the anomaly
          1.00
                             Trend                detection domain, there is usually no single best method, and
          0.75
                                                  the choice of method depends on the specific problem and the
          0.50
                                                  data. However, if LLMs, even at their best, cannot outperform
          0.25
                                                  the simplest traditional methods, then LLMs are not ready for
          0.00
                                                  the task, and our findings are not valid. This observation serves
                    S    U    L      N iso thr    as a sanity check for our study, and we pass it. According to the
          1.00
                             Freq                 experiments, LLMs with proper prompts and visual input out-
                                                  perform traditional methods on point, range, and trend datasets,
          0.75                                    as seen in Figure 19. We note that Gemini-1.5-flash typically
          0.50                                    has the best performance among our models. As mentioned be-
          0.25                                    fore, frequency anomalies are challenging for LLMs, suggest-
          0.00                                    ing that Fourier analysis or other preprocessing methods might
                    B    R    Q      R iso thr
                                                  be necessary.
Figure 19: Top-1 aff-F1 across models


              Observation 10 on Optimal Text Representation

              Across all text representation methods, no single method consistently outperforms the others.


                                     Previous works on LLM-based time series analysis typically
                                     use a single, so-called “best” prompt. However, we find that in
trend range point


                                     the task of time series anomaly detection, no single text rep-
                                     resentation method consistently outperforms the others. We
     H J K B H J K B H J K B H J K B
                                     assumed that PaP could have a benefit on the range dataset,
                                     as out-of-range anomalies become obvious if the model knows
                                     the average value. However, in practice, most LLMs do not
     H J K B H J K B H J K B H J K B
                                     make use of this extra information, and PaP is usually not the
                                     best method. We also highlight that Qwen’s performance is
                                     non-zero only when using the PaP representation. This demon-
     H J K B H J K B H J K B H J K B
                                     strates that Qwen lacks the ability to track long time series and
freq


                                     can only perform anomaly detection based on the extra short
                                     statistics provided by PaP. Additionally, we note that Gemini
     H J K B H J K B H J K B H J K B
                                     performs quite well on other datasets but is especially poor
                                     with the text trend dataset. This again demonstrates the model-
Figure 20: Comparing text repre-
                                     specific capabilities of LLMs.
sentations, CSV/PaP/TPD/Default


                                                           25
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


D    F ULL E XPERIMENT R ESULTS

                         Table 2: Trend anomalies in shifting sine wave

                                                     PRE     REC      F1      affi    affi    affi
                                                                               PRE     REC      F1
 Gemini-1.5-Flash     0shot-Text                     0.00    0.00    0.00      3.99    7.79    5.27
                      0shot-Text-S0.3                2.12    2.58    2.07     12.28   17.76   14.31
                      0shot-Text-S0.3-Calc           0.00    0.00    0.00      4.59    8.98    6.06
                      0shot-Text-S0.3-COT            0.52    1.01    0.63      7.83   13.90    9.94
                      0shot-Text-S0.3-COT-CSV        0.50    0.50    0.50      5.51    9.70    6.88
                      0shot-Text-S0.3-COT-PAP        0.25    0.25    0.25      3.26    5.66    4.07
                      0shot-Text-S0.3-COT-TPD        3.25    3.25    3.25      7.83   10.62    8.88
                      0shot-Text-S0.3-CSV            0.00    0.00    0.00      3.15    7.16    4.31
                      0shot-Text-S0.3-Dyscalc        0.00    0.00    0.00      3.90    7.85    5.20
                      0shot-Text-S0.3-PAP            0.00    0.00    0.00      3.37    7.25    4.56
                      0shot-Text-S0.3-TPD            0.00    0.00    0.00      3.03    5.81    3.97
                      0shot-Vision                  59.77   59.57   59.60     60.17   60.22   60.19
                      0shot-Vision-Calc             59.70   59.44   59.48     60.15   60.20   60.18
                      0shot-Vision-COT              57.93   57.94   57.93     57.99   58.00   57.99
                      0shot-Vision-Dyscalc          59.08   59.03   58.95     59.43   59.47   59.45
                      1shot-Text-S0.3                2.03    2.15    1.88     11.72   17.19   13.70
                      1shot-Text-S0.3-COT            5.64    7.96    6.32     19.15   24.30   21.23
                      1shot-Vision                  57.59   57.73   56.75     62.41   62.81   62.59
                      1shot-Vision-Calc             63.33   63.63   62.75     67.09   67.43   67.25
                      1shot-Vision-COT              41.07   40.88   39.55     50.91   53.18   51.82
                      1shot-Vision-Dyscalc          62.01   62.22   61.86     64.12   64.37   64.24
 GPT-4o-Mini          0shot-Text                     6.00    6.00    6.00     11.51   17.47   13.43
                      0shot-Text-S0.3                1.30    1.68    1.39      9.25   16.63   11.77
                      0shot-Text-S0.3-Calc           1.50    1.50    1.50      4.35    7.02    5.25
                      0shot-Text-S0.3-COT            6.53    6.54    6.54     15.43   22.80   18.00
                      0shot-Text-S0.3-COT-CSV        6.75    6.75    6.75      9.42   12.12   10.14
                      0shot-Text-S0.3-COT-PAP        9.00    9.00    9.00     10.28   10.62   10.41
                      0shot-Text-S0.3-COT-TPD        1.25    1.25    1.25      1.79    2.23    1.94
                      0shot-Text-S0.3-CSV            0.25    0.25    0.25      3.37    8.79    4.70
                      0shot-Text-S0.3-Dyscalc        1.25    1.25    1.25      4.56    7.77    5.64
                      0shot-Text-S0.3-PAP           15.25   15.25   15.25     16.94   17.94   17.29
                      0shot-Text-S0.3-TPD           22.75   22.75   22.75     25.37   27.75   26.18
                      0shot-Vision                  57.50   57.50   57.50     57.50   57.50   57.50
                      0shot-Vision-Calc             57.50   57.50   57.50     57.50   57.50   57.50
                      0shot-Vision-COT              57.50   57.50   57.50     57.50   57.50   57.50
                      0shot-Vision-Dyscalc          57.50   57.50   57.50     57.50   57.50   57.50
                      1shot-Text-S0.3                1.22    1.30    1.25      8.89   16.27   11.38
                      1shot-Text-S0.3-COT            2.09    2.36    2.17     12.30   20.40   15.15
                      1shot-Vision                  57.25   57.25   57.25     57.47   57.48   57.48
                      1shot-Vision-Calc             57.50   57.50   57.50     57.50   57.50   57.50
                      1shot-Vision-COT              57.50   57.50   57.50     57.50   57.50   57.50
                      1shot-Vision-Dyscalc          57.50   57.50   57.50     57.50   57.50   57.50
 Internvlm-76B        0shot-Text                    19.21   23.60   19.56     22.80   26.84   24.16
                      0shot-Text-S0.3               33.58   32.66   31.95     38.68   39.79   39.07
                      0shot-Text-S0.3-Calc          11.20   12.58   11.34     12.87   14.77   13.50
                      0shot-Text-S0.3-COT           13.26   13.50   13.27     15.42   17.52   16.12
                      0shot-Text-S0.3-COT-CSV        4.52    4.75    4.54      8.09    9.73    8.66
                      0shot-Text-S0.3-COT-PAP       20.40   20.84   20.42     21.31   22.32   21.65
                      0shot-Text-S0.3-COT-TPD       10.76   11.00   10.77     11.39   12.00   11.60
                      0shot-Text-S0.3-CSV            0.50    0.50    0.50      5.45    9.52    6.83
                                                                            Continued on next page

                                               26
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                              Table 2 – continued from previous page
                                                     PRE     REC        F1      affi    affi    affi
                                                                                 PRE     REC       F1
                      0shot-Text-S0.3-Dyscalc       11.38   13.71   11.63       14.30   17.62   15.41
                      0shot-Text-S0.3-PAP           46.08   46.75   46.14       47.07   48.13   47.43
                      0shot-Text-S0.3-TPD            2.06    4.73    2.30        5.75    9.78    7.09
                      0shot-Vision                  27.27   45.87   27.82       37.77   49.50   41.68
                      0shot-Vision-Calc             41.31   44.80   41.82       46.76   52.22   48.64
                      0shot-Vision-COT              51.13   51.34   51.06       53.27   54.16   53.60
                      0shot-Vision-Dyscalc          36.48   45.76   36.67       45.49   54.89   48.67
                      1shot-Text-S0.3               30.18   31.05   29.77       36.14   37.59   36.68
                      1shot-Text-S0.3-COT           37.44   36.65   35.74       42.01   42.32   42.14
                      1shot-Vision                  38.98   42.27   37.93       47.54   50.00   48.43
                      1shot-Vision-Calc             33.76   39.43   32.67       40.33   44.13   41.61
                      1shot-Vision-COT              44.90   44.90   44.29       46.92   47.32   47.08
                      1shot-Vision-Dyscalc          39.61   43.23   38.34       48.48   51.02   49.37
 Isolation-Forest     0shot                          6.04   19.74      8.64     21.81   42.14   28.69
 Qwen                 0shot-Text                     0.00    0.00    0.00        0.00    0.00    0.00
                      0shot-Text-S0.3                0.00    0.00    0.00        0.00    0.00    0.00
                      0shot-Text-S0.3-Calc           0.00    0.00    0.00        0.00    0.00    0.00
                      0shot-Text-S0.3-COT            3.25    3.25    3.25        3.49    3.72    3.56
                      0shot-Text-S0.3-COT-CSV        0.00    0.00    0.00        0.00    0.00    0.00
                      0shot-Text-S0.3-COT-PAP        6.26    6.50    6.27        6.41    6.56    6.46
                      0shot-Text-S0.3-COT-TPD        0.75    0.75    0.75        0.80    0.85    0.82
                      0shot-Text-S0.3-CSV            0.00    0.00    0.00        0.00    0.00    0.00
                      0shot-Text-S0.3-Dyscalc        0.00    0.00    0.00        0.00    0.00    0.00
                      0shot-Text-S0.3-PAP           12.75   12.75   12.75       12.75   12.76   12.76
                      0shot-Text-S0.3-TPD            1.25    1.25    1.25        1.30    1.36    1.32
                      0shot-Vision                   8.21   32.50   10.13       21.04   34.49   25.66
                      0shot-Vision-Calc              5.68   27.76    7.52       16.91   29.03   21.07
                      0shot-Vision-COT              12.25   17.59   12.66       15.80   19.06   16.94
                      0shot-Vision-Dyscalc           6.51   25.75    8.10       15.71   25.77   19.16
                      1shot-Text-S0.3-COT            0.00    0.00    0.00        0.00    0.00    0.00
                      1shot-Vision                   7.80   28.89    9.46       25.09   37.34   29.43
                      1shot-Vision-Calc             13.13   20.00   13.62       16.54   20.44   17.86
                      1shot-Vision-COT              27.57   28.08   27.56       29.62   30.16   29.85
                      1shot-Vision-Dyscalc          14.85   31.64   15.48       29.00   38.45   32.33
 Threshold            0shot                          6.91    2.98      3.90     20.15   38.90   26.45



                       Table 3: Frequency anomalies in regular sine wave

                                                     PRE     REC        F1      affi    affi    affi
                                                                                 PRE     REC      F1
 Gemini-1.5-Flash     0shot-Text                     4.01    4.30    3.63       39.24   31.84   33.65
                      0shot-Text-S0.3               11.28   14.24   10.91       58.42   52.67   53.59
                      0shot-Text-S0.3-Calc           3.29    2.61    2.51       36.76   27.58   29.91
                      0shot-Text-S0.3-COT            3.46    4.78    3.36       21.76   19.93   19.99
                      0shot-Text-S0.3-COT-CSV        2.55    2.34    1.94       30.81   23.37   25.37
                      0shot-Text-S0.3-COT-PAP        3.92    2.35    2.61       29.46   19.21   22.12
                      0shot-Text-S0.3-COT-TPD        2.61    2.37    1.97       25.96   19.14   21.00
                      0shot-Text-S0.3-CSV            2.77    2.21    2.08       46.48   33.66   37.03
                      0shot-Text-S0.3-Dyscalc        3.74    3.24    2.91       36.95   28.19   30.32
                      0shot-Text-S0.3-PAP            1.97    0.73    0.94       33.36   22.71   25.54
                      0shot-Text-S0.3-TPD            2.57    1.57    1.63       39.54   29.61   32.22
                                                                              Continued on next page


                                               27
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                              Table 3 – continued from previous page
                                                     PRE     REC        F1      affi    affi    affi
                                                                                 PRE     REC       F1
                      0shot-Vision                  13.56   13.77   13.54       15.47   13.15   13.76
                      0shot-Vision-Calc             17.82   19.68   18.14       23.65   17.80   19.39
                      0shot-Vision-COT              12.65   12.71   12.45       14.16   12.52   12.98
                      0shot-Vision-Dyscalc          16.71   17.84   16.83       21.44   16.58   17.88
                      1shot-Text-S0.3               10.20   14.73   10.45       56.37   52.78   52.61
                      1shot-Text-S0.3-COT           12.81   17.30   12.31       56.67   50.63   51.30
                      1shot-Vision                  21.78   21.31   20.52       35.84   25.89   28.46
                      1shot-Vision-Calc             23.10   20.50   20.73       34.76   24.87   27.46
                      1shot-Vision-COT              14.29   16.89   13.80       54.19   41.68   43.93
                      1shot-Vision-Dyscalc          23.73   21.83   21.61       36.35   24.37   27.57
 GPT-4o-Mini          0shot-Text                    11.14   10.91   10.71       23.10   20.56   21.21
                      0shot-Text-S0.3                9.18   10.37    8.75       53.75   49.13   49.18
                      0shot-Text-S0.3-Calc           3.51    3.11    2.83       33.03   28.20   29.02
                      0shot-Text-S0.3-COT            3.95    8.88    4.53       33.36   36.97   33.79
                      0shot-Text-S0.3-COT-CSV        4.56    4.73    4.36       14.51   11.35   12.07
                      0shot-Text-S0.3-COT-PAP        6.13    6.30    6.12       10.72    9.50    9.82
                      0shot-Text-S0.3-COT-TPD        0.32    0.31    0.29        4.23    3.05    3.37
                      0shot-Text-S0.3-CSV           10.52    9.74    9.80       24.45   19.26   20.67
                      0shot-Text-S0.3-Dyscalc        2.95    2.64    2.24       36.62   30.97   31.90
                      0shot-Text-S0.3-PAP            8.09    7.95    7.68       19.09   14.66   15.84
                      0shot-Text-S0.3-TPD            2.66    2.75    2.16       31.51   26.09   27.19
                      0shot-Vision                  10.00   10.00   10.00       10.00   10.00   10.00
                      0shot-Vision-Calc             10.38   10.16   10.21       10.89   10.70   10.76
                      0shot-Vision-COT              10.25   10.05   10.08       10.25   10.12   10.16
                      0shot-Vision-Dyscalc          10.45   10.18   10.25       11.10   10.82   10.91
                      1shot-Text-S0.3                9.58   11.05    9.08       52.93   48.83   48.65
                      1shot-Text-S0.3-COT            6.91   13.05    7.70       51.68   54.35   51.29
                      1shot-Vision                  12.42   10.32   10.69       34.12   26.85   28.63
                      1shot-Vision-Calc             11.91   11.21   11.06       24.28   19.32   20.70
                      1shot-Vision-COT              11.86   11.04   11.09       19.80   17.07   17.67
                      1shot-Vision-Dyscalc          12.32   11.03   11.08       25.08   19.94   21.15
 Internvlm-76B        0shot-Text                     5.66   12.39      6.04     15.82   17.30   15.53
                      0shot-Text-S0.3                3.38    7.18      3.33     37.12   33.84   33.16
                      0shot-Text-S0.3-Calc           8.18    9.48      8.30     14.36   13.50   13.45
                      0shot-Text-S0.3-COT            6.51    7.71      6.72     12.89   11.98   12.06
                      0shot-Text-S0.3-COT-CSV        2.60    4.52      2.69     19.44   17.81   17.71
                      0shot-Text-S0.3-COT-PAP        3.79    3.68      3.71      6.45    5.57    5.78
                      0shot-Text-S0.3-COT-TPD        3.13    3.73      3.15     10.65    8.46    8.98
                      0shot-Text-S0.3-CSV            3.65    8.97      3.62     37.52   31.89   32.68
                      0shot-Text-S0.3-Dyscalc        7.15    8.20      7.22     16.55   13.84   14.39
                      0shot-Text-S0.3-PAP            8.36    9.29      8.38     13.77   12.68   12.77
                      0shot-Text-S0.3-TPD            4.01    7.60      4.01     24.88   21.46   21.45
                      0shot-Vision                   6.51   17.82      8.81     35.94   35.14   33.37
                      0shot-Vision-Calc              4.68   15.55      5.41     26.42   29.19   25.80
                      0shot-Vision-COT               4.97    9.25      5.37     30.18   27.70   27.27
                      0shot-Vision-Dyscalc           7.16   18.74      8.88     32.78   33.72   31.01
                      1shot-Text-S0.3                4.24    4.93      3.22     37.50   32.79   32.66
                      1shot-Text-S0.3-COT            3.05    2.69      2.40     30.54   26.81   26.86
                      1shot-Vision                   4.31   15.22      4.92     38.93   44.67   38.43
                      1shot-Vision-Calc              4.55   13.45      5.19     35.04   38.20   33.78
                      1shot-Vision-COT               2.76    8.41      3.58     35.98   42.04   36.75
                      1shot-Vision-Dyscalc           4.11   12.28      5.37     35.10   38.41   33.73
 Isolation-Forest     0shot                          3.41   90.00      6.44     45.27   90.00   60.25

                                                                              Continued on next page


                                               28
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                              Table 3 – continued from previous page
                                                     PRE     REC        F1      affi    affi    affi
                                                                                 PRE     REC      F1
 Qwen                 0shot-Text                     0.00    0.00      0.00      0.00    0.00    0.00
                      0shot-Text-S0.3                0.00    0.00      0.00      0.00    0.00    0.00
                      0shot-Text-S0.3-Calc           0.00    0.00      0.00      0.00    0.00    0.00
                      0shot-Text-S0.3-COT            0.55    0.92      0.59      1.52    1.36    1.37
                      0shot-Text-S0.3-COT-CSV        0.00    0.00      0.00      0.00    0.00    0.00
                      0shot-Text-S0.3-COT-PAP        1.28    1.50      1.31      1.73    1.64    1.65
                      0shot-Text-S0.3-COT-TPD        0.54    0.61      0.53      1.68    1.11    1.27
                      0shot-Text-S0.3-CSV            0.00    0.00      0.00      0.00    0.00    0.00
                      0shot-Text-S0.3-Dyscalc        0.00    0.00      0.00      0.00    0.00    0.00
                      0shot-Text-S0.3-PAP            2.25    2.25      2.25      3.77    3.13    3.30
                      0shot-Text-S0.3-TPD            0.07    0.81      0.12      3.14    2.67    2.73
                      0shot-Vision                   3.17   55.44      5.25     32.89   60.12   42.26
                      0shot-Vision-Calc              2.79   56.91      4.81     30.73   58.87   40.24
                      0shot-Vision-COT               4.44    8.61      4.60      7.13    9.26    7.86
                      0shot-Vision-Dyscalc           3.19   42.57      4.68     24.03   44.83   31.05
                      1shot-Text-S0.3-COT            0.00    0.00      0.00      0.00    0.00    0.00
                      1shot-Vision                   4.31   17.42      4.66     43.41   50.74   44.11
                      1shot-Vision-Calc              1.12    3.31      1.23      2.97    4.11    3.32
                      1shot-Vision-COT               1.76    3.56      1.88     11.06   14.18   12.02
                      1shot-Vision-Dyscalc           5.06   13.32      5.11     39.87   44.46   39.41
 Threshold            0shot                          3.20    3.47      2.95     44.73   85.12   58.59



                      Table 4: Point noises anomalies in regular sine wave

                                                     PRE     REC        F1      affi    affi    affi
                                                                                 PRE     REC      F1
 Gemini-1.5-Flash     0shot-Text                     1.09    1.06    0.93       23.84   24.38   23.35
                      0shot-Text-S0.3                2.75    3.60    2.83       43.01   41.02   40.64
                      0shot-Text-S0.3-Calc           0.10    0.05    0.06       18.67   19.37   18.53
                      0shot-Text-S0.3-COT            2.66    3.72    2.54       19.37   20.22   19.12
                      0shot-Text-S0.3-COT-CSV        2.88    2.86    2.19       24.03   20.64   21.46
                      0shot-Text-S0.3-COT-PAP        3.31    3.51    3.30       17.68   16.21   16.44
                      0shot-Text-S0.3-COT-TPD        3.89    3.79    3.76       18.41   16.85   17.14
                      0shot-Text-S0.3-CSV            3.81    2.85    2.74       34.27   29.22   30.44
                      0shot-Text-S0.3-Dyscalc        0.20    0.10    0.12       18.22   18.78   18.08
                      0shot-Text-S0.3-PAP            0.00    0.00    0.00       15.58   14.10   14.28
                      0shot-Text-S0.3-TPD            1.83    1.76    1.77       22.66   20.71   20.94
                      0shot-Vision                  52.35   90.69   60.90       94.22   95.46   94.38
                      0shot-Vision-Calc             51.56   87.56   59.74       94.28   95.88   94.63
                      0shot-Vision-COT              51.87   84.03   59.20       91.78   89.43   89.75
                      0shot-Vision-Dyscalc          51.40   88.72   59.53       94.18   95.87   94.52
                      1shot-Text-S0.3                3.63    4.20    3.61       43.49   41.13   40.93
                      1shot-Text-S0.3-COT            8.19    9.11    8.05       45.60   43.79   43.26
                      1shot-Vision                  53.54   78.76   59.96       93.42   93.83   93.19
                      1shot-Vision-Calc             55.95   77.36   61.54       94.88   94.55   94.17
                      1shot-Vision-COT              43.09   67.37   49.31       82.62   83.34   82.61
                      1shot-Vision-Dyscalc          54.29   78.90   60.44       95.18   96.15   95.25
 GPT-4o-Mini          0shot-Text                    30.54   30.52   30.32       43.21   40.21   40.97
                      0shot-Text-S0.3                9.01    8.50    7.20       43.15   41.55   40.79
                      0shot-Text-S0.3-Calc           1.98    2.21    1.94       21.50   19.72   19.99
                      0shot-Text-S0.3-COT            6.13    8.93    5.87       35.72   40.27   36.77
                                                                              Continued on next page


                                               29
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                              Table 4 – continued from previous page
                                                     PRE     REC        F1      affi    affi    affi
                                                                                 PRE     REC       F1
                      0shot-Text-S0.3-COT-CSV        7.34    7.42    6.84       27.29   22.92   24.05
                      0shot-Text-S0.3-COT-PAP       12.50   12.50   12.50       16.22   15.71   15.83
                      0shot-Text-S0.3-COT-TPD        0.93    0.86    0.87        8.27    7.94    7.89
                      0shot-Text-S0.3-CSV           16.60   17.03   16.34       30.86   29.03   29.29
                      0shot-Text-S0.3-Dyscalc        1.49    1.89    1.51       24.42   23.94   23.45
                      0shot-Text-S0.3-PAP           15.02   14.88   14.93       23.92   22.86   23.05
                      0shot-Text-S0.3-TPD            4.11    6.40    4.34       22.28   23.67   22.35
                      0shot-Vision                  39.16   41.75   39.01       62.88   58.88   60.10
                      0shot-Vision-Calc             38.89   42.58   39.11       63.17   61.04   61.42
                      0shot-Vision-COT              39.70   40.55   38.90       63.08   58.39   59.89
                      0shot-Vision-Dyscalc          39.02   42.07   39.13       63.05   60.52   61.12
                      1shot-Text-S0.3                6.11    4.87    4.26       42.74   40.82   40.18
                      1shot-Text-S0.3-COT           10.90   14.44   11.04       46.00   50.70   47.15
                      1shot-Vision                  38.24   39.36   36.32       76.21   71.14   72.22
                      1shot-Vision-Calc             41.29   41.60   39.22       76.55   71.06   72.36
                      1shot-Vision-COT              40.35   42.84   39.01       76.07   71.23   72.04
                      1shot-Vision-Dyscalc          40.96   43.16   39.99       77.02   71.87   72.99
 Internvlm-76B        0shot-Text                    19.26   22.48   19.47       25.08   27.32   25.84
                      0shot-Text-S0.3               10.21   11.34    9.96       33.19   34.47   32.60
                      0shot-Text-S0.3-Calc          21.42   23.25   21.52       25.62   26.72   25.93
                      0shot-Text-S0.3-COT           15.82   16.50   15.86       18.51   19.07   18.68
                      0shot-Text-S0.3-COT-CSV        9.21    9.82    8.81       26.12   24.75   24.70
                      0shot-Text-S0.3-COT-PAP       10.58   10.83   10.58       11.56   11.76   11.62
                      0shot-Text-S0.3-COT-TPD        9.00    9.00    9.00       11.69   11.68   11.63
                      0shot-Text-S0.3-CSV           11.92   13.91   11.20       40.05   38.01   37.78
                      0shot-Text-S0.3-Dyscalc       18.89   19.66   18.94       23.35   23.80   23.46
                      0shot-Text-S0.3-PAP           25.26   25.50   25.27       27.14   27.26   27.16
                      0shot-Text-S0.3-TPD            7.00    7.00    7.00       14.89   15.08   14.88
                      0shot-Vision                  14.26   53.10   20.64       56.18   67.83   60.77
                      0shot-Vision-Calc             22.97   58.75   28.77       66.27   76.14   70.44
                      0shot-Vision-COT               4.35   12.95    5.47       31.51   39.00   33.61
                      0shot-Vision-Dyscalc          17.31   54.36   23.36       59.49   70.15   63.79
                      1shot-Text-S0.3                8.69    9.89    7.70       32.37   32.95   31.19
                      1shot-Text-S0.3-COT           10.20    9.98    9.43       30.63   30.69   29.49
                      1shot-Vision                   9.97   29.84   12.99       44.76   57.62   49.26
                      1shot-Vision-Calc             10.01   29.92   12.26       44.34   57.93   48.86
                      1shot-Vision-COT               3.87   12.65    4.61       33.66   45.65   37.30
                      1shot-Vision-Dyscalc           8.98   31.81   11.90       42.77   59.47   48.65
 Isolation-Forest     0shot                          3.36   70.48      6.16     35.66   70.75   47.43
 Qwen                 0shot-Text                     0.00    0.00    0.00        0.00    0.00    0.00
                      0shot-Text-S0.3                0.00    0.00    0.00        0.00    0.00    0.00
                      0shot-Text-S0.3-Calc           0.00    0.00    0.00        0.00    0.00    0.00
                      0shot-Text-S0.3-COT            1.50    1.50    1.50        1.61    1.59    1.60
                      0shot-Text-S0.3-COT-CSV        0.00    0.00    0.00        0.00    0.00    0.00
                      0shot-Text-S0.3-COT-PAP        2.00    2.00    2.00        2.00    2.00    2.00
                      0shot-Text-S0.3-COT-TPD        0.50    0.50    0.50        0.80    0.84    0.82
                      0shot-Text-S0.3-CSV            0.00    0.00    0.00        0.00    0.00    0.00
                      0shot-Text-S0.3-Dyscalc        0.00    0.00    0.00        0.00    0.00    0.00
                      0shot-Text-S0.3-PAP            6.00    6.00    6.00        6.16    6.17    6.16
                      0shot-Text-S0.3-TPD            0.50    0.50    0.50        1.19    1.34    1.25
                      0shot-Vision                   6.29   42.00    8.22       30.05   48.49   36.66
                      0shot-Vision-Calc              4.11   36.69    5.56       22.05   39.14   27.93
                      0shot-Vision-COT              12.70   19.27   13.14       17.54   21.53   18.92
                                                                              Continued on next page


                                               30
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                              Table 4 – continued from previous page
                                                     PRE     REC        F1      affi    affi    affi
                                                                                 PRE     REC       F1
                      0shot-Vision-Dyscalc           3.26   28.28    4.58       17.87   30.85   22.36
                      1shot-Text-S0.3-COT            0.00    0.00    0.00        0.00    0.00    0.00
                      1shot-Vision                   9.15   25.49   10.04       41.59   47.97   42.61
                      1shot-Vision-Calc              7.88   12.80    8.16       10.78   13.28   11.59
                      1shot-Vision-COT              11.42   16.01   11.60       29.38   30.82   29.23
                      1shot-Vision-Dyscalc           8.55   19.61    8.72       37.64   43.60   38.63
 Threshold            0shot                          3.49    3.17      2.82     35.06   68.55   46.36



                       Table 5: Out-of-range anomalies in Gaussian noise

                                                     PRE     REC        F1      affi    affi    affi
                                                                                 PRE     REC      F1
 Gemini-1.5-Flash     0shot-Text                     2.92    4.53    2.98       32.52   38.30   34.27
                      0shot-Text-S0.3                7.15   12.76    8.34       46.77   56.31   50.25
                      0shot-Text-S0.3-Calc           2.24    1.92    1.81       35.13   36.94   34.99
                      0shot-Text-S0.3-COT            4.28    4.90    4.18       20.54   22.27   20.84
                      0shot-Text-S0.3-COT-CSV        2.70    2.24    2.34       16.85   15.47   15.75
                      0shot-Text-S0.3-COT-PAP        6.59    6.17    6.17       25.46   22.12   23.01
                      0shot-Text-S0.3-COT-TPD        2.87    3.03    2.86       16.75   14.98   15.26
                      0shot-Text-S0.3-CSV            5.00    4.52    4.62       35.17   33.31   33.28
                      0shot-Text-S0.3-Dyscalc        2.20    1.95    1.85       33.94   36.51   34.22
                      0shot-Text-S0.3-PAP            1.97    0.88    1.08       30.66   27.80   28.09
                      0shot-Text-S0.3-TPD            2.30    2.63    2.13       29.22   28.56   27.96
                      0shot-Vision                  32.70   74.46   40.19       79.35   83.16   80.95
                      0shot-Vision-Calc             20.96   60.42   28.02       68.04   70.94   69.07
                      0shot-Vision-COT              28.58   61.32   34.67       75.91   73.62   73.75
                      0shot-Vision-Dyscalc          26.94   66.70   34.00       74.17   77.29   75.34
                      1shot-Text-S0.3                7.12   13.71    8.42       47.06   56.95   50.69
                      1shot-Text-S0.3-COT           12.04   14.57   12.31       46.38   49.43   46.57
                      1shot-Vision                  33.77   63.17   40.02       80.05   82.67   81.07
                      1shot-Vision-Calc             36.28   64.25   42.40       81.41   84.05   82.40
                      1shot-Vision-COT              22.85   50.51   28.87       69.16   71.62   70.05
                      1shot-Vision-Dyscalc          35.52   61.50   41.15       81.49   83.06   81.82
 GPT-4o-Mini          0shot-Text                     8.08    9.57    8.19       38.07   36.57   36.13
                      0shot-Text-S0.3                7.45   11.75    8.13       42.93   45.39   42.84
                      0shot-Text-S0.3-Calc          17.02   16.80   16.80       30.47   28.11   28.71
                      0shot-Text-S0.3-COT           10.00   10.61    9.21       31.39   30.25   30.00
                      0shot-Text-S0.3-COT-CSV       10.40   10.05    9.98       24.63   21.52   22.37
                      0shot-Text-S0.3-COT-PAP        6.74    6.87    6.72       15.02   12.78   13.43
                      0shot-Text-S0.3-COT-TPD        0.84    0.80    0.82        4.45    4.50    4.41
                      0shot-Text-S0.3-CSV           20.31   19.38   19.23       42.18   37.17   38.57
                      0shot-Text-S0.3-Dyscalc       12.86   12.95   12.62       26.48   24.86   24.96
                      0shot-Text-S0.3-PAP           15.99   15.63   15.66       26.82   23.95   24.75
                      0shot-Text-S0.3-TPD            8.11    7.29    7.41       24.51   23.05   23.04
                      0shot-Vision                  37.13   44.84   38.48       74.12   77.89   75.28
                      0shot-Vision-Calc             37.30   43.03   38.00       75.49   78.54   76.26
                      0shot-Vision-COT              36.58   44.09   37.55       75.99   78.92   76.74
                      0shot-Vision-Dyscalc          36.67   41.84   37.21       72.87   75.26   73.43
                      1shot-Text-S0.3                7.96   12.51    8.52       43.20   45.55   43.17
                      1shot-Text-S0.3-COT            9.43   11.72    9.65       44.53   43.69   42.97
                      1shot-Vision                  31.52   33.83   30.99       75.81   76.46   75.34
                                                                              Continued on next page


                                               31
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                              Table 5 – continued from previous page
                                                     PRE     REC       F1   affi    affi    affi
                                                                             PRE     REC       F1
                      1shot-Vision-Calc             32.83   36.30   32.24   72.08   72.94   71.72
                      1shot-Vision-COT              30.29   34.15   30.50   76.48   77.37   76.14
                      1shot-Vision-Dyscalc          31.18   32.85   30.59   73.85   74.29   73.26
 Internvlm-76B        0shot-Text                     8.95   27.30    9.39   27.16   36.32   29.81
                      0shot-Text-S0.3                7.45    8.89    7.48   25.94   25.18   24.59
                      0shot-Text-S0.3-Calc          10.49   13.55   10.29   20.98   21.34   20.46
                      0shot-Text-S0.3-COT            9.85   10.45    9.94   16.89   17.87   17.13
                      0shot-Text-S0.3-COT-CSV        4.83    5.71    4.75   19.71   18.08   18.24
                      0shot-Text-S0.3-COT-PAP       12.58   12.40   12.37   18.20   17.09   17.31
                      0shot-Text-S0.3-COT-TPD        6.40    6.46    6.34   11.74   11.09   11.12
                      0shot-Text-S0.3-CSV            7.83    8.24    7.49   38.79   34.59   35.52
                      0shot-Text-S0.3-Dyscalc        7.56   16.99    7.92   21.17   25.37   22.00
                      0shot-Text-S0.3-PAP           25.43   27.34   25.51   28.87   29.71   29.00
                      0shot-Text-S0.3-TPD            7.83   12.72    8.05   22.23   23.44   21.88
                      0shot-Vision                  27.08   56.67   32.58   73.52   79.03   75.84
                      0shot-Vision-Calc             27.58   56.64   32.82   72.83   78.02   74.93
                      0shot-Vision-COT               8.25   12.05    8.64   34.21   36.28   33.99
                      0shot-Vision-Dyscalc           4.39   13.78    5.03   32.84   39.45   34.03
                      1shot-Text-S0.3                8.61    9.95    8.37   27.64   26.60   25.94
                      1shot-Text-S0.3-COT            8.70    8.90    8.48   28.66   28.08   27.47
                      1shot-Vision                  17.79   33.39   20.35   58.16   61.04   58.53
                      1shot-Vision-Calc             19.32   35.23   21.91   60.17   65.54   61.65
                      1shot-Vision-COT               3.57    5.90    3.66   31.10   34.97   31.58
                      1shot-Vision-Dyscalc          17.24   34.25   20.14   59.85   65.48   61.53
 Isolation-Forest     0shot                         15.77   69.75   23.58   42.30   69.75   52.44
 Qwen                 0shot-Text                     0.00    0.00    0.00    0.00    0.00    0.00
                      0shot-Text-S0.3                0.00    0.00    0.00    0.00    0.00    0.00
                      0shot-Text-S0.3-Calc           0.00    0.00    0.00    0.00    0.00    0.00
                      0shot-Text-S0.3-COT            1.26    1.51    1.27    2.13    2.06    2.05
                      0shot-Text-S0.3-COT-CSV        0.00    0.00    0.00    0.00    0.00    0.00
                      0shot-Text-S0.3-COT-PAP        4.50    4.50    4.50    4.64    4.64    4.64
                      0shot-Text-S0.3-COT-TPD        0.61    0.85    0.57    1.59    1.51    1.44
                      0shot-Text-S0.3-CSV            0.00    0.00    0.00    0.00    0.00    0.00
                      0shot-Text-S0.3-Dyscalc        0.00    0.00    0.00    0.00    0.00    0.00
                      0shot-Text-S0.3-PAP            7.25    7.25    7.25    7.25    7.25    7.25
                      0shot-Text-S0.3-TPD            1.21    1.08    1.12    1.72    1.66    1.65
                      0shot-Vision                   3.22   29.46    4.75   30.09   47.51   36.40
                      0shot-Vision-Calc              2.71   35.65    4.60   31.95   52.36   39.18
                      0shot-Vision-COT               9.63   16.43    9.92   13.94   17.67   15.23
                      0shot-Vision-Dyscalc           2.90   28.12    4.34   26.32   41.84   31.78
                      1shot-Text-S0.3-COT            0.00    0.00    0.00    0.00    0.00    0.00
                      1shot-Vision                   9.42   17.36   10.10   38.10   43.64   39.14
                      1shot-Vision-Calc              7.13    9.19    7.21    9.97   10.89   10.23
                      1shot-Vision-COT              11.12   12.31   10.95   22.28   24.65   22.70
                      1shot-Vision-Dyscalc           8.92   13.66    9.20   34.59   37.55   34.54
 Threshold            0shot                         32.49   53.38   34.28   50.54   69.54   58.09


                                               32
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                 Table 6: Trend anomalies in shifting sine wave with extra noise

                                                     PRE     REC      F1      affi    affi    affi
                                                                               PRE     REC      F1
 Gemini-1.5-Flash     0shot-Text                     0.00    0.00    0.00      7.07   13.05    9.16
                      0shot-Text-S0.3                0.43    0.62    0.46     12.77   24.24   16.68
                      0shot-Text-S0.3-COT            1.25    2.43    1.51      8.95   15.05   11.15
                      0shot-Text-S0.3-COT-CSV        0.00    0.00    0.00      3.50    6.32    4.43
                      0shot-Text-S0.3-COT-PAP        1.75    1.75    1.75      5.00    7.04    5.73
                      0shot-Text-S0.3-COT-TPD        1.75    1.75    1.75      4.70    6.53    5.38
                      0shot-Text-S0.3-CSV            0.00    0.00    0.00      2.67    5.68    3.52
                      0shot-Text-S0.3-PAP            0.00    0.00    0.00      3.72    7.16    4.88
                      0shot-Text-S0.3-TPD            0.00    0.00    0.00      2.91    5.80    3.85
                      0shot-Vision                  61.66   61.99   61.48     62.96   63.61   63.21
                      0shot-Vision-COT              59.35   59.19   59.16     59.58   59.66   59.61
                      1shot-Text-S0.3                0.55    0.57    0.49     12.41   23.06   16.08
                      1shot-Text-S0.3-COT            0.50    0.50    0.45     11.47   18.85   14.16
                      1shot-Vision                  55.43   54.91   54.51     58.14   58.29   58.21
                      1shot-Vision-COT              16.59   23.58   15.96     30.33   37.52   32.85
 GPT-4o-Mini          0shot-Text                     0.00    0.00    0.00      3.88    6.95    4.97
                      0shot-Text-S0.3                0.06    0.08    0.07      8.01   14.97   10.37
                      0shot-Text-S0.3-COT            2.75    2.75    2.75      8.98   14.20   10.75
                      0shot-Text-S0.3-COT-CSV        4.00    4.00    4.00      5.69    7.17    6.11
                      0shot-Text-S0.3-COT-PAP        9.50    9.50    9.50     10.38   10.68   10.48
                      0shot-Text-S0.3-COT-TPD        1.50    1.50    1.50      1.86    2.18    1.96
                      0shot-Text-S0.3-CSV            0.00    0.00    0.00      3.09    6.86    4.13
                      0shot-Text-S0.3-PAP           13.25   13.25   13.25     14.69   15.52   14.97
                      0shot-Text-S0.3-TPD            4.50    4.50    4.50      7.01    9.17    7.75
                      0shot-Vision                  59.79   59.76   59.77     60.64   61.48   60.95
                      0shot-Vision-COT              59.69   59.68   59.67     60.12   60.59   60.29
                      1shot-Text-S0.3                0.09    0.32    0.11      8.23   15.53   10.71
                      1shot-Text-S0.3-COT            0.17    0.75    0.26     10.02   17.56   12.71
                      1shot-Vision                  22.10   23.80   22.23     33.83   44.08   37.45
                      1shot-Vision-COT              24.78   25.45   24.66     35.93   46.75   39.81
 Internvlm-76B        0shot-Text                     5.87   15.45    6.70     12.10   19.43   14.55
                      0shot-Text-S0.3               16.64   19.12   16.90     20.66   24.08   21.83
                      0shot-Text-S0.3-COT           11.75   11.75   11.75     13.39   14.79   13.86
                      0shot-Text-S0.3-COT-CSV        2.03    2.25    2.05      4.64    6.36    5.23
                      0shot-Text-S0.3-COT-PAP       15.85   16.26   15.86     16.59   17.41   16.87
                      0shot-Text-S0.3-COT-TPD        8.75    8.75    8.75      9.16    9.56    9.30
                      0shot-Text-S0.3-CSV            0.50    0.50    0.50      4.19    7.64    5.33
                      0shot-Text-S0.3-PAP           38.00   39.03   38.15     39.07   40.37   39.51
                      0shot-Text-S0.3-TPD            4.23    7.30    4.57      8.36   13.01    9.92
                      0shot-Vision                   4.73   15.62    6.03     17.11   32.39   22.13
                      0shot-Vision-COT              11.99   15.10   12.59     25.63   39.81   30.49
                      1shot-Text-S0.3               20.50   22.98   20.68     24.44   27.95   25.64
                      1shot-Text-S0.3-COT           38.12   37.71   36.67     43.13   43.61   43.32
                      1shot-Vision                  33.08   37.78   31.98     40.59   43.70   41.67
                      1shot-Vision-COT              29.14   32.33   29.49     35.35   39.70   36.89
 Qwen                 0shot-Text                     0.00    0.00    0.00      0.00    0.00    0.00
                      0shot-Text-S0.3                0.00    0.00    0.00      0.00    0.00    0.00
                      0shot-Text-S0.3-COT            3.00    3.00    3.00      3.12    3.24    3.16
                      0shot-Text-S0.3-COT-CSV        0.00    0.00    0.00      0.00    0.00    0.00
                      0shot-Text-S0.3-COT-PAP        6.75    6.75    6.75      6.79    6.83    6.80
                      0shot-Text-S0.3-COT-TPD        0.50    0.50    0.50      0.58    0.65    0.60
                                                                            Continued on next page



                                               33
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                              Table 6 – continued from previous page
                                                     PRE     REC        F1      affi    affi    affi
                                                                                 PRE     REC       F1
                      0shot-Text-S0.3-CSV            0.00    0.00    0.00        0.00    0.00    0.00
                      0shot-Text-S0.3-PAP           12.00   12.00   12.00       12.00   12.00   12.00
                      0shot-Text-S0.3-TPD            1.25    1.25    1.25        1.29    1.33    1.30
                      0shot-Vision                   4.17   27.94    6.29       16.61   30.00   21.21
                      0shot-Vision-COT              21.45   25.06   21.78       23.75   25.71   24.46
                      1shot-Text-S0.3-COT            0.00    0.00    0.00        0.00    0.00    0.00
                      1shot-Vision                   7.96   25.63    9.18       23.34   33.78   27.03
                      1shot-Vision-COT              30.74   31.50   30.86       33.42   33.91   33.63
 Threshold            0shot                          6.58    2.56      3.46     19.40   37.51   25.41



               Table 7: Frequency anomalies in regular sine wave with extra noise

                                                     PRE     REC        F1      affi    affi    affi
                                                                                 PRE     REC      F1
 Gemini-1.5-Flash     0shot-Text                     3.49    4.33    3.42       36.32   32.22   32.67
                      0shot-Text-S0.3                5.55    5.56    4.52       49.76   44.03   44.64
                      0shot-Text-S0.3-COT            1.02    1.54    0.99       10.87   10.11   10.06
                      0shot-Text-S0.3-COT-CSV        2.53    1.15    1.37       21.91   17.21   18.15
                      0shot-Text-S0.3-COT-PAP        4.24    2.95    3.18       23.96   16.49   18.35
                      0shot-Text-S0.3-COT-TPD        3.08    2.51    2.30       21.07   16.42   17.54
                      0shot-Text-S0.3-CSV            1.83    0.99    1.11       25.04   17.47   19.42
                      0shot-Text-S0.3-PAP            2.52    0.66    0.95       29.37   20.91   23.13
                      0shot-Text-S0.3-TPD            2.89    1.61    1.65       30.57   24.15   25.60
                      0shot-Vision                  15.48   16.25   15.74       18.21   15.49   16.30
                      0shot-Vision-COT              15.02   15.58   15.12       17.98   15.41   16.14
                      1shot-Text-S0.3                5.58    5.40    4.67       48.78   42.01   43.08
                      1shot-Text-S0.3-COT            6.38    6.62    5.62       48.53   39.45   41.23
                      1shot-Vision                   9.43    9.56    9.22       24.40   23.19   22.68
                      1shot-Vision-COT               4.05    4.44    3.73       42.42   37.36   36.99
 GPT-4o-Mini          0shot-Text                     3.07    3.90    2.91       34.43   28.86   29.92
                      0shot-Text-S0.3                3.26    5.14    3.26       46.28   50.33   46.79
                      0shot-Text-S0.3-COT            2.94    4.54    2.84       25.88   24.39   24.13
                      0shot-Text-S0.3-COT-CSV        2.92    2.48    2.49       15.09   12.37   12.84
                      0shot-Text-S0.3-COT-PAP        5.28    5.28    5.28        7.74    7.07    7.27
                      0shot-Text-S0.3-COT-TPD        1.03    0.69    0.76        3.46    2.55    2.82
                      0shot-Text-S0.3-CSV            6.50    4.84    4.95       22.11   16.88   17.98
                      0shot-Text-S0.3-PAP            7.94    7.38    7.41       15.97   12.83   13.61
                      0shot-Text-S0.3-TPD            5.50    4.32    4.47       28.72   21.46   23.33
                      0shot-Vision                  14.42   13.79   13.81       19.11   17.57   17.90
                      0shot-Vision-COT              14.69   13.79   14.00       18.20   16.15   16.66
                      1shot-Text-S0.3                3.57    5.88    3.59       47.82   51.01   47.89
                      1shot-Text-S0.3-COT            4.36    7.62    4.50       46.82   53.21   48.43
                      1shot-Vision                  11.36    9.50    8.97       46.21   40.67   40.96
                      1shot-Vision-COT              17.16   16.35   16.05       38.43   34.08   34.53
 Internvlm-76B        0shot-Text                     8.05   15.96      8.36     19.88   22.41   19.82
                      0shot-Text-S0.3                3.91    5.76      3.78     34.44   32.29   31.51
                      0shot-Text-S0.3-COT            4.95    5.62      5.02     13.32   13.13   12.71
                      0shot-Text-S0.3-COT-CSV        2.15    2.22      1.76     17.98   15.28   15.60
                      0shot-Text-S0.3-COT-PAP        4.71    5.32      4.70      8.91    8.33    8.32
                      0shot-Text-S0.3-COT-TPD        4.54    4.64      4.38     11.81    9.53   10.09
                      0shot-Text-S0.3-CSV            3.32    4.13      2.69     31.42   25.17   26.43
                                                                              Continued on next page


                                               34
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                              Table 7 – continued from previous page
                                                      PRE     REC       F1      affi    affi    affi
                                                                                 PRE     REC       F1
                      0shot-Text-S0.3-PAP            6.93   18.54      7.33     20.58   25.28   21.37
                      0shot-Text-S0.3-TPD            3.54    7.06      3.58     20.54   17.54   17.58
                      0shot-Vision                   6.42   27.41      8.37     35.89   49.66   39.36
                      0shot-Vision-COT               6.67   13.42      7.40     27.07   30.84   27.36
                      1shot-Text-S0.3                4.04    4.93      3.62     32.27   31.25   30.26
                      1shot-Text-S0.3-COT            2.52    2.45      1.95     32.61   28.65   28.26
                      1shot-Vision                   4.07   17.07      4.29     42.30   44.61   40.25
                      1shot-Vision-COT               5.65    9.66      5.86     39.17   40.44   37.75
 Qwen                 0shot-Text                     0.00    0.00      0.00      0.00    0.00    0.00
                      0shot-Text-S0.3                0.00    0.00      0.00      0.00    0.00    0.00
                      0shot-Text-S0.3-COT            1.29    1.37      1.31      2.12    2.06    2.06
                      0shot-Text-S0.3-COT-CSV        0.00    0.00      0.00      0.00    0.00    0.00
                      0shot-Text-S0.3-COT-PAP        1.05    1.05      1.05      1.90    1.48    1.60
                      0shot-Text-S0.3-COT-TPD        0.30    0.41      0.30      1.33    1.12    1.18
                      0shot-Text-S0.3-CSV            0.00    0.00      0.00      0.00    0.00    0.00
                      0shot-Text-S0.3-PAP            3.25    3.25      3.25      3.88    3.65    3.73
                      0shot-Text-S0.3-TPD            0.86    1.01      0.85      1.75    1.56    1.59
                      0shot-Vision                   3.49   52.89      5.61     31.02   56.16   39.71
                      0shot-Vision-COT               5.07   10.77      5.34      8.26   11.14    9.27
                      1shot-Text-S0.3-COT            0.00    0.00      0.00      0.00    0.00    0.00
                      1shot-Vision                   4.43   16.33      4.87     41.37   47.88   41.80
                      1shot-Vision-COT               2.41    4.67      2.66     11.85   15.40   12.97
 Threshold            0shot                          3.34    3.17      2.90     43.61   80.70   56.47



             Table 8: Point noises anomalies in regular sine wave with Gaussian noise

                                                      PRE     REC       F1      affi    affi    affi
                                                                                 PRE     REC      F1
 Gemini-1.5-Flash     0shot-Text                     1.74    2.13    1.59       25.29   29.59   26.65
                      0shot-Text-S0.3                3.16    3.24    2.52       42.84   43.91   42.33
                      0shot-Text-S0.3-COT            2.14    2.36    2.04       12.24   13.54   12.42
                      0shot-Text-S0.3-COT-CSV        1.36    1.44    1.12       15.91   17.39   16.20
                      0shot-Text-S0.3-COT-PAP        3.20    3.01    3.05       18.53   17.87   17.73
                      0shot-Text-S0.3-COT-TPD        1.41    1.29    1.24       14.45   15.35   14.58
                      0shot-Text-S0.3-CSV            0.56    0.20    0.21       18.01   18.43   17.80
                      0shot-Text-S0.3-PAP            0.52    0.36    0.40       20.46   21.62   20.60
                      0shot-Text-S0.3-TPD            1.76    1.44    1.48       22.54   25.53   23.44
                      0shot-Vision                  16.40   23.95   17.81       41.99   41.51   40.64
                      0shot-Vision-COT              52.07   74.07   57.06       87.58   80.69   82.49
                      1shot-Text-S0.3                1.98    2.32    1.74       42.93   43.62   42.06
                      1shot-Text-S0.3-COT            4.45    6.45    4.16       41.18   41.31   40.00
                      1shot-Vision                  51.76   71.87   56.92       89.71   86.76   87.30
                      1shot-Vision-COT              35.73   55.60   40.53       74.40   72.92   72.70
 GPT-4o-Mini          0shot-Text                     1.44    2.33    1.40       27.13   30.86   28.14
                      0shot-Text-S0.3                4.18    8.57    4.54       42.21   52.73   46.02
                      0shot-Text-S0.3-COT            3.29    3.06    2.72       22.44   25.08   23.00
                      0shot-Text-S0.3-COT-CSV        3.21    2.97    2.98       12.96   14.78   13.43
                      0shot-Text-S0.3-COT-PAP        9.50    9.50    9.50       11.31   11.20   11.20
                      0shot-Text-S0.3-COT-TPD        0.31    0.26    0.26        3.83    4.08    3.86
                      0shot-Text-S0.3-CSV            7.82    7.78    7.78       20.13   21.64   20.42
                      0shot-Text-S0.3-PAP           13.85   13.77   13.78       20.05   20.37   20.09
                                                                              Continued on next page


                                               35
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                              Table 8 – continued from previous page
                                                      PRE     REC       F1      affi    affi    affi
                                                                                 PRE     REC       F1
                      0shot-Text-S0.3-TPD            4.58    4.57    4.57       21.37   22.99   21.72
                      0shot-Vision                  41.91   45.92   41.57       76.05   74.43   74.48
                      0shot-Vision-COT              41.55   45.81   41.43       72.90   71.14   71.31
                      1shot-Text-S0.3                4.14    8.09    4.28       42.12   52.09   45.60
                      1shot-Text-S0.3-COT            5.64   10.55    5.99       40.98   52.15   44.92
                      1shot-Vision                  33.29   37.83   33.19       71.85   72.18   70.90
                      1shot-Vision-COT              33.30   39.88   33.51       72.22   72.06   70.86
 Internvlm-76B        0shot-Text                    13.25   21.58   13.63       23.04   28.73   24.93
                      0shot-Text-S0.3                6.17    7.62    6.08       23.42   26.53   24.26
                      0shot-Text-S0.3-COT            9.65   10.44    9.68       16.69   18.60   17.37
                      0shot-Text-S0.3-COT-CSV        3.67    4.17    3.47       17.26   18.61   17.49
                      0shot-Text-S0.3-COT-PAP        7.76    9.23    7.83       12.08   13.10   12.40
                      0shot-Text-S0.3-COT-TPD        6.76    7.53    6.85       11.60   12.34   11.84
                      0shot-Text-S0.3-CSV            1.71    1.40    1.29       24.40   26.54   24.70
                      0shot-Text-S0.3-PAP           11.81   23.53   12.45       25.24   34.09   28.20
                      0shot-Text-S0.3-TPD            5.19    8.47    5.46       18.19   20.99   19.13
                      0shot-Vision                  16.95   47.68   22.03       55.46   65.17   58.43
                      0shot-Vision-COT               6.29   14.72    7.42       34.55   41.95   36.87
                      1shot-Text-S0.3                7.38    8.30    7.16       24.13   27.35   25.17
                      1shot-Text-S0.3-COT           12.16   11.92   10.70       34.66   34.30   33.14
                      1shot-Vision                  10.80   20.32   11.11       45.91   49.07   45.36
                      1shot-Vision-COT               8.32   13.05    8.37       37.04   42.25   38.01
 Qwen                 0shot-Text                     0.00    0.00    0.00        0.00    0.00    0.00
                      0shot-Text-S0.3                0.00    0.00    0.00        0.00    0.00    0.00
                      0shot-Text-S0.3-COT            1.30    1.31    1.30        1.83    1.80    1.80
                      0shot-Text-S0.3-COT-CSV        0.00    0.00    0.00        0.00    0.00    0.00
                      0shot-Text-S0.3-COT-PAP        2.50    2.50    2.50        3.03    3.02    3.02
                      0shot-Text-S0.3-COT-TPD        1.25    1.25    1.25        1.46    1.47    1.46
                      0shot-Text-S0.3-CSV            0.00    0.00    0.00        0.00    0.00    0.00
                      0shot-Text-S0.3-PAP            7.50    7.50    7.50        8.11    8.09    8.10
                      0shot-Text-S0.3-TPD            1.00    1.00    1.00        2.48    2.53    2.47
                      0shot-Vision                   4.76   45.49    6.90       28.33   49.37   35.65
                      0shot-Vision-COT              12.68   18.82   13.03       16.26   19.68   17.43
                      1shot-Text-S0.3-COT            0.00    0.00    0.00        0.00    0.00    0.00
                      1shot-Vision                   7.18   25.56    8.21       41.94   52.88   45.10
                      1shot-Vision-COT              11.38   14.62   11.00       25.47   28.22   25.98
 Threshold            0shot                          2.98    2.87      2.38     37.16   70.83   48.67



        Table 9: Trend anomalies, but no negating trend, and less noticeable speed changes

                                                      PRE     REC       F1      affi    affi    affi
                                                                                 PRE     REC      F1
 Gemini-1.5-Flash     0shot-Text                     0.00    0.00      0.00      4.82    9.69    6.43
                      0shot-Text-S0.3                8.07    8.51      7.84     16.98   20.53   18.27
                      0shot-Text-S0.3-COT            2.69    3.02      2.74      5.24    7.76    6.10
                      0shot-Text-S0.3-COT-CSV        0.25    0.25      0.25      2.03    3.59    2.54
                      0shot-Text-S0.3-COT-PAP        3.75    3.75      3.75      5.23    6.53    5.65
                      0shot-Text-S0.3-COT-TPD        1.50    1.50      1.50      3.26    4.69    3.76
                      0shot-Text-S0.3-CSV            0.00    0.00      0.00      2.76    6.33    3.78
                      0shot-Text-S0.3-PAP            0.00    0.00      0.00      3.33    7.14    4.52
                      0shot-Text-S0.3-TPD            0.00    0.00      0.00      3.79    7.75    5.08
                                                                              Continued on next page


                                               36
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                            Table 9 – continued from previous page
                                                     PRE     REC      F1    affi    affi    affi
                                                                             PRE     REC       F1
                      0shot-Vision                  57.50   57.50   57.50   57.50   57.50   57.50
                      0shot-Vision-COT              57.50   57.50   57.50   57.50   57.50   57.50
                      1shot-Text-S0.3               11.30   12.34   10.77   21.27   24.65   22.52
                      1shot-Text-S0.3-COT           12.40   13.31   12.12   23.69   27.45   25.23
                      1shot-Vision                  57.91   57.91   57.89   57.99   58.00   57.99
                      1shot-Vision-COT              16.24   22.09   15.77   25.75   30.56   27.48
 GPT-4o-Mini          0shot-Text                     1.25    1.25    1.25    5.49    9.74    6.88
                      0shot-Text-S0.3                0.11    0.43    0.17   11.15   21.05   14.56
                      0shot-Text-S0.3-COT            0.81    0.97    0.85    2.19    3.50    2.63
                      0shot-Text-S0.3-COT-CSV        5.25    5.25    5.25    7.55   10.35    8.32
                      0shot-Text-S0.3-COT-PAP        6.75    6.75    6.75    7.42    7.75    7.55
                      0shot-Text-S0.3-COT-TPD        0.25    0.25    0.25    0.52    0.77    0.61
                      0shot-Text-S0.3-CSV            0.25    0.25    0.25    3.46    8.72    4.83
                      0shot-Text-S0.3-PAP           11.25   11.25   11.25   12.41   12.91   12.59
                      0shot-Text-S0.3-TPD            6.50    6.50    6.50    8.67   10.87    9.39
                      0shot-Vision                  57.50   57.50   57.50   57.50   57.50   57.50
                      0shot-Vision-COT              57.25   57.25   57.25   57.25   57.25   57.25
                      1shot-Text-S0.3                0.52    1.10    0.65   11.20   21.18   14.61
                      1shot-Text-S0.3-COT            1.84    2.06    1.91   12.11   20.06   14.94
                      1shot-Vision                  57.50   57.50   57.50   57.50   57.50   57.50
                      1shot-Vision-COT              57.00   57.00   57.00   57.00   57.00   57.00
 Internvlm-76B        0shot-Text                    10.36   16.13   10.94   15.48   21.61   17.51
                      0shot-Text-S0.3               26.61   27.85   25.85   32.78   34.41   33.37
                      0shot-Text-S0.3-COT           10.67   12.35   10.81   12.60   14.33   13.19
                      0shot-Text-S0.3-COT-CSV        5.55    6.25    5.59    8.85   10.68    9.49
                      0shot-Text-S0.3-COT-PAP       15.11   15.75   15.19   16.03   16.70   16.26
                      0shot-Text-S0.3-COT-TPD        8.89    9.63    8.98    9.67   10.54    9.96
                      0shot-Text-S0.3-CSV            5.09    5.39    5.14    9.83   13.88   11.21
                      0shot-Text-S0.3-PAP           33.80   35.78   34.00   35.62   37.63   36.24
                      0shot-Text-S0.3-TPD            3.99    6.55    4.19    6.64    9.57    7.62
                      0shot-Vision                  34.58   42.52   35.03   40.75   47.54   43.03
                      0shot-Vision-COT              51.88   51.66   51.72   52.85   53.70   53.14
                      1shot-Text-S0.3               29.16   30.57   28.69   36.38   37.31   36.77
                      1shot-Text-S0.3-COT           39.77   41.00   39.16   46.03   46.61   46.29
                      1shot-Vision                  37.95   42.16   37.07   44.67   46.94   45.50
                      1shot-Vision-COT              51.37   53.02   51.53   54.02   55.26   54.47
 Qwen                 0shot-Text                     0.00    0.00    0.00    0.00    0.00    0.00
                      0shot-Text-S0.3                0.00    0.00    0.00    0.00    0.00    0.00
                      0shot-Text-S0.3-COT            0.00    0.00    0.00    0.00    0.00    0.00
                      0shot-Text-S0.3-COT-CSV        0.00    0.00    0.00    0.00    0.00    0.00
                      0shot-Text-S0.3-COT-PAP        0.00    0.00    0.00    0.00    0.00    0.00
                      0shot-Text-S0.3-COT-TPD        0.00    0.00    0.00    0.00    0.00    0.00
                      0shot-Text-S0.3-CSV            0.00    0.00    0.00    0.00    0.00    0.00
                      0shot-Text-S0.3-PAP            0.00    0.00    0.00    0.00    0.00    0.00
                      0shot-Text-S0.3-TPD            0.00    0.00    0.00    0.00    0.00    0.00
                      0shot-Vision                   4.71   21.94    6.04   13.05   22.47   16.24
                      0shot-Vision-COT              21.65   22.75   21.76   22.20   22.76   22.40
                      1shot-Text-S0.3                0.00    0.00    0.00    0.00    0.00    0.00
                      1shot-Text-S0.3-COT            0.00    0.00    0.00    0.00    0.00    0.00
                      1shot-Vision                  12.72   28.32   13.09   28.20   38.21   31.73
                      1shot-Vision-COT              29.98   31.18   29.79   34.14   35.79   34.78


                                               37
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                 Table 10: Yahoo S5 dataset

                                                    PRE     REC      F1    affi    affi    affi
                                                                            PRE     REC      F1
   Gemini-1.5-Flash    0shot-Text                0.18       3.16    0.26   16.10   18.50   16.46
                       0shot-Text-S0.3          20.21      22.73   20.10   31.04   30.41   29.91
                       0shot-Text-S0.3-CSV       3.82       3.95    3.82   13.80   10.71   11.60
                       0shot-Text-S0.3-PAP      16.48      16.67   16.51   26.52   23.85   24.53
                       0shot-Text-S0.3-TPD      14.97      16.62   15.11   28.32   27.09   27.00
                       0shot-Vision             30.44      45.17   31.74   54.82   57.25   55.77
                       1shot-Text-S0.3          20.41      21.93   20.40   31.39   30.66   30.32
                       1shot-Vision             28.54      31.06   28.56   45.27   43.10   43.64
   GPT-4o-Mini         0shot-Text                2.74       4.04    2.50   15.26   14.68   14.40
                       0shot-Text-S0.3          36.02      37.42   36.06   41.38   41.57   41.26
                       0shot-Text-S0.3-CSV      18.28      18.48   18.29   27.40   25.31   25.86
                       0shot-Text-S0.3-PAP      25.62      25.70   25.63   29.31   28.48   28.70
                       0shot-Text-S0.3-TPD       4.17       4.65    4.22   11.98   11.00   11.20
                       0shot-Vision             50.88      57.84   51.31   71.42   74.07   72.19
                       1shot-Text-S0.3          39.74      41.03   39.73   46.59   45.90   45.76
                       1shot-Vision             17.22      18.07   17.18   32.81   34.18   32.61
   Internvlm-76B       0shot-Text               30.42      37.91   30.54   38.31   42.25   39.53
                       0shot-Text-S0.3          46.08      47.28   46.10   48.13   48.47   48.13
                       0shot-Text-S0.3-CSV       6.30       8.49    6.34   16.59   14.92   15.32
                       0shot-Text-S0.3-PAP      53.72      54.52   53.76   55.43   55.64   55.49
                       0shot-Text-S0.3-TPD      14.80      17.51   14.86   19.96   21.27   20.29
                       0shot-Vision             12.42      29.87   13.52   35.19   40.91   37.41
                       1shot-Text-S0.3          50.17      52.32   50.21   52.12   53.23   52.46
                       1shot-Vision              1.84      11.19    2.47   20.62   23.15   20.96
   Isolation-Forest    0shot                        2.07   29.26    3.25   16.75   33.18   21.94
   Qwen                0shot-Text                0.00       0.00    0.00    0.00    0.00    0.00
                       0shot-Text-S0.3           0.00       0.00    0.00    0.00    0.00    0.00
                       0shot-Text-S0.3-CSV       0.00       0.00    0.00    0.00    0.00    0.00
                       0shot-Text-S0.3-PAP      19.89      19.89   19.89   19.91   19.90   19.91
                       0shot-Text-S0.3-TPD       2.18       2.18    2.18    2.19    2.21    2.20
                       0shot-Vision              3.10      19.21    3.40   16.19   25.37   19.53
                       1shot-Text-S0.3           0.00       0.00    0.00    0.00    0.00    0.00
                       1shot-Vision              3.39       5.68    3.24   18.37   21.61   19.22
   Threshold           0shot                        3.99   21.99    5.51   16.40   31.80   21.03


                                               38
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


E     M ATHEMATICAL F ORMULATIONS OF H YPOTHESES 2 AND 3
E.1   H YPOTHESIS 2: R EPETITION B IAS AND P ERIODICITY D ETECTION

Let f (t) be a time series and T (f ) be its tokenized representation in an LLM’s vocabulary space V.
We define:
1) Perfect periodicity: f (t + P ) = f (t) for some period P > 0
2) Noisy periodicity: f (t + P ) = f (t) + ϵ(t) where ϵ(t) ∼ N (0, σ 2 ) and σ ≪ mint,t′ |f (t) − f (t′ )|
Note that while noisy periodicity is defined on numerical values, the tokenization process T (·) maps
these values to discrete tokens, making perfect periodicity in token space impossible for noisy peri-
odic signals.
Let A(f ) be the LLM’s anomaly detection accuracy on time series f and DP be the set of all periodic
time series with period P . Given there exists an optimal anomaly detector B, whose accuracy
is B ∗ (f ), that can achieve near-perfect accuracy on both perfect and noisy periodic signals. The
hypothesis states:
For any f1 , f2 ∈ DP , if T (f1 ) exhibits token-level periodicity and T (f2 ) does not, then:
                                        E[A(f1 )] ≫ E[A(f2 )]

while the optimal detector maintains consistent performance:
                                        B ∗ (f1 ) ≈ B ∗ (f2 ) ≈ 1

This formulation suggests that LLMs’ performance difference is due to token-level repetition bias
rather than the inherent complexity of the anomaly detection task, as a properly designed detector
can achieve near-perfect performance on both cases.

E.2   H YPOTHESIS 3: A RITHMETIC A BILITY AND PATTERN R ECOGNITION

Let M be an LLM and M ′ be the same LLM with impaired arithmetic ability.
1) Define arithmetic ability α(M ) as accuracy on basic arithmetic tasks:
                          α(M ) = Ex,y [⊮[M (”What is x + y?”) = x + y]]

2) Define reasoning ability ρ(M ) as accuracy on non-arithmetic reasoning tasks:
                                 ρ(M ) = Eq∈Q [⊮[M (q) = correct]]
where Q is a set of logical reasoning questions.
3) Obtain M ′ by training M on incorrect arithmetic examples while preserving reasoning:
                                        α(M ′ ) ≪ α(M )


                                        ρ(M ′ ) ≈ ρ(M )

4) Hypothesis holds if:
                                  Ef ∈D [AM (f )] ≫ Ef ∈D [AM ′ (f )]
where δ is small and dataset D is arbitrary. To falsify the hypothesis, we show the difference is
negligble or reversed for certain datasets.


                                                   39
