Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


E FFICIENT AND ACCURATE E XPLANATION E STIMATION
WITH D ISTRIBUTION C OMPRESSION

 Hubert Baniecki                                              Giuseppe Casalicchio
 University of Warsaw                                         LMU Munich
 h.baniecki@uw.edu.pl                                         Munich Center for Machine Learning

 Bernd Bischl                                          Przemyslaw Biecek
 LMU Munich                                            University of Warsaw
 Munich Center for Machine Learning                    Warsaw University of Technology


                                            A BSTRACT
         We discover a theoretical connection between explanation estimation and distribu-
         tion compression that significantly improves the approximation of feature attribu-
         tions, importance, and effects. While the exact computation of various machine
         learning explanations requires numerous model inferences and becomes imprac-
         tical, the computational cost of approximation increases with an ever-increasing
         size of data and model parameters. We show that the standard i.i.d. sampling
         used in a broad spectrum of algorithms for post-hoc explanation leads to an ap-
         proximation error worthy of improvement. To this end, we introduce compress
         then explain (CTE), a new paradigm of sample-efficient explainability. It relies on
         distribution compression through kernel thinning to obtain a data sample that best
         approximates its marginal distribution. CTE significantly improves the accuracy
         and stability of explanation estimation with negligible computational overhead. It
         often achieves an on-par explanation approximation error 2–3× faster by using
         fewer samples, i.e. requiring 2–3× fewer model evaluations. CTE is a simple, yet
         powerful, plug-in for any explanation method that now relies on i.i.d. sampling.


1    I NTRODUCTION
Computationally efficient estimation of post-hoc explanations is at the forefront of current research on
explainable machine learning (Strumbelj & Kononenko, 2010; Slack et al., 2021; Jethani et al., 2022;
Chen et al., 2023; Donnelly et al., 2023; Muschalik et al., 2024). The majority of the work focuses
on improving efficiency with respect to the dimension of features (Covert et al., 2020; Jethani et al.,
2022; Chen et al., 2023; Fumagalli et al., 2023), specific model classes like neural networks (Erion
et al., 2021; Chen et al., 2024) and decision trees (Muschalik et al., 2024), or approximating the
conditional feature distribution (Chen et al., 2018; Aas et al., 2021; Olsen et al., 2022; 2024).
However, in many practical settings, a marginal feature distribution is used instead to estimate expla-
nations, and i.i.d. samples from the data typically form the so-called background data samples, also
known as reference points or baselines, which plays a crucial role in the estimation process (Lundberg
& Lee, 2017; Scholbeck et al., 2020; Erion et al., 2021; Ghalebikesabi et al., 2021; Lundstrom et al.,
2022). For example, Covert et al. (2020) mention “[O]ur sampling approximation for SAGE was run
using draws from the marginal distribution. We used a fixed set of 512 background samples [...]” and
we provide more such references in Appendix A to motivate our research question: Can we reliably
improve on standard i.i.d. sampling in explanation estimation?
We make a connection to research on statistical theory, where kernel thinning (KT, Dwivedi & Mackey,
2021; 2022) was introduced to compress a distribution more effectively than with i.i.d. sampling. KT
has an efficient implementation in the COMPRESS++ algorithm (Shetty et al., 2022) and was applied
to improve statistical kernel testing (Domingo-Enrich et al., 2023). Building on this line of work, this
paper aims to thoroughly quantify the error introduced by the current sample then explain paradigm
in feature marginalization, which is involved in the estimation of both local and global removal-based
explanations (Covert et al., 2021). We propose an efficient way to reduce this approximation error
based on distribution compression (Figure 1).


                                                   1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


          i.i.d. sample
                                      Compress Then Explain (CTE)
          compressed distribution                                               negligible
                                                                                              sample then explain
                                                 estimated explanation          overhead
                                                                                              compress then explain
                                      is recidivist
                                                                                              101     10
                                                                                                           2
                                                                                                               10
                                                                                                                    3
                                                                                                                        10
                                                                                                                             4


                                     priors count                                                      time [s]
                                                                                     MAE
                                              race              underestimate

                                               sex                                      1.0

                                              age               overestimate
                                                                                        0.5
                                    charge degree                                             4× more efficient ≈ 4× faster
                                                                approximation error
                                      stay length                                             2%      4%       6%       8%
                                                                                                     sample size

Figure 1: Garbage sample in, garbage explanation out. Sample then explain is a conventional
approach to decrease the computational cost of explanation estimation. Although fast, sampling
is inefficient and prone to error, which may even lead to changes in feature importance rankings.
We propose compress then explain (CTE), a new paradigm for accurate, yet efficient, estimation of
explanations based on a marginal distribution that is compressed, e.g. with kernel thinning.


Contribution. In summary, our work advances literature in multiple ways: (1) Quantifying the error
of standard i.i.d. sampling: We bring to attention and measure the approximation error introduced
by using i.i.d. sampling of background and foreground data in various explanation methods. It
may even lead to changes in feature importance rankings. (2) Compress then explain (CTE):
We introduce a new paradigm of sample-efficient explainability where post-hoc explanations, like
feature attributions and effects, are estimated based on a marginal distribution compressed more
efficiently than with i.i.d. sampling. CTE is theoretically justified as we discover a connection between
explanation estimation and distribution compression. (3) Kernel thinning for (explainable) machine
learning: We show empirically that KT outperforms i.i.d. sampling in compressing the distribution
of popular datasets used in research on explainable machine learning. In fact, this is the first work to
evaluate distribution compression via KT on datasets for supervised learning, which itself is valuable.
(4) Decreasing the computational cost of explanation estimation: We benchmark compress then
explain (CTE) with popular explanation methods and show it results in more accurate explanations
of smaller variance. CTE often achieves on-par error using 2–3× fewer samples, i.e. requiring 2–3×
fewer model inferences. CTE is a simple, yet powerful, plug-in for a broad class of methods that
sample from a dataset, e.g. removal-based and global explanations.
Related work. Our work is the first to empirically evaluate KT on datasets for supervised learning,
and one of the first to reliably improve on i.i.d. sampling for multiple post-hoc explanation methods
at once. Laberge et al. (2023) propose a biased sampling algorithm to attack the estimation of feature
attributions, which further motivates finding robust improvements for i.i.d. sampling. Our research
question is orthogonal to that of how to sample perturbations around an input (Petsiuk et al., 2018;
Slack et al., 2021; Li et al., 2021; Ghalebikesabi et al., 2021; Li et al., 2023), or how to efficiently
sample feature coalitions (Chen et al., 2018; Covert & Lee, 2021; Fumagalli et al., 2023). Instead of
generating samples from the conditional distribution itself, which is challenging (Olsen et al., 2022),
we explore how to efficiently select an appropriate subset of background data for explanations (Hase
et al., 2021; Lundstrom et al., 2022). Specifically for Shapley-based explanations, Jethani et al.
(2022) propose to predict them with a learned surrogate model, while Kolpaczki et al. (2024) propose
their representation detached from the notion of marginal contribution. We aim to propose a general
paradigm shift that benefits a broader class of explanation methods including feature effects (Apley &
Zhu, 2020; Moosbauer et al., 2021) and expected gradients (Erion et al., 2021; Zhang et al., 2024).
Concerning distribution compression, the method most related to KT (Dwivedi & Mackey, 2021) is
the inferior standard thinning approach (Owen, 2017). Cooper et al. (2023) use insights from KT to
accelerate distributed training, while Zimmerman et al. (2024) apply KT in robotics. In the context
of data-centric machine learning, we broadly relate to finding coresets to improve the efficiency
of clustering (Agarwal et al., 2004; Har-Peled & Mazumdar, 2004) and active learning (Sener &
Savarese, 2018), as well as dataset distillation (Wang et al., 2018) and dataset condensation (Zhao
et al., 2021; Kim et al., 2022) that create synthetic samples to improve the efficiency of model training.


                                                            2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


2     P RELIMINARIES
We aim to explain a prediction model trained on labeled data and denoted by f : X 7→ R where X is
the feature space; it predicts an output using an input feature vector x. Usually, we assume X ⊆ Rd .
Without loss of generality, in the case of classification, we explain the output of a single class as
a posterior probability from [0, 1]. We can assume a given dataset {(x(1) , y (1) ), . . . , (x(n) , y (n) )},
where every element comes from X × Y, the underlying feature and label space, on which the
explanations are computed. Depending on the explanation method and scenario, the dataset could be
provided without labels. We denote such n × d dimensional dataset by X where x(i) appears in the
i-th row of X, which is assumed to be sampled in an i.i.d. fashion from an underlying distribution
p(x, y) defined on X × Y. We denote a random vector as X ∈ X . Further, let s ⊂ {1, . . . , d} be a
feature index set of interest with its complement s̄ = {1, . . . , d} \ s. We index feature vectors x and
random variables X by index set s to restrict them to these index sets. We write pX (x) and pXs (xs )
for marginal distributions on X and Xs , respectively, and pXs |Xt (xs |xt ) for conditional distribution
on Xs |Xt . We use qX to denote an empirical distribution approximating pX based on a dataset X.

2.1   S AMPLING FROM THE DATASET IS PREVALENT IN EXPLANATION ESTIMATION

Various estimators of post-hoc explanations sample from the dataset to efficiently approximate the ex-
planation estimate (Appendix A). For example, many removal-based explanations (Covert et al., 2021)
like SHAP (Lundberg & Lee, 2017) and SAGE (Covert et al., 2020) rely on marginalizing features
out of the model function f using their joint conditional distribution EXs̄ ∼pXs̄ |Xs =xs [f (xs , Xs̄ )] =
R
   f (xs , xs̄ )pXs̄ |Xs =xs (xs̄ |xs )dxs̄ . Note that the practical approximation of the conditional distribu-
tion pXs̄ |Xs =xs (xs̄ |xs ) itself is challenging (Chen et al., 2018; Aas et al., 2021; Olsen et al., 2022)
and there is no ideal solution to this problem (see a recent benchmark by Olsen et al., 2024). For
example, the default for SAGE is to assume feature independence and use the marginal distribution
pXs̄ |Xs =xs (xs̄ |xs ) := pXs̄ (xs̄ ) (Covert et al., 2020, Appendix D); so does the KERNEL - SHAP esti-
mator, i.e. a practical implementation of SHAP (Lundberg & Lee, 2017). This trend continues in more
recent work sampling from marginal distribution (Fumagalli et al., 2023; Krzyziński et al., 2023).
Definition 1 (Feature marginalization). Given a set of observed values xs , we define a model function
with marginalized features from the set s̄ as f (xs ; pX ) := EXs̄ ∼pXs̄ [f (xs , Xs̄ )].

In practice, the expectation EXs̄ ∼pXs̄ [f (xs , Xs̄ )] is estimated by i.i.d. sampling from the dataset
X that approximates the distribution pXs̄ (xs̄ ). This sampled set of points forms the so-called
background data, aka reference points, or baselines as specifically in case of the expected gradi-
ents (Erion et al., h2021) explanation method, which
                                               i        can be defined as EXPECTED - GRADIENTS(x) :=
                                ∂f (X+α·(x−X))
EX∼pX ,α∼U (0,1) (x − X) ·             ∂x        . Klein et al. (2024) benchmark feature attribution
methods showing that EXPECTED - GRADIENTS is among the most faithful and robust ones.
Furthermore, i.i.d. sampling is used in global explanation methods, many of which are an aggregation
of local explanations. To improve the computational efficiency of these approximations, often
only a subset of X is considered, called foreground data. Examples include: FEATURE - EFFECTS
explanations (Apley & Zhu, 2020), an aggregation of LIME (Ribeiro et al., 2016) into G - LIME (Li
et al., 2023), and again SAGE, for which points from X require to have their corresponding labels y.

2.2   BACKGROUND ON DISTRIBUTION COMPRESSION

Standard sampling strategies
                          Pn can be inefficient (Dwivedi & Mackey, 2021). For example, the
Monte Carlo estimate n1 i=1 h(x(i) ) of an unknown expectation EX∼pX h(X) based on n i.i.d.
                 √                                             Pn
points has Θ(1/ n) integration error EX∼pX h(X) − n1 i=1 h(x(i) ) requiring 102 points for
10% relative error and 104 points for 1% error (Shetty et al., 2022). To improve on i.i.d. sampling,
given a sequence X of n input points summarizing a target distribution pX , the goal of distribution
compression is to identify a high quality coreset Xe of size ñ ≪ n. This quality is measured with the
                             1
                               Pn                1
                                                   Pñ
coreset’s integration error n i=1 h(x ) − ñ i=1 h(x̃(i) ) for functions h in the reproducing
                                          (i)

kernel Hilbert space induced by a given kernel function k (Muandet et al., 2017). The recently
introduced KT algorithm (Dwivedi & Mackey, 2021; 2022) returns such a coreset that minimizes the
kernel maximum mean discrepancy (MMDk , Gretton et al., 2012).


                                                       3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Definition 2 (Kernel maximum mean discrepancy (Gretton et al., 2012; Dwivedi & Mackey, 2021)).
Let k : Rd × Rd 7→ R be a bounded kernel function with k(x, ·) measurable for all x ∈ Rd , e.g.
a Gaussian kernel. Kernel maximum mean discrepancy between probability distributions p, q on
Rd is defined as MMDk (p, q) := suph∈Hk :∥h∥k ≤1 EX∼pX h(X) − EX∼qX h(X) , where Hk is a
reproducing kernel Hilbert induced by k.
To formulate Propositions 1 & 2 in the next Section, we recall a biased estimate of maximum
mean discrepancy, which is discussed in (Chérief-Abdellatif & Alquier, 2022, remark 3.2) and
(Sriperumbudur et al., 2010, corollary 4).
Definition 3 (Biased estimator of MMDk ). From (Muandet et al., 2017, section 5.1), as shown in
(Gretton et al., 2012), the L2 distance between kernel density estimates pX , qX is a special case of the
                                              2                                                    2
                                         \ k (pX , qX ) := ∥pX − qX ∥2 =
                                                                             R
biased MMDk estimator, i.e. we have MMD                                  2      pX (x) − qX (x) dx.
An unbiased empirical estimate of MMDk can be relatively easily computed given a kernel func-
tion k (Gretton et al., 2012).
                           √ COMPRESS++ (Shetty et al., 2022)
                                                           √    is an efficient algorithm for KT that
returns a coreset of size n in O(n log3 n) time and O( n log2 n) space, making KT viable for
large datasets. It was adapted to improve the kernel two-sample test (Domingo-Enrich et al., 2023).

3    C OMPRESS T HEN E XPLAIN (CTE)
We propose distribution compression as a substitute to i.i.d. sampling for feature marginalization in
removal-based explanations and for aggregating global explanations. We now formalize the problem
and provide theoretical intuition as to why methods for distribution compression can lead to more
accurate explanation estimates. We defer the proofs to Appendix B.
Definition 4 (Local explanation based on feature marginalization). A local explanation is a func-
tion g(x; f, pX ) : X 7→ Rp of input x given model f that relies on a distribution pX for feature
marginalization. For estimation, it uses an empirical distribution qX in place of pX .
Examples of such local explanations include SHAP (Lundberg & Lee, 2017) and EXPECTED -
GRADIENTS (Erion et al., 2021). We aim to provide high-quality explanations stemming from
compressed samples as measured with a given approximation error, e.g. mean absolute error.
Problem formulation. To optimize the approximation error, we propose a novel formulation of the
sample selection problem:
                                    min     g(x; f, qX ) − g(x; f, qXe )
                                      X
                                      e
                                                                                                    (1)
                                     s.t. |X|
                                           e = ñ ≪ n
for a given ñ, where i.i.d. sampling, distribution compression, or for example clustering, are the
potential methods to find X e in an unsupervised manner. We discover a connection between distribution
compression and explanation estimation in Propositions 1 & 2.
Proposition 1 (Feature marginalization is bounded by the maximum mean discrepancy between data
samples). For two empirical distributions qX , qXe approximated with a kernel density estimator k, we
have f (xs ; qX ) − f (xs ; qXe ) ≤ Cf · MMD
                                         \ k (qX , qe ), where Cf denotes a constant that bounds the
                                                        X
model function f , i.e. ∀x∈Rp f (x) ≤ Cf .
Proposition 1 provides a worst-case bound for feature marginalization, the backbone of local explana-
tions, in terms of the MMDk distance between the (often compressed) empirical data distributions.
It complements the results for input and model perturbations obtained in (Lin et al., 2023, Lem-
mas 1 & 4), which also shows how such a bound propagates to the local explanation function g.
Effectively, Proposition 1 states that an algorithm minimizing MMDk , e.g. KT, restricts the approx-
imation error of explanation estimation. This makes CTE a natural contender to improve on i.i.d.
sampling, given it was efficient and stable, which we evaluate empirically in extensive experiments.
Compress then explain globally. Local explanations are often aggregated into global explanations
based on a representative sample from data, resulting in estimates of feature importance and effects.
Definition 5 (Global explanation). A global explanation is a function that aggregates local explana-
tions g of model f over input samples from distribution pX , i.e. G(pX ; f, g) := EX∼pX [g(X; f, ·)].
For estimation, it uses an empirical distribution qX in place of pX .


                                                   4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Examples of such global explanations include FEATURE - EFFECTS like partial dependence plots and
accumulated local effects (Apley & Zhu, 2020), and SAGE (Covert et al., 2020), which additionally re-
quires as an input labels y of the samples drawn from pX . Notably, the local explanation function g in
SAGE itself relies on feature marginalization leading to using pX twice, i.e. EX∼pX [g(X; f, pX )] (see
Listing 1 for a practical implementation).
Problem formulation revisited. For global explanations, following Equation 1, we have:
                             min      G(qX ; f, g) − G(qXe ; f, g)
                                  X
                                  e
                                                                                                   (2)
                                   s.t. |X|
                                         e = ñ ≪ n.
In Proposition 2, we conduct a worst-case analysis for global aggregated explanations.
Proposition 2 (Global explanation is bounded by the maximum mean discrepancy between data
samples). For two empirical distributions qX , qXe approximated with a kernel density estimator k, we
have G(qX ; f, g) − G(qXe ; f, g) 2 ≤ Cg · MMD
                                            \ k (qX , qe ), where Cg denotes a constant that bounds
                                                         X
the local explanation function g, i.e. ∀x∈Rp g(x; ·) 2 ≤ Cg .
Analogously to Proposition 1, Proposition 2 states that an algorithm minimizing MMDk , e.g. KT,
restricts the approximation error of explanation estimation, which makes CTE a natural contender to
improve on i.i.d. sampling. It extends the bounds for total variation distance obtained in (Baniecki
et al., 2024). Moreover, in Section 4.5, we explore empirically the impact that minimizing MMDk
has on decreasing alternative distribution discrepancies in practical (explainable) machine learning
settings. It gives further intuition as to why clustering often leads to higher errors in explanation
estimation. Our insights may guide future work on tighter theoretical guarantees for improving
explanation estimation with distribution compression.
Implementation. The pivotal strength of CTE is that it is simple to plug into the current workflows
for explanation estimation as shown in Listing 1 for SAGE. We provide analogous code listings for
SHAP , EXPECTED - GRADIENTS and FEATURE - EFFECTS in Appendix C.

X, y, model = ...
from goodpoints import compress
ids = compress.compresspp_kt(X, kernel_type=b"gaussian", g=4)
X_compressed = X[ids]
import sage
imputer = sage.MarginalImputer(model.predict, X_compressed)
estimator = sage.KernelEstimator(imputer)
explanation = estimator(X, y)
# or even
y_compressed = y[ids]
explanation = estimator(X_compressed, y_compressed)

Listing 1: Code snippet showing the 3-line plug-in of distribution compression for SAGE estimation.


4   E XPERIMENTS
In experiments, we empirically validate that the CTE paradigm improves explanation estimation across
4 methods, 2 model classes, and over 50 datasets. We compare CTE to the widely adopted practice of
i.i.d. sampling (see Appendix A for further motivation). We also report sanity check results for a
more deterministic baseline – sampling with k-medoids – where centroids from the clustering define
a coreset from the dataset. We use the default hyperparameters of explanation algorithms (details
are provided in Appendix D.1). For distribution compression, we use COMPRESS++ implemented
in the goodpoints Python package (Dwivedi    √ & Mackey, 2021), where we follow (Shetty et al.,
2022) to use a Gaussian
                    √    kernel k with σ  =    2d. For all the compared methods, the subsampled set
of points is of size n as we leave oversampling distribution compression for future work. We repeat
all experiments where we apply some form of downsampling before explanation estimation 33 times
and report the mean and standard error (se.) or deviation (sd.) of metric values.
Ground truth. The goal of CTE is to improve explanation estimation over the standard i.i.d. sampling.
We measure the accuracy and effectiveness of explanation estimation with respect to a “ground truth”


                                                  5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A)                                                 B)


C)                                                 D)


Figure 2: Comparison between CTE and i.i.d. sampling for the two estimators of SHAP and SAGE
explanations on the adult dataset. A) We measure mean absolute error (MAE ↓) between feature
attribution and importance values, and B) the precision in correctly identifying the 5 most important
features (Top-k ↑). C) Comparison between the computational time of distribution compression
and explanation estimation on the compressed sample, assuming the time of i.i.d. sampling is 0.
D) Comparison between the computational time of explanation estimation on the compressed sample
and on full data (in green). Analogous results for the other 4 datasets are in Appendix E. (mean ± se.)


explanation (cf. Appendix I) that is estimated using a full validation dataset X, i.e. without sampling
or compression. We consider settings where this is very inefficient to compute in practice (n := nvalid
is between 1000 and 25000 samples). For large datasets, we truncate the validation dataset to 20×
the size of the compressed dataset. Since some explanation methods include a random component in
the algorithm, we repeat their ground truth estimation 3 times and average the resulting explanations.
Accuracy. We are mainly interested in the accuracy of estimating a single explanation, measured
by the explanation
               Pnvalid approximation      error. Namely, mean absolute error (MAE), where we mea-
        1                 (i)
sure nvalid ·d  i=1    g(x    ; f, qX ) −  g(x(i) ; f, qXe ) 1 for SHAP and EXPECTED - GRADIENTS, and
 1                                                                                      2
dG G(qX ; f, g) − G(qX   e ; f, g) 1 with dG = d for SAGE . We have dG = 100 · (d + d ) for FEATURE -
EFFECTS , since we use 100 uniformly distributed grid points for 1-dimensional effects and 10×10
uniformly distributed grid points for 2-dimensional effects (see Appendix D). For broader context, in
Section 4.1, we also measure the precision of correctly indicating the top k features.
Efficiency. We measure the efficiency of compression and explanation estimation with CPU wall-
clock time (in seconds), assuming the time of i.i.d. sampling is 0. We rely on popular open-source
implementations of the algorithms (see Appendix C) and perform efficiency experiments on a personal
computer with an M3 chip. This is to imitate the most standard workflow of explanation estimation,
while we acknowledge that specific time estimates will vary in more sophisticated settings.

4.1   CTE IMPROVES THE ACCURACY OF ESTIMATING FEATURE ATTRIBUTIONS & IMPORTANCE

We use the preprocessed datasets and pretrained neural network models from the well-established
OpenXAI benchmark (Agarwal et al., 2022). We filter out three datasets with less than 1000
observations in the validation set, where sampling is not crucial, which results in five tasks:
adult (nvalid = 9045, d = 13), compas (nvalid = 1235, d = 7), gaussian (a synthetic dataset,
nvalid = 1250, d = 20), gmsc (Give Me Some Credit, nvalid = 20442, d = 10), and heloc (aka
FICO, nvalid = 1975, d = 23). Further details on datasets and models are provided in Appendix D.2.
We aim to show that CTE improves the estimation of feature attribution and importance explanations,
namely for SHAP and SAGE. We experiment with two model-agnostic estimators: kernel-based and
permutation-based. For example, Figure 2 shows the differences in MAE and Top-k between CTE
and standard i.i.d. sampling on the adult dataset. Analogous results for the other 4 datasets from
OpenXAI are shown in Appendix E. On all the considered tasks, CTE results in a notable decrease
in approximation error when compared to i.i.d. sampling and an increase in precision (for top-k
feature identification) with negligible computational overhead. Moreover, CTE results in explanation
estimates of significantly smaller variance on average as shown in Table 1.


                                                  6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Table 1: We report the improvement in the mean absolute error of estimating four popular explana-
tions on five datasets from the OpenXAI benchmark. CTE not only improves the accuracy over i.i.d.
by 20–45%, but also leads to more stable estimates by about 50%. MAE (↓, ± sd.) values are scaled
and rounded to improve readability while detailed and extended results are reported in Appendix E.

 Task                                          Explanation estimator
                 KERNEL - SHAP        PERMUTATION - SHAP        KERNEL - SAGE        PERMUTATION - SAGE
                       diff.                 21%                    37%                        40%
 adult           i.i.d. −−→ CTE        73±14 −−→ 58±6      65±42 −−→ 41±10            63±40 −−→ 38±10
                       40%                   45%                     38%                        39%
 compas          10±4 −−→ 6±2           11±4 −−→ 6±2       29±17 −−→ 18±9              28±16 −−→ 17±8
                       38%                   27%                     42%                        44%
 gaussian        13±2 −−→ 8±1          15±2 −−→ 11±1       52±27 −−→ 30±7              52±26 −−→ 29±7
                      39%                    32%                     40%                        43%
 gmsc           23±6 −−→ 14±3          25±5 −−→ 17±3       30±13 −−→ 18±5              28±14 −−→ 16±5
                       39%                   33%                     21%                        28%
 heloc          67±15 −−→ 41±7         72±13 −−→ 48±6      34±10 −−→ 27±6              29±11 −−→ 21±6



4.2     CTE AS AN EFFICIENT ALTERNATIVE TO I . I . D . SAMPLING IN EXPLANATION ESTIMATION

We find CTE to be a very efficient alternative to standard
i.i.d. sampling in explanation estimation. For example, com-         gaussian                    compress
                                                                                                 cluster
pressing a distribution from 1k to 32 samples takes less than
0.1 seconds, and from 20k to 128 samples takes less than              compas
1 second. The exact runtime will, of course, differ based                 heloc
on the number of features. Figure 3 reports the wall-clock
                                                                          adult
time for datasets of different sizes. Note that the potential
runtimes for distribution compression are of magnitudes                   gmsc
smaller than the typical runtime of explanation estimation.                   10 2   10 1      100      101
For example, estimating KERNEL - SHAP for 9k samples us-                                Time [s]
ing 128 background samples takes 30 minutes, which is
about 60× less than estimating the ground truth explana-         Figure 3: Compressing a distribution
tion (Figure 2). Moreover, estimating KERNEL - SHAP or           from 20k to 128 samples takes less
PERMUTATION - SAGE for 1k samples using 32 background            than 1 second to compute on a CPU.
samples takes about 10 seconds, which is about 30× less          (mean ± se.)
than estimating the ground truth explanation (Appendix E).

4.3     CTE IMPROVES GRADIENT- BASED EXPLANATIONS SPECIFIC TO NEURAL NETWORKS

Next, we aim to show the broader applicability of CTE by
evaluating it on gradient-based explanations specific to neu-       A)
ral networks, often fitted to larger unstructured datasets.
Sanity check. We first compress the validation sets of IMDB
and ImageNet-1k on a single CPU as a sanity check for the
viability of CTE in settings considering larger datasets. For
the IMDB dataset (nvalid = 25000, d = 768), CTE takes as            B)
an input text embeddings from the pretrained DistilBERT
model’s last layer (preceding a classifier) that has a dimen-
sion of size 768. Similarly, for ImageNet-1k (nvalid = 50000,
d = 512), CTE operates on the hidden representation ex-
tracted from ResNet-18. Figure 4 shows the optimized             Figure 4: A) COMPRESS++ effec-
MMDk metric between the distributions and computation            tively optimizes MMDk on unstruc-
time in seconds. We can see that proper compression results      tured IMDB and Imagenet-1k datasets.
in huge benefits w.r.t. MMDk (compared to i.i.d. sampling        B) Compressing a distribution from
and clustering) and only negligible computational overhead.      25k–50k to 128 samples in 512–768
Accuracy and efficiency. We now study CTE together with          dimensions takes about 5–10 sec. to
EXPECTED - GRADIENTS of neural network models trained            compute on a CPU. (mean ± se.)
to 18 datasets (nvalid > 1000, d ≥ 32) from the OpenML-
CC18 (Bischl et al., 2021) and OpenML-CTR23 (Fischer
et al., 2023) benchmark suites. Details on datasets and models are provided in Appendix D.2.


                                                   7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                          3× more efficient


Figure 5: Comparison between CTE, i.i.d. sampling and clustering for EXPECTED - GRADIENTS
explanations on the 4 image classification datasets. We measure mean absolute error (MAE ↓)
between feature attribution values. CTE is not only more accurate but also more stable as measured
with deviation. Analogous results for the remaining 14 datasets are in Appendix F. (mean ± sd.)


In Figure 5, we show the explanation approximation error for 4 image classification tasks, while
analogous results for the remaining 14 datasets are provided in Appendix F. Additionally here, we
vary the number of data points sampled from i.i.d. to inspect the increase in efficiency of CTE. In
all cases, CTE achieves on-par approximation error using fewer samples than i.i.d. sampling, i.e.
requiring fewer model inferences, resulting in faster computation and saved resources. The accuracy
improvements are significant, i.e. CTE decreases the estimation error for EXPECTED - GRADIENTS
by 35% on mnist 784 (Welch’s t-test: p < 1e−10), by 40% on Fashion-MNIST (p < 1e−10),
and by 21% on CIFAR 10 (p < 1e−10). Moreover, CTE provides 2–3× efficiency improvements as
measured by the number of samples required for i.i.d. to reach the error of CTE.
Model-agnostic explanation of a language model. In Appendix F, we further experiment with
applying CTE to improve the estimation of G - LIME (Li et al., 2023) explaining the predictions of a
DistilBERT language model trained on the IMDB dataset for sentiment analysis.

4.4   A BLATIONS WITH ANOTHER 30 DATASETS , AN XGB OOST MODEL & FEATURE EFFECTS

For a convincing case to use CTE instead of i.i.d. in practice, we perform additional empirical analysis
on various datasets, with a different model class, and include another global explanation method.
More specifically, we use CTE to improve FEATURE - EFFECTS of XGBoost models trained on further
30 datasets (nvalid > 1000, d < 32) from OpenML-CC18 and OpenML-CTR23. Details on datasets
and models are provided in Appendix D.2. Moreover, we include SHAP and SAGE in the benchmark
similarly to Section 4.1. As another ablation, SAGE is evaluated in two variants that consider either
compressing only the background data (a rather typical scenario), or using the compressed samples as
both background and foreground data (as indicated with “fg.”; refer to Listing 1 for this distinction).
Figure 6 shows the explanation approximation error for 3 predictive tasks, while analogous results
for the remaining explanation estimators and 27 datasets are provided in Appendix G. We observe
that CTE significantly improves the estimation of FEATURE - EFFECTS in all cases. We further confirm
the conclusions from Sections 4.1 & 4.2 that CTE improves SHAP and SAGE. Another insight is that,
on average, CTE provides a smaller improvement over i.i.d. sampling when considering compressing
foreground data in SAGE.
Conclusion from the experiments. In Figure 7, we aggregated the results from Sections 4.3 & 4.4
to conclude the main claim that CTE offers 2–3× improvements in efficiency over i.i.d. sampling.

4.5   K ERNEL THINNING ON DATASETS FOR ( EXPLAINABLE ) MACHINE LEARNING

We have already established that distribution compression is a viable approach to data sampling,
which regularly entails a better approximation of explanations. Moreover, its computational overhead
is negligible when applied before explanation estimation. To provide more context on discovering the
theoretical justification for CTE from Section 3, we aim to show that COMPRESS++ entails a better
approximation of feature distribution on popular datasets for (explainable) machine learning. This is
out-of-the-box, without tuning its hyperparameters, which is a natural direction for future work.


                                                   8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                                                  3× more efficient


                                  4× more efficient


           4× more efficient


Figure 6: CTE improves the approximation error of local and global removal-based explanations.
SAGE is evaluated in two variants that consider either compressing only the background data (default),
or using the compressed samples as both background and foreground data (as indicated with “fg.”).
Analogous results for the remaining estimators and 27 datasets are in Appendix G. (mean ± sd.)


A)                                                    B)


Figure 7: Critical difference diagrams of average ranks (lower is better) aggregated over 6 explanation
estimators and 48 dataset–model pairs: A) for MAE averaged over repeats, and B) for the sd. of
MAE over repeats that corresponds to the stability of explanation estimation. CTE often achieves
on-par explanation approximation error using 2–3× fewer samples, i.e. requiring 2–3× fewer model
inferences, which is efficient. Moreover, CTE guarantees more stable estimates than i.i.d. sampling.



Measuring distribution change. In general, measuring the similarity of distributions or datasets is
challenging, and many metrics with various properties have been proposed for this task (Gibbs & Su,
2002). Here, we report the following distance metric values between the original and compressed
distribution: the optimized MMDk , total variation distance (TV, Gibbs & Su, 2002), Kullback–Leibler
divergence (KL, Gibbs & Su, 2002), and d-dimensional Wasserstein distance (WD, Feydy et al., 2019;
Laberge et al., 2023). Since approximating d-dimensional TV and KL is infeasible in practice (see
e.g. Sriperumbudur et al., 2012, section 5), we report an average of the top-3 largest discrepancies
between the 1-dimensional distributions of features as a proxy.
Result. In Figure 8, we observe that COMPRESS++ works much better in terms of MMDk on all
five datasets from OpenXAI, compared to standard i.i.d. sampling or the clustering baseline, which
is no surprise as this metric is internally optimized by the former. Note that it also leads to notable
improvements in all other metrics. Overall, there is no consistent improvement in approximating the
distribution using clustering, which explains why it leads to higher error in explanation estimation.


                                                      9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A)                                                 B)


C)                                                 D)


Figure 8: COMPRESS++ with Gaussian kernel on five datasets (rows) for the four considered
distribution change metrics (panels): A) MMDk , B) total variation distance, C) d-dimensional
Wasserstein distance, and D) Kullback–Leibler divergence. The length of the bar is the mean value ±
standard error across statistical repetitions, where color indicates the applied downsampling method.


5    D ISCUSSION

We propose compress then explain as a powerful alternative to the conventional sample then explain
paradigm in explanation estimation. CTE has the potential to improve approximation error across
a wide range of explanation methods for various predictive tasks. Specifically, we show accuracy
and stability improvements in popular removal-based explanations that marginalize feature influence,
and in general, global explanations that aggregate local explanations over a subset of data. Moreover,
CTE leads to more efficient explanation estimation by decreasing the computational resources (time,
model inferences) required to achieve error on par with a larger i.i.d. sample size.
Future work on methods for marginal distribution compression other than kernel thinning and
clustering will bring further improvements in the performance of explanation estimation. Distribution
compression methods, by design, have hyperparameters that may impact the empirical results.
Although we have shown that the default COMPRESS++ algorithm is a robust baseline, exploring
the tunability of its hyperparameters is a natural future work direction (similarly as in the case
of conditional sampling methods, Olsen et al., 2024). We used the Gaussian kernel because it
is the standard in the field of distribution compression (Dwivedi & Mackey, 2022; Shetty et al.,
2022; Domingo-Enrich et al., 2023), especially in experimental analysis, and is generally adopted
within machine learning applications. Although our empirical validation shows that the Gaussian
kernel works well for over 50 datasets, exploring other kernels for which theoretical thinning error
bounds exist, like Matérn or B-spline (Dwivedi & Mackey, 2021), is a viable future work direction.
Furthermore, especially for tabular datasets, dealing with categorical features can be an issue, which
we elaborate on in Appendix D.2. Specifically for supervised learning, a stratified variant of kernel
thinning taking into account a distribution of the target feature could further improve loss-based
explanations like SAGE, or even the estimation of group fairness metrics. In concurrent work, Gong
et al. (2024) generalize KT to speed up supervised learning problems involving kernel methods. One
could also investigate how influence functions (Koh & Liang, 2017), which aim to attribute the
importance of data to the model’s prediction, can guide sampling for efficient explanation estimation.
Broader impact. In general, improving explanation methods has positive implications for humans
interacting with AI systems (Rong et al., 2024). But, specifically in the context of this work, biased
sampling can be exploited to manipulate the explanation results (Slack et al., 2020; Baniecki &
Biecek, 2022; Laberge et al., 2023). CTE could minimize the risk of such adversaries and prevent
“random seed/state hacking” based on the rather unstable i.i.d. sampling from data in empirical
research (Herrmann et al., 2024).
Code. We provide additional details on reproducibility in the Appendix, as well as the code to
reproduce all experiments in this paper is available at https://github.com/hbaniecki/
compress-then-explain.


                                                 10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

This work was financially supported by the Polish National Science Centre grant number
2021/43/O/ST6/00347, and carried out with the support of the Laboratory of Bioinformatics and Com-
putational Genomics and the High Performance Computing Center of the Faculty of Mathematics and
Information Science, Warsaw University of Technology. Hubert Baniecki gratefully acknowledges
scholarship funding from the Polish National Agency for Academic Exchange under the Preludium
Bis NAWA 3 program. We want to thank Maximilian Muschalik, Mateusz Biesiadowski, Paulina
Kaczynska, Anna Semik, and anonymous reviewers for their valuable feedback regarding this work.

R EFERENCES
Kjersti Aas, Martin Jullum, and Anders Løland. Explaining individual predictions when features are
  dependent: More accurate approximations to Shapley values. Artificial Intelligence, 298:103502,
  2021. 1, 2.1

Chirag Agarwal, Satyapriya Krishna, Eshika Saxena, Martin Pawelczyk, Nari Johnson, Isha Puri,
  Marinka Zitnik, and Himabindu Lakkaraju. OpenXAI: Towards a transparent evaluation of model
  explanations. In NeurIPS, 2022. 4.1, D.2

Pankaj K. Agarwal, Sariel Har-Peled, and Kasturi R. Varadarajan. Approximating extent measures of
  points. Journal of the ACM, 51(4):606–635, 2004. 1

Daniel W. Apley and Jingyu Zhu. Visualizing the effects of predictor variables in black box supervised
  learning models. Journal of the Royal Statistical Society: Series B (Statistical Methodology), 82
  (4):1059–1086, 2020. 1, 2.1, 3, D.1

Hubert Baniecki and Przemyslaw Biecek. Manipulating SHAP via Adversarial Data Perturbations
 (Student Abstract). In AAAI, 2022. 5

Hubert Baniecki, Giuseppe Casalicchio, Bernd Bischl, and Przemyslaw Biecek. On the Robustness
  of Global Feature Effect Explanations. In ECML PKDD, 2024. 3

Bernd Bischl, Giuseppe Casalicchio, Matthias Feurer, Pieter Gijsbers, Frank Hutter, Michel Lang,
  Rafael Gomes Mantovani, Jan N. van Rijn, and Joaquin Vanschoren. OpenML benchmarking
  suites. In NeurIPS, 2021. 4.3, D.2

Hugh Chen, Ian C Covert, Scott M Lundberg, and Su-In Lee. Algorithms to estimate Shapley value
  feature attributions. Nature Machine Intelligence, 5(6):590–601, 2023. 1

Jianbo Chen, Le Song, Martin J. Wainwright, and Michael I. Jordan. Learning to explain: An
   information-theoretic perspective on model interpretation. In ICML, 2018. 1, 1, 2.1

Ruoyu Chen, Hua Zhang, Siyuan Liang, Jingzhi Li, and Xiaochun Cao. Less is more: Fewer
  interpretable region via submodular subset selection. In ICLR, 2024. 1

Zhaozheng Chen and Qianru Sun. Extracting class activation maps from non-discriminative features
  as well. In CVPR, 2023. A

Badr-Eddine Chérief-Abdellatif and Pierre Alquier. Finite sample properties of parametric mmd
  estimation: Robustness to misspecification and dependence. Bernoulli, 28(1), 2022. 2.2

A. Feder Cooper, Wentao Guo, Khiem Pham, Tiancheng Yuan, Charlie F. Ruan, Yucheng Lu, and
  Christopher De Sa. Coordinating distributed example orders for provably accelerated training. In
  NeurIPS, 2023. 1

Ian Covert and Su-In Lee. Improving KernelSHAP: Practical Shapley value estimation via linear
  regression. In AISTATS, 2021. 1

Ian Covert, Scott M Lundberg, and Su-In Lee. Understanding global feature contributions with
  additive importance measures. In NeurIPS, 2020. 1, 2.1, 3, A, D.1


                                                 11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Ian Covert, Scott Lundberg, and Su-In Lee. Explaining by removing: A unified framework for model
  explanation. Journal of Machine Learning Research, 22(209):1–90, 2021. 1, 2.1
Carles Domingo-Enrich, Raaz Dwivedi, and Lester Mackey. Compress then test: Powerful kernel
  testing in near-linear time. In AISTATS, 2023. 1, 2.2, 5
Jon Donnelly, Srikar Katta, Cynthia Rudin, and Edward Browne. The Rashomon importance
  distribution: Getting RID of unstable, single model-based variable importance. In NeurIPS, 2023.
  1
Raaz Dwivedi and Lester Mackey. Kernel thinning. In COLT, 2021. 1, 1, 2.2, 2, 4, 5, C
Raaz Dwivedi and Lester Mackey. Generalized kernel thinning. In ICLR, 2022. 1, 2.2, 5
Gabriel Erion, Joseph D Janizek, Pascal Sturmfels, Scott M Lundberg, and Su-In Lee. Improving
  performance of deep learning models with axiomatic attribution priors and expected gradients.
  Nature Machine Intelligence, 3(7):620–631, 2021. 1, 1, 2.1, 3, A
Jean Feydy, Thibault Séjourné, François-Xavier Vialard, Shun-ichi Amari, Alain Trouve, and Gabriel
  Peyré. Interpolating between optimal transport and MMD using sinkhorn divergences. In AISTATS,
  2019. 4.5
Sebastian Felix Fischer, Matthias Feurer, and Bernd Bischl. OpenML-CTR23 – a curated tabular
  regression benchmarking suite. In AutoML, 2023. 4.3, D.2
Fabian Fumagalli, Maximilian Muschalik, Patrick Kolpaczki, Eyke Hüllermeier, and Barbara Hammer.
  SHAP-IQ: Unified approximation of any-order Shapley interactions. In NeurIPS, 2023. 1, 1, 2.1
Sahra Ghalebikesabi, Lucile Ter-Minassian, Karla DiazOrdaz, and Chris C Holmes. On locality of
  local explanation models. In NeurIPS, 2021. 1, 1, A
Alison L Gibbs and Francis Edward Su. On choosing and bounding probability metrics. International
  Statistical Review, 70(3):419–435, 2002. 4.5
Albert Gong, Kyuseong Choi, and Raaz Dwivedi. Supervised kernel thinning. In NeurIPS, 2024. 5
Arthur Gretton, Karsten M Borgwardt, Malte J Rasch, Bernhard Schölkopf, and Alexander Smola. A
  kernel two-sample test. Journal of Machine Learning Research, 13(1):723–773, 2012. 2.2, 2, 3,
  2.2
Sariel Har-Peled and Soham Mazumdar. On coresets for k-means and k-median clustering. In STOC,
  2004. 1
Peter Hase, Harry Xie, and Mohit Bansal. The out-of-distribution problem in explainability and
  search methods for feature importance explanations. In NeurIPS, 2021. 1
Moritz Herrmann, F. Julian D. Lange, Katharina Eggensperger, Giuseppe Casalicchio, Marcel Wever,
 Matthias Feurer, David Rügamer, Eyke Hüllermeier, Anne-Laure Boulesteix, and Bernd Bischl.
 Position paper: Rethinking empirical research in machine learning: Addressing epistemic and
 methodological challenges of experimentation. In ICML, 2024. 5
Neil Jethani, Mukund Sudarshan, Ian Connick Covert, Su-In Lee, and Rajesh Ranganath. FastSHAP:
  Real-time Shapley value estimation. In ICLR, 2022. 1, 1
Jang-Hyun Kim, Jinuk Kim, Seong Joon Oh, Sangdoo Yun, Hwanjun Song, Joonhyun Jeong, Jung-
  Woo Ha, and Hyun Oh Song. Dataset condensation via efficient synthetic-data parameterization.
  In ICML, 2022. 1
Lukas Klein, Carsten T. Lüth, Udo Schlegel, Till J. Bungert, Mennatallah El-Assady, and Paul F.
  Jäger. Navigating the maze of explainable AI: A systematic approach to evaluating methods and
  metrics. In NeurIPS, 2024. 2.1
Pang Wei Koh and Percy Liang. Understanding black-box predictions via influence functions. In
  ICML, 2017. 5


                                                12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Narine Kokhlikyan, Vivek Miglani, Miguel Martin, Edward Wang, Bilal Alsallakh, Jonathan
  Reynolds, Alexander Melnikov, Natalia Kliushkina, Carlos Araya, Siqi Yan, and Orion Reblitz-
  Richardson. Captum: A unified and generic model interpretability library for PyTorch. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2009.07896, 2020. D.1
Patrick Kolpaczki, Viktor Bengs, Maximilian Muschalik, and Eyke Hüllermeier. Approximating the
  Shapley value without marginal contributions. In AAAI, 2024. 1
Mateusz Krzyziński, Mikołaj Spytek, Hubert Baniecki, and Przemysław Biecek. SurvSHAP(t):
 Time-dependent explanations of machine learning survival models. Knowledge-Based Systems,
 262:110234, 2023. 2.1
Gabriel Laberge, Ulrich Aivodji, Satoshi Hara, and Foutse Khomh Mario Marchand. Fooling SHAP
  with Stealthily Biased Sampling. In ICLR, 2023. 1, 4.5, 5, A
Jeffrey Li, Vaishnavh Nagarajan, Gregory Plumb, and Ameet Talwalkar. A learning theoretic
  perspective on local explainability. In ICLR, 2021. 1
Xuhong Li, Haoyi Xiong, Xingjian Li, Xiao Zhang, Ji Liu, Haiyan Jiang, Zeyu Chen, and Dejing
  Dou. G-LIME: Statistical learning for local interpretations of deep neural networks using global
  priors. Artificial Intelligence, 314:103823, 2023. 1, 2.1, 4.3, F
Chris Lin, Ian Covert, and Su-In Lee. On the robustness of removal-based feature attributions. In
  NeurIPS, 2023. 3
Scott M Lundberg and Su-In Lee. A unified approach to interpreting model predictions. In NeurIPS,
  2017. 1, 2.1, 3, A, D.1
Daniel D Lundstrom, Tianjian Huang, and Meisam Razaviyayn. A rigorous study of integrated
  gradients method and extensions to internal neuron attributions. In ICML, 2022. 1, 1
Julia Moosbauer, Julia Herbinger, Giuseppe Casalicchio, Marius Lindauer, and Bernd Bischl. Ex-
  plaining hyperparameter optimization via partial dependence plots. In NeurIPS, 2021. 1, D.1
Krikamol Muandet, Kenji Fukumizu, Bharath Sriperumbudur, and Bernhard Schölkopf. Kernel mean
  embedding of distributions: A review and beyond. Foundations and Trends in Machine Learning,
  10(1–2):1–141, 2017. 2.2, 3
Maximilian Muschalik, Fabian Fumagalli, Barbara Hammer, and Eyke Hüllermeier. Beyond Tree-
 SHAP: Efficient computation of any-order Shapley interactions for tree ensembles. In AAAI, 2024.
 1
Lars H. B. Olsen, Ingrid K. Glad, Martin Jullum, and Kjersti Aas. Using Shapley values and
  variational autoencoders to explain predictive models with dependent mixed features. Journal of
  Machine Learning Research, 23(213):1–51, 2022. 1, 1, 2.1
Lars Henry Berge Olsen, Ingrid Kristine Glad, Martin Jullum, and Kjersti Aas. A comparative
  study of methods for estimating model-agnostic Shapley value explanations. Data Mining and
  Knowledge Discovery, pp. 1–48, 2024. 1, 2.1, 5
Art B Owen. Statistically efficient thinning of a markov chain sampler. Journal of Computational
  and Graphical Statistics, 26(3):738–744, 2017. 1
Vitali Petsiuk, Abir Das, and Kate Saenko. RISE: Randomized input sampling for explanation of
  black-box models. In BMVC, 2018. 1
Marco Tulio Ribeiro, Sameer Singh, and Carlos Guestrin. “Why should I trust you?” Explaining the
 predictions of any classifier. In KDD, 2016. 2.1, F
Yao Rong, Tobias Leemann, Thai-Trang Nguyen, Lisa Fiedler, Peizhu Qian, Vaibhav Unhelkar,
  Tina Seidel, Gjergji Kasneci, and Enkelejda Kasneci. Towards human-centered explainable AI: A
  survey of user studies for model explanations. IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine
  Intelligence, 46(4):2104–2122, 2024. 5


                                               13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Christian A Scholbeck, Christoph Molnar, Christian Heumann, Bernd Bischl, and Giuseppe Casalic-
  chio. Sampling, intervention, prediction, aggregation: a generalized framework for model-agnostic
  interpretations. In ECML PKDD, 2020. 1
Ozan Sener and Silvio Savarese. Active learning for convolutional neural networks: A core-set
  approach. In ICLR, 2018. 1
Abhishek Shetty, Raaz Dwivedi, and Lester Mackey. Distribution compression in near-linear time. In
  ICLR, 2022. 1, 2.2, 2.2, 4, 5
Dylan Slack, Sophie Hilgard, Emily Jia, Sameer Singh, and Himabindu Lakkaraju. Fooling LIME
  and SHAP: Adversarial attacks on post hoc explanation methods. In AIES, 2020. 5
Dylan Slack, Anna Hilgard, Sameer Singh, and Himabindu Lakkaraju. Reliable post hoc explanations:
  Modeling uncertainty in explainability. In NeurIPS, 2021. 1, 1
Bharath K. Sriperumbudur, Arthur Gretton, Kenji Fukumizu, Bernhard Schölkopf, and Gert R.G.
  Lanckriet. Hilbert space embeddings and metrics on probability measures. Journal of Machine
  Learning Research, 11(50):1517–1561, 2010. 2.2
Bharath K Sriperumbudur, Kenji Fukumizu, Arthur Gretton, Bernhard Schölkopf, and Gert RG
  Lanckriet. On the empirical estimation of integral probability metrics. Electronic Journal of
  Statistics, 6:1550–1599, 2012. 4.5
Erik Strumbelj and Igor Kononenko. An efficient explanation of individual classifications using game
  theory. Journal of Machine Learning Research, 11:1–18, 2010. 1
Arnaud Van Looveren and Janis Klaise. Interpretable counterfactual explanations guided by proto-
  types. In ECML PKDD, 2021. A
Tongzhou Wang, Jun-Yan Zhu, Antonio Torralba, and Alexei A. Efros. Dataset distillation. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:1811.10959, 2018. 1
Borui Zhang, Wenzhao Zheng, Jie Zhou, and Jiwen Lu. Path choice matters for clear attributions in
  path methods. In ICLR, 2024. 1
Bo Zhao, Konda Reddy Mopuri, and Hakan Bilen. Dataset condensation with gradient matching. In
  ICLR, 2021. 1
Nicky Zimmerman, Alessandro Giusti, and Jérôme Guzzi. Resource-aware collaborative monte carlo
  localization with distribution compression. arXiv preprint arXiv:2404.02010, 2024. 1


                                                14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A PPENDIX FOR “E FFICIENT AND ACCURATE E XPLANATION E STIMATION WITH
D ISTRIBUTION C OMPRESSION ”
In Appendix B, we derive proofs for Propositions 1 & 2. Appendix C provides code listings for
SHAP , EXPECTED - GRADIENTS and FEATURE - EFFECTS , analogous to Listing 1 for SAGE . Addi-
tional details on the experimental setup are provided in Appendix D. Appendices E, F & G report
experimental results for the remaining datasets. Appendix H comments on compute resources used
for experiments. Appendix I provides exemplary visual comparisons of explanations. The code to
reproduce all experiments in this paper is available at https://github.com/hbaniecki/
compress-then-explain.

A Motivation: standard i.i.d. sampling in explanation estimation                                 16

B Proofs                                                                                         17

C Implementing CTE in practice                                                                   18

D Experimental setup                                                                             19
    D.1 Explanation hyperparameters . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    19
    D.2 Details on datasets and models . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   19

E CTE significantly improves the estimation of feature attributions & importance                 21

F CTE improves gradient-based explanations                                                       23

G Ablations                                                                                      25

H Compute resources                                                                              35

I   Visual comparison of explanations                                                            36


                                                15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A    M OTIVATION : STANDARD I . I . D . SAMPLING IN EXPLANATION ESTIMATION
We find that i.i.d. sampling from datasets is a heuristic often used (and overlooked) in various estima-
tors of post-hoc explanations. Our work aims to first quantify the approximation error introduced by
sample then explain, and then propose a method to efficiently reduce it. Below are a few examples
from the literature on explainability that motivate the shift to our introduced compress then explain
paradigm.
In (Laberge et al., 2023), we read “For instance, when a dataset is used to represent a background
distribution, explainers in the SHAP library such as the ExactExplainer and TreeExplainer will
subsample this dataset by selecting 100 instances uniformly at random when the size of the dataset
exceeds 100.”
In (Chen & Sun, 2023), we read “[Footnote 1.] We use a random subset of samples for each class in
the real implementation, to reduce the computation costs of clustering.”
In (Ghalebikesabi et al., 2021), we read “After training a convolutional neural network on the MNIST
dataset, we explain digits with the predicted label 8 given a background dataset of 100 images with
labels 3 and 8.”, as well as “Feature attributions are sorted by similarity according to a preliminary
PCA analysis across a subset of 2000 samples from the Adult Income dataset, using 2000 reference
points.”
In (Erion et al., 2021), we read “During training, we let k be the number of samples we draw to
compute expected gradients for each mini-batch. and “This expectation-based formulation lends itself
to a natural, sampling based approximation method: (1) draw samples of x′ from the training dataset
[...], (2) compute the value inside the expectation for each sample and (3) average over samples.”
In (Van Looveren & Klaise, 2021), we read “We also need a representative, unlabeled sample of the
training dataset.”, and in Algorithms 1 and 2: “A sample X = {x1 , . . . , xn } from training set.”
In (Covert et al., 2020), we read “When calculating feature importance, our sampling approximation
for SAGE (Algorithm 1) was run using draws from the marginal distribution. We used a fixed set of
512 background samples for the bank, bike and credit datasets, 128 for MNIST, and all 334 training
examples for BRCA.”
In the shap Python package (Lundberg & Lee, 2017), there is a warning saying “Using 110
background data samples could cause slower run times. Consider using shap.sample(data, K) or
shap.kmeans(data, K) to summarize the background as K samples.”, and the documentation mentions
“For small problems, this background dataset can be the whole training set, but for larger problems
consider using a single reference value or using the kmeans function to summarize the dataset.”


                                                  16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


B    P ROOFS
Below, we derive proofs for Propositions 1 & 2.
Proposition 1 (Feature marginalization is bounded by the maximum mean discrepancy between data
samples). For two empirical distributions qX , qXe approximated with a kernel density estimator k, we
have f (xs ; qX ) − f (xs ; qXe ) ≤ Cf · MMD
                                         \ k (qX , qe ), where Cf denotes a constant that bounds the
                                                     X
model function f , i.e. ∀x∈Rp f (x) ≤ Cf .

Proof. We derive the following inequality:
                                    2                                                         2
    f (xs ; pXs̄ ) − f (xs ; qXs̄ ) = EXs̄ ∼pXs̄ [f (xs , Xs̄ )] − EXs̄ ∼qXs̄ [f (xs , Xs̄ )]                (3)
                                         Z                               Z                              2
                                      =    f (xs , xs̄ )pXs̄ (xs̄ )dxs̄ − f (xs , xs̄ )qXs̄ (xs̄ )dxs̄       (4)
                                         Z                                           2

                        (linearity) =  f (xs , xs̄ ) pXs̄ (xs̄ ) − qXs̄ (xs̄ ) dxs̄                          (5)
                                  Z                        Z
                                                    2                                     2
              (Cauchy–Schwarz) ≤      f (xs , xs̄ ) dxs̄        pXs̄ (xs̄ ) − qXs̄ (xs̄ ) dxs̄               (6)
                                       Z
                                    2
                                                                       2
                  (boundedness) ≤ Cf ·     pXs̄ (xs̄ ) − qXs̄ (xs̄ ) dxs̄                                    (7)
                                                       2
                    (Definition 3) = Cf2 · MMD
                                           \ k (pXs̄ , qXs̄ ).                                               (8)

Substituting with empirical distributions, we have

                             f (xs ; qX ) − f (xs ; qXe ) ≤ Cf · MMD
                                                                 \ k (qX , qe ).
                                                                            X                                (9)


Proposition 2 (Global explanation is bounded by the maximum mean discrepancy between data
samples). For two empirical distributions qX , qXe approximated with a kernel density estimator k, we
have G(qX ; f, g) − G(qXe ; f, g) 2 ≤ Cg · MMD
                                           \ k (qX , qe ), where Cg denotes a constant that bounds
                                                         X
the local explanation function g, i.e. ∀x∈Rp g(x; ·) 2 ≤ Cg .

Proof. We derive the following inequality:
                                             2                                                     2
            G(pX ; f, g) − G(qX ; f, g) 2 = EX∼pX [g(X; f, ·)] − EX∼qX [g(X; f, ·)]                2
                                                                                                            (10)
                                            Z                  Z               2
                                          =   g(x)pX (x)dx − g(x)qX (x)dx                                   (11)
                                                                                              2
                                                   Z                      2

                                  (linearity) =  g(x) pX (x) − qX (x) dx                                    (12)
                                                                          2
                                            Z              Z
                                                      2                       2
                        (Cauchy–Schwarz) ≤       g(x) 2 dx    pX (x) − qX (x) dx                            (13)
                                                  Z
                                                                     2
                            (boundedness) ≤ Cg2 ·    pX (x) − qX (x) dx                                     (14)
                                                                2
                              (Definition 3) = Cg2 · MMD
                                                     \ k (pX , qX ).                                        (15)

Substituting with empirical distributions, we have

                           G(qX ; f, g) − G(qXe ; f, g) 2 ≤ Cg · MMD
                                                                 \ k (qX , qe ).
                                                                            X                               (16)


                                                           17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


C    I MPLEMENTING CTE IN PRACTICE
CTE is simple to plug-into the current workflows for explanation estimation as shown in Listing 1
for SAGE, Listing 2 for SHAP, Listing 3 for EXPECTED - GRADIENTS, and Listing 4 for FEATURE -
EFFECTS. We use the goodpoints Python package (Dwivedi & Mackey, 2021, MIT license).

X, model = ...
from goodpoints import compress
ids = compress.compresspp_kt(X, kernel_type=b"gaussian", g=4)
X_compressed = X[ids]
import shap
masker = shap.maskers.Independent(X_compressed)
explainer = shap.PermutationExplainer(model.predict, masker)
explanation = explainer(X)

Listing 2: Code snippet showing the 3-line plug-in of distribution compression for SHAP estimation.

X, model = ...
from goodpoints import compress
ids = compress.compresspp_kt(X, kernel_type=b"gaussian", g=4)
X_compressed = X[ids]
import captum
explainer = captum.attr.IntegratedGradients(model)
import torch
inputs = torch.as_tensor(X)
baselines = torch.as_tensor(X_compressed)
explanation = torch.mean(torch.stack([
    explainer.attribute(inputs, baselines[[i]], target=1)
    for i in range(baselines.shape[0])
]), dim=0)

Listing 3: Code snippet showing the plug-in of distribution compression for EXPECTED - GRADIENTS.

X, model = ...
from goodpoints import compress
ids = compress.compresspp_kt(X, kernel_type=b"gaussian", g=4)
X_compressed = X[ids]
import alibi
explainer = alibi.explainers.PartialDependence(predictor=model.predict)
explanation = explainer.explain(X_compressed)

 Listing 4: Code snippet showing the plug-in of distribution compression for FEATURE - EFFECTS.


                                                18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


D     E XPERIMENTAL SETUP

D.1   E XPLANATION HYPERPARAMETERS

In Section 4, we experiment with 4 explanation methods (6 estimators). Without the loss of generality,
in case of classification models, we always explain a prediction for the 2nd class. For SHAP, we use
the KERNEL - SHAP and PERMUTATION - SHAP implementations from the shap Python package (Lund-
berg & Lee, 2017, MIT license) with default hyperparameters (notably, npermutations=10 in
the latter). For SAGE, we use the KERNEL - SAGE and PERMUTATION - SAGE implementations from
the sage Python package (Covert et al., 2020, MIT license). We use default hyperparameters;
notably, a cross-entropy loss for classification and mean squared error for regression. For EXPECTED -
GRADIENTS, we aggregate with mean the integrated gradients explanations from the captum Python
package (Kokhlikyan et al., 2020, BSD-3 license), for which we use default hyperparameters; notably,
n steps=50 and method="gausslegendre". For FEATURE - EFFECTS, we implement the
partial dependence algorithm (Apley & Zhu, 2020; Moosbauer et al., 2021) ourselves for maximum
computational speed in case of 2-dimensional plots, mimicking the popular open-source implementa-
tions.1 We use 100 uniformly distributed grid points for 1-dimensional plots and 10×10 uniformly
distributed grid points for 2-dimensional plots.


D.2   D ETAILS ON DATASETS AND MODELS

Table 2 shows details of datasets from the OpenXAI (Agarwal et al., 2022, MIT license) benchmark
used in Sections 4.1, 4.2 & 4.5. To each dataset, there is a pretrained neural network with an accuracy
of 92% (gaussian), 85% (compas), 74% (heloc), 85% (adult) and 93% (gmsc). We do not
further preprocess data; notably, feature values are already scaled to [0, 1].


             Table 2: Datasets from OpenXAI with nvalid > 1000 used in experiments.

                         Dataset          ntrain    nvalid   d    No. classes
                         gaussian         3750      1250     20             2
                         compas           4937      1235      7             2
                         heloc            7896      1975     23             2
                         adult           36177      9045     13             2
                         gmsc            81767     20442     10             2


Table 3 shows details of datasets from the OpenML-CC18 (Bischl et al., 2021, BSD-3 license) and
OpenML-CTR23 (Fischer et al., 2023, BSD-3 license) benchmarks used in Sections 4.3 & 4.4. We
first split all datasets in 75:25 (train:validation) ratio and left 48 datasets with nvalid > 1000 for
our experiments. For the 30 smaller (d < 32) datasets, we train an XGBoost model with default
hyperparameters (200 estimators) and explain it with SHAP, SAGE, FEATURE - EFFECTS. For the 18
bigger (d ≥ 32) datasets, we train a 3-layer neural network model with (128, 64) neurons in hidden
ReLU layers and explain it with EXPECTED - GRADIENTS. We perform basic preprocessing of data:
(1) remove features with a single or n unique values, (2) target encode categorical features, (3) impute
missing values with mean, and (4) standardize features.
In general, categorical features can be an issue for clustering and distribution compression algorithms;
so are for many explanation algorithms and conditional distribution samplers. Although target
encoding worked well in our setup, we envision two additional heuristics to deal with categorical
features: (1) perform distribution compression using a dataset restricted to non-categorical features,
(2) target encode categorical features only for distribution compression.


  1
    https://docs.seldon.io/projects/alibi/en/latest/api/alibi.explainers.
html#alibi.explainers.PartialDependence; https://interpret.ml/docs/python/
api/PartialDependence


                                                   19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Table 3: Datasets from OpenML-CC18 and OpenML-CTR23 with nvalid > 1000 used in experiments.

          Dataset                   Task ID         ntrain   nvalid     d    No. classes
          phoneme                   9952         4053         1351      5             2
          wilt                      146820       3629         1210      5             2
          cps88wages                361261      21116         7039      6             –
          jungle chess              167119      33614        11205      6             3
          abalone                   361234       3132         1045      8             –
          electricity               219         33984        11328      8             2
          kin8nm                    361258       6144         2048      8             –
          california housing        361255      15480         5160      8             –
          brazilian houses          361267       8019         2673      9             –
          diamonds                  361257      40455        13485      9             –
          physiochemical protein    361241      34297        11433      9             –
          white wine                361249       3673         1225     11             –
          health insurance          361269      16704         5568     11             –
          grid stability            361251       7500         2500     12             –
          adult                     7592        36631        12211     14             2
          naval propulsion plant    361247       8950         2984     14             –
          miami housing             361260      10449         3483     15             –
          letter                    6           15000         5000     16            26
          bank-marketing            14965       33908        11303     16             2
          pendigits                 32           8244         2748     16            10
          video transcoding         361252      51588        17196     18             –
          churn                     167141       3750         1250     20             2
          kings county              361266      16209         5404     21             –
          numerai28.6               167120      72240        24080     21             2
          sarcos                    361254      36699        12234     21             –
          cpu activity              361256       6144         2048     21             –
          jm1                       3904         8163         2722     21             2
          wall-robot-navigation     9960         4092         1364     24             4
          fifa                      361272      14383         4795     28             –
          PhishingWebsites          14952        8291         2764     30             2
          pumadyn32nh               361259       6144         2048      32            –
          GestureSegmentation       14969        7404         2469      32            5
          satimage                  2074         4822         1608      36            6
          texture                   125922       4125         1375      40           11
          connect-4                 146195      50667        16890      42            3
          fps benchmark             361268      18468         6156      43            –
          wave energy               361253      54000        18000      48            –
          theorem-proving           9985         4588         1530      51            6
          spambase                  43           3450         1151      57            2
          optdigits                 28           4215         1405      64           10
          superconductivity         361242      15947         5316      81            –
          nomao                     9977        25848         8617     118            2
          har                       14970        7724         2575     561            6
          isolet                    3481         5847         1950     617           26
          mnist 784                 3573        52500        17500     784           10
          Fashion-MNIST             146825      52500        17500     784           10
          Devnagari-Script          167121      69000        23000    1024           46
          CIFAR 10                  167124      45000        15000    3072           10


                                               20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


E     CTE SIGNIFICANTLY IMPROVES THE ESTIMATION OF FEATURE
      ATTRIBUTIONS & IMPORTANCE

We report the differences in MAE and Top-k between CTE and i.i.d. sampling in Figure 9 (compas),
Figure 10 (heloc), Figure 11 (gmsc) and Figure 12 (gaussian). On all the considered tasks, CTE
offers a notable decrease in approximation error of SHAP and SAGE with negligible computational
overhead (as measured by time in seconds).

      KernelSHAP                                                         compress         KernelSHAP
                                                                         sample
 PermutationSHAP                                                                     PermutationSHAP         compress
                                                                                                             sample
      KernelSAGE                                                                          KernelSAGE
 PermutationSAGE                                                                     PermutationSAGE
                   0.00           0.01                  0.02              0.03                         0.5        0.6            0.7              0.8           0.9         1.0
                                                MAE                                                                                     Top-k
      KernelSHAP                                                                          KernelSHAP
 PermutationSHAP                                                         compress    PermutationSHAP
                                                                         explain
      KernelSAGE                                                                          KernelSAGE
                                                                                                             explain (ground truth)
 PermutationSAGE                                                                     PermutationSAGE         explain (compressed)
                   10 2      10 1                100            101           102                      100                 101                          102                 103
                                               Time [s]                                                                                Time [s]

Figure 9: Extended Figure 2 (1/4). CTE improves SHAP and SAGE estimation by using the compressed
samples as background data for the compas dataset. We measure mean absolute error (MAE ↓)
between feature attribution and importance values, as well as the precision in correctly indicating the
3 most important features (Top-k ↑). Computational resources required to compress a distribution are
negligible in the context of explanation estimation. (mean ± se.)

      KernelSHAP                                                                          KernelSHAP
 PermutationSHAP                                                                     PermutationSHAP         compress
                                                                                                             sample
      KernelSAGE                                                                          KernelSAGE
                                                                         compress
 PermutationSAGE                                                         sample      PermutationSAGE
                   0.000     0.002              0.004           0.006       0.008                      0.5        0.6            0.7              0.8           0.9         1.0
                                                 MAE                                                                                    Top-k
      KernelSHAP                                                                          KernelSHAP
 PermutationSHAP                                                                     PermutationSHAP                                                     explain (ground truth)
                                                                                                                                                         explain (compressed)
      KernelSAGE                                                                          KernelSAGE
                                                                         compress
 PermutationSAGE                                                         explain     PermutationSAGE
                   10 2    10 1          100              101      102        103                      101           102                 103                  104           105
                                               Time [s]                                                                                Time [s]

Figure 10: Extended Figure 2 (2/4). CTE improves SHAP and SAGE estimation on the heloc dataset.


                                                                                    21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


      KernelSHAP                                                         compress           KernelSHAP
                                                                         sample
 PermutationSHAP                                                                       PermutationSHAP         compress
                                                                                                               sample
      KernelSAGE                                                                            KernelSAGE
 PermutationSAGE                                                                       PermutationSAGE
                   0.000          0.001             0.002            0.003                               0.5       0.6            0.7              0.8           0.9         1.0
                                                 MAE                                                                                     Top-k
      KernelSHAP                                                                            KernelSHAP
 PermutationSHAP                                                                       PermutationSHAP                                                    explain (ground truth)
                                                                                                                                                          explain (compressed)
      KernelSAGE                                                                            KernelSAGE
                                                                         compress
 PermutationSAGE                                                         explain       PermutationSAGE
                   10 1    100            101              102     103           104                     102          103                 104                  105           106
                                                Time [s]                                                                                Time [s]

Figure 11: Extended Figure 2 (3/4). CTE improves SHAP and SAGE estimation by using the
compressed samples as background data for the gmsc dataset. We measure mean absolute error
(MAE ↓) between feature attribution and importance values, as well as the precision in correctly
indicating the 5 most important features (Top-k ↑). Computational resources required to compress a
distribution are negligible in the context of explanation estimation. (mean ± se.)

      KernelSHAP                                                                            KernelSHAP
 PermutationSHAP                                                                       PermutationSHAP         compress
                                                                                                               sample
      KernelSAGE                                                                            KernelSAGE
                                                                         compress
 PermutationSAGE                                                         sample        PermutationSAGE
                   0.000          0.005                    0.010         0.015                           0.5       0.6            0.7              0.8           0.9         1.0
                                                 MAE                                                                                     Top-k
      KernelSHAP                                                                            KernelSHAP
 PermutationSHAP                                                                       PermutationSHAP                                                    explain (ground truth)
                                                                                                                                                          explain (compressed)
      KernelSAGE                                                                            KernelSAGE
                                                                         compress
 PermutationSAGE                                                         explain       PermutationSAGE
                   10 2    10 1           100              101     102           103                     101                102                          103                 104
                                                Time [s]                                                                                Time [s]

Figure 12: Extended Figure 2 (4/4). CTE improves SHAP and SAGE estimation on the gaussian
dataset.


                                                                                    22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


F      CTE IMPROVES GRADIENT- BASED EXPLANATIONS
Figure 13 shows the EXPECTED - GRADIENTS approximation error for 18 datasets. In all cases, CTE
achieves on-par approximation error using fewer samples than i.i.d. sampling, i.e. requiring fewer
model inferences, resulting in faster computation and saved resources.

                                Explanation: Expected Gradients
      1e 4       isolet   1e 3 theorem-proving 1e 4      mnist_784   1e 3    satimage
        3                                                              6
                            3                  2.4
        2                   2                  1.6                     4
    MAE


        1                   1                  0.8                     2
        0                   0                  0.0                     0
           32 64 96 128        32 64 96 128         128 256 384 512       32 64 96 128
      1e 2 fps_benchmark 1e 4 Devnagari-Script 1e 3       nomao      1e 3     texture
      1.2                 1.5                                          9
                                                 3
      0.8                 1.0                    2                     6
MAE


      0.4                 0.5                    1                     3
      0.0                 0.0                    0                     0
           64 128 192 256      128 256 384 512      64 128 192 256        32 64 96 128
      1e 3   wave_energy  1e 4        har      1e 4    Fashion-MNIST 1e 3    optdigits
      7.5                   9                                        2.4
                                               1.8
      5.0                   6                                        1.6
                                               1.2
MAE


      2.5                   3                  0.6                   0.8
      0.0                     0                      0.0                  0.0
            128 256 384 512      32 64 96 128             128 256 384 512       32 64 96 128
      1e6 3     connect-4   1e 4       CIFAR_10      1e 3    pumadyn32nh  1e 2 superconductivity
                            1.8                        9                  2.4
        4                                              6                  1.6
                            1.2
    MAE


        2                   0.6                        3                  0.8
        0                   0.0                        0                  0.0
            128 256 384 512      64 128 192 256           32 64 96 128          64 128 192 256
                                                               N samples             N samples
      1e6 3     spambase    1e 3 GestureSegmentation
                            4.5
        4                                                                  Method
                            3.0
    MAE


                                                                             sample
        2                   1.5                                              compress
                                                                             cluster
        0                   0.0
            32 64 96 128         32 64 96 128
                N samples             N samples

Figure 13: Extended Figure 5. Comparison between CTE, i.i.d. sampling and clustering for
EXPECTED - GRADIENTS explanations on 18 datasets. We measure mean absolute error (MAE ↓)
between feature attribution values. CTE is not only more efficient and accurate, but also more stable
as measured with deviation. (mean ± sd.)


                                                 23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Model-agnostic explanation of a language model. We further experimented with applying CTE to
improve the estimation of global aggregated LIME (Ribeiro et al., 2016), aka G - LIME (Li et al., 2023),
which is a more complex setup that we leave for future work. We aim to explain the predictions of a
DistilBERT language model2 trained on the IMDB dataset3 for sentiment analysis. We calculate LIME
with k = 10 for all samples from the validation set using an A100 GPU and aggregate these local
explanations into global token importance with a mean of absolute normalized values (Li et al., 2023),
which is the “ground truth” explanation. We then compress the set with i.i.d. sampling, CTE, and
clustering based on the inputs’ text embeddings from the model’s last layer (preceding a classifier)
that has a dimension of size 768. Figure 14 shows results for explanation approximation error and
an exemplary comparison between the explanations relating to Figure 1. To obtain these results, we
used 8× more samples than the typical compression scenario (still 25× fewer than the full sample)
so as to overcome the issue of rare tokens skewing the results. It becomes challenging to compute the
distance between the ground truth and approximated explanations as the latter contains significantly
fewer tokens (features), as opposed to previous experiments where these two explanations always
had equal dimensions. Thus, MAE becomes biased towards sparse explanations and popular tokens,
i.e. an explanation with a single token of well-approximated importance could have an error close
to 0. For context, we measure TV between the discrete distributions of tokens in local explanations
before the global aggregation (lower is better). We report results for different token cutoffs, where we
remove the tokens from the ground truth explanation by their rarity, which saturates at 5% tokens left.

                 A)                            D)


                 B)


                 C)


Figure 14: CTE for G - LIME of a DistilBERT model classifying IMDB reviews. A) It is not obvi-
ous how to measure the distance between global explanations containing different sets of tokens
(Token coverage in % w.r.t. ground truth, ↑). Therefore, we gradually remove rare tokens from
the measurement based on their occurrence in the ground truth explanation (Token cutoff in quan-
tiles). B) Measurement of mean absolute error (MAE, ↓) between aggregated global explanations.
C) Measurement of total variation distance (TV, ↓) between token occurrences in local explanations
before global aggregation. D) We show an exemplary “worst-case” explanation, i.e. with the lowest
MAE for cutoff 0.95 where token coverage is over 99%, for both CTE and i.i.d. sampling. For this
visualization, we only show the importance of the 5 most positive/negative tokens, and 5 tokens with
the importance closest to zero. Explanation approximation error is indicated with transparent bars.
Notably, i.i.d. sampling misses containing any input with an important token “superbly”, while CTE
misses “disgrace”. Sampling overestimates the global importance of tokens “disappointing”, “into”
and “get”, while CTE, for example, overestimates “than” and underestimates “tedious” or “delightful”.

   2
       https://huggingface.co/dfurman/distilbert-base-uncased-imdb
   3
       https://huggingface.co/datasets/stanfordnlp/imdb


                                                    24
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


G    A BLATIONS
Figures 15–23 report the explanation approximation error for 30 predictive tasks. We observe that
CTE significantly improves the estimation of FEATURE - EFFECTS in all cases. Another insight is that,
on average, CTE provides a smaller improvement over i.i.d. sampling when considering compressing
foreground data in SAGE.

                                          Dataset: california_housing
     1e 2          KernelSHAP    1e 2     KernelSAGE     1e 2   KernelSAGE (fg.)   1e 1    Feature Effects
                                 7.5                     7.5                       1.2
          6
          4                      5.0                     5.0                       0.8
    MAE


          2                      2.5                     2.5                       0.4
          0                      0.0                     0.0                       0.0
                                                                                          64 128 192 256
     1e 2 PermutationSHAP      1e 2 PermutationSAGE 1e 2 PermutationSAGE (fg.)               N samples
                               7.5                  7.5
          6
                               5.0                  5.0                                     Method
          4
    MAE


                               2.5                                                           sample
          2                                         2.5                                      compress
          0                    0.0                  0.0                                      cluster
                64 128 192 256     64 128 192 256         64 128 192 256
                   N samples           N samples              N samples

                                               Dataset: diamonds
     1e 2          KernelSHAP    1e 2     KernelSAGE     1e 2   KernelSAGE (fg.)   1e 1    Feature Effects
       3                         1.8                       6                       1.5
       2                         1.2                       4                       1.0
    MAE


       1                         0.6                       2                       0.5
       0                         0.0                       0                       0.0
                                                                                          64 128 192 256
     1e 2 PermutationSHAP      1e 2 PermutationSAGE 1e 2 PermutationSAGE (fg.)               N samples
                                                      6
          3                    1.2
                               0.8                    4                                     Method
          2
    MAE


                                                      2                                      sample
          1                    0.4                                                           compress
          0                    0.0                    0                                      cluster
                64 128 192 256     64 128 192 256         64 128 192 256
                   N samples           N samples              N samples

                                             Dataset: grid_stability
          1e 2      KernelSHAP    1e 3     KernelSAGE    1e 2 KernelSAGE (fg.) 1e 1 Feature Effects
                                    9                    4.5
          3.0                                                                       1.8
                                    6                    3.0
                                                                                    1.2
    MAE


          1.5                       3                    1.5                        0.6
          0.0                       0                    0.0                        0.0
                                                                                        32 64 96 128
          1e 2 PermutationSHAP
                           1e 3 PermutationSAGE          1e 2 PermutationSAGE (fg.)        N samples
                                                         4.5
          3.0              7.5
                                                3.0                                         Method
                           5.0
    MAE


          1.5                                   1.5                                          sample
                           2.5                                                               compress
          0.0              0.0                  0.0                                          cluster
              32 64 96 128     32 64 96 128         32 64 96 128
                 N samples         N samples           N samples

Figure 15: Extended Figure 6 (1/10). CTE improves the explanation approximation error of various
local and global removal-based explanations. SAGE is evaluated in two variants that consider either
compressing only the background data (default), or using the compressed samples as both background
and foreground data (as indicated with “fg.”). (mean ± sd.)


                                                        25
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                          Dataset: abalone
      1e 2    KernelSHAP    1e 1     KernelSAGE 1e 1 KernelSAGE (fg.) 1e 1 Feature Effects
                            1.2                 1.2                        1.5
      7.5
      5.0                   0.8                 0.8                        1.0
MAE


      2.5                   0.4                 0.4                        0.5
      0.0                   0.0                 0.0                        0.0
                                                                               32 64 96 128
      1e 2 PermutationSHAP 1e 1 PermutationSAGE 1e 1 PermutationSAGE (fg.)        N samples
                           1.2                  1.2
      7.5
                           0.8                  0.8                              Method
      5.0
MAE


                           0.4                  0.4                               sample
      2.5                                                                         compress
      0.0                  0.0                  0.0                               cluster
          32 64 96 128         32 64 96 128           32 64 96 128
              N samples            N samples              N samples

                                           Dataset: adult
 1e 3        KernelSHAP    1e 3     KernelSAGE     1e 2     KernelSAGE (fg.)   1e 2    Feature Effects
                           2.4                     1.2                         4.5
   6
   4                       1.6                     0.8                         3.0
MAE


   2                       0.8                     0.4                         1.5
   0                       0.0                     0.0                         0.0
                                                                                      64 128 192 256
 1e 3 PermutationSHAP    1e 3 PermutationSAGE 1e 2 PermutationSAGE (fg.)                 N samples
                         1.8                  1.2
      6
      4                  1.2                  0.8                                       Method
MAE


                                                                                         sample
      2                  0.6                  0.4                                        compress
      0                  0.0                  0.0                                        cluster
          64 128 192 256     64 128 192 256         64 128 192 256
             N samples           N samples              N samples

                                      Dataset: bank-marketing
 1e 3        KernelSHAP    1e 3     KernelSAGE     1e 2     KernelSAGE (fg.)   1e 2    Feature Effects
   6                                                                           4.5
                           2.4                     1.2
   4                       1.6                     0.8                         3.0
MAE


   2                       0.8                     0.4                         1.5
   0                       0.0                     0.0                         0.0
                                                                                      64 128 192 256
 1e 3 PermutationSHAP 1e 3 PermutationSAGE 1e 2 PermutationSAGE (fg.)                    N samples
   6                                       1.2
                      1.2
   4                  0.8                  0.8                                          Method
MAE


   2                                                                                     sample
                      0.4                  0.4                                           compress
   0                  0.0                  0.0                                           cluster
     64 128 192 256       64 128 192 256         64 128 192 256
         N samples            N samples              N samples

Figure 16: Extended Figure 6 (2/10). CTE improves the explanation approximation error of various
local and global removal-based explanations. SAGE is evaluated in two variants that consider either
compressing only the background data (default), or using the compressed samples as both background
and foreground data (as indicated with “fg.”). (mean ± sd.)


                                                  26
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                     Dataset: brazilian_houses
      1e 1    KernelSHAP    1e 1     KernelSAGE        1e1   KernelSAGE (fg.)   1e 1        Feature Effects
      1.2                   1.8                                                   9
                                                       3.0
      0.8                   1.2                                                   6
MAE


                            0.6                        1.5                        3
      0.4
      0.0                   0.0                        0.0                        0
                                                                                       32      64 96 128
      1e 1 PermutationSHAP 1e 1 PermutationSAGE 1e1 PermutationSAGE (fg.)                     N samples
      1.2                  1.5                    3
      0.8                  1.0                    2                                         Method
MAE


                                                                                             sample
      0.4                  0.5                    1                                          compress
      0.0                  0.0                    0                                          cluster
          32 64 96 128         32 64 96 128          32 64 96 128
              N samples            N samples             N samples

                                           Dataset: churn
      1e 3    KernelSHAP    1e 2     KernelSAGE   1e 2 KernelSAGE (fg.) 1e 2 Feature Effects
                            1.2
      7.5                                         1.8                        7.5
      5.0                   0.8                                              5.0
                                                  1.2
MAE


      2.5                   0.4                   0.6                        2.5
      0.0                   0.0                   0.0                        0.0
                                                                                 32 64 96 128
      1e 3  PermutationSHAP 1e 3  PermutationSAGE 1e 2 PermutationSAGE (fg.)        N samples
      7.5                     9                   1.8
      5.0                     6                   1.2                              Method
MAE


                                                                                    sample
      2.5                     3                   0.6                               compress
      0.0                     0                   0.0                               cluster
           32 64 96 128          32 64 96 128           32 64 96 128
               N samples             N samples              N samples

                                       Dataset: cps88wages
      1e 2    KernelSHAP    1e 3     KernelSAGE        1e 2 KernelSAGE (fg.) 1e 1 Feature Effects
      4.5                     9                        7.5                       1.2
      3.0                     6                        5.0                       0.8
MAE


      1.5                     3                        2.5                       0.4
      0.0                     0                        0.0                       0.0
                                                                                     64 128 192 256
      1e 2 PermutationSHAP 1e 3 PermutationSAGE        1e 2PermutationSAGE (fg.)        N samples
      4.5                    9                  7.5
      3.0                    6                  5.0                                         Method
MAE


                                                                                             sample
      1.5                    3                  2.5                                          compress
      0.0                    0                  0.0                                          cluster
          64 128 192 256       64 128 192 256       64 128 192 256
              N samples            N samples           N samples

Figure 17: Extended Figure 6 (3/10). CTE improves the explanation approximation error of various
local and global removal-based explanations. SAGE is evaluated in two variants that consider either
compressing only the background data (default), or using the compressed samples as both background
and foreground data (as indicated with “fg.”). (mean ± sd.)


                                                  27
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                        Dataset: cpu_activity
      1e 2    KernelSHAP    1e 2     KernelSAGE 1e 1 KernelSAGE (fg.) 1e 1 Feature Effects
      4.5                     6                 1.5                        7.5
      3.0                     4                 1.0                        5.0
MAE


      1.5                     2                 0.5                        2.5
      0.0                     0                 0.0                        0.0
                                                                               32 64 96 128
      1e 2 PermutationSHAP 1e 2 PermutationSAGE 1e 1 PermutationSAGE (fg.)        N samples
      4.5                  4.5                  1.2
      3.0                  3.0                  0.8                              Method
MAE


                                                0.4                               sample
      1.5                  1.5                                                    compress
      0.0                  0.0                  0.0                               cluster
          32 64 96 128         32 64 96 128           32 64 96 128
              N samples            N samples              N samples

                                       Dataset: jungle_chess
      1e 2    KernelSHAP    1e 3     KernelSAGE        1e 2 KernelSAGE (fg.)   1e 2    Feature Effects
                                                       2.4
      1.5                     6                                                3.0
                                                       1.6
      1.0                     4
MAE


                                                       0.8                     1.5
      0.5                     2
      0.0                     0                   0.0                        0.0
                                                                                 64 128 192 256
      1e 2  PermutationSHAP 1e 3  PermutationSAGE 1e 2 PermutationSAGE (fg.)        N samples
      1.8                                         2.4
                              6
      1.2                                         1.6                              Method
                              4
MAE


      0.6                                         0.8                               sample
                              2                                                     compress
      0.0                     0                   0.0                               cluster
           64 128 192 256        64 128 192 256         64 128 192 256
               N samples             N samples              N samples

                                         Dataset: electricity
      1e 2    KernelSHAP    1e 3     KernelSAGE        1e 2 KernelSAGE (fg.)   1e 2    Feature Effects
      1.5                     9                                                4.5
                                                       2.4
      1.0                     6                        1.6                     3.0
MAE


      0.5                     3                        0.8                     1.5
      0.0                     0                        0.0                     0.0
                                                                                      64 128 192 256
      1e 2 PermutationSHAP 1e 3 PermutationSAGE 1e 2 PermutationSAGE (fg.)               N samples
      1.5                  4.5                  2.4
      1.0                  3.0                  1.6                                     Method
MAE


      0.5                                                                                sample
                           1.5                  0.8                                      compress
      0.0                  0.0                  0.0                                      cluster
          64 128 192 256       64 128 192 256         64 128 192 256
              N samples            N samples              N samples

Figure 18: Extended Figure 6 (4/10). CTE improves the explanation approximation error of various
local and global removal-based explanations. SAGE is evaluated in two variants that consider either
compressing only the background data (default), or using the compressed samples as both background
and foreground data (as indicated with “fg.”). (mean ± sd.)


                                                  28
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                            Dataset: fifa
      1e 3    KernelSHAP    1e       KernelSAGE        1e 2 KernelSAGE (fg.)           Feature Effects
                            1.2 2                        6
                                                                               1e 1
      7.5                                                                      1.2
                            0.8                         4                      0.8
      5.0
MAE


      2.5                   0.4                         2                      0.4
      0.0                   0.0                         0                      0.0
                                                                                      64 128 192 256
      1e 3 PermutationSHAP 1e 3 PermutationSAGE 1e 2PermutationSAGE (fg.)                N samples
                           2.4                  4.5
        9
        6                  1.6                  3.0                                     Method
 MAE


                           0.8                  1.5                                      sample
        3                                                                                compress
        0                  0.0                  0.0                                      cluster
          64 128 192 256       64 128 192 256        64 128 192 256
              N samples            N samples             N samples

                                     Dataset: health_insurance
      1e 2    KernelSHAP    1e 3     KernelSAGE        1e 2 KernelSAGE (fg.) 1e 2 Feature Effects
                            7.5                          3
      1.8                                                                         7.5
      1.2                   5.0                          2
                                                                                  5.0
MAE


      0.6                   2.5                          1                        2.5
      0.0                   0.0                          0                        0.0
                                                                                      64 128 192 256
      1e 2 PermutationSHAP 1e 3 PermutationSAGE        1e 2 PermutationSAGE (fg.)        N samples
      1.8                  4.5                  2.4
      1.2                  3.0                  1.6                                     Method
MAE


                                                                                         sample
      0.6                  1.5                  0.8                                      compress
      0.0                  0.0                  0.0                                      cluster
          64 128 192 256       64 128 192 256       64 128 192 256
              N samples            N samples           N samples

                                            Dataset: jm1
      1e 2    KernelSHAP    1e 2     KernelSAGE 1e 2 KernelSAGE (fg.) 1e 1 Feature Effects
                            1.5                 2.4                        3
      2.4
      1.6                   1.0                 1.6                        2
MAE


      0.8                   0.5                 0.8                        1
      0.0                   0.0                 0.0                        0
                                                                             32 64 96 128
      1e 2 PermutationSHAP 1e 2 PermutationSAGE 1e 2 PermutationSAGE (fg.)      N samples
                           1.5                  2.4
      2.4
      1.6                  1.0                  1.6                            Method
MAE


                                                0.8                             sample
      0.8                  0.5                                                  compress
      0.0                  0.0                  0.0                             cluster
          32 64 96 128         32 64 96 128           32 64 96 128
              N samples            N samples              N samples

Figure 19: Extended Figure 6 (5/10). CTE improves the explanation approximation error of various
local and global removal-based explanations. SAGE is evaluated in two variants that consider either
compressing only the background data (default), or using the compressed samples as both background
and foreground data (as indicated with “fg.”). (mean ± sd.)


                                                  29
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                           Dataset: kin8nm
      1e 2      KernelSHAP    1e 2    KernelSAGE    1e 2 KernelSAGE (fg.)    1e 1        Feature Effects
                              1.2                     6
      4.5                                                                    1.2
                              0.8                       4
      3.0                                                                    0.8
MAE


      1.5                     0.4                       2                    0.4
      0.0                     0.0                       0                    0.0
                                                                                    32      64 96 128
      1e 2 PermutationSHAP1e 3 PermutationSAGE 1e6 2 PermutationSAGE (fg.)                 N samples
      4.5                   9
                            6                    4                                        Method
      3.0
MAE


                                                 2                                         sample
      1.5                   3                                                              compress
      0.0                   0                    0                                         cluster
             32 64 96 128     32 64 96 128            32 64 96 128
                N samples         N samples               N samples

                                        Dataset: kings_county
      1e 2      KernelSHAP    1e 2    KernelSAGE  1e 2 KernelSAGE (fg.) 1e 1 Feature Effects
      2.4                     1.2                   6                        3
      1.6                     0.8                   4                        2
MAE


      0.8                     0.4                   2                        1
      0.0                     0.0                   0                        0
                                                                               64 128 192 256
      1e 2  PermutationSHAP 1e 3  PermutationSAGE 1e 2 PermutationSAGE (fg.)      N samples
      2.4                     9                     6
      1.6                     6                     4                            Method
MAE


      0.8                                           2                             sample
                              3                                                   compress
      0.0                     0                     0                             cluster
           64 128 192 256        64 128 192 256         64 128 192 256
               N samples             N samples              N samples

                                       Dataset: miami_housing
      1e 2      KernelSHAP    1e 3    KernelSAGE1e 2 KernelSAGE (fg.) 1e 1 Feature Effects
                                                  6                        1.8
      1.8                  7.5
      1.2                  5.0                    4                        1.2
MAE


      0.6                  2.5                    2                        0.6
      0.0                  0.0                    0                        0.0
                                                                               32 64 96 128
      1e 2 PermutationSHAP 1e 3 PermutationSAGE 1e 2 PermutationSAGE (fg.)        N samples
                             6                    6
      1.8
                             4                    4                              Method
      1.2
MAE


                             2                    2                               sample
      0.6                                                                         compress
      0.0                    0                    0                               cluster
          32 64 96 128         32 64 96 128           32 64 96 128
              N samples            N samples              N samples

Figure 20: Extended Figure 6 (6/10). CTE improves the explanation approximation error of various
local and global removal-based explanations. SAGE is evaluated in two variants that consider either
compressing only the background data (default), or using the compressed samples as both background
and foreground data (as indicated with “fg.”). (mean ± sd.)


                                                   30
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                    Dataset: naval_propulsion_plant
      1e 1     KernelSHAP    1e 2     KernelSAGE1e 2 KernelSAGE (fg.) 1e           Feature Effects
                                                                           2.4 1
      1.2                    2.4                  9
      0.8                                         6                        1.6
                             1.6
MAE


      0.4                    0.8                  3                        0.8
      0.0                    0.0                  0                        0.0
                                                                                 32 64 96 128
      1e 1 PermutationSHAP 1e 2 PermutationSAGE 1e 2 PermutationSAGE (fg.)           N samples
      1.2                  2.4                    9
      0.8                  1.6                    6                                 Method
MAE


                                                  3                                  sample
      0.4                  0.8                                                       compress
      0.0                  0.0                    0                                  cluster
          32 64 96 128         32 64 96 128           32 64 96 128
              N samples            N samples              N samples

                                          Dataset: pendigits
      1e 3     KernelSHAP    1e 2     KernelSAGE        1e 2 KernelSAGE (fg.) 1e 2 Feature Effects
      7.5                    1.2                        1.5                        6
      5.0                    0.8                        1.0                        4
MAE


      2.5                    0.4                        0.5                        2
      0.0                    0.0                        0.0                        0
                                                                                     32 64 96 128
      1e 3 PermutationSHAP1e 2 PermutationSAGE          1e 2 PermutationSAGE (fg.)      N samples
      7.5                 1.2                  1.5
      5.0                 0.8                  1.0                                   Method
MAE


                                                                                      sample
      2.5                 0.4                  0.5                                    compress
      0.0                 0.0                  0.0                                    cluster
             32 64 96 128     32 64 96 128         32 64 96 128
                N samples         N samples           N samples

                                        Dataset: numerai28.6
      1e 3     KernelSHAP    1e 4     KernelSAGE1e 3 KernelSAGE (fg.) 1e 2 Feature Effects
        3                    1.2                4.5                       1.5
        2                    0.8                3.0                       1.0
 MAE


        1                    0.4                1.5                       0.5
        0                    0.0                0.0                       0.0
                                                    PermutationSAGE (fg.)     128 256 384 512
      1e 3 PermutationSHAP 1e 4 PermutationSAGE 1e 3                              N samples
      4.5                  1.2                  4.5
      3.0                  0.8                  3.0                              Method
MAE


      1.5                  0.4                  1.5                               sample
                                                                                  compress
      0.0                  0.0                  0.0                               cluster
          128 256 384 512      128 256 384 512       128 256 384 512
              N samples            N samples             N samples

Figure 21: Extended Figure 6 (7/10). CTE improves the explanation approximation error of various
local and global removal-based explanations. SAGE is evaluated in two variants that consider either
compressing only the background data (default), or using the compressed samples as both background
and foreground data (as indicated with “fg.”). (mean ± sd.)


                                                   31
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                         Dataset: phoneme
      1e 2    KernelSHAP    1e 3     KernelSAGE 1e 2 KernelSAGE (fg.) 1e 2 Feature Effects
                                                4.5                        6
      2.4                   7.5
                            5.0                 3.0                        4
      1.6
MAE


      0.8                   2.5                 1.5                        2
      0.0                   0.0                 0.0                        0
                                                                             32 64 96 128
      1e 2 PermutationSHAP 1e 3 PermutationSAGE 1e 2 PermutationSAGE (fg.)      N samples
                           7.5                  4.5
      2.4
      1.6                  5.0                  3.0                            Method
MAE


                                                1.5                             sample
      0.8                  2.5                                                  compress
      0.0                  0.0                  0.0                             cluster
          32 64 96 128         32 64 96 128           32 64 96 128
              N samples            N samples              N samples

                                   Dataset: physiochemical_protein
      1e 2    KernelSHAP    1e 1     KernelSAGE        1e 2 KernelSAGE (fg.)   1e 1    Feature Effects
      7.5                   1.5                         6                        3
      5.0                   1.0                         4                        2
MAE


      2.5                   0.5                         2                        1
      0.0                   0.0                         0                        0
                                                                                      64 128 192 256
      1e 2 PermutationSHAP 1e 1 PermutationSAGE 1e 2 PermutationSAGE (fg.)               N samples
        9                  1.5                    6
        6                  1.0                    4                                     Method
 MAE


        3                                                                                sample
                           0.5                    2                                      compress
        0                  0.0                    0                                      cluster
          64 128 192 256       64 128 192 256         64 128 192 256
              N samples            N samples              N samples

                                          Dataset: sarcos
      1e 2    KernelSHAP    1e 2     KernelSAGE 1e 2 KernelSAGE (fg.) 1e 1 Feature Effects
                                                4.5                        1.8
      1.5                   1.8
      1.0                   1.2                 3.0                        1.2
MAE


      0.5                   0.6                 1.5                        0.6
      0.0                   0.0                 0.0                        0.0
                                                                               64 128 192 256
      1e 2 PermutationSHAP 1e 3 PermutationSAGE 1e 2 PermutationSAGE (fg.)        N samples
      1.8                  4.5                    3
      1.2                  3.0                    2                              Method
MAE


      0.6                  1.5                    1                               sample
                                                                                  compress
      0.0                  0.0                    0                               cluster
          64 128 192 256       64 128 192 256         64 128 192 256
              N samples            N samples              N samples

Figure 22: Extended Figure 6 (8/10). CTE improves the explanation approximation error of various
local and global removal-based explanations. SAGE is evaluated in two variants that consider either
compressing only the background data (default), or using the compressed samples as both background
and foreground data (as indicated with “fg.”). (mean ± sd.)


                                                  32
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                    Dataset: wall-robot-navigation
 1e 3        KernelSHAP     1e 3     KernelSAGE     1e 2     KernelSAGE (fg.)   1e 1        Feature Effects
   6                          9                     1.5                         1.2
   4                          6                     1.0                         0.8
MAE


   2                          3                     0.5                         0.4
   0                          0                     0.0                         0.0
                                                                                       32      64 96 128
 1e 3 PermutationSHAP 1e 3 PermutationSAGE 1e 3 PermutationSAGE (fg.)                         N samples
   6                    3                    9
   4                    2                    6                                               Method
MAE


                                                                                              sample
   2                    1                    3                                                compress
   0                    0                    0                                                cluster
     32 64 96 128         32 64 96 128           32 64 96 128
         N samples            N samples              N samples

                                         Dataset: white_wine
      1e 2    KernelSHAP     1e 2     KernelSAGE  1e 2 KernelSAGE (fg.) 1e 1 Feature Effects
      4.5                                           6                        2.4
                             1.2
      3.0                    0.8                    4                        1.6
MAE


      1.5                    0.4                    2                        0.8
      0.0                    0.0                    0                        0.0
                                                                                 32 64 96 128
      1e 2  PermutationSHAP 1e 2  PermutationSAGE 1e 2 PermutationSAGE (fg.)        N samples
      4.5                   1.2                     6
      3.0                   0.8                     4                              Method
MAE


                                                                                    sample
      1.5                   0.4                     2                               compress
      0.0                   0.0                     0                               cluster
           32 64 96 128          32 64 96 128           32 64 96 128
               N samples             N samples              N samples

                                             Dataset: wilt
      1e 2     KernelSHAP    1e 2     KernelSAGE    1e 2     KernelSAGE (fg.) 1e 2          Feature Effects
                               6                                                6
      3.0                                             6
                               4                                                 4
                                                      4
MAE


      1.5                      2                      2                          2
      0.0                      0                      0                          0
                                                                                       32      64 96 128
      1e 2 PermutationSHAP 1e6 2 PermutationSAGE 1e 2 PermutationSAGE (fg.)                   N samples
                                                   6
      3.0                    4
                                                   4                                         Method
MAE


      1.5                    2                                                                sample
                                                   2                                          compress
      0.0                    0                     0                                          cluster
          32 64 96 128          32 64 96 128           32 64 96 128
              N samples             N samples              N samples

Figure 23: Extended Figure 6 (9/10). CTE improves the explanation approximation error of various
local and global removal-based explanations. SAGE is evaluated in two variants that consider either
compressing only the background data (default), or using the compressed samples as both background
and foreground data (as indicated with “fg.”). (mean ± sd.)


                                                   33
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                    Dataset: video_transcoding
      1e 2    KernelSHAP    1e 2    KernelSAGE        1e 2 KernelSAGE (fg.) 1e 1 Feature Effects
                            1.2
      1.8                                             4.5                        1.5
      1.2                   0.8                       3.0                        1.0
MAE


      0.6                   0.4                       1.5                        0.5
      0.0                   0.0                       0.0                        0.0
                                                                                     128 256 384 512
      1e 2 PermutationSHAP 1e 3 PermutationSAGE       1e 2 PermutationSAGE (fg.)         N samples
                           4.5                        4.5
      1.8
      1.2                  3.0                  3.0                                  Method
MAE


                           1.5                  1.5                                   sample
      0.6                                                                             compress
      0.0                  0.0                  0.0                                   cluster
          128 256 384 512      128 256 384 512      128 256 384 512
              N samples            N samples            N samples

                                          Dataset: letter
      1e 3    KernelSHAP    1e 3    KernelSAGE    1e 2 KernelSAGE (fg.) 1e 2 Feature Effects
                              3                   1.2                        2.4
      3.0
                              2                   0.8                        1.6
MAE


      1.5                                         0.4                        0.8
                              1
      0.0                     0                   0.0                        0.0
                                                                                 64 128 192 256
      1e 3  PermutationSHAP 1e 3  PermutationSAGE 1e 2 PermutationSAGE (fg.)        N samples
      4.5                                         1.2
                              3
      3.0                     2                   0.8                              Method
MAE


      1.5                                                                           sample
                              1                   0.4                               compress
      0.0                     0                   0.0                               cluster
           64 128 192 256        64 128 192 256         64 128 192 256
               N samples             N samples              N samples

                                     Dataset: PhishingWebsites
      1e 3    KernelSHAP    1e 3    KernelSAGE  1e 2 KernelSAGE (fg.) 1e 1 Feature Effects
      7.5                     6                 1.2                        1.2
      5.0                     4                 0.8                        0.8
MAE


      2.5                     2                 0.4                        0.4
      0.0                     0                 0.0                        0.0
                                                                               32 64 96 128
      1e 3 PermutationSHAP 1e 3 PermutationSAGE 1e 3 PermutationSAGE (fg.)        N samples
      7.5                  2.4                    9
      5.0                  1.6                    6                              Method
MAE


                                                                                  sample
      2.5                  0.8                    3                               compress
      0.0                  0.0                    0                               cluster
          32 64 96 128         32 64 96 128           32 64 96 128
              N samples            N samples              N samples

Figure 24: Extended Figure 6 (10/10). CTE improves the explanation approximation error of various
local and global removal-based explanations. SAGE is evaluated in two variants that consider either
compressing only the background data (default), or using the compressed samples as both background
and foreground data (as indicated with “fg.”). (mean ± sd.)


                                                 34
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


H    C OMPUTE RESOURCES
Experiments described in Sections 4.1, 4.2 & 4.5, and Figure 4, were computed on a personal
computer with an M3 chip as justified in the beginning of Section 4. Experiments described in
Sections 4.3 & 4.4 were computed on a cluster with 4× AMD Rome 7742 CPUs (256 cores) and
4TB of RAM for about 14 days combined.


                                               35
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


I          V ISUAL COMPARISON OF EXPLANATIONS
We provide exemplary visual comparisons between ground truth explanations and those estimated on
an i.i.d. and compressed sample in 4 experimental settings.
Figure 25 shows a comparison for KERNEL - SAGE explaining an XGBoost model trained on the
compas dataset. Figure 26 shows a comparison for PERMUTATION - SHAP explaining a neural
network trained on the compas dataset, and Figure 27 shows the same on the heloc dataset. Note
that we show all local explanations at once (not to hand-pick a single one), which might falsely look
like a good approximation “on average” when in fact the attribution values in specific cases differ
significantly. Figure 28 shows a comparison for FEATURE - EFFECTS explaining an XGBoost model
trained on the grid stability dataset, and Figure 29 shows the same on the miami housing
dataset. Figures 30 & 31 show exemplary visual comparisons for EXPECTED - GRADIENTS explaining
a convolutional neural network trained on the CIFAR 10 dataset.
                           Ground truth explanation estimated on a full sample                                                                  Explanation estimated on an i.i.d. sample
           priors_count                                                                                              priors_count
                   race                                                                                                      race
        two_year_recid                                                                                            two_year_recid
    c_charge_degree_F                                                                                                         age
                    age                                                                                       c_charge_degree_F
            sex_Female                                                                                                sex_Female
         length_of_stay                                                                                            length_of_stay
                       0.04              0.02          0.00      0.02         0.04               0.06                            0.04                0.02             0.00     0.02                            0.04                 0.06
                                                         SAGE value                                                                                                      SAGE value


                           Ground truth explanation estimated on a full sample                                                            Explanation estimated on a compressed sample
            priors_count                                                                                              priors_count
                    race                                                                                                      race
         two_year_recid                                                                                            two_year_recid
     c_charge_degree_F                                                                                         c_charge_degree_F
                     age                                                                                                       age
             sex_Female                                                                                                sex_Female
          length_of_stay                                                                                            length_of_stay
                        0.04              0.02         0.00      0.02         0.04                     0.06                       0.04                 0.02            0.00      0.02                            0.04                        0.06
                                                         SAGE value                                                                                                      SAGE value

Figure 25: Comparison between KERNEL - SAGE estimated on the full (left), sampled (right top), and
compressed (right bottom) subsets of the compas dataset. MAE introduced by i.i.d. sampling equals
0.0050 for the importance values and 0.00033 for their standard deviations (error bars), by CTE is
0.0011 and 0.00007 respectively, and so the relative improvement of CTE is 78% in both cases.

                          Ground truth explanation estimated on a full sample        High
                                                                                                                                            Explanation estimated on an i.i.d. sample                                      High
           priors_count                                                                                              priors_count
                    age                                                                                                       age
        two_year_recid                                                                                             length_of_stay
                                                                                       Feature value


                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Feature value


         length_of_stay                                                                                           two_year_recid
                   race                                                                                                      race
    c_charge_degree_F                                                                                         c_charge_degree_F
            sex_Female                                                                                                sex_Female
                                                                                     Low                                                                                                                                   Low
                           0.8     0.6          0.4    0.2    0.0    0.2    0.4                                                     0.8        0.6       0.4         0.2         0.0         0.2         0.4         0.6
                                   SHAP value (impact on model output)                                                                          SHAP value (impact on model output)


                          Ground truth explanation estimated on a full sample        High
                                                                                                                                      Explanation estimated on a compressed sample                                         High
           priors_count                                                                                              priors_count
                    age                                                                                                       age
        two_year_recid                                                                                            two_year_recid
                                                                                         Feature value


                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Feature value


         length_of_stay                                                                                            length_of_stay
                   race                                                                                                      race
    c_charge_degree_F                                                                                         c_charge_degree_F
            sex_Female                                                                                                sex_Female
                                                                                     Low                                                                                                                                   Low
                            0.8     0.6          0.4    0.2   0.0     0.2   0.4                                                       0.8        0.6           0.4         0.2         0.0         0.2         0.4
                                    SHAP value (impact on model output)                                                                          SHAP value (impact on model output)


Figure 26: Comparison between all local PERMUTATION - SHAP explanations estimated on full (left),
sampled (right top), and compressed (right bottom) subsets of the compas dataset. MAE introduced
by i.i.d. sampling equals 0.0227, by CTE is 0.0032, and so the relative improvement of CTE is 86%.


                                                                                                          36
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                   Ground truth explanation estimated on a full sample High                                                                  Explanation estimated on an i.i.d. sample         High
        NetFractionRevolvingBurden                                                                                          NetFractionRevolvingBurden
             MSinceMostRecentDelq                                                                                                MSinceMostRecentDelq
                     AverageMInFile                                                                                                      AverageMInFile
               ExternalRiskEstimate                                                                                              NumSatisfactoryTrades
             NumSatisfactoryTrades                                                                                                       NumInqLast6M
     MSinceMostRecentInqexcl7days                                                                                                  ExternalRiskEstimate
                     NumInqLast6M                                                                                        MSinceMostRecentInqexcl7days
 NumBank2NatlTradesWHighUtilization                                                                                  NumBank2NatlTradesWHighUtilization
      NumRevolvingTradesWBalance                                                                                               NumInqLast6Mexcl7days
           NumInqLast6Mexcl7days                                                                                          NumRevolvingTradesWBalance
           MSinceOldestTradeOpen                                                                                               MSinceOldestTradeOpen


                                                                                                  Feature value


                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Feature value
                PercentInstallTrades                                                                                                PercentInstallTrades
           PercentTradesNeverDelq                                                                                              PercentTradesNeverDelq
    NumTrades60Ever2DerogPubRec                                                                                            MSinceMostRecentTradeOpen
       MSinceMostRecentTradeOpen                                                                                        NumTrades60Ever2DerogPubRec
         NumTradesOpeninLast12M                                                                                              NumTradesOpeninLast12M
                       MaxDelqEver                                                                                                         MaxDelqEver
                    NumTotalTrades                                                                                                      NumTotalTrades
            PercentTradesWBalance                                                                                              NetFractionInstallBurden
           NetFractionInstallBurden                                                                                          NumInstallTradesWBalance
    NumTrades90Ever2DerogPubRec                                                                                             MaxDelq2PublicRecLast12M
         NumInstallTradesWBalance                                                                                               PercentTradesWBalance
        MaxDelq2PublicRecLast12M                                                                                        NumTrades90Ever2DerogPubRec
                                                                                                Low                                                                                                            Low
                                              0.4          0.2       0.0       0.2        0.4                                                                    0.4       0.2      0.0       0.2        0.4
                                                SHAP value (impact on model output)                                                                              SHAP value (impact on model output)


                                       Ground truth explanation estimated on a full sample High                                                            Explanation estimated on a compressed sample        High
        NetFractionRevolvingBurden                                                                                          NetFractionRevolvingBurden
             MSinceMostRecentDelq                                                                                                MSinceMostRecentDelq
                     AverageMInFile                                                                                                      AverageMInFile
               ExternalRiskEstimate                                                                                              NumSatisfactoryTrades
             NumSatisfactoryTrades                                                                                                 ExternalRiskEstimate
     MSinceMostRecentInqexcl7days                                                                                        MSinceMostRecentInqexcl7days
                     NumInqLast6M                                                                                                        NumInqLast6M
 NumBank2NatlTradesWHighUtilization                                                                                  NumBank2NatlTradesWHighUtilization
      NumRevolvingTradesWBalance                                                                                          NumRevolvingTradesWBalance
           NumInqLast6Mexcl7days                                                                                               NumInqLast6Mexcl7days
           MSinceOldestTradeOpen                                                                                               MSinceOldestTradeOpen
                                                                                                    Feature value


                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Feature value
                PercentInstallTrades                                                                                                PercentInstallTrades
           PercentTradesNeverDelq                                                                                              PercentTradesNeverDelq
    NumTrades60Ever2DerogPubRec                                                                                         NumTrades60Ever2DerogPubRec
       MSinceMostRecentTradeOpen                                                                                           MSinceMostRecentTradeOpen
         NumTradesOpeninLast12M                                                                                              NumTradesOpeninLast12M
                       MaxDelqEver                                                                                                         MaxDelqEver
                    NumTotalTrades                                                                                                      NumTotalTrades
            PercentTradesWBalance                                                                                               PercentTradesWBalance
           NetFractionInstallBurden                                                                                     NumTrades90Ever2DerogPubRec
    NumTrades90Ever2DerogPubRec                                                                                                NetFractionInstallBurden
         NumInstallTradesWBalance                                                                                            NumInstallTradesWBalance
        MaxDelq2PublicRecLast12M                                                                                            MaxDelq2PublicRecLast12M
                                                                                                Low                                                                                                            Low
                                               0.4          0.2       0.0       0.2       0.4                                                                   0.4       0.2      0.0       0.2        0.4
                                                    SHAP value (impact on model output)                                                                           SHAP value (impact on model output)


Figure 27: Comparison between all local PERMUTATION - SHAP explanations estimated on full (left),
sampled (right top), and compressed (right bottom) subsets of the heloc dataset. MAE introduced
by i.i.d. sampling equals 0.0087, by CTE is 0.0053, and so the relative improvement of CTE is 38%.


                                                                                                                    37
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                  Feature = tau1          Feature = tau2          Feature = tau3          Feature = tau4
                       0.04



      Feature effect
                       0.02
                       0.00

                                     1 0 1                  1 0 1                    1 0 1                 1 0 1
                                    Feature = p1           Feature = p2             Feature = p3          Feature = p4
                       0.04
      Feature effect


                       0.02                                                                                                Explanation
                                                                                                                             CTE
                       0.00                                                                                                  i.i.d.
                                                                                                                             Ground truth
                              2.5        0.0     2.5        1 0 1                    1 0 1                 1 0 1
                                    Feature = g1           Feature = g2             Feature = g3          Feature = g4
                       0.04
      Feature effect


                       0.02
                       0.00

                                    1 0 1                  1 0 1                   1 0 1                   1 0 1
                                   Feature value          Feature value           Feature value           Feature value

Figure 28: Comparison between FEATURE - EFFECTS explanation estimated on the full (Ground truth),
sampled (i.i.d.), and compressed (CTE) subsets of the grid stability dataset. MAE introduced
by i.i.d. sampling equals 0.0032, by CTE is 0.0007, and so the relative improvement of CTE is 79%.

                                  Feature = LATITUDE     Feature = LONGITUDE Feature = LND_SQFOOT Feature = TOT_LVG_AREA
        Feature effect


                         600000

                         400000

                         200000
                                  2       0             2      0       2          0         5           0.0 2.5 5.0
                              Feature = SPEC_FEAT_VAL Feature = RAIL_DIST      Feature = OCEAN_DIST Feature = WATER_DIST
        Feature effect


                         600000

                         400000

                         200000                                                                                            Explanation
                                    0         5             0      2       2       0      2                 0        2
                                                                                                                             CTE
                                  Feature = CNTR_DIST Feature = SUBCNTR_DI Feature = HWY_DIST              Feature = age     i.i.d.
                                                                                                                             Ground truth
        Feature effect


                         600000

                         400000

                         200000
                                   2      0      2      2     0      2            0           5              0        2
                                  Feature = avno60plus Feature = month_sold Feature = structure_quality    Feature value
        Feature effect


                         600000

                         400000

                         200000
                                  0            5              1 0 1                 2        0
                                      Feature value          Feature value           Feature value

Figure 29: Comparison between FEATURE - EFFECTS explanation estimated on the full (Ground truth),
sampled (i.i.d.), and compressed (CTE) subsets of the miami housing dataset. MAE introduced
by i.i.d. sampling equals 49766, by CTE is 14031, and so the relative improvement of CTE is 71%.



                                                                               38
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                    Prediction: horse                                              Prediction: horse
                                                       1.00
                                                                                                                      1.5
                                                       0.75
                                                                                                                      1.0
                                                       0.50
         i.i.d.      Ground truth           CTE                         i.i.d.      Ground truth           CTE        0.5
                                                       0.25

                                                       0.00                                                           0.0

                                                        0.25                                                           0.5
     MAE = 0.0276    MAE = 0.0000       MAE = 0.0211                MAE = 0.0202    MAE = 0.0000       MAE = 0.0135
                                                        0.50
                                                                                                                       1.0
                                                        0.75
                                                                                                                       1.5
                                                        1.00

                    Prediction: plane                                              Prediction: deer

                                                       1.0                                                            0.4


         i.i.d.      Ground truth           CTE        0.5              i.i.d.      Ground truth           CTE        0.2


                                                       0.0                                                            0.0


     MAE = 0.0279    MAE = 0.0000       MAE = 0.0207    0.5         MAE = 0.0151    MAE = 0.0000       MAE = 0.0092    0.2


                                                        1.0                                                            0.4



                     Prediction: car                                                Prediction: car
                                                       1.00                                                           1.00
                                                       0.75                                                           0.75
                                                       0.50                                                           0.50
         i.i.d.      Ground truth           CTE                         i.i.d.      Ground truth           CTE
                                                       0.25                                                           0.25

                                                       0.00                                                           0.00

                                                        0.25                                                           0.25
     MAE = 0.0262    MAE = 0.0000       MAE = 0.0193                MAE = 0.0240    MAE = 0.0000       MAE = 0.0177
                                                        0.50                                                           0.50

                                                        0.75                                                           0.75

                                                        1.00                                                           1.00

                     Prediction: car                                               Prediction: ship

                                                       1.0
                                                                                                                      1.0

                                                       0.5
         i.i.d.      Ground truth           CTE                         i.i.d.      Ground truth           CTE        0.5


                                                       0.0                                                            0.0


     MAE = 0.0216    MAE = 0.0000       MAE = 0.0154    0.5         MAE = 0.0216    MAE = 0.0000       MAE = 0.0153    0.5


                                                                                                                       1.0
                                                        1.0


Figure 30: Comparison between EXPECTED - GRADIENTS explanations estimated on the full (Ground
truth), sampled (i.i.d.), and compressed (CTE) subsets of the CIFAR 10 dataset. The bottom rows
visualize the differences (MAE ↓) from the ground truth explanation. All predictions are correct.



                                                               39
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                    Prediction: horse                                             Prediction: bird
                                                                                                                    0.8
                                                       1.0
                                                                                                                    0.6

                                                       0.5                                                          0.4
         i.i.d.      Ground truth           CTE                        i.i.d.      Ground truth          CTE
                                                                                                                    0.2

                                                       0.0                                                          0.0

                                                                                                                     0.2
     MAE = 0.0221    MAE = 0.0000       MAE = 0.0141    0.5
                                                                   MAE = 0.0249   MAE = 0.0000       MAE = 0.0172
                                                                                                                     0.4

                                                                                                                     0.6
                                                        1.0
                                                                                                                     0.8

                    Prediction: ship                                              Prediction: deer
                                                       1.5
                                                                                                                    0.4
                                                       1.0

         i.i.d.      Ground truth           CTE                        i.i.d.      Ground truth          CTE        0.2
                                                       0.5

                                                       0.0                                                          0.0

                                                        0.5
     MAE = 0.0412    MAE = 0.0000       MAE = 0.0323               MAE = 0.0148   MAE = 0.0000       MAE = 0.0088    0.2
                                                        1.0
                                                                                                                     0.4
                                                        1.5



Figure 31: Comparison between EXPECTED - GRADIENTS explanations estimated on the full (Ground
truth), sampled (i.i.d.), and compressed (CTE) subsets of the CIFAR 10 dataset. The bottom rows
visualize the differences (MAE ↓) from the ground truth explanation. All predictions are wrong.


                                                              40
