LOL-EVE: P REDICTING P ROMOTER VARIANT
E FFECTS FROM E VOLUTIONARY S EQUENCES
 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                             A BSTRACT
         Genetic studies reveal extensive disease-associated variation across the human
         genome, predominantly in noncoding regions, such as promoters. Quantifying
         the impact of these variants on disease risk is crucial to our understanding of the
         underlying disease mechanisms and advancing personalized medicine. However,
         current computational methods struggle to capture variant effects, particularly
         those of insertions and deletions (indels), which can significantly disrupt gene
         expression. To address this challenge, we present LOL-EVE (Language Of Life
         for Evolutionary Variant Effects), a conditional autoregressive transformer model
         trained on 14.6 million diverse mammalian promoter sequences. Leveraging evo-
         lutionary information and proximal genetic context, LOL-EVE predicts indel vari-
         ant effects in human promoter regions. We introduce three new benchmarks for
         indel variant effect prediction in promoter regions, comprising the identification
         of putatively causal eQTLs, prioritization of rare variants in the human popula-
         tion, and understanding disruptions of transcription factor binding sites. We find
         that LOL-EVE achieves state-of-the-art performance on these tasks, demonstrat-
         ing the potential of region-specific large genomic language models and offering
         a powerful tool for prioritizing potentially causal non-coding variants in disease
         studies.


1   I NTRODUCTION
The molecular language of life, DNA, has existed for over 4 billion years, constantly subject to
evolutionary pressures. This evolution through natural selection can be seen as a series of count-
less experiments continuously refining the genomic code to maximize organismal fitness. A long
standing challenge of computational biology is to use genomic information to learn a mapping be-
tween underlying genomic state and the corresponding organism state, i.e. genotype to phenotype.
Utilizing evolutionary sequence information for unsupervised phenotype predictions is valuable as it
allows assessment of mutational impacts on organism fitness without requiring a priori knowledge of
impact mechanisms or experimental work. While substantial progress has been made in developing
compuational methods to determine how protein variants affect phenotype (Frazer et al., 2021; Hopf
et al., 2017; Orenbuch et al., 2023; Su et al., 2024; Notin et al., 2022; 2023), methods for predicting
the effects of variants in the rest of the genome, particularly in non-coding regions, are still in their
infancy.
Non-coding regions, which composes 99% of the genome, contain thousands of variants linked
to human disease (Maurano et al., 2012). These non-coding variants contribute to many rare and
undiagnosed diseases that have eluded diagnosis through protein-coding exome sequencing alone
(Marwaha et al., 2022). However, identifying whether these non-coding variants are causal of phe-
notype changes or merely passenger to, or in linkage disequilibrium, with causal variants remains
challenging (Abell et al., 2022).
Current approaches to variant effect prediction in non-coding regions primarily examine single nu-
cleotide variants (SNVs), which have been the primary focus due to the relative ease of their detec-
tion in whole-genome sequencing (Mullaney et al., 2010; Jiang et al., 2015). While this approach
has yielded valuable insights, there is an opportunity to expand our focus to include insertions and
deletions (indels), a vast and important source of genetic variation (Li et al., 2023). Several studies
suggest that the probability of individual SNVs having a large effect at an organismal scale is rel-


                                                   1
atively low, especially in non-coding regions (Kircher et al., 2014; Short et al., 2018). This lower
impact is partly due to the redundancy built into biological systems and the generally smaller effect
sizes of non-coding variants (Zhu et al., 2017). However, there is a considerable amount of heritabil-
ity in promoter regions, suggesting that these effects may be due to larger variants or the cumulative
impact of multiple SNVs (Gazal et al., 2017; Finucane et al., 2015).
Furthermore, many methods have relied on expression or chromatin accessibility data, highly in-
formative in specific biological contexts (Smedley et al., 2016) – however this data is difficult, and
sometimes impossible, to gather. As such, developing complementary methods that can make pre-
dictions in biological scenarios where such data is unavailable is valuable to the community. Pro-
moter variation likely accounts for a significant percentage of undiscovered causes of disease (Mau-
rano et al., 2012; Albert & Kruglyak, 2015), although research to date has revealed only small effects
on clinical outcomes and gene expression (Gamazon et al., 2018; GTEx Consortium et al., 2020).
Recent research has shown that the orientation and order of transcription factor (TF) binding sites
are major drivers of gene regulatory activity (Georgakopoulos-Soares et al., 2023), necessitating a
method that can predict the effects of large insertions or deletions.
We hypothesize that expanding the scope of variant effect prediction to include indels, particularly in
promoter regions, could lead to the discovery of variants with larger phenotypic effects (Zheng et al.,
2024; Chiang et al., 2017). This approach will potentially identify previously overlooked sources of
genetic variation with significant phenotypic impacts, contributing to a deeper understanding of rare
and undiagnosed diseases and potentially uncovering new pathways for diagnosis and treatment.
In this paper, we present LOL-EVE (Language Of Life across EVolutionary Effects), a novel ge-
nomic large language model designed to address the challenges of predicting indel variant effects in
promoter regions. Our key contributions are as follows:

       • We develop LOL-EVE, a 235 million parameter conditional generative model of pro-
         moter evolution for predicting variant effects (§ 3.1);
       • We construct a dataset of 14.6 million sequences comprising almost 20 thousand 1kb pro-
         moter region sequences from 447 species across mammalian evolution identified in the
         Zoonomia project (Christmas et al., 2023) (§ 3.2);
       • We create and introduce three new benchmarks specifically designed for zero-shot indel
         variant effect prediction in promoter regions, encompassing rare indel detection, causal
         variant prioritization and TF binding site disruption (§ 4).

This work not only advances the field of genomic language models but also provides a powerful tool
for studying the impact of non-coding variants on gene regulation and disease.

2   BACKGROUND
Here, we broadly categorized methods for modeling genomic sequences into alignment-free,
alignment-based, and sequence-to-activity. While this paper focuses on unsupervised models for
predicting evolutionary sequence fitness, we briefly touch on all three categories.
Alignment-free methods: A growing number of unsupervised language models (LMs) for eukary-
otic genomic DNA have been proposed, including DNABERT (Ji et al., 2021; Zhou et al., 2024),
Nucleotide Transformer (Dalla-Torre et al., 2023), HyenaDNA (Nguyen et al., 2023), and Caduceus
(Schiff et al., 2024). While having some differences in their architectures, training objectives, and
training data, these models are all fully unsupervised and trained only on genome-wide data (Bene-
gas et al., 2024b). While LMs have shown utility in some downstream prediction tasks, their per-
formance in variant effect prediction varies. Independent benchmarks have revealed that models
trained on genome-wide data learn different aspects of the genome to varying extents, sometimes
focusing on splice site patterns and other times on regulatory elements, in ways that are difficult to
predict (Marin et al., 2024; Li et al., 2024).
An alternative approach involves specialized LMs trained on local genomic regions, such as plant
promoters or fungal 5’ and 3’ regions (Levy et al., 2022; Gankin et al., 2023). These models reli-
ably capture regulatory motifs and learn embeddings useful for downstream tasks. Recently, Vilov
& Heinig (2024) proposed and evaluated several 3’UTR-specific language models for the human


                                                  2
genome. Their study showed that these region-specific models often outperformed genome-wide
models and even conservation-based approaches like PhyloP on various tasks, including variant
effect prediction.
Alignment-based methods: Multiple sequence alignments (MSAs) offer a powerful approach to
understanding natural sequence variation, enabling the identification of potentially non-neutral mu-
tations with likely functional consequences. PhyloP (Pollard et al., 2010) is an MSA-based statistical
method that assigns a conservation score to each position in a sequence and compares observed sub-
stitutions to those expected under a neutral evolution model. GPN-MSA (Benegas et al., 2024a),
a more recent development, combines whole-genome alignments with a genomic LM approach.
Trained to reconstruct masked nucleotides given an MSA as input, GPN-MSA has shown improve-
ment in SNV effect prediction compared to PhyloP. However, a major limitation of alignment-based
approaches is their treatment of positions individually, which doesn’t naturally generalize to indel
variants.
Sequence-to-activity models & Meta Predictors: An alternative approach to unsupervised models
of sequences involves training supervised regression or classification models on measurements of
sequence activity. These models often use data from high-throughput functional genomics experi-
ments that measure various aspects of genomic function, such as expression initiation or epigenetic
modifications. Models like Puffin (Dudnyk et al., 2024) and Enformer (Avsec et al., 2021) have
demonstrated an understanding of factors contributing to gene expression in different cell types.
Notably, Puffin showed correspondence with evolutionary conservation measures like PhyloP, sug-
gesting its ability to capture biologically relevant sequence features that are not cell type specific
(Dudnyk et al., 2024), but it has not been tested on variant effect prediction tasks. However, recent
studies by Sasse et al. (Sasse et al., 2023) and Huang et al. (Huang et al., 2023) have shown
that the performance of models such as DeepSEA (Zhou et al., 2018), Basenji2 (Kelley et al.,
2018), Enformer (Avsec et al., 2021) in explaining expression variation between individuals due
to cis-regulatory genetic variants remains limited. Another widely used method, CADD (Combined
Annotation Dependent Depletion), integrates numerous diverse genomic annotations into a single
deleteriousness score using machine learning (Schubach et al., 2024). However, as Grimm et al.
(Grimm et al., 2015) demonstrated, comparative evaluations of variant effect predictors like CADD
are complicated by circularity issues in their training and testing datasets. These findings underscore
the need for further research to overcome these limitations and enhance our understanding of genetic
variant effects in humans.


3     LOL-EVE

3.1   M ODEL A RCHITECTURE

To address the challenge of modeling non-aligned promoter sequences across mammalian evolution
for indel variant effect prediction, LOL-EVE learns a generative model over full promoter nucleotide
sequences. To incorporate evolutionary context, the model conditions its predictions on the pro-
moter’s most proximal gene, species, and clade, such as non-primate mammals and primates (Fig-
ure 1A-right). This strategy is implemented using a decoder-only transformer architecture, following
the CTRL framework (Keskar et al., 2019) (Figure 1B). The conditioning information is provided
as prefix tokens, allowing LOL-EVE to generate and score promoter sequences in a context-aware
manner. This approach enables the model to capture both broad evolutionary patterns and species-
specific variations in regulatory elements. This clade specificity, as shown in (Figure 1A-mid), can
be useful for capturing, in this model, mammal vs. primate-specific constraint, which is shown to be
crucial for distinguishing disease-associated regulatory variants. Specifically, primate-constrained
elements are more likely to harbor regulatory variants tied to human-specific traits and diseases,
while mammal-constrained elements may underlie conserved regulatory processes across a broader
evolutionary scope (Kuderna et al., 2023).
We provide the list of all model hyperparameters used in our final architecture in Table A1. Unlike
LMs that use k-mer tokenization schemes to achieve length compression (Dalla-Torre et al., 2023;
Zhou et al., 2024), LOL-EVE directly tokenizes the promoter sequence x at base pair resolution.
This enables the model to accurately handle insertions and deletions without causing tokenization
shifts in the remainder of the sequence.


                                                  3
   A. DATA PREPROCESSING                                 Clade A
                                                                                                      clade species gene

                                                                                                       A                       1     ATTTAGCCCGTTA...


               evolutionary sequences                                                  assemble
                                                                                                       A                       2     GCAATAACTTCAG...
                                                                                     training data
         extract promoters
                                             determine
                                               tokens                                                  A                       1     ATTAATTCGCGCC...


                                                                        ...
                   TSS


                                                                                                       ...

                                                                                                                    ...

                                                                                                                               ...



                                                                                                                                                 ...
        promoter exon 1             exon 2                                                             B                       3     GATATTCACGCGC...


      1KB upstream           gene                                                                           control codes               promoter sequences
                                                         Clade B



   B. PRE-TRAINING                                                     C. INFERENCE & BENCHMARKS


    A          1        A T T T A G C C ? ? ? ? ?



                                                                          Variant Prioritization               eQTLs                    TFBS Disruption


                             LOL-EVE

           next token
           prediction    ℙ(A) ℙ(C) ℙ(G) ℙ(T)                                                 common                   background                          variable
                                                                                                       predicted                         consistent
                                                                                                        causal

                                                                              rare



                                                                                     score                         score                          score


Figure 1: LOL-EVE approach overview Figure 1: LOL-EVE approach overview. A. Data pre-
processing: Promoter sequences (1KB upstream of first exon) are extracted from evolutionary se-
quences across mammals. Species are grouped into clades (e.g., Clade A: primates, Clade B: non-
primate mammals) and tokenized with control codes for clade, species, and gene identifiers. B.
Pre-training: The model performs next-token prediction conditioned on preceding sequence con-
text (x < i), control codes for clade (c), species (s), and ESM gene embeddings (g). C. Inference
Benchmarks: The model is evaluated on three tasks: (1) Variant Prioritization - distinguishing rare
from common variants in human populations, (2) eQTLs - identifying causal expression quantitative
trait loci, and (3) TFBS Disruption - predicting transcription factor binding site disruption effects in
consistently vs variably expressed genes.


                                                                   4
To encode the most proximal gene g, we use mean-pooled ESM2 embeddings
(ESM2 t33 650M UR50D) (Lin et al., 2023) of a gene’s canonical human protein sequence.
ESM vectors are kept frozen during training and are projected from dimension 1280 to LOL-EVE’s
embedding dimension using a learned linear mapping. The ESM-based embedding scheme allows
LOL-EVE to generalize to gene tokens unseen during training, which is critical in genomics where
chromosome-wise hold outs are typically preferred. The species s and clade c are encoded using
learned embeddings. Taken together, LOL-EVE models the autoregressive conditional distribution
of a length L promoter as:

                                                     L
                                                 1X
                           p(x|c, s, g) =              log p(xi |x<i , c, s, ESM(g)).                         (1)
                                                 L i=1

To prevent overfitting, we apply different data augmentation strategies during training. First, as
shown in equation 2 we apply control tag dropout to entice the model to learn representations that
are robust to the presence of such tags and mitigate sequence memorization. Second, we augment the
training data with reverse complements (rc), enabling LOL-EVE to bidirectionally score promoters
as shown in equation 3 and in (Figure 1C).

                  |D|
                  X
      L(D) = −          log pθ (xki |xk<i , ck , sk , g k , mk ⊙ [ck , sk , g k ]), where mk ∼ Bernoulli(p)   (2)
                  k=1


                                                 p(xvar                 p(xvar

                                   1                fwd |c, s, g)          rc |c, s, g)
                        score =            log      wt            + log                       .               (3)
                                   2             p(xfwd |c, s, g)       p(xwt
                                                                           rc |c, s, g)

The score in equation (3) represents the log-likelihood ratio between variant and wildtype sequences.
This captures how likely/unlikely the variant sequence is compared to wildtype, given evolutionary
patterns learned during pre-training.

3.2   T RAINING DATA

Promoters and other regulatory regions generally evolve faster than protein-coding sequences, as
regulatory changes can often be more easily tolerated than changes to protein structure and function
(Wittkopp & Kalay, 2011). To capture these evolutionarily relevant regulatory signals, particularly
those that have evolved recently, we focused on training data from mammals. We curated a promoter
dataset across 447 diverse species from the Zoonomia project (Christmas et al., 2023; Kuderna et al.,
2023).
Transcription Start Site (TSS) annotations, which are often used to infer promoter regions, are not
readily available for most species in our dataset due to several factors. Many of the 447 species lack
comprehensive genome annotations, particularly for regulatory regions like promoters. Even in well-
annotated species, TSS and promoter definitions can vary significantly across different databases and
research groups. To address this, we employed a comparative genomics approach to identify putative
promoter regions, leveraging sequence similarity to the first exon of 19,254 protein-coding genes
from the NCBI RefSeq human genome annotation (assembly GRCh38.p14, annotation release 109).
This strategy allowed us to consistently infer promoter regions across species by aligning known
human exonic regions to homologous exons in other species, then extracting sequences upstream
of the start of the first exon (which we define as the putative TSS). It’s important to note that no
genome has “promoter annotations” as such; rather, we use these inferred TSS positions and their
upstream sequences as proxies for promoter regions. Importantly, in the human annotations we
utilized, the 5’UTR often overlaps with the annotations for exon 1, which influences our definition
of putative promoter regions across species. A visual representation of the sequence regions is shown
in Figure 1A-left.
Using the HAL toolkit (Hickey et al., 2013), we performed a liftover of these exon coordinates to
each species in the Zoonomia project. For each species, exons were retained if their length was at
least 50% of the length of the corresponding human exon. This threshold ensured that conserved
regions were captured while excluding regions where the alignment is unreliable.


                                                           5
To define promoter regions, we extracted the 1,000 base pairs upstream of each exon start, account-
ing for the strand orientation of the gene. This conservative approach minimized the risk of including
non-promoter sequences but may exclude more distal regulatory elements, a potential caveat of the
1,000 bp window approach. Additionally, in cases where promoter regions from neighboring genes
were within 100 base pairs of each other, we merged the coordinates. This merging process ensured
that promoter regions were not artificially fragmented due to closely spaced genes.
To gain further insight into the validity of the upstream 1,000 bp approach, we scored all extracted
sequences using the Sei promoter score (Chen et al., 2022), which is trained on functional genomics
data from humans. Despite Sei being human-based, we found that the promoter scores general-
ize well across species, showing strong conservation of regulatory elements in many mammalian
species. Notably, promoters from species closely related to humans, such as other primates, tend to
have higher Sei scores, indicating similar promoter activity, while more distant species still retain
significant functional signal, suggesting that core regulatory sequences are preserved across mam-
mals (A1). Further we assessed how the Sei score distributions for 3 groups: Human CDS regions,
Human promoters, and our training data compare in (A2). Our training data promoter distribution
aligns more closely with the raw Human promoters than the Human CDS regions.
Including reverse complements, this resulted in a dataset of 14.6 million sequences. We employed a
chromosome-wise split for development, with chromosome 19 used for validation. Promoters from
non-human species were assigned to the respective set based on the chromosome of the human gene
used for liftover, thereby ensuring that all instances of a gene are placed in the same partition and no
gene information leakage between the training and validation set.

4     B ENCHMARKS
In the following section, we introduce a collection of benchmark tasks designed to evaluate the
unsupervised understanding of promoter variation. There are currently no established benchmarks
focused specifically on promoter indel variant effect prediction, making this work a significant con-
tribution to the field. All tasks are evaluated in a zero-shot setting, meaning the models have not
been explicitly trained on the specific benchmarks, highlighting their generalization ability to un-
seen promoter sequences and variant effects. To ensure rigorous and fair model comparisons across
these benchmarks, we maintain strict methodological consistency. This includes using standardized
scoring approaches across all models (detailed in A.3), implementing identical preprocessing and
evaluation pipelines, and focusing exclusively on zero-shot performance without any task-specific
training or fine-tuning.

4.1   F REQUENCY-BASED I NDEL P RIORITIZATION

Rationale Variants that are rare in the human population are generally more likely to be deleterious
than common variants, which are more likely to be of neutral consequence (Lohmueller et al., 2008).
Rare variants tend to be under stronger selective pressure, and as a result, they are often associated
with more severe functional consequences. Therefore, rare variants should be assigned lower variant
effect scores, reflecting their low likelihood of observation and possible deleteriousness.

Task Given a collection of indel variants labeled as rare and common based on population-wide
incidence, models should assign lower variant effect scores to rare variants. Using predicted model
scores, we evaluate the enrichment of low-frequency variants in the top 1% score percentile as the
odds ratio.

Data We collect promoter indel variants from gnomAD (Chen et al., 2024) release V4.0, cate-
gorizing variants into low-frequency variants and common variants using a mean allele frequency
(MAF) threshold of 0.05 (Consortium, 2015), yielding 578,495 low frequency indel variants and
15,137 common indel variants.

4.2   P UTATIVELY C AUSAL E QTL P RIORITIZATION

Rationale An expression Quantitative Trait Locus (eQTL) is a genetic variant that is statistically
associated with a phenotypic change in gene expression. For some eQTLs, the effect of the variant


                                                   6
on the expression change is putatively causal. Causality can be inferred using fine-mapping ap-
proaches, such as SUSIE (Wang et al., 2020b), which yield a posterior inclusion probability (PIP)
that quantifies the likelihood of causality. EQTLs can be anywhere in the genome regardless of the
position of their affected gene (eGene), eQTLs that are proximal to their eGene are referred to as
cis.

Task As the evolutionary directionality of a variant affecting expression is unclear (a causal change
in gene expression may be benign or deleterious), scores are evaluated as |score| in this task. Given
a collection of putatively causal and non-causal cis-eQTL indels in promoter regions, models are
expected to assign larger effect scores to putatively causal eQTLs because putatively causal variants
are more likely to induce meaningful changes in gene regulation compared to non-causal variants.
We analyze the difference in score between the two groups as the area under the precision-recall
curve (AUPRC) and as the effect size, as quantified by Cohen’s d. To make AUPRC values more
intuitive, we normalize the AUPRC by dividing it by the baseline AUPRC, which is equivalent to
the proportion of putatively causal variants in the dataset as defined in Table A4.

Data Putatively Causal eQTLs, fine-mapped credible sets based on SuSiE analysis (Wang et al.,
2020a) from 42 individual studies, were aquired from the eQTL Catalogue (Kerimov et al., 2021)
and filtered for those falling into our promoter regions defined previously. We subsetted to indel
eQTLs in promoter regions, filtering for cis-eQTLs where the eGene is the promoter’s proximal
gene. We bin the data into putatively causal and background eQTLs using a PIP cutoff of 0.95,
yielding 132 putatively causal and 3,949 non-causal variants.

4.3   TFBS D ISRUPTION

Rationale Transcription factors (TFs) are essential regulators of gene expression, binding to spe-
cific DNA sequences in promoter regions to control transcriptional activity. Disruptions to TF bind-
ing sites (TFBS) can significantly impact gene regulation, particularly in genes with consistent ex-
pression across multiple tissues. Genes with consistent expression across tissues are often more
intolerant to mutations, suggesting that disrupting TFBS in these genes could have more severe
consequences than in genes with variable expression across tissues (Wolf et al., 2023).

Task We divide genes into two groups (consistent and variable expression across tissues). For
each TF, we score in silico variants that completely delete TFBS in both groups. We expect variants
disrupting TFBS in consistently expressed genes to be more deleterious than those in variably ex-
pressed genes. We assume that deleting the TFBS would be deleterious in this context as the gene
of interest would no longer be expressed For each TF, we evaluate whether variants in consistently
expressed genes receive lower (more deleterious) scores than variants in variably expressed genes.
We report the delta accuracy (observed accuracy minus random accuracy of 0.5) across all TFs.

Data The gene groups were constructed using GTEx (Consortium, 2020) data to calculate the
coefficient of variation (CV) for gene expression across tissues. The 500 genes with the lowest
CV formed the “consistent expression” group, while the 500 genes with the highest CV constituted
the “variable expression” group. To identify relevant in silico TFBS disruptions, we employed a
two-step process:

      1. TF Selection: We sourced human TFs from the JASPAR CORE (Fornes et al., 2020)
         database, applying a filter to include only those expressed above 1 TPM in at least 30 tissue
         types.
      2. TFBS Identification: Using position-specific scoring matrices (PSSMs) from JASPAR, we
         scanned promoter sequences for TFBS with scores exceeding 0.8. A TFBS was considered
         knocked out if, following the deletion of the entire TFBS, the PSSM score in the mutated
         region fell below 0.8.

In total, we analyzed 340 TFs that met our filtering criteria, resulting in 38,854 deletions for the
consistently expressed gene group and 3,790 deletions for the variably expressed gene group.


                                                  7
5     R ESULTS



We benchmark LOL-EVE against DNA LMs that are applicable to the human genome: HyenaDNA
(Nguyen et al., 2023), DNABERT-2 (Zhou et al., 2024), Nucleotide Transformer (NT) (Dalla-Torre
et al., 2023), and Caduceus (Schiff et al., 2024). For LMs that make multiple checkpoints available,
we focus our discussion on the best performing checkpoint in each experiment, with remaining
checkpoints evaluated in section A.4. For scoring, we use the likelihood of autoregressive LMs,
and the pseudolikelihood for masked LMs (A.3). For benchmarking PhyloP, we use the score at
the position of the indel in the reference genome. Additionally, PhyloP is the only score where low
indicates a less conserved region or a region more tolerant to mutation, thus, within this work, we
always invert PhyloP scores to maintain consistent directionality for all methods.


5.1   F REQUENCY-BASED I NDEL P RIORITIZATION


Figure 2: Comparison of odds ratios for low frequency range (0.0 - 0.05) vs. common range(≥ 0.05)
variants across different models at the top 1% score percentile. Ablations are in Figure A3. Best
checkpoints: m-450k, ps-131k, 500m-human-ref.


LOL-EVE demonstrates superior performance in distinguishing between low-frequency and com-
mon indels across various minor allele frequency (MAF) thresholds (Figure A3). As shown in Fig-
ure 2, LOL-EVE achieves higher odds ratios compared to other models, particularly for rare variants
(MAF < 0.001). This suggests that LOL-EVE is more effective at identifying potentially deleteri-
ous rare variants in promoter regions. PhyloP also shows good performance, while DNABERT-2,
Nucleotide Transformer, Caduceus, HyenaDNA have lower discriminative power for this task.


                                                 8
5.2   C AUSAL E QTL P RIORITIZATION



Table 1: Performance on the eQTL causal variant prediction task. Effect sizes were calculated as
Cohen’s d. Complete results are in Table A5. Ablation of metrics vs PIP thresholds Figure A9. Best
checkpoints: ph-131k,s-32k, 2.5B-1000G

               Model            Effect size (↑)   AUPRC (↑)       Norm. AUPRC (↑)
               LOL-EVE               0.26              0.19               1.42
               Caduceus              0.21              0.17               1.28
               HyenaDNA              0.13              0.15               1.17
               NT                    0.11              0.15               1.11
               PhyloP               0.126             0.151              1.140
               DNABERT-2             -0.1              0.12               0.94


Table 1 illustrates LOL-EVE’s superior performance in distinguishing between causal and back-
ground eQTL variants. With the highest effect size (Cohen’s d = 0.28) and normalized AUPRC
(1.46), LOL-EVE outperforms other models in identifying causal variants. Nucleotide Transformer
shows the second-best performance, while DNABERT-2 shows a negative effect size.

5.3   TFBS D ISRUPTION


Figure 3: Comparison of delta accuracy scores models in predicting in silico TFBS disruptions. All
models in Figure A12. Best checkpoints: small-32k,ps-131k, 2.5B-MS.


Figure 3 demonstrates LOL-EVE’s effectiveness in predicting the impact of in silico TFBS disrup-
tions between consistently and variably expressed genes. LOL-EVE outperforms other models in
differentiating the potential effects of disruptions on these two gene sets. The model achieves a
higher percentage of transcription factors for which it correctly predicts lower disruption scores for
consistently expressed genes compared to variably expressed genes. LOL-EVE’s ability to capture
this biological expectation - that variably expressed genes should be less sensitive to TFBS dis-
ruptions than consistently expressed genes - indicates that LOL-EVE can more accurately predict


                                                  9
the functional impact of variations in these regions, aligning well with our understanding of gene
regulation dynamics across tissues.

6   D ISCUSSION & C ONCLUSION
LOL-EVE’s consistent superior performance across multiple benchmarks demonstrates its potential
as a powerful tool for predicting the effects of indel variants in promoter regions. By leveraging
evolutionary information and proximal genetic context, LOL-EVE captures important aspects of
regulatory genomics that other models may overlook. The model’s ability to distinguish between
low-frequency and common indels suggests it has learned to identify potentially deleterious variants
under negative selection. This capability is particularly valuable for identifying rare variants that
may contribute to disease risk, addressing a significant challenge in genomics research. Furthermore,
LOL-EVE’s strong performance in prioritizing causal eQTLs indicates its potential utility in fine-
mapping studies and in elucidating the genetic basis of gene expression variation. LOL-EVE’s
effectiveness in predicting transcription factor binding site disruptions in consistently or variably
expressed genes is especially noteworthy. This suggests that the model has learned to recognize
complex patterns in regulatory sequences and can predict the functional impact of variations in
these regions with respect to gene expression dynamics. Such capability is likely invaluable in
understanding the mechanisms by which non-coding variants contribute to phenotypic variation and
disease risk.
The superior performance of LOL-EVE over other models can be attributed to several factors that
address limitations in existing approaches. Many current models employ tokenization strategies that
may be disrupted by indel changes leading to poor performance in variant effect prediction tasks.
LOL-EVE’s base-pair-level tokenization allows it to handle indels more effectively, maintaining se-
quence integrity even in the presence of insertions or deletions. Additionally, models trained solely
on the human genome or on full genomes may lack the specific context necessary for accurate pro-
moter region analysis. LOL-EVE’s focus on promoter regions across multiple species provides it
with a rich evolutionary context, allowing it to capture subtle regulatory patterns that may be missed
by more generalized models. This specialized training approach enables LOL-EVE to better un-
derstand the functional importance of specific sequence motifs in promoter regions. Furthermore,
models relying on alignments for training or inference may struggle with promoter regions, which
often do not align perfectly across species due to their rapid evolution. LOL-EVE’s alignment-
free approach circumvents this issue, allowing it to capture regulatory information without being
constrained by alignment artifacts. This is particularly important for analyzing rapidly evolving reg-
ulatory regions where traditional alignment-based methods may fail to capture important functional
relationships.
While LOL-EVE shows promising results, there is still significant room for improvement. Future
work could focus on incorporating additional sources of biological information, such as more ex-
tensive genomic sequencing across mammalian evolution, to further enhance the model’s predictive
power. Moreover, experimental validation of LOL-EVE’s predictions will be crucial in establishing
its reliability for use in clinical and research settings. By addressing these limitations of existing
models, LOL-EVE represents a significant step forward in our ability to predict and understand the
effects of genetic variations in promoter regions. Its performance across diverse benchmarks re-
flecting critical challenges in disease genetics suggests that this approach of combining evolutionary
information with specialized training on promoter regions could set a new standard for genomic
language models in regulatory genomics.

R EFERENCES
Nathan S Abell, Marianne K DeGorter, Michael J Gloudemans, Emily Greenwald, Kevin S Smith,
  Zihuai He, and Stephen B Montgomery. Multiple causal variants underlie genetic associations in
  humans. Science, 375(6586):1247–1254, 2022.
Frank W Albert and Leonid Kruglyak. The role of regulatory variation in complex traits and disease.
  Nature Reviews Genetics, 16(4):197–212, 2015.
Žiga Avsec, Vikram Agarwal, Daniel Visentin, Joseph R Ledsam, Agnieszka Grabska-Barwinska,
   Kyle R Taylor, Yannis Assael, John Jumper, Pushmeet Kohli, and David R Kelley. Effective gene


                                                 10
  expression prediction from sequence by integrating long-range interactions. Nature methods, 18
  (10):1196–1203, 2021. doi: 10.1038/s41592-021-01252-x.
Gonzalo Benegas, Carlos Albors, Alan J. Aw, Chengzhong Ye, and Yun S. Song. Gpn-msa:
  an alignment-based dna language model for genome-wide variant effect prediction. bioRxiv,
  2024a. doi: 10.1101/2023.10.10.561776. URL https://www.biorxiv.org/content/early/
  2024/04/06/2023.10.10.561776.
Gonzalo Benegas, Chengzhong Ye, Carlos Albors, Jianan Canal Li, and Yun S. Song. Genomic
  language models: Opportunities and challenges, 2024b. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2407.
  11435.
Kathleen M Chen, Aaron K Wong, Olga G Troyanskaya, and Jian Zhou. A sequence-based global
  map of regulatory activity for deciphering human genetics. Nat. Genet., 54(7):940–949, July
  2022.
Siwei Chen, Laurent C Francioli, Julia K Goodrich, Ryan L Collins, Masahiro Kanai, Qingbo Wang,
  Jessica Alföldi, Nicholas A Watts, Christopher Vittal, Laura D Gauthier, et al. A genomic mu-
  tational constraint map using variation in 76,156 human genomes. Nature, 625(7993):92–100,
  2024.
Colby Chiang, Alexandra J Scott, Joe R Davis, Emily K Tsang, Xin Li, Yungil Kim, Towfique Pratt,
  Andrey Ziyatdinov, Fabian E Maller, Corin Ronning, et al. The impact of structural variation on
  human gene expression. Nature Genetics, 49(5):692–699, 2017.
Matthew J Christmas, Irene M Kaplow, Diane P Genereux, Michael X Dong, Graham M Hughes,
 Xue Li, Patrick F Sullivan, Allyson G Hindle, Gregory Andrews, Joel C Armstrong, Matteo
 Bianchi, Ana M Breit, Mark Diekhans, Cornelia Fanter, Nicole M Foley, Daniel B Goodman,
 Linda Goodman, Kathleen C Keough, Bogdan Kirilenko, Amanda Kowalczyk, Colleen Lawless,
 Abigail L Lind, Jennifer R S Meadows, Lucas R Moreira, Ruby W Redlich, Louise Ryan, Ross
 Swofford, Alejandro Valenzuela, Franziska Wagner, Ola Wallerman, Ashley R Brown, Joana
 Damas, Kaili Fan, John Gatesy, Jenna Grimshaw, Jeremy Johnson, Sergey V Kozyrev, Alyssa J
 Lawler, Voichita D Marinescu, Kathleen M Morrill, Austin Osmanski, Nicole S Paulat, Badoi N
 Phan, Steven K Reilly, Daniel E Schäffer, Cynthia Steiner, Megan A Supple, Aryn P Wilder, Mor-
 gan E Wirthlin, James R Xue, Zoonomia Consortium§, Bruce W Birren, Steven Gazal, Robert M
 Hubley, Klaus-Peter Koepfli, Tomas Marques-Bonet, Wynn K Meyer, Martin Nweeia, Pardis C
 Sabeti, Beth Shapiro, Arian F A Smit, Mark S Springer, Emma C Teeling, Zhiping Weng, Michael
 Hiller, Danielle L Levesque, Harris A Lewin, William J Murphy, Arcadi Navarro, Benedict Paten,
 Katherine S Pollard, David A Ray, Irina Ruf, Oliver A Ryder, Andreas R Pfenning, Kerstin
 Lindblad-Toh, and Elinor K Karlsson. Evolutionary constraint and innovation across hundreds
 of placental mammals. Science, 380(6643):eabn3943, April 2023.
1000 Genomes Project Consortium. A global reference for human genetic variation. Nature, 526
  (7571):68–74, 2015.
GTEx Consortium. The gtex consortium atlas of genetic regulatory effects across human tissues.
 Science, 369(6509):1318–1330, 2020.
Hugo Dalla-Torre, Liam Gonzalez, Javier Mendoza Revilla, Nicolas Lopez Carranza, Adam Hen-
  ryk Grzywaczewski, Francesco Oteri, Christian Dallago, Evan Trop, Hassan Sirelkhatim, Guil-
  laume Richard, Marcin Skwark, Karim Beguir, Marie Lopez, and Thomas Pierrot. The nucleotide
  transformer: Building and evaluating robust foundation models for human genomics. bioRxiv,
  2023. doi: 10.1101/2023.01.11.523679. URL https://www.biorxiv.org/content/early/
  2023/01/15/2023.01.11.523679.
Kseniia Dudnyk, Donghong Cai, Chenlai Shi, Jian Xu, and Jian Zhou. Sequence basis of transcrip-
  tion initiation in the human genome. Science, 384(6694):eadj0116, 2024. doi: 10.1126/science.
  adj0116.
Hilary K Finucane, Brendan Bulik-Sullivan, Alexander Gusev, Gosia Trynka, Yakir Reshef, Po-
  Ru Loh, Verneri Anttila, Han Xu, Chongzhi Zang, Kyle Farh, et al. Partitioning heritability by
  functional annotation using genome-wide association summary statistics. Nature genetics, 47
  (11):1228–1235, 2015.


                                               11
Oriol Fornes, Jacobo A Castro-Mondragon, Anamaria Khan, Ruben van der Lee, Xiaofei Zhang,
  Patrick A Richmond, Bharat P Modi, Simon Correard, Mihai Gheorghe, Deni Baranašić, Wioleta
  Santana-Garcia, Ge Tan, Julie Chèneby, Benoit Ballester, François Parcy, Albin Sandelin, Boris
  Lenhard, Wyeth W Wasserman, and Anthony Mathelier. Jaspar 2020: update of the open-access
  database of transcription factor binding profiles. Nucleic Acids Research, 48(D1):D87–D92, 2020.

Jonathan Frazer, Pascal Notin, Mafalda Dias, Aidan Gomez, Joseph K Min, Kelly Brock, Yarin Gal,
  and Debora S Marks. Structure-aware protein embedding using deep learning. bioRxiv, 2021.

Eric R Gamazon, Ayellet V Segre, Martijn van de Bunt, Xiaoquan Wen, Hualin S Xi, Farhad Hor-
  mozdiari, Halit Ongen, Anuar Konkashbaev, Eske M Derks, François Aguet, et al. Using an
  atlas of gene regulation across 44 human tissues to inform complex disease-and trait-associated
  variation. Nature Genetics, 50(7):956–967, 2018.

Dennis Gankin, Alexander Karollus, Martin Grosshauser, Kristian Klemon, Johannes Hingerl, and
  Julien Gagneur. Species-aware DNA language modeling. bioRxiv, pp. 2023.01.26.525670, Jan-
  uary 2023. doi: 10.1101/2023.01.26.525670. URL http://biorxiv.org/content/early/
  2023/01/27/2023.01.26.525670.abstract.

Steven Gazal, Hilary K Finucane, Nicholas A Furlotte, Po-Ru Loh, Pier Francesco Palamara, Xu-
  anyao Liu, Armin Schoech, Brendan Bulik-Sullivan, Benjamin M Neale, Alexander Gusev, et al.
  Linkage disequilibrium–dependent architecture of human complex traits shows action of negative
  selection. Nature genetics, 49(10):1421–1427, 2017.

Ilias Georgakopoulos-Soares, Chengyu Deng, Vikram Agarwal, Candace SY Chan, Jingjing Zhao,
   Fumitaka Inoue, and Nadav Ahituv. Transcription factor binding site orientation and order are
   major drivers of gene regulatory activity. Nature communications, 14(1):2333, 2023.

Dominik G Grimm, Chloé-Agathe Azencott, Fabian Aicheler, Udo Gieraths, Daniel G MacArthur,
  Kaitlin E Samocha, David N Cooper, Peter D Stenson, Mark J Daly, Jordan W Smoller, Laramie E
  Duncan, and Karsten M Borgwardt. The evaluation of tools used to predict the impact of missense
  variants is hindered by two types of circularity. Hum. Mutat., 36(5):513–523, May 2015.

GTEx Consortium et al. The gtex consortium atlas of genetic regulatory effects across human
 tissues. Science, 369(6509):1318–1330, 2020.

Glenn Hickey, Benedict Paten, Dent Earl, Daniel Zerbino, and David Haussler. HAL: a hierarchical
  format for storing and analyzing multiple genome alignments. Bioinformatics, 29(10):1341–1342,
  May 2013.

Thomas A Hopf, John B Ingraham, Frank J Poelwijk, Charlotta PI Schärfe, Michael Springer, Chris
  Sander, and Debora S Marks. Mutation effects predicted from sequence co-variation. Nature
  biotechnology, 35(2):128–135, 2017.

Connie Huang, Richard W Shuai, Parth Baokar, Ryan Chung, Ruchir Rastogi, Pooja Kathail, and
  Nilah M Ioannidis. Personal transcriptome variation is poorly explained by current genomic deep
  learning models. Nature Genetics, 55(12):2056–2059, 2023. doi: 10.1038/s41588-023-01574-w.

Yanrong Ji, Zhihan Zhou, Han Liu, and Ramana V Davuluri. DNABERT: pre-trained Bidirectional
  Encoder Representations from Transformers model for DNA-language in genome. Bioinformat-
  ics, 37(15):2112–2120, 02 2021. ISSN 1367-4803. doi: 10.1093/bioinformatics/btab083. URL
  https://doi.org/10.1093/bioinformatics/btab083.

Han Jiang, Yiyang Ling, Alexej Stella, Michael C Zhang, Giuseppe Narzisi, William Hahn,
  Michael C Zody, Michael C Schatz, and Ivan Iossifov. Indel variant analysis of short-read se-
  quencing data with scalpel. Nature protocols, 10(5):723–733, 2015.

David R Kelley, Yakir A Reshef, Maxwell Bileschi, David Belanger, Cory Y McLean, and Jasper
  Snoek. Sequential regulatory activity prediction across chromosomes with convolutional neural
  networks. Genome Res., 28(5):739–750, May 2018.


                                               12
Ninel Kerimov, Joyne Hayhurst, Katerina Peikova, Jonathan R Manning, Philip Walter, Lars Kol-
  berg, Ionut Samovici, Daniel J McCarthy, Alessandro Breschi, Xiaoqin Zhang, et al. A com-
  pendium of uniformly processed human gene expression and splicing quantitative trait loci. Na-
  ture Genetics, 53(9):1290–1299, 2021.

Nitish Shirish Keskar, Bryan McCann, Lav R Varshney, Caiming Xiong, and Richard Socher. CTRL:
  A conditional transformer language model for controllable generation. arXiv [cs.CL], September
  2019.

Martin Kircher, Daniela M Witten, Preti Jain, Brian J O’Roak, Gregory M Cooper, and Jay Shen-
 dure. A general framework for estimating the relative pathogenicity of human genetic variants.
 Nature genetics, 46(3):310–315, 2014.

Lukas F K Kuderna, Jacob C Ulirsch, Sabrina Rashid, Mohamed Ameen, Laksshman Sundaram,
  Glenn Hickey, Anthony J Cox, Hong Gao, Arvind Kumar, Francois Aguet, Matthew J Christ-
  mas, Hiram Clawson, Maximilian Haeussler, Mareike C Janiak, Martin Kuhlwilm, Joseph D
  Orkin, Thomas Bataillon, Shivakumara Manu, Alejandro Valenzuela, Juraj Bergman, Marjo-
  laine Rouselle, Felipe Ennes Silva, Lidia Agueda, Julie Blanc, Marta Gut, Dorien de Vries, Ian
  Goodhead, R Alan Harris, Muthuswamy Raveendran, Axel Jensen, Idriss S Chuma, Julie E Hor-
  vath, Christina Hvilsom, David Juan, Peter Frandsen, Joshua G Schraiber, Fabiano R de Melo,
  Fabrı́cio Bertuol, Hazel Byrne, Iracilda Sampaio, Izeni Farias, João Valsecchi, Malu Messias,
  Maria N F da Silva, Mihir Trivedi, Rogerio Rossi, Tomas Hrbek, Nicole Andriaholinirina,
  Clément J Rabarivola, Alphonse Zaramody, Clifford J Jolly, Jane Phillips-Conroy, Gregory Wilk-
  erson, Christian Abee, Joe H Simmons, Eduardo Fernandez-Duque, Sree Kanthaswamy, Fekadu
  Shiferaw, Dongdong Wu, Long Zhou, Yong Shao, Guojie Zhang, Julius D Keyyu, Sascha Knauf,
  Minh D Le, Esther Lizano, Stefan Merker, Arcadi Navarro, Tilo Nadler, Chiea Chuen Khor,
  Jessica Lee, Patrick Tan, Weng Khong Lim, Andrew C Kitchener, Dietmar Zinner, Ivo Gut,
  Amanda D Melin, Katerina Guschanski, Mikkel Heide Schierup, Robin M D Beck, Ioannis
  Karakikes, Kevin C Wang, Govindhaswamy Umapathy, Christian Roos, Jean P Boubli, Adam
  Siepel, Anshul Kundaje, Benedict Paten, Kerstin Lindblad-Toh, Jeffrey Rogers, Tomas Mar-
  ques Bonet, and Kyle Kai-How Farh. Identification of constrained sequence elements across
  239 primate genomes. Nature, November 2023.

Benjamin Levy, Zihao Xu, Liyang Zhao, Karl Kremling, Ross Altman, Phoebe Wong, and Chris
  Tanner. FloraBERT: cross-species transfer learning withattention-based neural networks for gene-
  expression prediction. preprint, In Review, August 2022. URL https://www.researchsquare.
  com/article/rs-1927200/v1.

Shuwei Li, UK Biobank Whole-Genome Sequencing Consortium, Keren J Carss, Bjarni V Hall-
  dorsson, and Adrian Cortes. Whole-genome sequencing of half-a-million uk biobank participants.
  medRxiv, pp. 2023–12, 2023.

Zehui Li, Vallijah Subasri, Guy-Bart Stan, Yiren Zhao, and Bo Wang. Gv-rep: A large-scale dataset
  for genetic variant representation learning, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2407.16940.

Zeming Lin, Halil Akin, Roshan Rao, Brian Hie, Zhongkai Zhu, Wenting Lu, Nikita Smetanin,
  Robert Verkuil, Ori Kabeli, Yaniv Shmueli, et al. Evolutionary-scale prediction of atomic-level
  protein structure with a language model. Science, 379(6637):1123–1130, 2023.

Kirk E Lohmueller, Megan M Mauney, David Reich, and Gregory M Cooper. Proportionally more
  deleterious genetic variation in european than in african populations. Nature, 451(7181):994–997,
  2008.

Frederikke Isa Marin, Felix Teufel, Marc Horlacher, Dennis Madsen, Dennis Pultz, Ole Winther,
  and Wouter Boomsma. BEND: Benchmarking DNA language models on biologically meaningful
  tasks. In The Twelfth International Conference on Learning Representations, 2024. URL https:
  //openreview.net/forum?id=uKB4cFNQFg.

Shruti Marwaha, Joshua W Knowles, and Euan A Ashley. A guide for the diagnosis of rare and
  undiagnosed disease: beyond the exome. Genome Medicine, 14(1):23, 2022.


                                                13
Matthew T Maurano, Richard Humbert, Eric Rynes, Robert E Thurman, Eric Haugen, Hao Wang,
 Alex P Reynolds, Richard Sandstrom, Hongzhu Qu, Jennifer Brody, et al. Systematic localization
 of common disease-associated variation in regulatory dna. Science, 337(6099):1190–1195, 2012.

Julienne M Mullaney, Ryan E Mills, W Stephen Pittard, and Scott E Devine. Small insertions and
  deletions (indels) in human genomes. Human molecular genetics, 19(R2):R131–R136, 2010.

Eric Nguyen, Michael Poli, Marjan Faizi, Armin Thomas, Michael Wornow, Callum Birch-Sykes,
  Stefano Massaroli, Aman Patel, Clayton Rabideau, Yoshua Bengio, Stefano Ermon, Christopher
  Ré, and Stephen Baccus. Hyenadna: Long-range genomic sequence modeling at single nucleotide
  resolution. In A. Oh, T. Naumann, A. Globerson, K. Saenko, M. Hardt, and S. Levine (eds.),
  Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 36, pp. 43177–43201. Curran Asso-
  ciates, Inc., 2023. URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper files/paper/2023/file/
  86ab6927ee4ae9bde4247793c46797c7-Paper-Conference.pdf.

Pascal Notin, Lood Van Niekerk, Aaron W Kollasch, Daniel Ritter, Yarin Gal, and Debora Su-
  san Marks. TranceptEVE: Combining family-specific and family-agnostic models of protein se-
  quences for improved fitness prediction. In NeurIPS 2022 Workshop on Learning Meaningful
  Representations of Life, 2022. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=l7Oo9DcLmR1.

Pascal Notin, Aaron W Kollasch, Daniel Ritter, Lood Van Niekerk, Steffan Paul, Han Spinner,
  Nathan J Rollins, Ada Shaw, Rose Orenbuch, Ruben Weitzman, Jonathan Frazer, Mafalda Dias,
  Dinko Franceschi, Yarin Gal, and Debora Susan Marks. Proteingym: Large-scale benchmarks
  for protein fitness prediction and design. In Thirty-seventh Conference on Neural Information
  Processing Systems Datasets and Benchmarks Track, 2023. URL https://openreview.net/
  forum?id=URoZHqAohf.

Rose Orenbuch, Aaron W Kollasch, Hansen D Spinner, Courtney A Shearer, Thomas A Hopf, Dinko
  Franceschi, Mafalda Dias, Jonathan Frazer, and Debora S Marks. Deep generative modeling of the
  human proteome reveals over a hundred novel genes involved in rare genetic disorders. Medrxiv,
  2023.

Katherine S Pollard, Melissa J Hubisz, Kate R Rosenbloom, and Adam Siepel. Detection of non-
  neutral substitution rates on mammalian phylogenies. Genome research, 20(1):110–121, 2010.

Alexander Sasse, Bernard Ng, Anna E Spiro, Shinya Tasaki, David A Bennett, Christopher Gaiteri,
  Philip L De Jager, Maria Chikina, and Sara Mostafavi. Benchmarking of deep neural networks for
  predicting personal gene expression from dna sequence highlights shortcomings. Nature Genetics,
  55(12):2060–2064, 2023. doi: 10.1038/s41588-023-01524-6.

Yair Schiff, Chia Hsiang Kao, Aaron Gokaslan, Tri Dao, Albert Gu, and Volodymyr Kuleshov.
  Caduceus: Bi-directional equivariant long-range DNA sequence modeling. In Ruslan Salakhut-
  dinov, Zico Kolter, Katherine Heller, Adrian Weller, Nuria Oliver, Jonathan Scarlett, and Felix
  Berkenkamp (eds.), Proceedings of the 41st International Conference on Machine Learning, vol-
  ume 235 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pp. 43632–43648. PMLR, 21–27 Jul
  2024. URL https://proceedings.mlr.press/v235/schiff24a.html.

Max Schubach, Thorben Maass, Lusiné Nazaretyan, Sebastian Röner, and Martin Kircher. CADD
 v1.7: using protein language models, regulatory CNNs and other nucleotide-level scores to im-
 prove genome-wide variant predictions. Nucleic Acids Res., 52(D1):D1143–D1154, January
 2024.

Patrick J Short, Jeremy F McRae, Giuseppe Gallone, Alejandro Sifrim, Hyejung Won, Daniel H
  Geschwind, Caroline F Wright, Helen V Firth, David R FitzPatrick, Jeffrey C Barrett, et al. De
  novo mutations in regulatory elements in neurodevelopmental disorders. Nature, 555(7698):611–
  616, 2018.

Damian Smedley, Max Schubach, Julius OB Jacobsen, Sebastian Köhler, Tomasz Zemojtel, Malte
  Spielmann, Marten Jäger, Harry Hochheiser, Nicole L Washington, Julie A McMurry, et al. A
  whole-genome analysis framework for effective identification of pathogenic regulatory variants
  in mendelian disease. American Journal of Human Genetics, 99(3):595–606, 2016.


                                               14
Jin Su, Chenchen Han, Yuyang Zhou, Junjie Shan, Xibin Zhou, and Fajie Yuan. Saprot: Protein
   language modeling with structure-aware vocabulary. In The Twelfth International Conference on
   Learning Representations, 2024. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=6MRm3G4NiU.
Sergey Vilov and Matthias Heinig. Investigating the performance of foundation models on human
  3’utr sequences. bioRxiv, pp. 2024–02, 2024.
Gao Wang, Abhishek Sarkar, Peter Carbonetto, and Matthew Stephens. A simple new approach to
  variable selection in regression, with application to genetic fine mapping. Journal of the Royal
  Statistical Society Series B: Statistical Methodology, 82(5):1273–1300, 2020a.
Yin Wang, Jonathan K Pritchard, and Matthew Stephens. Simple new approaches to variable se-
  lection in regression, with application to genetic fine mapping. Journal of the Royal Statistical
  Society: Series B (Statistical Methodology), 82(5):1273–1300, 2020b.
Patricia J Wittkopp and Gizem Kalay. Cis-regulatory elements: molecular mechanisms and evolu-
  tionary processes underlying divergence. Nat. Rev. Genet., 13(1):59–69, December 2011.
Scott Wolf, Diogo Melo, Kristina M Garske, Luisa F Pallares, Amanda J Lea, and Julien F Ay-
  roles. Characterizing the landscape of gene expression variance in humans. PLoS genetics, 19(7):
  e1010833, 2023.
Zhili Zheng, Shouye Liu, Julia Sidorenko, Ying Wang, Tian Lin, Loic Yengo, Patrick Turley, Alireza
  Ani, Rujia Wang, Ilja M Nolte, et al. Leveraging functional genomic annotations and genome
  coverage to improve polygenic prediction of complex traits within and between ancestries. Nature
  Genetics, pp. 1–11, 2024.
J. Zhou, C.L. Theesfeld, K. Yao, K.M. Chen, A.K. Wong, and O.G. Troyanskaya. Predicting effects
   of noncoding variants with deep learning-based sequence model. Nature Methods, 15(8):541–
   548, 2018.
Zhihan Zhou, Yanrong Ji, Weijian Li, Pratik Dutta, Ramana V Davuluri, and Han Liu. DNABERT-2:
  Efficient foundation model and benchmark for multi-species genomes. In The Twelfth Interna-
  tional Conference on Learning Representations, 2024. URL https://openreview.net/forum?
  id=oMLQB4EZE1.
Xiaoming Zhu, Mingze Li, Hao Pan, Xinhua Bao, Jinmin Zhang, and Xiru Wu. Whole-genome
  sequencing in a family with twin boys with autism and intellectual disability suggests multiallelic
  inheritance. Molecular autism, 8(1):39, 2017.


                                                 15
A     A PPENDIX
A.1   M ODEL DETAILS


                    Table A1: The hyperparameters of the LOL-EVE model.

                                Hyperparameter            Value
                                Dimension                  768
                                Layers                      12
                                Heads                       12
                                Feedforward dimension     8192
                                Learning rate             1e−5
                                Batch size                  16
                                Epochs                       7



A.2   T RAINING DATA


Figure A1: Average Promoter Sei scores plotted against the number of promoter sequences gathered
for model training from the comparative genomics analysis conducted with the HAL suite. Clade
types are specified by color and the red dot represents Homo sapiens. The maximum number of
sequences per species is 19,254. Point sizes reflect the number of sequences.


Figure A2: Average Promoter Sei scores were plotted for Human CDS regions, Human promoter
regions, and all of the promoter data used gathered for training.


                                              16
A.3     BASELINE DETAILS

A.3.1    AUTOREGRESSIVE MODELS
Autoregressive LMs assign scores to sequences s using their log likelihood

                                                 n
                                            1X
                                     p(s) =       log p(si |s<i ).                                 (4)
                                            n i=1

HyenaDNA HyenaDNA uses base pair tokenization. For computing the cross entropy, we subset
the logits and labels to the dimensions of actual nucleotides x ∈ {A, G, C, T, N } and exclude
special tokens. We ignore the final EOS position when taking the mean over the sequence.

A.3.2    M ASKED LANGUAGE MODELS
For computational efficiency, we evaluate bidirectional masked LMs using their pseudo log likeli-
hood,

                                                  n
                                               1X
                                      p(s) =         log p(si |s).                                 (5)
                                               n i=1

Caduceus Caduceus uses base pair tokenization. For computing the cross entropy, we subset the
logits and labels to the dimensions of actual nucleotides x ∈ {A, G, C, T, N } and exclude special
tokens. We do not apply any masking.

Nucleotide Transformer Nucleotide Transformer uses 6-mer tokenization. For computing the
cross entropy, we subset the logits and labels to the dimensions of the 6-mer and five trailing single-
base tokens and exclude special tokens. We do not apply any masking.

DNABERT-2 DNABERT-2 uses byte pair tokenization. For computing the cross entropy, we sub-
set the logits and labels to the dimensions of the BPE tokens and the [UNK] token which represents
N . Remaining special tokens are excluded. We do not apply any masking.

A.3.3    A LIGNMENT- BASED APPROACHES
PhyloP As they are based on an MSA, PhyloP scores are not naturally amenable to indel variants,
as a change in sequence length by insertion or deletion cannot be modeled by column-wise scores.
We follow gnomAD’s approach to computing PhyloP scores: For any indel, the PhyloP score of the
position in the reference genome at which the indel occurs is used for the indel as a whole. Note
that this inherently does not consider the actual sequence consequence of the indel - it only reflects
the conservation of the position at which the indel occurs.

A.4     E XTENDED R ESULTS ON B ENCHMARK DATASETS

A.4.1    F REQUENCY-BASED I NDEL P RIORITIZATION


                           Table A2: MAF cutoffs and corresponding counts.

            Low-freq range       Common range             Low-freq count   Common count
            0.0 - 0.05                    ≥ 0.05                 578,495           15,137
            0.0 - 0.01                    ≥ 0.01                 563,533           30,099
            0.01 - 0.05                   ≥ 0.05                  48,972           15,137
            0.001 - 0.01                  ≥ 0.01                  34,010           30,099



                                                     17
Figure A3: Ablation of odds ratios values for models across a variety of MAF cutoffs for low
frequency and common variants.


Figure A4: Comparison of odds ratios for rare indel identification across different minor allele
frequency (MAF) thresholds. Each panel shows results for different MAF cutoff comparisons, with
sample sizes indicated (n=rare vs common variants). Tools are compared based on their ability to
distinguish between rare and common variants, measured as odds ratios at top 1% score percentile.


                                               18
Figure A5: Distribution of variants per gene at different Minor Allele Frequency (MAF) thresholds,
comparing low frequency (blue) and common variants (orange). Vertical lines mark genes with 1
(red), 10 (green), and 100 (blue) variants for both classes. Most genes contain few variants, with
counts decreasing exponentially.


Figure A6: Distribution of gene-specific LOL-EVE score ranges (max-min) normalized to total
range (2.5th-97.5th percentiles). Analysis includes genes with 12 variants(10th percentile threshold).
Mean range: 62.6% (red dashed line).


                                                 19
Table A3: Performance of model checkpoints on eQTL causal variant prediction, grouped by model
type and ranked by NAUPRC.

Model                          C.d AUPRC NAUPRC C.d>5bp AUPRC>5bp NAUPRC>5bp
DNA Language Models
LOL-EVE                       0.261   0.187        1.416    0.375        0.355           1.480
Hyena-32k                     0.134   0.154        1.166    0.103        0.261           1.085
Hyena-1m                      0.117   0.150        1.139    0.105        0.264           1.099
Hyena-1k                      0.116   0.149        1.131    0.067        0.253           1.052
Hyena-450k                    0.114   0.148        1.122    0.105        0.259           1.077
Hyena-160k                    0.118   0.148        1.120    0.103        0.256           1.064
NT-2.5B                       0.079   0.147        1.113    0.243        0.298           1.242
NT-500M                       0.112   0.147        1.111    0.151        0.271           1.130
NT-500M-H                    -0.047   0.128        0.966   -0.070        0.230           0.958
DNABERT-2                    -0.106   0.123        0.935   -0.114        0.233           0.971
NT-2.5B-MS                   -0.098   0.122        0.928   -0.245        0.205           0.851
Caduceus-ph                   0.205   0.169        1.282    0.225        0.299           1.246
Caduceus-ps                   0.189   0.165        1.253    0.150        0.280           1.164
Non gLM
GC% change                    0.178   0.175        1.323    0.122        0.262           1.090
dist TSS                      0.038   0.154        1.164    0.050        0.278           1.156
FATHMM-indel                  0.105   0.151        1.142   -0.208        0.234           0.974
PhyloP                        0.126   0.151        1.140    0.159        0.272           1.134
PhyloP median 10bp           -0.014   0.135        1.020    0.248        0.310           1.290
PhyloP median 30bp           -0.006   0.134        1.011    0.220        0.294           1.226
Sequence-to-Expression Models
Enformer-single-pos-entropy 0.062     0.142        1.079   0.114         0.255           1.060
Enformer-avg-entropy          0.047   0.142        1.078   0.050         0.239           0.997


A.4.2   C AUSAL E QTL P RIORITIZATION


Figure A7: Distribution of causal versus background eQTL variants across genes, showing most
genes contain 0-2 causal variants regardless of their background variant count (0-6 variants)


                                              20
Figure A9: An ablation of PIP scores ranging from .7 to .95 with a step size of 0.025 for the Causal
eQTL Prioritization Benchmark metrics Cohen’s D and Normalized AUPRC.


Figure A8: Distribution of insertion/deletion (indel) lengths in base pairs (bp) for causal (n=291) and
background (n=1921) eQTL variants. The histogram shows the density of absolute indel lengths,
with causal variants shown in blue and background variants in orange. A 5bp threshold is marked
by the red dashed line


                                                  21
Table A4: Posterior inclusion probability (PIP) cutoff and corresponding causal and background
counts.

                       PIP cutoff   Causal count    Background count
                       0.95                  132                  3949
                       0.92                  151                  3930
                       0.89                  162                  3919
                       0.87                  173                  3908
                       0.84                  181                  3900
                       0.81                  188                  3893
                       0.78                  194                  3887
                       0.76                  205                  3876
                       0.73                  215                  3866
                       0.70                  225                  3856


A.4.3   TFBS D ISRUPTION


             Figure A10: All model scores shown for TFBS disruption Benchmark.


                                             22
A.4.4   L ENGTH N ORMALIZATION C OMPARISON E XPERIMENT


Figure A11: Comparison of odds ratios for rare indel identification across different minor allele
frequency (MAF) thresholds. Each panel shows results for different MAF cutoff comparisons, with
sample sizes indicated (n=rare vs common variants). Tools are compared based on their ability to
distinguish between rare and common variants, measured as odds ratios at top 1% score percentile.
Here LN indicates that the models scores were length normalized.


    Table A5: Performance of model checkpoints on the eQTL causal variant prediction task.
     Model               C.d AUPRC NAUPRC C.d>5bp AUPRC>5bp NAUPRC>5bp
     LOL-EVE LN        0.277     0.192      1.460      0.353          0.350           1.455
     LOL-EVE           0.266     0.190      1.447      0.307          0.334           1.388
     Caduceus-ph LN    0.206     0.169      1.283      0.225          0.299           1.246
     Caduceus-ph       0.188     0.164      1.247      0.188          0.289           1.203
     Caduceus-ps LN    0.188     0.165      1.251      0.150          0.280           1.164
     Caduceus-ps       0.174     0.160      1.218      0.119          0.268           1.117
     Hyena-32k LN      0.135     0.153      1.167      0.103          0.261           1.085
     Hyena-32k         0.114     0.146      1.113      0.061          0.240           1.000
     Hyena-1m LN       0.118     0.150      1.139      0.105          0.264           1.099
     Hyena-1m          0.101     0.144      1.096      0.068          0.244           1.016
     Hyena-1k LN       0.117     0.149      1.132      0.067          0.253           1.052
     Hyena-1k          0.095     0.144      1.097      0.020          0.239           0.993
     Hyena-450k LN     0.114     0.148      1.122      0.105          0.259           1.077
     Hyena-450k        0.094     0.145      1.098      0.066          0.249           1.037
     Hyena-160k LN     0.118     0.147      1.120      0.103          0.256           1.064
     Hyena-160k        0.099     0.145      1.099      0.064          0.248           1.034
     NT-2.5B LN        0.082     0.147      1.116      0.243          0.298           1.242
     NT-2.5B           0.093     0.144      1.093      0.135          0.267           1.113
     NT-500M LN        0.108     0.146      1.107      0.151          0.271           1.130
     NT-500M           0.063     0.142      1.077      0.211          0.300           1.250
     NT-500M-H LN     -0.045     0.127      0.969     -0.070          0.230           0.958
     NT-500M-H        -0.051     0.127      0.965     -0.082          0.229           0.953
     DNABERT-2 LN     -0.102     0.123      0.936     -0.114          0.233           0.971
     DNABERT-2        -0.091     0.124      0.940     -0.078          0.238           0.990
     NT-2.5B-MS LN    -0.091     0.123      0.932     -0.245          0.205           0.851
     NT-2.5B-MS       -0.087     0.122      0.930     -0.238          0.205           0.852



                                               23
Figure A12: All model scores shown for TFBS disruption Benchmark comparing Length normal-
ization vs nonnormalized scores.

A.4.5   SNV E XPANSION E XPERIMENT


Table A6: Performance comparison of models on prediction task, grouped by type and ranked by
NAUPRC.
              Type         Model                 Cohen’s d AUPRC NAUPRC
                           PhyloP                   0.205    0.133      1.263
              Non gLM
                           dist tss                 0.031    0.129      1.227
                           NT-2.5B                   0.066   0.113      1.075
                           NT-1.5B                   0.051   0.112      1.061
              Nucleotide
                           NT-500M                   0.019   0.108      1.026
                           NT-500M-H                -0.017   0.104      0.990
                       hyenadna-tiny-1k             -0.135   0.098      0.926
                       hyenadna-medium-450k         -0.081   0.101      0.964
                       hyenadna-medium-160k         -0.104   0.100      0.948
              HyenaDNA
                       hyenadna-large-1m            -0.086   0.101      0.961
                       hyenadna-small-32k           -0.113   0.099      0.939
                           caduceus-ph              -0.090   0.100      0.948
              Caduceus
                           caduceus-ps              -0.078   0.100      0.954
                           DNABERT-2                0.075    0.112      1.063
                           LOL-EVE                  0.054    0.112      1.059


                                            24
