Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A DA M ANIP : A DAPTIVE A RTICULATED O BJECT M ANIP -
ULATION E NVIRONMENTS AND P OLICY L EARNING

 Yuanfei Wang* 1 , Xiaojie Zhang* 2 , Ruihai Wu* 1 , Yu Li2 , Yan Shen1 , Mingdong Wu1 ,
 Zhaofeng He2 , Yizhou Wang1 3 4 5 , Hao Dong1
 1
   Center on Frontiers of Computing Studies, School of Computer Science, Peking University
 2
   Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications
 3
   Inst. for Artificial Intelligence, Peking University
 4
   Nat’l Eng. Research Center of Visual Technology, Peking University
 5
   State Key Laboratory of General Artificial Intelligence, Peking University


                                            A BSTRACT

         Articulated object manipulation is a critical capability for robots to perform various
         tasks in real-world scenarios. Composed of multiple parts connected by joints, ar-
         ticulated objects are endowed with diverse functional mechanisms through complex
         relative motions. For example, a safe consists of a door, a handle, and a lock, where
         the door can only be opened when the latch is unlocked. The internal structure, such
         as the state of a lock or joint angle constraints, cannot be directly observed from
         visual observation. Consequently, successful manipulation of these objects requires
         adaptive adjustment based on trial and error rather than a one-time visual inference.
         However, previous datasets and simulation environments for articulated objects
         have primarily focused on simple manipulation mechanisms where the complete
         manipulation process can be inferred from the object’s appearance. To enhance
         the diversity and complexity of adaptive manipulation mechanisms, we build a
         novel articulated object manipulation environment and equip it with 9 categories
         of objects. Based on the environment and objects, we further propose an adaptive
         demonstration collection and 3D visual diffusion-based imitation learning pipeline
         that learns the adaptive manipulation policy. The effectiveness of our designs and
         proposed method is validated through both simulation and real-world experiments.
         Our project page is available at: https://adamanip.github.io

1    I NTRODUCTION

Among the various categories of objects in our daily life, articulated objects are highly significant as
they are common in our surroundings (such as cabinets, doors, and laptops) and their components are
complex, featuring rich and diverse geometries, semantics, articulations, and functions. Therefore,
learning articulated object representation (Du et al., 2023; Wei et al., 2022; Heppert et al., 2023; Lei
et al., 2024) and manipulation (Xu et al., 2022; Wu et al., 2022) are essential while challenging for
future robots in home-assistant tasks.
Among articulated object manipulation tasks, door manipulation (Urakami et al., 2019) is first and
most thoroughly studied, as doors are most common and useful in our daily lives. Afterwards, with
the release of diverse articulated object manipulation datasets and environments (Mo et al., 2019;
Xiang et al., 2020; Liu et al., 2022; Geng et al., 2023b), various manipulation tasks (like opening,
sliding, rotating, and further language-guided manipulation) on many categories of articulated objects
(such as pots, lamps, and cabinets) have been studied.
While previous covered various aspects of articulated object manipulation, one of the most essential
features of articulated objects, the mechanisms of different parts and articulations for accomplishing
the final manipulation goal, has yet to be explored. For example, a safe can be directly opened by
pulling the door in previous environments, while in the real world, the robot may have to first turn
the key to unlock the latch, and then pull open the door. While UniDoorManip (Li et al., 2024b)
proposes an environment with the corresponding dataset that can simulate the mechanisms of doors,

    * indicates equal contribution


                                                   1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


       Open Safe                      Pull Door                        Turn Key                        Open Door
                 Multi-modal Prior             Unable to update        Multi-modal Prior               Update Posterior
                                               Posterior


                                     Unseen Failure

                                     Optimal Trajectories without
                                     Adaptation in Demo             Failure Recovery present in Demo
Invisible
Lock State                                  Static Policy                                          Adaptive Policy

Figure 1: Example comparison between Static and Adaptive Policies. The safe can be directly
opened if unlocked; otherwise, the key must be turned to unlock the latch before opening the door.
However, it is impossible to figure out the lock state from pure visual observations. Static Policy: The
demonstrations for training the static policy are optimal trajectories under full observation, including
both locked and unlocked states. Consequently, the learned policy is a bimodal distribution based on
visual observation alone. If the robot samples the "unlocked trajectory" and fails to open the locked
door, it will be out of distribution. Adaptive Policy: The demonstrations for training the adaptive
policy include recovery from the failed door opening. Therefore, the policy learns to first pull the
door to check the lock state and updates the policy distribution accordingly based on the feedback.

the mechanisms of various types of articulated objects could be much more diverse and complicated.
Therefore, we build an environment that can simulate the above-described complex mechanisms of
articulated object manipulation, equipping this environment with 9 categories of different objects
covering 5 types of adaptive mechanisms (details described in Section 3).
The different mechanisms of articulated objects call for two core capabilities of the policy: (1) multi-
modal action proposal and (2) adaptive manipulation from history actions. For an observed object,
the manipulation policy may contain multiple modes, including different manipulation trajectories.
For example, when observing the safe with its door closed (Bottom-Left in Figure 1), to achieve
the goal of opening the door, the policy could be either directly pulling the door (when the door is
unlocked) or turning the key and then pulling the door (when the door is locked), and the method
should be able to model these modalities from the same visual observation.
Furthermore, to identify and execute the accurate action from the multi-modal manipulation action
candidates, it is necessary to adapt the manipulation policy based on previous actions and their
corresponding outcomes. For example, when pulling the door results in no movement, the Adaptive
policy should adapt from proposing multi-modal actions (either pulling the door or turning the key)
to single-modal action (turning the key) (Bottom-Right in Figure 1).
To support multi-modal action proposals, we take advantage of the designs of diffusion policy (Chi
et al., 2023) and its following studies (Ze et al., 2024; Yan et al., 2024; Tie et al., 2025), which
have demonstrated modeling multi-modal distributions from only a few successful demonstrations.
To empower the policy with adaptive manipulation abilities, while previous studies only collect
optimal success trajectories (without any failures during the manipulation) for training, we introduce
trajectories including failure actions and the recovery and adaptation actions from failures for
training, as the failure actions help in revealing the accurate mechanisms and manipulation policy.
Figure 1 showcases the superiority of our proposed adaptive policy learning method. The pure
visual observation could not tell whether the door was locked or not. The static policy that only
takes the passive one-frame visual input will randomly propose one of the multi-modal trajectory
candidates. On the contrary, the adaptive policy will first try pulling the door, and then adapt the
policy distribution from multi-modal to single-model accordingly, as its training data include the


                                                          2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


failure of a direct pulling trial on the locked safe door, and then adaptively turning the key to open the
safe after the failure successfully.
Based on our proposed novel environment, we have conducted extensive experiments on 9 categories
of 277 different objects, covering 5 types of mechanisms, showcasing the necessity of the proposed
environment and dataset, and the effectiveness of the proposed policy learning framework in efficiently
and intelligently adapting the manipulation.
In summary, our contributions include:

       • We study the novel problem of adaptively manipulating articulated objects with diverse
         mechanisms and build an environment with various categories of objects and mechanisms.
       • We propose a novel framework that learns the adaptive manipulation policy for various
         mechanisms from diverse demonstrations.
       • Extensive experiments have demonstrated the significance of our proposed environment,
         and the effectiveness of the proposed adaptive policy learning framework.

2     R ELATED W ORK
2.1   A RTICULATED O BJECT E NVIRONMENTS AND DATASETS
To facilitate the study of representation and manipulation of diverse and complex articulated ob-
jects, DoorGym (Urakami et al., 2019), a door manipulation environment is first introduced with
diverse doors. UniDoorManip (Li et al., 2024b) further empowers door environments with different
mechanisms. PartNet-Mobility dataset first introduces multiple categories of articulated objects from
PartNet (Mo et al., 2019; Chang et al., 2015), integrated with the sapien environment (Xiang et al.,
2020; Mu et al., 2021; Gu et al., 2023) to support various articulated object manipulation tasks.
Further, GAPartNet (Geng et al., 2023b) provides fine-grained part annotations, AKB-48 (Liu et al.,
2022) provides real-world articulated object models, and Arnold (Gong et al., 2023) provides the
environment for language-guided manipulation.
2.2   A RTICULATED O BJECT M ANIPULATION
There have been a series of studies studying articulated object manipulation. Where2Act (Mo et al.,
2021) first studies the point-level affordance for short-term manipulation, with affordance-based (Wu
et al., 2022), flow-based (Eisner et al., 2022; Zhang et al., 2023), part-based (Geng et al., 2023a) and
rl-based (Geng et al., 2023c) methods study the long-horizon manipulation. Environment-Aware
Affordance (Wu et al., 2023a; Li et al., 2024a) further studies the manipulation with environment
constraints. Where2Explore (Ning et al., 2023) and AdaAfford (Wang et al., 2022) study converting
passive visual priors to manipulation posteriors using the few-shot interactions, which tackle the
problem of exploring novel articulated object categories with novel geometries and parts, and
manipulation on ambiguous kinematics and dynamics. Besides, coarse-to-fine method (Ling et al.,
2024) studies the sim2real framework for real-world manipulation, and language-guided methods (Xu
et al., 2024; Gong et al., 2023) explore the manipulation with language guidance. While these works
mainly investigated the manipulation with simple mechanisms (such as directly opening a door or
safe), in our work, we further study the policy for manipulating articulated objects with diverse and
complex mechanisms, with a novel proposed environment supporting such objects.

3     A DAPTIVE M ANIPULATION E NVIRONMENT
Previous datasets and simulation environments for articulated objects often lack diversity and realistic
manipulation mechanisms (Urakami et al., 2019; Li et al., 2024b; Geng et al., 2023b; Xiang et al.,
2020; Geng et al., 2023a). To address this issue, we developed a new environment to better explore
complex mechanisms in articulated object manipulation and learn adaptive manipulation policies.
Based on IsaacGym (Makoviychuk et al., 2021), this environment simulates these mechanisms and
includes 9 categories of objects (Section 3.1) with 5 types of adaptive mechanisms (Section 3.2).

3.1   A RTICULATED O BJECT DATASET
In recent years, several works have proposed datasets for articulated object manipulation. PartNet-
Mobility (Xiang et al., 2020) and AKB-48 (Liu et al., 2022) offer diverse datasets for articulated


                                                    3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Table 1: Statistics of our adaptive articulated object dataset, including 9 categories of 277 different
instances. CM. PC. respectively denote Coffee Maker and Pressure Cooker.
   Category Bottle Pen CM. Window Door Lamp Microwave Safe PC.
   Instance        32      36     18         30         57        25         37          36      6

   Table 2: Adaptive manipulation mechanism comparison between our environment and others.
    Environment Lock ±Clockwise Rotate&Slide Push/Rotate Switch Contact
    GAPartNet            ✗            ✗                  ✗                ✗                  ✗
     PartManip           ✓            ✗                  ✗                ✗                  ✗
     DoorGym             ✓            ✗                  ✗                ✗                  ✗
   UniDoorManip          ✓            ✓                  ✗                ✗                  ✗
       Ours              ✓            ✓                  ✓                ✓                  ✓


objects but focus on cross-category geometry diversity, neglecting the mechanisms of different parts
and articulations needed to achieve the final manipulation goal. For instance, PartNet-Mobility
includes the safe category, but the door can be directly opened without rotating the knob to unlock
the latch. GAPartNet (Geng et al., 2023b) provides fine-grained part annotations but still fails
to model complex manipulation mechanisms. DoorGym (Urakami et al., 2019) claims a large-
scale, scalable dataset specifically for door manipulation, considering the latch mechanism of doors.
UniDoorManip (Li et al., 2024b) enriches the diversity of door geometry by composing instances.
However, both DoorGym and UniDoorManip are limited to door manipulation and do not cover more
diverse and long-term mechanisms.
To investigate real-world articulated object manipulation, we introduce a new dataset that encom-
passes more realistic adaptive manipulation mechanisms. Our dataset includes 9 categories of 277
objects: Bottle, Pen, Coffee Maker, Window, Pressure Cooker, Lamp, Door, Safe, and Mi-
crowave. Table 1 provides detailed statistics of our dataset, and Figure 2 visualizes instances of each
category. The object assets in our dataset are handcrafted from materials primarily obtained from 3D
Warehouse (Trimble). More details can be found in Appendix B.

3.2   A DAPTIVE M ANIPULATION M ECHANISM
Most existing articulated object environments focus primarily on geometric diversity across different
categories of objects. While these objects may contain multiple parts, manipulating one part typically
does not impact other parts’ state or joint limits, resulting in simplified manipulation mechanisms.
Common actions in these environments include pushing or pulling a part, such as opening a drawer
or pressing a button, which can be deduced purely from visual observation. However, real-world
manipulation often depends on internal joint states that are not visible externally, necessitating
adaptive manipulation policies based on feedback.
To better simulate real-world articulated object manipulation as well as corresponding mechanisms,
we have identified five adaptive mechanisms that enhance the fidelity of our environment:
Lock Mechanism: Common in everyday objects like doors or safes, the lock mechanism requires an
initial action such as rotating a key or knob or pressing a button to unlock the object before it can
be opened. This mechanism tracks the key part’s joint state during manipulation and updates the
lock state accordingly. If the lock state transitions to "unlock", the door joint limit is lifted to allow
opening; otherwise, the door remains locked. Since the lock state cannot be inferred visually, the
robot must interact with the object to determine the lock state and adapt its policy accordingly.
Random Rotation Direction: When rotating a knob, cap, or handle, the direction (i.e., clockwise
or counterclockwise) is determined by the internal revolute joint limit. Our environment randomly
assigns the rotation direction upon initialization, preventing visual inference of the direction. The
robot must attempt one direction and switch if unsuccessful.
Rotate & Slide Mechanism: This mechanism requires a part to be rotated to a specific angle before
it can be lifted or pulled out, such as lifting the lid of a pressure cooker. The required rotation angle is
not visually discernible, necessitating the robot to rotate the part incrementally and attempt to slide it


                                                     4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


      Bottle   Pen   Coffee Maker Window Pressure Cooker Lamp          Door       Safe       Microwave
               Articulated Object Datasets with Diverse Adaptive Mechanisms and Geometries


                     Open Bottle                                     Open Pressure Cooker


                     Open Window         Selected Mechanisms           Open Microwave


Figure 2: Adaptive manipulation dataset and environments. Bottle and Pressure Cooker feature the
Rotate & Slide mechanism, requiring continued rotation after a failed lift. The window includes the
Lock and Random Rotation Direction mechanisms, necessitating exploration of the correct rotation
direction to unlock the latch. Microwave incorporates the Lock and Switch Contact mechanisms,
where the robot must first pull the handle to check the lock state and press the button if locked.

to determine if the correct angle is reached. We randomize the revolute joint limit and initially set the
prismatic joint limit to zero, lifting it once the correct angle is achieved.
Push/Rotate Mechanism: Due to the similar appearance of buttons and knobs, it is unclear whether
the part should be pushed or rotated. For example, a lamp might be turned on by pushing a button in
some instances and rotating a knob in others. Our environment includes both revolute and prismatic
joints for the same part in the URDF file and randomly determines whether the part should be pushed
or rotated, adjusting the joint limit accordingly.
Switch Contact Mechanism: Based on the lock mechanism, this requires the robot to manipulate
different key parts, such as a handle and a knob, if they are separate. For instance, in a safe, the robot
must switch contact points during manipulation due to the lock state ambiguity, preventing it from
determining the sequence of contact points at the outset.
Table 2 compares the richness and diversity of mechanisms between our environment and others. We
visualize the adaptive manipulation mechanisms in Figure 2 and Figure 4. More details can be found
in Appendix C.2 and D.

4      M ETHOD
As illustrated in Figure 3, we propose a novel framework that learns an adaptive manipulation policy
for various mechanisms from collected adaptive demonstrations. To achieve this, we leverage the
annotated part poses in our dataset to generate expert manipulation trajectories in the environments,
considering invisible internal states to ensure the trajectories are adaptive. Next, to model the expert
trajectory distribution with high multi-modality, we employ 3D visual diffusion-based imitation
learning (Ze et al., 2024; Chi et al., 2023), which learns the gradient of the action score function to
generate actions.

4.1     A DAPTIVE D EMONSTRATION C OLLECTION
Our goal is to generate adaptive demonstrations that are optimal under partial observation. For
instance, when opening a microwave, the expert adaptive policy initially pulls the handle to check the
lock state. If the latch is locked, the policy will push the button before opening the door. If the latch
is not locked, the policy continues pulling the handle to open the door. In contrast, a static policy


                                                    5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                Adaptive Demonstration Collection



                                                         If Locked
        Initial State                  Pull Door                          Push Button                     Open Door

                                                                     If Unlocked

                          3D Adaptive Manipulation Diffusion Policy


                                                                             Pointnet++            3D Features

                             Multi-modal Prior learned
                                                                                                 Proprioceptions
      Initial
                             from Adaptive Demo
      Observation                                                    History
      Condition                                                                                  Previous Actions
                                                                     Condition
  𝑵(𝟎, 𝑰)    Denoising
                                                                𝑵(𝟎, 𝑰)     Denoising
                                                                      Posterior Update learned
                                                                      from Adaptive Demo


Figure 3: Adaptive demonstration collection: Given the uncertain lock state of a microwave, we
instruct the robot to first pull the door to check if it is locked, and then follow two different trajectories
based on the result. Diffusion-based 3D adaptive manipulation policy: Conditioning on the history
of 3D visual features, proprioceptions, and actions, the policy denoises Gaussian noise into the
trajectory distribution. Initially, the policy captures the bimodal distribution in the demonstration
based on the initial observation. As the observed lock state is determined, the policy distribution
adaptively shifts to an unimodal distribution.

with full observation would know the lock state in advance and could directly open the door or push
the button without first trying to pull the handle.
We design rule-based expert adaptive policies to gather adaptive demonstrations in our simulation
environments. We start by computing the bounding box of the part mesh and annotating the part
pose through an interactive script. Using these annotations, we label the sequences of parts and
manipulation actions for each category, ensuring optimal trajectories under partial observation. For
example, the manipulation sequence for a locked safe is grasping the handle, pulling the door,
grasping the knob, rotating the knob, grasping the handle, and opening the door. Note that the
recorded trajectories are end effector poses instead of the high-level action labels. More details are
provided in Appendix C. With these policies, we collect adaptive demonstrations of robot motion
trajectories for all 9 categories of objects.

4.2    3D D IFFUSION -BASED A DAPTIVE P OLICY L EARNING
Given the collected demonstration dataset D = {(ot , at )}, we aim to learn a policy that models
the conditional distribution P (At |Ot , Ât ). Here At refers to the predicted action sequence At =
(at , ..., at+Ta ), where Ta is the action horizon. Ot refers to the observation history, including 3D
point clouds and proprioception states, Ot = (ot−To , ..., ot ), where To is the history horizon. Ât
refers to action history, Ât = (at−To −1 , ..., at−1 ).
However, conducting imitation learning on D is challenging due to its multi-modal nature: The
ambiguity of the internal states of articulated objects results in multiple successful manipulation
trajectories under the same visual observation. Thanks to recent progress in diffusion-based meth-
ods (Chi et al., 2023; Ze et al., 2024; Ke et al., 2024), we can better fit the multi-modal distribution
by learning the action score function.
Following the Diffusion Policy (Chi et al., 2023), we utilize DDPM (Ho et al., 2020) to estimate the
conditional distribution P (At |Ot , Ât ). The DDPM scheduler performs K iterations of denoising


                                                            6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


steps to transform Gaussian noise AK                                 0
                                       t into a noise-free action At . This process adheres to Eq. 1,
where αk , γk , and σk are parameters determined by the scheduler. This reverse process conditions the
action prediction on both observations and previous actions, differing from the vanilla implementation
of the diffusion policy.

                      Ak−1
                        t   =  α k   A k
                                       t − γ k ϵ θ (A k
                                                      t , Ot , Â t , k)  + N (0, σk2 I)           (1)
The noise prediction network ϵθ is trained by minimizing the loss function in Eq. 2, which effectively
minimizes the variational lower bound of the KL-divergence between the data distribution and the
sample distribution drawn from DDPM:

                                                                                                 2
                                                            k
                       L(θ) = E k∼U (0,100),            ϵ       − ϵθ (A0t + ϵk , Ot , Ât , k)           (2)
                                  ϵk ∼N (0,σ 2 I)
                                            k
                                                                                                 2
In practice, the observation ot consists of an observed third-view partial point cloud and the robot’s
proprioception state (e.g., end-effector pose, robot joint angles, and velocities). The point cloud is first
cropped and downsampled by Farthest Point Sampling (FPS) and then encoded by PointNet++ (Qi
et al., 2017). The action at is the next robot end-effector goal pose. Notably, we find that employing
a 6D rotation representation (Ke et al., 2024) for the end-effector pose action stabilizes the training
process. During execution, the policy only executes a sub-sequence of the predicted actions, as the
adaptive manipulation process requires high-frequency adjustments.


                   Lamp                                                     Pen & Coffee Machine


                                                            Door

Figure 4: Adaptive Environments and Qualitative Manipulation Results. This figure shows the
manipulation results of object categories apart from Figure 2.

5     E XPERIMENTS
5.1   S ETTINGS AND M ETRIC

We conduct experiments in the category level covering all the 9 object categories, and collect 20
adaptive manipulation demonstrations for each object as the training data. For evaluation metric,
we use success rate of manipulations. To evaluate what kind of adaptive demonstrations is the most
beneficial to adaptive policy learning, we train adaptive policies on adaptive demonstrations with
different numbers of adaptive trials.


                                                                7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


          VAT-MART                                  AdaAfford                                Ours w/o adaptive


                                                        Ours

Figure 5: Manipulation Trajectories Proposed by Our Method and Others. Our method can se-
quentially propose stable and accurate adaptive actions, while others have their respective drawbacks.

Table 3: Success Rates of Different Methods. Our method outperforms baseline methods and the
ablated version in all categories.
       Task                                                Adaptive Manipulation


      Method
  VAT-MART     41.43±17.44 45.00±12.04 38.33±18.33 71.43±14.29 1.25±0.88 6.00±5.10 13.75±6.73 15.00±12.24 34.29±19.38
  AdaAfford    42.86±14.29 70.00±11.83 55.00±15.00 61.43±22.18 21.25±16.31 77.00±17.35 45.00±17.85 21.25±11.25 52.86±18.13
   Sampling     17.37±9.72 24.00±11.14 26.67±16.99 38.57±16.96 15.71±11.87 25.00±10.25 18.57±12.86 11.25±8.75 28.75±13.75
     ACT        75.79±8.55 74.00±16.85 81.11±5.49 90.48±6.73 28.57±15.43 59.00±14.46 66.67±5.39 52.50±14.58 51.19±13.62
     DP3       83.16±12.19 83.00±11.87 86.67±4.08 85.71±10.10 35.71±21.02 62.00±13.27 70.95±3.37 58.75±14.84 53.57±13.20
Ours w/o adaptive 87.14±14.91 80.00±10.00 85.00±8.90 91.42±11.42 38.75±20.50 58.00±38.16 74.77±2.81 56.25±13.98 54.29±20.00
      Ours        95.07±9.70 99.05±0.81 98.33±4.99 97.14±5.71 61.25±33.28 100.00±0.0 94.33±2.38 88.75±10.38 82.53±14.72


5.2     BASELINES AND A BLATION

To demonstrate the superiority of our proposed method and its components in manipulating articulated
objects with different mechanisms, we compare it with state-of-the-art affordance-based methods,
offline imitation learning methods, a sampling-based method, and an ablation of our method.

         • VAT-Mart (Wu et al., 2022), affordance-based (Zhao et al., 2022; Wu et al., 2023b) method
           that predicts the open-loop trajectories from the one-frame passive observation.
         • AdaAfford (Wang et al., 2022), adaptive method that adjusts the manipulation policy based
           on history interactions using CVAE (Sohn et al., 2015).
         • Sampling, a planning-based method that samples a macro action from a discrete set at each
           high-level time step and then plans to the sub-goal pose associated with the selected macro
           action computed based on the object part pose annotation.
         • ACT (Zhao et al., 2023), an imitation learning method that uses Action Chunking with
           Transformers and CVAE.
         • DP3 (Ze et al., 2024), Diffusion Policy extended with 3D visual representations.
         • Ours w/o adaptive, replace the adaptive demonstration data with static demonstration data
           that is optimal under full observation, maintaining the diffusion-based imitation learning.

                                                          8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Table 4: Effects of Repeated Adaptive Trials in Adaptive Demonstration for Bottle. While
adaptive trials are necessary for learning the adaptive policy, repeated adaptive trials make it more
difficult to model the adaptive manipulation distribution.
             Trials          0      1(ours)      2         3         4         5          6
         Success Rate 0.8714 0.9364 0.7571 0.6571 0.5714 0.4143 0.4428


5.3   S IMULATION R ESULTS

Table 3 and Figure 5 respectively show the success rates and manipulation trajectories of different
methods. Figure 4 further shows more manipulation trajectories proposed by our method. Our
method outperforms all other methods and demonstrates stable and accurate action trajectories for
adaptive manipulation. From the visualizations, we can observe that, for VAT-Mart, as an open-loop
method, it is difficult to fit the whole trajectory space and directly predict a manipulation trajectory
at a time, and the open-loop method does not support adapting the policy from previously executed
actions. Using the diffusion-based imitation method, our method can more accurately model the
poses of actions using the limited number of data (such advantage is also demonstrated in other
diffusion-based imitation studies (Chi et al., 2023; Ze et al., 2024)). In contrast, AdaAfford suffers
from the inferior multi-modal distribution modeling capability of CVAE and the increased training
data requirements associated with point-level affordance learning. The Sampling-based method
performs worse than AdaManip and other baselines because its sampling process because its sampling
process cannot efficiently leverage priors or posteriors learned from demonstrations. While ACT and
DP3 outperform affordance-based methods, they fall short of AdaManip due to the absence of an
adaptive demonstration collection pipeline. Additionally, ACT is further limited by its lack of the
robust multi-modality modeling capability provided by diffusion models.
Ours w/o adaptive is not trained from demonstrations with recovery actions from failure trials, so
the learned policy could not adapt from failure actions to finally achieve the goal. As illustrated in
Figure 5, when the safe is locked and Ours w/o adaptive attempts to open the door, it fails to switch
to rotating the knob and instead continues on the opening trajectory.
Table 4 shows the effects of repeated adaptive trials in adaptive demonstrations for training. When
only using optimal successful actions (i.e., 0 adaptive trials) under full observation, the model is
the same with Ours w/o adaptive and could not have the adaptation capability. When using more
than one adaptive trial at the same object state, these adaptive trials are redundant and increase
the complexity of distributions to model, while not increasing the scenarios the policy can handle.
Therefore, the performance decreases when the number of repeated adaptive trials increases from 1.
These results validate our demonstration collection design, which limits the manipulation sequence
to only one adaptive trial.


                               Table 5: Real-world Evaluation Results.
         Tasks      Open Bottle     Open Microwave       Open Safe     Open Pressure Cooker
        Success        8/10              7/10              5/10                5/10


5.4   R EAL -W ORLD E XPERIMENTS

To validate the generalization of our adaptive diffusion policy to real-world scenarios, we conduct
experiments on various real-world objects like Pressure Cooker, Microwave, Bottle, and Safe. For the
real-world settings, we employ a Franka Emika Panda Robot Arm as our agent. To capture 3d visual
observation, we position an Azure Kinect DK camera adjacent to the robot arm. Our policy takes
the real-time point clouds from the depth camera, the robot state from the robot arm, and previous
actions as the input, and generates the corresponding end-effector action in a close-loop fashion.
We collected 35 adaptive expert demonstrations for each object by human teleoperation to train the
policies, and conducted 10 evaluation trials per object.
Table 5 presents the number of successful executions across four real-world tasks. The results in
Figure 6 demonstrate that our adaptive policy can be effectively applied to real-world scenarios. To


                                                   9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


better illustrate this adaptive behavior, we visualize different trajectories under different object states
in Figure 7. The red trajectory shows that the robot finds out that the microwave is locked after it
failed to pull the door and turned to push the button to unlock the door. Conversely, if the microwave
is initially unlocked, the robot will continue to open the door after it grasps the handle, as depicted by
the blue trajectory in sub-figure 2 of Figure 7. For more visualizations, please see Appendix D.


                 Open Pressure Cooker                                   Open Microwave


                      Open Bottle                                         Open Safe
                   Figure 6: Manipulation Trajectories of Real-World Scenarios.


               Grasp Handle           Locked: Pull Door Failure          Push Button
                                       Unlocked: Open Door


                 Open Door                    Pull Door                  Grasp Handle


Figure 7: Visualization of adaptive policy of Open Microwave in the real world. The trajectories vary
depending on the state of the microwave. The red trajectory represents the executed trajectory when
the microwave is locked. In subfigure 2, the blue trajectory illustrates the robot’s action when the
microwave is unlocked, prompting it to continue opening the door. The red trajectory shows that the
robot failed to pull the locked door and turned to push the button.

6    C ONCLUSION
We study the problem of adaptive manipulation policy for manipulating articulated objects with
diverse and complex mechanisms, build environments with different categories of such objects that
support the various manipulation mechanisms, and propose a novel framework that learns the adaptive
manipulation policy for various mechanisms from diverse adaptive demonstrations based on diffusion
policy. The significance of our proposed environment and the effectiveness of the proposed adaptive
policy learning framework have been demonstrated by our experiments.
Our paper represents the initial study into the environment suitable for adaptive manipulation policy
learning. Currently, our dataset encompasses 9 categories with a total of 277 objects, which we
plan to expand by introducing more categories and instances to cover increasingly complex and
realistic mechanisms. Additionally, incorporating deformable object manipulation into adaptive tasks
represents a significant direction for future research. Moving forward, the AdaManip environment
will progressively include a broader spectrum of real adaptive manipulation tasks, making it a
comprehensive platform for both training and testing adaptive manipulation policies.


                                                    10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

This project is supported by the National Science and Technology Major Project (2022ZD0114904),
the National Natural Science Foundation of China (No. 62376006), the National Youth Talent Support
Program (8200800081), the National Natural Science Foundation of China (No. 62136001) and
NSFC-6247070125.

R EFERENCES
Angel X. Chang, Thomas A. Funkhouser, Leonidas J. Guibas, Pat Hanrahan, Qi-Xing Huang, Zimo
  Li, Silvio Savarese, Manolis Savva, Shuran Song, Hao Su, Jianxiong Xiao, L. Yi, and Fisher
 Yu. Shapenet: An information-rich 3d model repository. ArXiv, abs/1512.03012, 2015. URL
  https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:2554264.

Cheng Chi, Siyuan Feng, Yilun Du, Zhenjia Xu, Eric A. Cousineau, Benjamin Burchfiel, and Shuran
  Song. Diffusion policy: Visuomotor policy learning via action diffusion. ArXiv, abs/2303.04137,
  2023. URL https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:257378658.

Yushi Du, Ruihai Wu, Yan Shen, and Hao Dong. Learning part motion of articulated objects using
  spatially continuous neural implicit representations. In British Machine Vision Conference (BMVC),
  November 2023.

Ben Eisner, Harry Zhang, and David Held. Flowbot3d: Learning 3d articulation flow to manipulate
  articulated objects. arXiv preprint arXiv:2205.04382, 2022.

Haoran Geng, Ziming Li, Yiran Geng, Jiayi Chen, Hao Dong, and He Wang. Partmanip: Learning
  cross-category generalizable part manipulation policy from point cloud observations. In Proceed-
  ings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 2978–2988,
  2023a.

Haoran Geng, Helin Xu, Chengyang Zhao, Chao Xu, Li Yi, Siyuan Huang, and He Wang. Gapartnet:
  Cross-category domain-generalizable object perception and manipulation via generalizable and
  actionable parts. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
  Recognition, pp. 7081–7091, 2023b.

Yiran Geng, Boshi An, Haoran Geng, Yuanpei Chen, Yaodong Yang, and Hao Dong. End-to-end
  affordance learning for robotic manipulation. ICRA, 2023c.

Ran Gong, Jiangyong Huang, Yizhou Zhao, Haoran Geng, Xiaofeng Gao, Qingyang Wu, Wensi Ai,
  Ziheng Zhou, Demetri Terzopoulos, Song-Chun Zhu, et al. Arnold: A benchmark for language-
  grounded task learning with continuous states in realistic 3d scenes. In Proceedings of the
  IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV), 2023.

Jiayuan Gu, Fanbo Xiang, Xuanlin Li, Zhan Ling, Xiqiang Liu, Tongzhou Mu, Yihe Tang, Stone Tao,
   Xinyue Wei, Yunchao Yao, et al. Maniskill2: A unified benchmark for generalizable manipulation
   skills. arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.04659, 2023.

Nick Heppert, Muhammad Zubair Irshad, Sergey Zakharov, Katherine Liu, Rares Andrei Ambrus,
  Jeannette Bohg, Abhinav Valada, and Thomas Kollar. Carto: Category and joint agnostic recon-
  struction of articulated objects. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision
  and Pattern Recognition, pp. 21201–21210, 2023.

Jonathan Ho, Ajay Jain, and Pieter Abbeel. Denoising diffusion probabilistic models. Advances in
  neural information processing systems, 33:6840–6851, 2020.

Tsung-Wei Ke, Nikolaos Gkanatsios, and Katerina Fragkiadaki. 3d diffuser actor: Policy diffusion
  with 3d scene representations. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.10885, 2024.

Jiahui Lei, Congyue Deng, William B Shen, Leonidas J Guibas, and Kostas Daniilidis. Nap: Neural
   3d articulated object prior. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 36, 2024.


                                                11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Yu Li, Kai Cheng, Ruihai Wu, Yan Shen, Kaichen Zhou, and Hao Dong. Mobileafford: Mobile
  robotic manipulation through differentiable affordance learning. In 2nd Workshop on Mobile
  Manipulation and Embodied Intelligence at ICRA 2024, 2024a. URL https://openreview.
  net/forum?id=f6sc69sfrL.
Yu Li, Xiaojie Zhang, Ruihai Wu, Zilong Zhang, Yiran Geng, Hao Dong, and Zhaofeng He. Unidoor-
  manip: Learning universal door manipulation policy over large-scale and diverse door manipulation
  environments. arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.02604, 2024b.
Suhan Ling, Yian Wang, Shiguang Wu, Yuzheng Zhuang, Tianyi Xu, Yu Li, Chang Liu, and Hao
  Dong. Articulated object manipulation with coarse-to-fine affordance for mitigating the effect of
  point cloud noise. ICRA, 2024.
Liu Liu, Wenqiang Xu, Haoyuan Fu, Sucheng Qian, Qiaojun Yu, Yang Han, and Cewu Lu. Akb-48:
  A real-world articulated object knowledge base. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on
  Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 14809–14818, 2022.
Viktor Makoviychuk, Lukasz Wawrzyniak, Yunrong Guo, Michelle Lu, Kier Storey, Miles Macklin,
  David Hoeller, Nikita Rudin, Arthur Allshire, Ankur Handa, et al. Isaac gym: High performance
  gpu-based physics simulation for robot learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2108.10470, 2021.
Kaichun Mo, Shilin Zhu, Angel X. Chang, Li Yi, Subarna Tripathi, Leonidas J. Guibas, and Hao
  Su. PartNet: A large-scale benchmark for fine-grained and hierarchical part-level 3D object
  understanding. In The IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR),
  June 2019.
Kaichun Mo, Leonidas J. Guibas, Mustafa Mukadam, Abhinav Gupta, and Shubham Tulsiani.
 Where2act: From pixels to actions for articulated 3d objects. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF
  International Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV), pp. 6813–6823, October 2021.
Tongzhou Mu, Zhan Ling, Fanbo Xiang, Derek Cathera Yang, Xuanlin Li, Stone Tao, Zhiao Huang,
  Zhiwei Jia, and Hao Su. Maniskill: Generalizable manipulation skill benchmark with large-scale
  demonstrations. In Thirty-fifth Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems Datasets
  and Benchmarks Track (Round 2), 2021.
Chuanruo Ning, Ruihai Wu, Haoran Lu, Kaichun Mo, and Hao Dong. Where2explore: Few-shot
  affordance learning for unseen novel categories of articulated objects. In Advances in Neural
  Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS), 2023.
Charles Ruizhongtai Qi, Li Yi, Hao Su, and Leonidas J Guibas. Pointnet++: Deep hierarchical feature
  learning on point sets in a metric space. Advances in neural information processing systems, 30,
  2017.
Kihyuk Sohn, Honglak Lee, and Xinchen Yan. Learning structured output representation using deep
  conditional generative models. Advances in neural information processing systems, 28, 2015.
Chenrui Tie, Yue Chen, Ruihai Wu, Boxuan Dong, Zeyi Li, Chongkai Gao, and Hao Dong. Et-seed:
  Efficient trajectory-level se(3) equivariant diffusion policy. ICLR, 2025.
Trimble. 3dwarehouse. https://3dwarehouse.sketchup.com/.
Yusuke Urakami, Alec Hodgkinson, Casey Carlin, Randall Leu, Luca Rigazio, and Pieter
  Abbeel. Doorgym: A scalable door opening environment and baseline agent. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1908.01887, 2019.
Yian Wang, Ruihai Wu, Kaichun Mo, Jiaqi Ke, Qingnan Fan, Leonidas Guibas, and Hao Dong.
  Adaafford: Learning to adapt manipulation affordance for 3d articulated objects via few-shot
  interactions. European conference on computer vision (ECCV 2022), 2022.
Fangyin Wei, Rohan Chabra, Lingni Ma, Christoph Lassner, Michael Zollhöfer, Szymon
  Rusinkiewicz, Chris Sweeney, Richard Newcombe, and Mira Slavcheva. Self-supervised neural ar-
  ticulated shape and appearance models. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer
  Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 15816–15826, 2022.


                                                12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Ruihai Wu, Yan Zhao, Kaichun Mo, Zizheng Guo, Yian Wang, Tianhao Wu, Qingnan Fan, Xuelin
  Chen, Leonidas Guibas, and Hao Dong. VAT-mart: Learning visual action trajectory proposals for
  manipulating 3d ARTiculated objects. In International Conference on Learning Representations,
  2022. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=iEx3PiooLy.
Ruihai Wu, Kai Cheng, Yan Zhao, Chuanruo Ning, Guanqi Zhan, and Hao Dong. Learning
  environment-aware affordance for 3d articulated object manipulation under occlusions. In
  Thirty-seventh Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems, 2023a. URL https:
  //openreview.net/forum?id=Re2NHYoZ5l.
Ruihai Wu, Chuanruo Ning, and Hao Dong. Learning foresightful dense visual affordance for
  deformable object manipulation. In IEEE International Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV),
  2023b.
Fanbo Xiang, Yuzhe Qin, Kaichun Mo, Yikuan Xia, Hao Zhu, Fangchen Liu, Minghua Liu, Hanxiao
  Jiang, Yifu Yuan, He Wang, et al. Sapien: A simulated part-based interactive environment.
  In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp.
  11097–11107, 2020.
Ran Xu, Yan Shen, Xiaoqi Li, Ruihai Wu, and Hao Dong. Naturalvlm: Leveraging fine-grained
  natural language for affordance-guided visual manipulation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.08355,
  2024.
Zhenjia Xu, He Zhanpeng, and Shuran Song. Umpnet: Universal manipulation policy network for
  articulated objects. IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters, 2022.
Ge Yan, Yueh-Hua Wu, and Xiaolong Wang. Dnact: Diffusion guided multi-task 3d policy learning.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.04115, 2024.
Yanjie Ze, Gu Zhang, Kangning Zhang, Chenyuan Hu, Muhan Wang, and Huazhe Xu. 3d diffu-
  sion policy. ArXiv, abs/2403.03954, 2024. URL https://api.semanticscholar.org/
  CorpusID:268253298.
Harry Zhang, Ben Eisner, and David Held. Flowbot++: Learning generalized articulated objects
  manipulation via articulation projection. arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.12893, 2023.
Tony Z Zhao, Vikash Kumar, Sergey Levine, and Chelsea Finn. Learning fine-grained bimanual
  manipulation with low-cost hardware. arXiv preprint arXiv:2304.13705, 2023.
Yan Zhao, Ruihai Wu, Zhehuan Chen, Yourong Zhang, Qingnan Fan, Kaichun Mo, and Hao Dong.
  Dualafford: Learning collaborative visual affordance for dual-gripper object manipulation. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2207.01971, 2022.


                                               13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                    Table 6: Parameters for training and diffusion model
                            Training                       Values
                    Hardware Configuration      NVIDIA GeForce GTX 4090
                          Weight Decay                      1e-6
                           Batch Size                        64
                            Optimizer                      Adam
                          Learning Rate                     1e-4
                             Epochs                          500
                          Time Expense                       3h
                             Model                         Values
                         Pointcloud Size                    4096
                            Backbone                        Unet
                   Observation History Horizon                4
                       Prediction Horizon                     4
                         Action Horizon                       2
                           EMAModel                         True
                       Diffusion Timestep                    100
                        Noise Scheduler                 squaredcos
                          Action Space           absolute end-effector pose



A     H YPER - PARAMETERS FOR EXPERIMENTS

Table 6 summarizes the hyperparameters for our diffusion policy model and training details.


B     DATASET C ONSTRUCTION

Apart from object assets collected from existing datasets (Xiang et al., 2020; Li et al., 2024b), most
of the object assets in our dataset are obtained from 3Dwarehouse (Trimble). We dedicate significant
time and effort to carefully selecting the available object meshes, segmenting them into distinct
parts, re-aligning the object mesh coordinate systems, and subsequently developing Python scripts to
facilitate the efficient synthesis of operational dataset instances. Similar to GAPartNet (Geng et al.,
2023b), we annotate the object assets with rich and comprehensive labels.


C     D ETAILED E XPERT P OLICY D ESIGN FOR A DAPTIVE D EMONSTRATION
      C OLLECTION

C.1   P OSE A NNOTATION

To achieve precise part operation, we employ a pose labeling approach for the parts. Initially, we
roughly estimate the part pose through the bounding box of the part mesh calculated using the Python
library trimesh. Subsequently, we observe the pose annotation results in real-time through an online
interactive script to complete the precise annotation of the pose.

C.2   A DAPTIVE M ANIPULATION S EQUENCE

Bottle: Grasp the Cap. Rotate Cap after a failed Lift Up. Randomly sample Rotate/Lift if the previous
action is Rotate.
Pen: Same as Bottle.
Pressure Cooker: Grasp the Handle. Rotate Handle after a failed Lift Up. Randomly sample
Rotate/Lift if the previous action is Rotate.
Coffee Maker: Grasp Portafilter. Rotate Portafilter after a failed Pull Down. Randomly sample
Rotate/Pull if the previous action is Rotate.


                                                 14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Window: Grasp the Handle. Randomly choose a direction to Rotate Handle. If failed, choose the
other direction. Rotate Handle after a failed open trial. Randomly sample Rotate/Open if the previous
action is Rotate.
Door: Same as Window.
Lamp: Randomly choose to Push/Clockwise Rotate/Counter Clockwise Rotate. Never choose a
failed action.
Safe: Pull Door. If succeed, then continue opening the door. If failed, Rotate Knob. Randomly
choose a direction to Rotate and choose the other one if failed. Then Pull Door again to open it.
Microwave: Pull Door. If succeed, then continue opening the door. If failed, Push Button. Then Pull
Door again to open it.

C.3   T RAJECTORY S PARSIFICATION

If the history consists of a dense trajectory of the robot’s end effector poses, the policy would require
a long history context length to capture previous failures. However, training a policy with a long
history context is challenging, as it requires more computing resources and is less robust. To mitigate
this issue, we chose to sparsify the trajectory. Only key frames of the demonstration trajectories
are saved for imitation learning, but the recorded actions are still 6D end effector poses instead of
high-level macro actions.
For example, in the open-safe task, the recorded history includes grasping poses and several ma-
nipulation poses while omitting most intermediate steps. The history condition for the policy is as
follows: [grasp the handle, pull the door and fail to open]. Other intermediate poses during execution
are excluded from the history. Based on this context, the robot predicts the next goal pose [unlock the
key]. Once the goal pose is predicted, we apply inverse kinematics (IK) to plan the path for execution.


                                              Open Safe


                                             Open Bottle


                                         Open Pressure Cooker



Figure 8: Visualization of Open Safe/Bottle/Pressure Cooker Experiment in the real world. The red
trajectory represents the executed trajectory. The blue trajectory indicates the actions under other
object states.


D     M ECHANISM V ISUALIZATION AND E XPERIMENTAL R ESULTS
Figure 4 illustrates the operating mechanism of the remaining categories and the experimental results.
The mechanism of the lamp in the upper left corner is "Push/Rotate". which can be operated by
pressing/rotating the button/knob, but only one way is correct. The pen and coffee machine in the


                                                   15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


upper right corner fall under the "Rotate/Slide". To operate them, you need to rotate a specific part
to a certain angle to open the pen cap or the coffee machine handle. The door at the bottom belongs to
the "Random Rotation Direction" and "Lock", where the handle must be rotated either clockwise
or counterclockwise to open the door.
Figure 8 shows the visualizations of the other 3 experiments in real world apart from Open Microwave
shown in Figure 7. In these visualizations, the red trajectories represent the paths actually executed
by the robot, while the blue trajectories indicate potential paths under different object states. For
instance, in Sub-figure 3 of the Open Bottle experiment, the blue trajectory shows that if the cap is
rotated sufficiently, the robot can then lift the cap. This visualization helps illustrate the adaptability
of the robot’s actions based on the observed state of the objects involved.


                                                    16
