Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


E LICITING H UMAN P REFERENCES WITH
L ANGUAGE M ODELS
 Belinda Z. Li∗     Alex Tamkin∗                      Noah D. Goodman              Jacob Andreas
 MIT CSAIL          Anthropic†                        Stanford                     MIT CSAIL
 bzl@mit.edu        atamkin@cs.stanford.edu           ngoodman@stanford.edu        jda@mit.edu



                                            A BSTRACT

          Language models (LMs) can be directed to perform user- and context-dependent
          tasks by using labeled examples or natural language prompts. But selecting ex-
          amples or writing prompts can be challenging—especially in tasks that require
          users to precisely articulate nebulous preferences or reason about complex edge
          cases. For such tasks, we introduce generative active task elicitation (GATE) for
          using LMs themselves to guide the task specification process. GATE is a learning
          framework in which models elicit and infer human preferences through free-form,
          language-based interaction with users. We identify prototypical challenges that
          users face when specifying preferences, and design three preference modeling
          tasks to study these challenges: content recommendation, moral reasoning, and
          email validation. In preregistered experiments, we show that LMs that learn to
          perform these tasks using GATE (by interactively querying users with open-ended
          questions) obtain preference specifications that are more informative than user-
          written prompts or examples. GATE matches existing task specification methods
          in the moral reasoning task, and significantly outperforms them in the content
          recommendation and email validation tasks. Users additionally report that inter-
          active task elicitation requires less effort than prompting or example labeling and
          surfaces considerations that they did not anticipate on their own. Our findings
          suggest that LM-driven elicitation can be a powerful tool for aligning models to
          complex human preferences and values. 1



1       I NTRODUCTION

The complexity of human preferences makes them challenging to specify to machine learning sys-
tems. Consider the problem of designing a recommendation system for songs or news articles. First,
system builders must develop a formal model of the potential factors influencing user preferences.
Second, users must describe their preferences in a format that a learning algorithm can use to make
future recommendations. Each of these steps requires mental effort and continual refinement by
users and system builders. Until recently, the dominant approach in machine learning has specified
preferences using examples: users first label a dataset with examples of the desired model behavior,
then train a machine learning model on this dataset. This strategy has seen widespread use across
diverse tasks, including image classification and question answering (Krizhevsky et al., 2012; De-
vlin et al., 2019). In more recent years, this paradigm has changed with the advent of instruction
following methods (Brown et al., 2020)—by pre-training langauge models (LMs) on large-scale text
corpora, it is possible to induce desired behaviors by conditioning only on natural language task
specifications, in tasks as diverse as code generation and text summarization.
However, this progress has also accentuated the challenges described above: complex behaviors
require an increasing amount of prompt engineering or dataset design to overcome the imprecision
of natural language and prevent models from misunderstanding or misgeneralizing from spurious
features of prompts or examples. For example, a user who says they enjoy reading tennis articles
    ∗
      Equal contribution. Author order decided via coin flip.
    †
      Work performed while at Stanford University.
    1
      Code is ava/ilable at https://github.com/alextamkin/generative-elicitation


                                                  1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


         (A) Unknown user preferences



                                                                              🎾
                                                                                                           Finance             Politics
                                                      Science                                                                   …
                                                                                                            📈

                                                            🤖
                                                      🏥                                                                           SCIENTIFIC
                                                                                               🏈                                  AMERICAN
                                                                          ⚽
                                                      🪐                 Sports             Writing style
                                                                                               …                              Sources


         (B) Task elicitation
                   PROMPTING                               ACTIVE LEARNING                       GENERATIVE ELICITATION
                                                                                                       What’s one topic you like to         🤖
                                                           Wall Street Journal:
           I like reading science articles.   🤖            Stocks climb despite rise                   read about, and one topic            🏥
           I particularly enjoy articles                   in treasury yields          📈               you don’t?
           about AI and outer space.          🪐                                                                                             🪐
           Maybe some other areas of          📈                                                       I like to read about science, but     📈
           science as well. I don’t really
           enjoy reading about finance                                             👎                  not finance.
           though, especially not whether
           the stock market is going up                                                                What are your hobbies, and
                                                           CBS sports: Top 10                          do you enjoy articles about
           or down.                                        breakout college stars      🏈               them?

                                                                                                      I play tennis and yes I read a lot    🎾
                                                                                   👎                  about it.


                                                           Tennis.com: R Gasquet
                                                                                                       Do you like other sports?            ⚽
                                                           defeats M Huesler           🎾
                                                                                                                                            🏈
                                                                                                       I can’t think of any
                                                      LM
                                                                                   👍                   Where do you get your news?
                                                                                                 LM
                                                                                                       I have a Scientific American         S.A.
                                                                                                       subscription. I also read the NYT.


         (C) Evaluation on test cases
          New York Times: What
          Does the Future Hold for AI?            👍              👍    ✔                     👎      ✘                           👍    ✔
          CBS Sports: Top Basketball
          Trends to Watch.                        👎              👍    ✘                     👎      ✔                           👎    ✔
          ESPN: Behind Serena’s
          Killer Serve.                           👍              👎    ✘                     👍      ✔                           👍    ✔

                                                            PROMPTING                  ACT. LEARN.                      GEN. ELICIT.


Figure 1: Generative Active Task Elicitation (GATE) elicits user preferences through inter-
active, free-form questions, which can then be used in downstream decision-making. Unlike
non-interactive elicitation approaches (e.g., prompting), which rely entirely on the human to eluci-
date their preferences, generative elicitation is better able to probe nuances of human preferences.
Unlike active learning approaches, generative elicitation can ask more generic, free-form questions.
The three parts of this figure illustrate: (A) Fuzzy user preferences: A user wishes to translate their
fuzzy preferences for how a task should be performed into a specification for a machine learning
model. This is challenging because users lack perfect introspection, preferences can be difficult to
specify in language, the specification needs to anticipate tricky real-world edge cases, and models
may misgeneralize from provided examples or instructions. (B) Task elicitation: We consider vari-
ous ways of eliciting these fuzzy preferences from users, including non-interactive prompting, active
learning, and generative elicitation (GATE). (C) Evaluation: We evaluate methods on a held-out test
set, scoring how well a language model predicted the true decisions made by the user.


                                                                          2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


could either be interested in the competitive tennis circuit or in improving their own serve. A few
user-provided examples of tennis-related articles might fail to specify whether the user is interested
in broader tennis content, such as tennis-themed satire. These challenges of task ambiguity (Finn
et al., 2018; Tamkin et al., 2022a) loom large as models continue to be applied to more open-
ended tasks and higher-stakes domains. Recent work (Don-Yehiya et al., 2024) has shown that
in natural chatbot interactions, as many as 30% of the chats include explicit feedback, with the
plurality of the feedback cases ( 35%) corresponding to when the user rephrased their last response,
presumably due to the LM misinterpreting their initial query. Recent efforts to align LMs with
human preferences have largely focused on training them to rank candidate outputs in accordance
with fixed, pre-collected preference datasets (Ouyang et al., 2022; Rafailov et al., 2024; Hejna et al.,
2024), or modeling preferences according to factors (Hu et al., 2023; Oh et al., 2024), but have
overlooked the complexity of eliciting those preferences in the first place.
To address these challenges, we propose to use LMs themselves to help convert human preferences
into automated decision-making systems. This paper describes generative active task elicitation
(GATE), a learning framework in which models elicit and infer user preferences through open-ended
interaction. We describe several techniques for leveraging LMs to perform GATE—for example, by
asking informative open-ended questions or generating edge cases for users to label.
Users face a number of different challenges when trying to specify or articulate their preferred
solution to a task: they must identify the features of a solution that are relevant, evaluate tradeoffs
in the relevant importance of these features, and reason about how they will interact in unexpected
edge cases. To evaluate GATE and other specification methods, we design three preference modeling
tasks to study these challenges: content recommendation, moral reasoning, and email validation.
In pre-registered experiments, we find that LM-based task elicitation yields more equally or more
accurate models than existing prompting or active learning techniques, while requiring comparable
or less mental effort from users and surfacing novel considerations. More specifically, learning from
LM-generated open-ended questions outperforms both prompting and active learning in the content
recommendation and email specification tasks, and matches prompting in the moral reasoning task.
In summary, this paper introduces a new preference elicitation framework (GATE), a family of meth-
ods that perform GATE using pre-trained language models, and experimental evidence showing that
these methods match or outperform existing prompting and labeling methods in modeling user pref-
erences about language model behavior. Our results show that interactive, language-based task
elicitation is a flexible and powerful tool for building personalized models, capable of overcoming
many challenges inherent in prompt- and example-based methods.

2     E LICITING TASK P REFERENCES FROM H UMAN U SERS
2.1   T HE TASK E LICITATION F RAMEWORK

We study the problem of efficiently training a machine learning model to perform a task in ac-
cordance with a user’s preferences. Throughout this paper, we use task to refer to a context- and
user-dependent function f : x 7→ y that maps inputs x to outputs y. When building a personalized
news article recommendation system, for example, x are articles and y are user preference scores for
that article. Because different users may prefer different content, each user’s individual preferences
specify a distinct task: content recommendation for Pat and content recommendation for Avery are
different tasks within the domain of content recommendation (Ziegler et al., 2020). To build such
a model, we must collect some task specification from a human user (e.g., revealing what articles
they are interested in). Current in-context and preference learning approaches admit a wide variety
of specification types, including collections of labeled examples, natural language instructions, or
combinations of the two.
What makes one type of specification preferable to another? Ideally, we would like specifications
that are both (1) easy for humans to create and (2) informative to learners, enabling them to model
human preferences accurately. Very abstractly, we seek a framework for gathering and learning from
specifications that optimizes an objective:
                        α · human–predictor alignment − β · specification cost                  (1)
where human–predictor alignment measures the extent to which model behaviors align with the
human’s desired behavior (e.g. user satisfaction with article recommendations), specification cost


                                                   3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


measures human effort in crafting the specification (e.g. time required for the user to specify their
preferences about news articles), and α and β trade off between the two. Formally, let Hf denote
a human user whose preferences are represented by a function f . We wish to design an elicitation
policy E that interacts with Hf to produce a task specification s. This specification may then be
input to a learning algorithm to produce a model fˆ(s). Then, letting C(·) denote a scalar measure of
specification cost, and A(·, ·) denote a measure of alignment distance between two predictors (lower
is better), we wish to minimize (in expectation over the population of human users):

                              EHf Es∼E(Hf ) α · C(s) + β · A(f, fˆ(s)) .

                                                                                                  (2)

Here, C might measure the number of words the user typed to produce the specification s, while
A might measure model–predictor agreement at the level of individual predictions from some pop-
ulation: A(f, fˆ) = Ex ∥f (x) − fˆ(x)∥. In general, appropriate definitions of C and A are domain-
dependent; in this paper, our experiments compare the alignment of different predictors at a fixed
cost. Evaluation of cost, alignment, and tradeoffs between them are discussed more in Section 5.

2.2   E XISTING P REFERENCE M ODELLING PARADIGMS IN THE TASK E LICITATION
      F RAMEWORK

                                                        Many existing approaches for preference learn-
                  Passive            Interactive
                                                        ing can be described within the framework
                                                        given in Figure 2. Understood as task elic-
 Example-                            Pool-based         itation procedures, existing approaches differ
            Supervised learning
 based                             active learning
                                                        along two key axes: their level of interactivity
 Free-                            Generative active     and their level of flexibility. In interactive elic-
                Prompting
 form                              task elicitation     itation methods, queries can change depending
                                                        on user responses (e.g., querying for the most
                                                        useful information based on what is known thus
 Figure 2: Axes of variation in task elicitation.       far) while passive elicitation methods expect
                                                        the user to provide specifications in a single
shot. Example-based specification methods ask users to label a set of examples, while free-form
elicitation approaches are less restrictive, allowing the user to provide a much wider range of inputs,
including natural language instructions and explanations.

Supervised learning: passive, example-based In the most common supervised learning setup,
the elicitation policy E simply instructs the human user Hf to generate a collection of labeled (input,
output) pairs, after which fˆ(s) is produced by fitting or fine-tuning a learned model using standard
algorithms. This is an example-based process because the specification is provided via labeled
examples and is passive, as the model does not interactively query the user to label additional data.
This category broadly covers in-context learning approaches that require users insert demonstrations
in the context (Brown et al., 2020), as well as preference-learning approaches that ask users to rate
model outputs on a scale (Ouyang et al., 2022), or select the best output in a pair of outputs (Rafailov
et al., 2024).

Active learning: interactive, example-based In active learning, the elicitation policy is interac-
tive. Users first assemble a fixed pool of unlabeled inputs x. Next, E, selects from this pool an
example whose label would be most informative. The user Hf provides a label for this example,
then E selects the next-most-informative example, and so on (Cohn et al., 1994; Dagan & Engelson,
1995; Lewis & Gale, 1994; Settles, 2009). Finally, fˆ(s) is trained as in supervised methods. Opti-
mal experiment design methods (Emery & Nenarokomov, 1998) may be viewed as generalizations
of this paradigm in which inputs x are generated rather than selected. Interactive processes enable
the model to query for examples that may resolve uncertainty or ambiguity in the task specification
(Tamkin et al., 2022b).
Recent approaches to in-context learning have explored various sampling techniques to determine
which samples to insert in-context (Margatina et al., 2023a). Furthermore, preference learning ap-
proaches have explored actively selecting samples to label (Muldrew et al., 2024).


                                                     4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Prompting: passive, free-form Modern pre-trained models allow for specifying tasks in more
flexible ways than simply labeling examples. For example, models can be conditioned with a prompt
describing the user’s intended task in natural language (Brown et al., 2020), or even a mix of lan-
guage and image inputs (Alayrac et al., 2022). As with supervised learning, the labeling policy E
here is simply an instruction to write a natural language task description (s), but the final predictor
fˆ(s) is produced by passing s to a pre-trained language model.
This category covers instruction-tuning techniques which improve LM’s ability to follow free-form
instructions in-context (Zhang et al., 2024), and preference learning techniques that learn from verbal
feedback (Stephan et al., 2024).


3     G ENERATIVE ACTIVE TASK E LICITATION

All of the methods above have important drawbacks: the burden typically falls upon the user to
ensure that prompts or example sets are truly comprehensive specifications of their preferences,
as any lack of clarity in the prompt could lead to task ambiguity (Tamkin et al., 2022a), resulting
in undesired behavior during deployment. Resolving task ambiguity by crafting better prompts is
challenging and time-consuming due to the difficulties of articulating nebulous personal preferences
and anticipating edge cases that will emerge during deployment time.
However, one quadrant of Fig. 2 is not occupied by any of the aforementioned approaches: there is
currently no method that leverages the flexibility of a free-form specification while using interaction
to resolve uncertainty. We explore whether it is possible to combine the flexibility and richness of
prompting-based specifications with the advantages of interactive methods such as active learning,
by having a model interactively query users for these rich specifications. We term this family of
methods generative active task elicitation (GATE).

3.1   M ETHODS FOR GATE

The effectiveness of language models (LMs) for understanding and producing free-form text sug-
gests that they may be capable of eliciting and understanding user preferences. In this paper, we thus
experiment with a family of GATE methods in which LMs serve as the backbone for both the elici-
tation policy E and the predictor fˆ(s). See Figure 1 for examples. In particular, we implement the
elicitation policy E by prompting an LM to ask the user questions while conditioning on the history
of previous questions and answers. To make predictions fˆ(s), an LM is prompted to predict a label
conditioned on an input x and a complete elicitation transcript s provided as input. We experiment
with several different information gathering policies, realized by simply prompting an LM to ask
different kinds of questions:2
Generative active learning The LM generates examples for the user to label. This approach has the
advantage of providing concrete scenarios to the user, including some they may not have considered
a priori. For example, for content recommendation, the LM might generate the question: Are you
interested in the following article? The Art of Fusion Cuisine: Mixing Cultures and Flavors [...].
Generative yes-or-no questions We restrict the LM to generating binary yes-or-no questions. This
approach enables the model to elicit more abstract preferences while still being easy for the user to
answer. For example, the model might probe a user’s preferences by asking: Do you enjoy reading
articles about health and wellness?
Generative open-ended questions The LM generates arbitrary questions requiring free-form nat-
ural language responses. This enables the LM to elicit the broadest and most abstract pieces of
knowledge at the potential cost of being overly broad or challenging for the user to answer. For
example, the LM might generate the question: What hobbies or activities do you enjoy in your free
time[...] and why do these hobbies or activities captivate you?
   2
     We also tried an open-ended conversations setting in early experiments, where we allowed users to freely
converse with a LLM. However, we found that this freedom actually caused the LM to display some non-well-
formed behavior, e.g. devolving into repetition, incoherence, or getting sidetracked by the most recent user
response and losing track of the main task. Restricting the format to a particular type of question kept this
behavior more at bay.


                                                     5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


The user is not constrained in their response in any of the above settings; they are free to provide as
much detail as they want. We present example elicitation transcripts for each policy in Figure 8.

4       E XPERIMENT S ETUP
We consider preference learning problems in three different domains to evaluate our generative
active task elicitation methods. A common feature of these domains is that they do not feature a
single correct behavior that could be learned during LM pre-training; instead, models must elicit
an individual human’s preferences in order to make accurate predictions. We allow each human
user (H in Eq. (2)) to interact open-endedly with an elicitation policy E for five minutes, resulting
in a specification s. Next, humans and learned models fˆ(s) independently label a set of held-
out examples. Finally, we measure agreement between each human study participant and the LM
conditioned on that user’s specification s. See Figure 8 for examples of environments and dialogues.3

4.1       D OMAINS AND DATASETS

There are several distinct challenges that arise when users attempt to specify their preferred model
behavior on a target task. In some cases, users may find it difficult to express tradeoffs between
different features of model behavior (e.g. in the recommendation domain, the relative importance
of a user’s preference for short articles and articles about current events). In some cases, they
may find it difficult to even articulate what the relevant features (e.g. length and topic) are, or to
predict how they will correlate and interact in natural data. Preference modeling may also serve
a variety of distinct functions in a larger automated decision-making system: understanding user’s
personal needs (e.g. for recommender systems), understanding their desired model behavior (e.g. for
language model alignment), or probing the user’s prior understanding of a task (e.g. as a prerequisite
for teaching). We evaluate GATE in three domains designed to capture these various challenges:

Content Recommendation In this domain (which has served as a running example), individual
users’ preferences about the articles’ content and style vary widely and may involve complex trade-
offs. After eliciting specifications from users, models’ and users independently rate a set of articles
(which are not available to users or learners during the elicitation phase). We constructed this eval-
uation set by collecting 16 popular online newspaper and magazine articles as test cases; ratings are
based on the article’s source website, title, and a one-paragraph description. Models are evaluated
on their accuracy in identifying users’ favorite articles from this set.

Moral Reasoning Moral preferences can be deeply personal and hard to articulate; indeed, even
the features of moral scenarios that factor into humans’ judgments can be difficult for them to ver-
balize. As a test-bed for eliciting moral values, we consider the question of when (if ever) it is
ethical to steal a loaf of bread. After elicitation, users and models are presented with textual de-
scriptions of scenarios in which someone wishes to steal a loaf of bread (e.g. if they are hungry, or
if the bread was previously stolen from them) and asked to judge whether stealing the bread would
be morally acceptable. Judgments are collected on 28 moral scenarios that were written manually
by the authors as test cases. The authors designed these test cases by considering wide range of
moral philosophies, including (but not limited to) deontology, utilitarianism, virtue ethics, animal
welfare, etc. These test cases were designed in similar ways to moral vignettes in prior work (Jin
et al., 2022), but shorter to ensure participants could annotate all scenarios in only a few minutes.
Models are evaluated on their ability to predict human judgments about these scenarios.

Email Verification Lastly, we may wish to elicit user’s degree of knowledge about a task in order
to tailor teaching, or other communication, in accordance with their beliefs. Email verification
is an example domain with many edge cases and requirements that a layperson may only have
incomplete understanding of. For example, people may have differing prior expectations about what
characters may be allowed in emails, how long they may be, etc. Here, we evaluate models’ ability
to predict user judgments about the well-formedness of emails. After elicitation, users and models
are presented with a set of 54 test cases, and asked to label them as well-formed or malformed. The
test cases were written by the authors based on the international standard outlined in IETF RFC
    3
        The preregistration for our experiments and analyses can be found at: https://osf.io/5v6nd/.


                                                       6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


6854, and carefully designed to probe for a diverse set of requirements, including special characters,
character counts, foreign-language characters, subaddresses, in domains and local parts, etc. Models
are evaluated on these test cases based on their ability to predict human well-formedness judgments.
A general note on evaluation: the test set in each domain is small by construction, to ensure that
each human participant can fully label all test cases, and all results are comparable. We obtain a
complete labeling of an evaluation set from every one of the 388 participants in our experiments,
which in turn allows us to establish statistically significant differences between elicitation methods.

4.2   H UMAN INTERACTION

Human participants in these experiments were recruited from English-speaking users of Prolific.
For the email validation task, we additionally recruited participants from several computer science
programs at US universities. We recruited 20–30 participants for each domain-method pair (6 elic-
itation methods across 3 domains), for a total of 388 participants. We collected 1 transcript per
participant. Participants were paid an average of $12/hr. Our experiments received IRB approval,
and all participants consented to having their data used for our experiments. The breakdown of the
number of participants allocated to each scenario and method can be found in Appendix B.1. Details
of the user interface used in experiments may be found in Appendix B.2.

4.3   M ODELING DETAILS

We use the GPT-4 model (gpt-4-0613 snapshot; OpenAI, 2023) to both elicit user preferences (as
an elicitation policy E) and make predictions based on the elicited preferences (as a predictor fˆ(s)).
We additionally run experiments on Mixtral, an open-source LM, in Appendix C.4. To elicit user
preferences, we prompt GPT-4 with a domain description and the current interaction history, and
instruct it to generate an informative but easy-to-answer edge case (for generative active learning)
or question (for generative yes-or-no questions and generative open-ended questions). To make
predictions, we prompt GPT-4 with the task specification s and a test sample x and ask it to generate
a prediction for the test sample. The full text of the prompts can be found in Appendix A.

4.4   BASELINE METHODS

We compare GATE with several baseline approaches for specifying tasks. Here, the elicitation policy
E is not parameterized by an LM, but constructed by the user or based on a pool of real examples.

Supervised learning We consider supervised learning as a baseline, as described in Section 2.2.
We randomly present participants with questions from a large pool of examples and ask them to
annotate up to the five-minute time limit. We study this approach exclusively in the content recom-
mendation domain because pools of examples are not readily available in the other two domains.
We use the Microsoft News Dataset (Wu et al., 2020) as our pool for this domain, a dataset of 160k
news articles with descriptions. The license terms for research use of this dataset can be found at
https://github.com/msnews/MIND/blob/master/MSRLicense_Data.pdf. We use the data con-
sistent with the terms in “1) Use Rights”.

In-context active learning As a baseline active learning approach, we consider a pool-based ac-
tive learning approach, as described in Section 2.2. For the elicitation policy, we use the diversity-
based sampling approach of Margatina et al. (2023b); we first cluster the examples using a Sentence-
BERT embedding model (Reimers & Gurevych, 2019) into 15 different clusters, then iteratively ask
questions from each cluster in a round-robin fashion, up until the five-minute time limit.4 This base-
line is intended to capture the difficulty of selecting informative examples from a pool of unlabeled
examples relative to generating informative examples from scratch. As with supervised learning, we
study this approach exclusively in content recommendation.
   4
     Margatina et al. (2023b) explored several different popular active learning sampling approaches for in-
context learning (including random, uncertainty, and diversity sampling) and found little difference in empirical
performance between them. We also ran exploratory model-model experiments in our domains and found no
significant difference between these three sampling strategies. See details in Appendix D.


                                                       7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 3: Across three domains, our LM-prompting implementations of GATE are gener-
ally able to elicit human preferences beyond baseline supervised learning, active learning, or
human-written prompts. We measure the Area Under the “∆p(correct) vs. Interaction time”
Curve, which gives us a time-normalized metric for how well (and how quickly) each elicitation
method is at aligning with human preferences. While GATE methods generally outperform the
baseline methods as well as no interaction (represented by a ∆p(correct) of 0), we are only able
to establish statistical significance between GATE and baselines in the content recommendation and
email verification domains. * indicates a statistically significant difference (p < 0.05).


User-written prompts As a baseline that does not use interactive elicitation, we ask participants to
write a short paragraph describing their preferences for the task for up to five minutes. We then use
the text of this paragraph to prompt a LM to make decisions. This baseline is intended to capture
the difficulty of specifying preferences in writing, both in terms of the effort it takes to write the
paragraph and difficulty of writing a paragraph that fully specifies one’s preferences.


4.5   E VALUATION AND METRICS

We measure how well models can predict the probability that users will answer questions a certain
way, which we call p(correct). Specifically, we prompt the model with the interaction history s as
a single test case, then ask the model to output a real-valued probability that a user would answer
“yes” to the test case (e.g. the probability the user likes an article for content recommendation),
which we call pLM . This probability is outputted in token space as a number between 0.0 and 1.0,
similar to past work (Branwen, 2020; Lin et al., 2022). The exact prompts we use for predicting
probabilities can be found in Appendix A.2.
We define p(correct) as the probability the model assigns to the user-preferred answer. For example,
if pLM = 0.8 for a given question, then p(correct) would be 0.8 if the user’s answer were “yes” to
the same question, and 0.2 if the user’s answer was “no”.
We use this metric instead of accuracy because we found modeling the uncertainty in (our estimate
of) user’s preferences was a more informative metric than predicting exact user decisions. In pilot
experiments prompting the LM to predict binary yes/no decisions, we found this resulted in skewed
predictions where the LM would predict one of ‘yes’ or ‘no’ for the entire test set, perhaps due to
miscalibration of the model’s implicit decision threshold. Furthermore, at the time of writing, token
probabilities for GPT-4 were not available via the OpenAI API. That said, we also discuss and report
a classification-based metric in Appendix C.2.
Given p(correct), we compute:

Area under the p(correct)-time curve We do not just care about the total information elicited,
but about how quickly good information is elicited. That is to say, if two methods arrived at the
same p(correct) at the end of five minutes, we want to reward the method that arrived a higher
p(correct) faster. To do this, we compute the average change in p(correct) after every minute of
human elicitation time (conditioning on the state of the transcript at that time). This produces a
curve where the x-axis is time, and the y-axis is the average change in p(correct). By taking the


                                                  8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 4: Left: GATE methods are equally or less mentally demanding than other meth-
ods. We plot the perceived mental demand across methods and domains (higher = greater mental
demand). Right: Language model elicitation does not shift human preferences. We plot the
proportion of participants who answered "yes" to each test question, comparing no LM interaction
(user-written prompts) to LM interaction (GATE) elicitation. The red line is the y = x curve, which
serves as a guideline to see how well humans’ no-LM interaction preferences align with their pref-
erences post-LM interaction (if they align perfectly, the points should fall along this curve). We see
that the points generally hover around this curve.

total area beneath this curve (AUC), we reward methods that arrive at higher p(correct) faster. We
also plot the final, average p(correct)’s after five minutes in Appendix C.3.

Rating of perceived effort across elicitation policies In addition to these performance-based met-
rics, we also ask users to rate how difficult they found the elicitation process to be. Specifically, we
asked users “How mentally demanding was writing your answer?” in the non-interactive-elicitation
setting, and “How mentally demanding was interacting with the chatbot?” in all elicitation settings
(which include all other settings from Section 2.2). The “mentally demanding” wording was taken
from the NASA TLX (Hart & Staveland, 1988). The question was assessed via a Likert scale from 1
(Very Little) to 7 (Very High). We also consider several additional questions to assess other usability
tradeoffs. See Appendix E for the full list.

5   R ESULTS
Evaluation results are shown in Figures 3 and 4. We plot the 95% confidence intervals of each
setting as error bars, and perform permutation tests between each (baseline method, GATE method)
pair to establish significance. Additional results, including sample conversations, can be found
in Appendix C. Additional analyses can be found in Appendix D.3. Our results show that GATE
methods...
...successfully elicit human preferences. GATE improves over no elicitation, where the model is
prompted to make decisions before any user interaction. This is the case across all domains studied
and all GATE methods (a positive score in Figure 3), with significance at the 0.05 level for all but the
email domain, where only generative active learning was significant.
...are comparable to or better than other elicitation methods. The variant of GATE that asks
open-ended questions matches (in the moral reasoning domain) or outperforms (in other domains)
all other supervised learning, active learning, and prompting-based task elicitation methods. In
the content recommendation and email domains, some other GATE variant also outperforms these
baselines.
...are equally or less mentally demanding than user-written prompts. As shown in Figure 4
(left), users generally find interactive elicitation methods to be less mentally demanding, especially
ones that involve labeling samples or answering yes/no questions, than non-interactive prompting.

We additionally run some of the settings using an open-source LM, Mixtral, which can be found
in Appendix C.4. Our results show that Mixtral performs comparably to GPT-4, indicating that
open-source models can be used in place of GPT-4 for GATE.


                                                   9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


6   OTHER R ELATED W ORK

A fundamental challenge across many fields is how to obtain information about people’s nebulous
thoughts, preferences, and goals (Ericsson & Simon, 1980; Henderson et al., 1995; Christel & Kang,
1992; Zowghi & Coulin, 2005; Pacheco et al., 2018). Many works attempt to computationally
describe or query human preferences, through bandits, Bayesian methods, inverse reinforcement
learning, generative modeling, and more (Robbins, 1952; Yue et al., 2012; Chajewska et al., 2000;
Emery & Nenarokomov, 1998; Ng et al., 2000; Hadfield-Menell et al., 2016; Mulla & Gharpure,
2023; Zhu & Bento, 2017). Most relevant to our work is active learning, which centers on how
models can choose useful data points to learn from (Lewis & Catlett, 1994; Settles & Craven, 2008;
Settles, 2009; Houlsby et al., 2011; Tamkin et al., 2022b). We extend this line of investigation to the
generative setting, clarifying user intent by querying a user with generated examples and questions.


7   D ISCUSSION AND C ONCLUSION

We introduced the GATE framework to interactively elicit preferences from human users with free-
form queries and answers. We presented initial evidence that LMs can successfully implement
GATE to elicit human preferences (sometimes) more accurately and with less effort than supervised
learning, active learning, or prompting-based approaches. There are many ways to expand on our
implementation of GATE: Future work may explore more principled methods for elicitation, for
example, integrating explicit notions of uncertainty. Second, larger models may be more capable
elicitors: future work can explore scaling laws for elicitation. Finally, many real-world tasks such
as software design and legal/medical decision-making present a richer set of constraints and edge
cases. These applications thus offer a rich space of possible extensions of GATE.

L IMITATIONS

In this work, our exploration of GATE methods has been limited prompt-based approaches, and no
explicit optimization of the objective in Equation (2). Future work can examine different ways
of implementing free-form interactive querying, including approaches that might combine explicit
optimization with the flexibility of language models.
In our human experiments (Section 5), we did not have the budget to survey a massive number of
humans for human experiments. Thus, we were unable to establish statistical significance of GATE
above baselines in certain domains. Furthermore, our sample of humans may be biased, as all of
them speak English and are from the United States. This means that we have likely not captured the
full spectrum of human preferences.
Finally, we would like note that our moral reasoning domain is very simplistic, and may be unable
to capture all the nuances of human moral preference. This paper also does not endorse aligning
to every potential human preference, understanding there are ethical risks to doing so. Overall,
designers of public-facing systems that make decisions may wish to implement safeguards against
allowing anyone to specify moral judgments.

E THICAL C ONSIDERATIONS

Our work presents several potential ethical benefits and risks. Examples of benefits include mak-
ing it easier for software designers to incorporate nuanced user preferences, or empowering people
with rare preferences or preferences that have historically not been considered when building soft-
ware systems. In addition, improving the effort-performance ratio, especially by requiring less user
typing, may help make language models more accessible to users with less time, familiarity with
language models, or physical ability to use such systems. However, this direction carries risks as
well. In particular, work on thin slicing (Ambady & Rosenthal, 1992) has demonstrated that small
amounts of information about a user can sometimes be used to predict a broader range of personal
characteristics, raising potential privacy considerations. The interactive nature of GATE also risks
increasing automation bias (Goddard et al., 2012), where users place undue weight on a model’s pre-
dictions. However, further work is necessary to establish if or when these risks are more significant
for GATE than for prompting-based approaches to steering language models.


                                                  10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This material is based upon work supported by the National Science Foundation under grants IIS-
2212310 and IIS-2331117, as well as an MIT Artificial Intelligence for Augmentation and Produc-
tivity Seed Grant. BZL is funded by an NDSEG Fellowship. We would like to thank Andi Peng and
Leshem Choshen for feedback on earlier drafts of the paper.

R EFERENCES
Jean-Baptiste Alayrac, Jeff Donahue, Pauline Luc, Antoine Miech, Iain Barr, Yana Hasson, Karel
  Lenc, Arthur Mensch, Katherine Millican, Malcolm Reynolds, et al. Flamingo: A visual language
  model for few-shot learning. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 35:23716–
  23736, 2022.
Nalini Ambady and Robert Rosenthal. Thin slices of expressive behavior as predictors of interper-
  sonal consequences: A meta-analysis. Psychological bulletin, 111(2):256, 1992.
Gwern Branwen. GPT-3 nonfiction — Calibration, 2020.            URL https://www.gwern.net/
 GPT-3-nonfiction#calibration.
Tom Brown, Benjamin Mann, Nick Ryder, Melanie Subbiah, Jared D Kaplan, Prafulla Dhari-
  wal, Arvind Neelakantan, Pranav Shyam, Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, Sandhini Agar-
  wal, Ariel Herbert-Voss, Gretchen Krueger, Tom Henighan, Rewon Child, Aditya Ramesh,
  Daniel Ziegler, Jeffrey Wu, Clemens Winter, Chris Hesse, Mark Chen, Eric Sigler, Ma-
  teusz Litwin, Scott Gray, Benjamin Chess, Jack Clark, Christopher Berner, Sam McCan-
  dlish, Alec Radford, Ilya Sutskever, and Dario Amodei. Language Models are Few-Shot
  Learners. In H. Larochelle, M. Ranzato, R. Hadsell, M. F. Balcan, and H. Lin (eds.), Ad-
  vances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 33, pp. 1877–1901. Curran As-
  sociates, Inc., 2020. URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper_files/paper/2020/
  file/1457c0d6bfcb4967418bfb8ac142f64a-Paper.pdf.
Urszula Chajewska, Daphne Koller, and Ronald Parr. Making rational decisions using adaptive
  utility elicitation. In AAAI/IAAI, pp. 363–369, 2000.
Michael G Christel and Kyo C Kang. Issues in requirements elicitation, 1992.
David Cohn, Les Atlas, and Richard Ladner. Improving generalization with active learning. Mach.
  Learn., 15(2):201–221, may 1994. ISSN 0885-6125. doi: 10.1023/A:1022673506211. URL
  https://doi.org/10.1023/A:1022673506211.
Ido Dagan and Sean P. Engelson. Committee-based sampling for training probabilistic classifiers.
  In Proceedings of the Twelfth International Conference on International Conference on Machine
  Learning, ICML’95, pp. 150–157, San Francisco, CA, USA, 1995. Morgan Kaufmann Publishers
  Inc. ISBN 1558603778.
Jacob Devlin, Ming-Wei Chang, Kenton Lee, and Kristina Toutanova. BERT: Pre-training of deep
  bidirectional transformers for language understanding. In Proceedings of the 2019 Conference of
  the North American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language
  Technologies, Volume 1 (Long and Short Papers), pp. 4171–4186, Minneapolis, Minnesota, June
  2019. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/N19-1423. URL https:
  //aclanthology.org/N19-1423.
Shachar Don-Yehiya, Leshem Choshen, and Omri Abend. Learning from naturally occurring feed-
  back, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2407.10944.
Ashley F Emery and Aleksey V Nenarokomov. Optimal experiment design. Measurement Science
  and Technology, 9(6):864, 1998.
K Anders Ericsson and Herbert A Simon. Verbal reports as data. Psychological review, 87(3):215,
  1980.
Chelsea Finn, Kelvin Xu, and Sergey Levine. Probabilistic model-agnostic meta-learning. Advances
  in neural information processing systems, 31, 2018.


                                               11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Kate Goddard, Abdul Roudsari, and Jeremy C Wyatt. Automation bias: A systematic review of
  frequency, effect mediators, and mitigators. Journal of the American Medical Informatics Asso-
  ciation, 19(1):121–127, 2012.
Dylan Hadfield-Menell, Stuart J Russell, Pieter Abbeel, and Anca Dragan. Cooperative inverse
  reinforcement learning. Advances in neural information processing systems, 29, 2016.
Sandra G. Hart and Lowell E. Staveland. Development of NASA-TLX (task load index): Results of
  empirical and theoretical research. In Peter A. Hancock and Najmedin Meshkati (eds.), Human
  Mental Workload, volume 52 of Advances in Psychology, pp. 139–183. North-Holland, 1988.
  doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/S0166-4115(08)62386-9. URL https://www.sciencedirect.
  com/science/article/pii/S0166411508623869.
Joey Hejna, Rafael Rafailov, Harshit Sikchi, Chelsea Finn, Scott Niekum, W. Bradley Knox, and
  Dorsa Sadigh. Contrastive preference learning: Learning from human feedback without rl, 2024.
  URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2310.13639.
Ron D Henderson, Mike C Smith, John Podd, and Hugo Varela-Alvarez. A comparison of the four
  prominent user-based methods for evaluating the usability of computer software. Ergonomics, 38
  (10):2030–2044, 1995.
Neil Houlsby, Ferenc Huszár, Zoubin Ghahramani, and Máté Lengyel. Bayesian active learning for
  classification and preference learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1112.5745, 2011.
Yebowen Hu, Kaiqiang Song, Sangwoo Cho, Xiaoyang Wang, Hassan Foroosh, and Fei Liu. De-
  cipherpref: Analyzing influential factors in human preference judgments via GPT-4, 2023. URL
  https://arxiv.org/abs/2305.14702.
Zhijing Jin, Sydney Levine, Fernando Gonzalez, Ojasv Kamal, Maarten Sap, Mrinmaya Sachan,
  Rada Mihalcea, Joshua Tenenbaum, and Bernhard Schölkopf. When to make exceptions: Ex-
  ploring language models as accounts of human moral judgment. In Proceedings of the 36th
  International Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems, NIPS ’22, Red Hook, NY,
  USA, 2022. Curran Associates Inc. ISBN 9781713871088.
Alex Krizhevsky, Ilya Sutskever, and Geoffrey E Hinton. Imagenet classification with deep
  convolutional neural networks. In F. Pereira, C.J. Burges, L. Bottou, and K.Q. Wein-
  berger (eds.), Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 25. Curran As-
  sociates, Inc., 2012. URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper_files/paper/2012/
  file/c399862d3b9d6b76c8436e924a68c45b-Paper.pdf.
David Krueger, Tegan Maharaj, and Jan Leike. Hidden incentives for auto-induced distributional
  shift. arXiv preprint arXiv:2009.09153, 2020.
David D Lewis and Jason Catlett. Heterogeneous uncertainty sampling for supervised learning. In
  Machine learning proceedings 1994, pp. 148–156. Elsevier, 1994.
David D. Lewis and William A. Gale. A sequential algorithm for training text classifiers. In Pro-
  ceedings of the 17th Annual International ACM SIGIR Conference on Research and Development
  in Information Retrieval, SIGIR ’94, pp. 3–12, Berlin, Heidelberg, 1994. Springer-Verlag. ISBN
  038719889X.
Stephanie Lin, Jacob Hilton, and Owain Evans. Teaching models to express their uncertainty in
  words. arXiv preprint arXiv:2205.14334, 2022.
Katerina Margatina, Timo Schick, Nikolaos Aletras, and Jane Dwivedi-Yu. Active learning prin-
  ciples for in-context learning with large language models. In Houda Bouamor, Juan Pino,
  and Kalika Bali (eds.), Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: EMNLP
  2023, pp. 5011–5034, Singapore, December 2023a. Association for Computational Linguis-
  tics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2023.findings-emnlp.334. URL https://aclanthology.org/2023.
  findings-emnlp.334.
Katerina Margatina, Timo Schick, Nikolaos Aletras, and Jane Dwivedi-Yu. Active learning princi-
  ples for in-context learning with large language models, 2023b.

                                               12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


William Muldrew, Peter Hayes, Mingtian Zhang, and David Barber. Active preference learning for
 large language models, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2402.08114.
Nikahat Mulla and Prachi Gharpure. Automatic question generation: A review of methodologies,
  datasets, evaluation metrics, and applications. Progress in Artificial Intelligence, 12(1):1–32,
  2023.
Andrew Y Ng, Stuart Russell, et al. Algorithms for inverse reinforcement learning. In Icml, vol-
  ume 1, pp. 2, 2000.
Juhyun Oh, Eunsu Kim, Jiseon Kim, Wenda Xu, Inha Cha, William Yang Wang, and Alice Oh.
  Uncovering factor level preferences to improve human-model alignment, 2024. URL https:
  //arxiv.org/abs/2410.06965.
OpenAI. Gpt-4 technical report, 2023.
Long Ouyang, Jeffrey Wu, Xu Jiang, Diogo Almeida, Carroll Wainwright, Pamela Mishkin, Chong
  Zhang, Sandhini Agarwal, Katarina Slama, Alex Ray, John Schulman, Jacob Hilton, Fraser
  Kelton, Luke Miller, Maddie Simens, Amanda Askell, Peter Welinder, Paul F Christiano, Jan
  Leike, and Ryan Lowe. Training language models to follow instructions with human feed-
  back. In S. Koyejo, S. Mohamed, A. Agarwal, D. Belgrave, K. Cho, and A. Oh (eds.), Ad-
  vances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 35, pp. 27730–27744. Curran As-
  sociates, Inc., 2022. URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper_files/paper/2022/
  file/b1efde53be364a73914f58805a001731-Paper-Conference.pdf.
Carla Pacheco, Ivan García, and Miryam Reyes. Requirements elicitation techniques: A systematic
  literature review based on the maturity of the techniques. IET Software, 12(4):365–378, 2018.
Rafael Rafailov, Archit Sharma, Eric Mitchell, Stefano Ermon, Christopher D. Manning, and
  Chelsea Finn. Direct preference optimization: Your language model is secretly a reward model,
  2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2305.18290.
Nils Reimers and Iryna Gurevych. Sentence-BERT: Sentence embeddings using siamese BERT-
  networks. In Proceedings of the 2019 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language
  Processing. Association for Computational Linguistics, 11 2019. URL https://arxiv.org/
  abs/1908.10084.
Herbert Robbins. Some aspects of the sequential design of experiments. Bulletin of the American
  Mathematical Society, 58(5):527 – 535, 1952.
Burr Settles. Active learning literature survey. Technical report, University of Wisconsin-Madison
  Department of Computer Sciences, 2009.
Burr Settles and Mark Craven. An analysis of active learning strategies for sequence labeling tasks.
  In Proceedings of the 2008 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing,
  pp. 1070–1079, 2008.
Moritz Stephan, Alexander Khazatsky, Eric Mitchell, Annie S Chen, Sheryl Hsu, Archit Sharma,
 and Chelsea Finn. RLVF: Learning from verbal feedback without overgeneralization, 2024. URL
 https://arxiv.org/abs/2402.10893.
Alex Tamkin, Kunal Handa, Avash Shrestha, and Noah Goodman. Task ambiguity in humans and
  language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2212.10711, 2022a.
Alex Tamkin, Dat Nguyen, Salil Deshpande, Jesse Mu, and Noah Goodman. Active learning helps
  pretrained models learn the intended task. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
  35:28140–28153, 2022b.
Fangzhao Wu, Ying Qiao, Jiun-Hung Chen, Chuhan Wu, Tao Qi, Jianxun Lian, Danyang Liu, Xing
  Xie, Jianfeng Gao, Winnie Wu, and Ming Zhou. MIND: A large-scale dataset for news recom-
  mendation. In Proceedings of the 58th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational
  Linguistics, pp. 3597–3606, Online, July 2020. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi:
  10.18653/v1/2020.acl-main.331. URL https://aclanthology.org/2020.acl-main.331.


                                                13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Yisong Yue, Josef Broder, Robert Kleinberg, and Thorsten Joachims. The k-armed dueling bandits
  problem. Journal of Computer and System Sciences, 78(5):1538–1556, 2012.
Shengyu Zhang, Linfeng Dong, Xiaoya Li, Sen Zhang, Xiaofei Sun, Shuhe Wang, Jiwei Li, Runyi
  Hu, Tianwei Zhang, Fei Wu, and Guoyin Wang. Instruction tuning for large language models: A
  survey, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2308.10792.
Jia-Jie Zhu and José Bento.        Generative adversarial active learning.      arXiv preprint
   arXiv:1702.07956, 2017.
Daniel M. Ziegler, Nisan Stiennon, Jeffrey Wu, Tom B. Brown, Alec Radford, Dario Amodei, Paul
  Christiano, and Geoffrey Irving. Fine-tuning language models from human preferences, 2020.
Didar Zowghi and Chad Coulin. Requirements elicitation: A survey of techniques, approaches, and
  tools. Engineering and managing software requirements, pp. 19–46, 2005.


                                               14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A     GATE P ROMPTS

A.1   E LICITATION P ROMPTS

Below, we list the prompts we use for generating elicitation queries (to instantiate the elicitation
policy E) for the various GATE methods.


Generative active learning The prompt for generative active learning can be found below. Brack-
eted, italicized text are placeholders, e.g. for the elicitation transcript (so far). Color-coded text is
domain-specific, e.g. the blue text represents text for the content recommendation domain, orange
text represents text for the moral reasoning domain, and the green text represents text for the email
validation domain.
Your task is to [ learn what topics a user is interested in reading online article about. People’s
interests are broad, so you should seek to understand their interests across many topics; in other
words, go for breadth rather than depth. Do not assume a user has given a complete answer
to any question, so make sure to keep probing different types of interests | learn under what
conditions the user would believe it is or is not ethical to steal a loaf of bread | learn what rules
a user believes a valid email address format must adhere to (e.g. for developing a regex format checker) ].

Come up with a potential edge case to learn as much information as you can about what their
desired behavior should be under different circumstances.
Make sure the edge case addresses different aspects of the system than the edge cases that have already
been considered.

An example edge case is: [ Are you interested in the following article? Website Name: TechTalkDaily
Title: 10 Must-Have Gadgets for 2023: A Comprehensive Guide
Description: Discover the top 10 gadgets that will revolutionize your daily life in 2023. From smart
home devices to the latest wearables, we’ve got you covered with our comprehensive guide. | Situation:
Is it ethical to steal a loaf of bread if you are starving to death and the bread would otherwise go to
waste? | Should the following email be accepted? username@example.com ]

Current cases:
[ Elicitation transcript ]

Generate the most informative edge case that, when answered, will reveal the most about the
desired behavior beyond what has already been queried for above. Generate the edge case in the
following format, and nothing else: "[ Are you interested in the following article? [edge case] | Situation:
[edge case] | Should the following be accepted? [edge case] ]"


Generating Questions The prompt for generating both yes-or-no and open-ended questions can
be found below. Once again, bracketed, italicized text are placeholders and color-coding indicates
text for specific domains.
Your task is to [ learn what topics a user is interested in reading online article about. People’s
interests are broad, so you should seek to understand their interests across many topics; in other
words, go for breadth rather than depth. Do not assume a user has given a complete answer
to any question, so make sure to keep probing different types of interests | learn under what
conditions the user would believe it is or is not ethical to steal a loaf of bread | learn what rules
a user believes a valid email address format must adhere to (e.g. for developing a regex format checker) ].

Previous questions:
[ Elicitation transcript ]

Generate the most informative [ yes/no question | open-ended question ] that, when answered,
will reveal the most about the desired behavior beyond what has already been queried for above. Make
sure your question addresses different aspects of the implementation than the questions that have
already been asked. At the same time however, the question should be bite-sized, and not ask for too
much at once. Phrase your question in a way that is understandable to non-expert humans; do not use
any jargon without explanation. Generate the [ yes/no question | open-ended question ] and nothing
else:


                                                   15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A.2     D ECISION - MAKING P ROMPTS

Given an elicitation transcript, we prompt the LM as follows to serve as a predictor fˆ(s) to make
decisions about each test case.

Content Recommendation The prompt for content recommendation can be found below. Brack-
eted, italicized text are placeholders, for the elicitation transcript and the test case sample.
A user has a particular set of preferences over what articles they would like to read. They have specified
their preferences below:
[ Eliciation transcript ]

Based on these preferences, would the user be interested in reading the following article? An-
swer with a probability between 0 and 1, where 0 means “definitely not interested” and 1 means
“definitely interested”. Only output the probability and nothing else. If uncertain, make your best guess.
[ Test case sample ]

Moral Reasoning The prompt for moral reasoning can be found below. Once again, bracketed,
italicized text are placeholders.
A user has a particular ethical code they follow. The following response(s) represent when this user
would believe it is ethical to steal a loaf of bread.
[ Eliciation transcript ]

"Based on these response(s), would the user believe it is ethical to steal a loaf of bread in the
following situation? Answer with a probability between 0 and 1, where 0 means “definitely not” and
1 means “definitely yes”. Only output the probability and nothing else. If uncertain, make your best
guess.
[ Test case sample ]

Email Validation The prompt for email validation can be found below. Once again, bracketed,
italicized text are placeholders.
A user has a particular format of emails that they believe to be valid. The following answer(s) represent
this user’s preferences of whether these emails adhere to their desired format.
[ Eliciation transcript ]

Based on the user’s preferences, does the following email adhere to the user’s desired format?
Answer with a probability between 0 and 1, where 0 means “definitely not” and 1 means “definitely yes”.
Only output the probability and nothing else. If uncertain, make your best guess.
[ Test case sample ]


B     E XPERIMENTAL D ETAILS
B.1     N UMBER OF PARTICIPANTS

The number of participants we recruited for our study, for each elicitation method and domain, can
be found in the table below.

B.2     U SER I NTERFACE D ETAILS

Details about the UI we built for our experiments can be found below. Recall that the human studies
proceeded in two parts: elicitation, followed by decision-making.

B.2.1    E LICITATION
For supervised learning, pool-based active learning, and the GATE methods, we had participants re-
spond to a series of queries using the chatbot interface (Figure 5). For prompting, we had participants
input a task description using the text-input interface (Figure 6).
The instructions for this phase can be found below.


                                                  16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                Content         Moral         Email
                                            Recommendation     Reasoning    Validation   Total
      Supervised learning                            30             -            -        30
      Pool-based active learning                     31             -            -        31
      Prompting                                      30            30           26        86
      Generative active learning                     30            30           20        80
      Generative yes-or-no questions                 31            30           19        80
      Generative open-ended questions                31            31           19        81
      Total                                       183             121           84       388

Table 1: Breakdown of how many participants we recruit for each domain and elicitation method.


Figure 5: Chatbot UI built for elicitation phases of GATE methods, supervised learning, and pool-
based active learning.


                 Figure 6: Text-input UI built for elicitation phase for prompting.


                                                17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


 Content       We are testing a system for understanding people’s interest in reading different kinds of
               online articles.

               For example, you might be interested in articles about some topics, but not about others.
 Moral         We are testing a system for understanding people’s fuzzy intuitions and preferences.

               In this experiment, we’ll be capturing your moral intuitions about the act of stealing a loaf
               of bread, and whether there are certain cases where stealing may be morally permissible.
 Email         We are testing a system for understanding people’s fuzzy intuitions and preferences.

               In this activity, we’re going to be looking at different strings of text and you’ll be deciding
               if they look like they could be an email address or not. For example, most people would
               agree that “username@domain.com” looks like an email address, while “n12z5lFEN4” does
               not. However, the rules for what can be an email address can be very unusual, so what
               we’re really interested in is your intuition on what an email address could look like.

               Important: We are not asking you to determine the rules for a *good* email address, or
               a *real (non-spam)* email address. We are simply asking about your intuition as to why
               certain strings look like email addresses and certain strings do not.

               Tip: in an email such as username@cs.stanford.edu, “username” is called the local-part
               of the email, while “cs.stanford.edu” is the domain. Furthermore, “cs” is a subdomain,
               and “edu” is a top-level domain.

           Table 2: Domain-specific instructions presented to users for the elicitation phases.


Supervised Learning / Pool-based Active Learning We present users with the following
instructions for both supervised learning and pool-based active learning. Bracketed, ital-
icized text represent placeholders for domain-specific text. [ Domain instructions ] is a
placeholder for the top-level instructions for each domain (see Table 2). Otherwise, blue
text represents text for the content recommendation domain, orange text represents text for
the moral reasoning domain, and green text represents text for the email validation domain.
[ Domain instructions ]

Try to answer in a way that accurately and comprehensively conveys your preferences, such
that someone reading your responses can understand and make judgments as close to your own as
possible. Feel free to respond naturally (you can use commas, short phrases, etc), and press [enter] to
send your response. Note that the chatbot technology is imperfect, and you are free to avoid answering
any questions that are overly broad or uncomfortable. When interacting with the chatbot, please avoid
asking follow-up questions or engaging in open-ended dialogue as the chatbot is unable to respond to you.

Note: The chatbot will stop asking questions after 5 minutes, after which you can send your
last response and you will be taken to the final part of the study.

In the final part of the study, you will give feedback on a test set of [ article headline and de-
scriptions | moral situations | email addresses ], which will enable us to see how well a chatbot reading
your responses has learned [ what you like and dislike | your moral preferences | your email preferences
].


Prompting We present users with the following instructions for prompting. Similar to above,
bracketed, italicized text represent places where we insert domain-specific text.


                                                      18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


[ Domain instructions ]

To the best of your ability, please explain all details about [ your preferences of what kinds of
online articles you would like to read | your belief of when it is moral to steal a loaf of bread | your
intuition of what makes email addresses look like email addresses ], such that someone reading your
responses can understand and make judgments as close to your own as possible. Try to be as detailed
as possible. For example, if you were writing a regex that accepts only email-address-like strings, what
might that regex look like? What are permissible / non-permissible symbols and characters, and in
what positions?

Note: You will have up to 5 minutes to articulate your preferences. Please try to submit your
response within that time. After you submit, you will be taken to the final part of the study.

In the final part of the study, you will give feedback on a test set of [ article headline and de-
scriptions | moral situations | email addresses ], which will enable us to see how well a chatbot reading
your responses has learned [ what you like and dislike | your moral preferences | your email preferences
].


GATE methods We present users with the following instructions for the three GATE methods (gen-
erative active learning, generative yes-or-no questions, generative open-ended questions). Once
again, bracketed italicized text represent domain-specific text.
[ Domain instructions ]

This chatbot will ask you a series of questions about [ your preferences of what kinds of online
articles you would like to read | your belief of when it is moral to steal a loaf of bread | your intuition
of what makes email addresses look like email addresses ]. Try to answer in a way that accurately and
comprehensively conveys your preferences, such that someone reading your responses can understand
and make judgments as close to your own as possible. Feel free to respond naturally (you can use
commas, short phrases, etc), and press [enter] to send your response. Note that the chatbot technology
is imperfect, and you are free to avoid answering any questions that are overly broad or uncomfortable.
When interacting with the chatbot, please avoid asking follow-up questions or engaging in open-ended
dialogue as the chatbot is unable to respond to you.

Note: The chatbot will stop asking questions after 5 minutes, after which you can send your
last response and you will be taken to the final part of the study.

In the final part of the study, you will give feedback on a test set of [ article headline and de-
scriptions | moral situations | email addresses ], which will enable us to see how well a chatbot reading
your responses has learned [ what you like and dislike | your moral preferences | your email preferences
].


B.2.2   D ECISION - MAKING

For the decision-making phase, we presented users with the following instruction:
Content Recommendation
Please indicate whether you would like to read the following articles: “yes” if you would, “no” if you
would not.
Moral Reasoning
Please indicate whether you think the following situations are morally permissible or not: “yes” if they
are, “no” if they aren’t.

Email Validation
Please indicate whether you think the following strings look like reasonably well-formatted email addresses
or not: “yes” if they do, “no” if they don’t.

Users are then presented with a list of test samples, and can use radio buttons to select whether each
test-case sample is acceptable. See Figure 7.


                                                   19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                            Figure 7: UI for the decision-making phase.


C     A DDITIONAL R ESULTS

C.1   S AMPLE T RANSCRIPTS

Sample transcripts of users interacting with the various generative active task elicitation methods
can be found in Figure 8.

C.2   AUROC R ESULTS

We measure AUROC over model-generated probabilities in addition to ∆p(correct). Figure 9 is the
analogous plot to Figure 3, but we measure the improvement in AUROC instead of p(correct), over
interaction time, rewarding methods that achieve higher improvements in AUROC sooner.
The general trends hold from Section 5: language models can elicit human preferences (beyond no
interaction), and language model elicitation is comparable or better than other elicitation baselines.
However, unlike the p(correct) metric, the AUROC metric is a simple classification-based metric.
Due to potential miscalibration in LMs, making it difficult for them to output well-calibrated proba-
bilities with the same threshold across questions, the overall improvements in this metric are lower
(particularly for generative open-ended questions) and the variances are much higher. Thus, we see
that it is harder to establish statistical significance using this metric.

C.3   F INAL p(CORRECT) R ESULTS

In Figure 10, we plot the average final p(correct) after five minutes of interaction with each elic-
itation method. Overall, we find that GATE methods generally still outperform baselines in each
setting, though the improvement is not always statistically significant with this metric. This in-
dicates that GATE methods converge to a high performance quicker than baseline methods, then
stagnate after a point, beyond which further interaction may not be worthwhile.

C.4   M IXTRAL R ESULTS

To test the robustness of GATE to the choice of underlying language model (for elicitation and
prediction), and particularly to test out how well open-source models perform relative to GPT-4, we
try to replicate some of our experiments on Mixtral (Mixtral-8x7B-Instruct-v0.1), one of the
state-of-the-art open-source models as of February 2024. We focus on the content recommendation
setting as the one where GPT-4 models performed the best. Using the same prompts and overall
setup as for GPT-4, we test Mixtral’s ability to generate open-ended questions. We separately test


                                                 20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 8: Excerpts of real transcripts across the different domains and elicitation methods we
investigate. The System messages are generated by the language model, while the User messages
are produced by human participants. Overall, the model is able to generate diverse and contextually-
appropriate questions in each setting. See Sections 3.1 and 4.1 for more details on the domains and
methods respectively.


                                                21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 9: We plot the Area Under the “∆AUROC vs. Interaction time” Curve, which gives us a
metric for how well (and how quickly) each elicitation method is at aligning with human preferences.
This plot is analogous to Figure 3, only we are using AUROC instead of p(correct) for the alignment
metric, which means that we are not measuring uncertainty. We see the same trends hold of GATE
methods (generally) beating supervised learning, pool-based learning, and prompting approaches,
while also beating no interaction (∆AUROC = 0) using this metric. However, we see generally
smaller ∆s over non-interaction using this metric, and higher variances, which make it harder to
establish statistical significance.


Figure 10: We plot the average final p(correct) after 5 minutes of interaction with each elicitation
method. While we see the same general trends as in Figure 3, the improvements are not generally
as statistically significant as when we were using AUROC, indicating that GATE methods converge
to higher performance quicker than baseline methods.


           Figure 11: Effectiveness of Mixtral as an elicitator and a predictor in GATE.


                                                22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Assistant: What hobbies or activities do you enjoy doing in your free time, and have you ever read any
articles related to those interests?
User: I really love post apocalyptic fiction and I can’t recall reading any articles in particular
Assistant: That’s interesting! Have you ever explored any non-fiction articles or research related to
post-apocalyptic scenarios, societal collapse, or emergency preparedness?
User: no, not really
Assistant: Have you ever come across any online articles or discussions about how post-apocalyptic
fiction might reflect or influence real-world emergency planning or disaster response strategies?
User: no
Assistant: Have you ever looked into how post-apocalyptic fiction might inspire or impact emergency
shelters, food storage, or water purification methods in real-world scenarios?
User: no, but it sound interesting
...[10 turns later]...
Assistant: Have you ever encountered any post-apocalyptic fiction that highlights unique or innovative
approaches to education, healthcare, or governance in reimagined societies, and what intriguing ideas
have you discovered that could potentially be applied to enhance resilience and adaptability in real-world
communities?
User: can we talk about sometthing else? Let’s chat about running. I love to run!
Assistant: That’s great to hear about your love for running! Have you ever read any articles about
how running or other physical activities can play a role in building resilience and adaptability during
challenging times, either in a post-apocalyptic scenario or in real-world emergency preparedness?
User: Interesting, but no


out how effective Mixtral is as an elicitor and as a predictor. Thus we have six total settings, with
three elicitation modes:
      1. Mixtral yes-or-no questions
      2. GPT-4 yes-or-no questions
      3. User-written prompts
each of which are evaluated by two prediction models:
      1. Mixtral predictor
      2. GPT-4 predictor
Results are shown in Figure 11. We find that the Mixtral model performs comparably to GPT-4 as
both an elicitor, and as a predictor, indicating that our results are robust across different choices of
underlying language models. This is also a promising indication that open-source models can be
used instead of GPT-4 for preference elicitation.
Qualitatively, we find that the open model likes to quickly hyperfixate on a topic once a user raises
it as a topic of interest. An example can be found in Appendix C.4, where Mixtral, upon learning
the user likes post-apocalyptic fiction on the first turn, pivots to only asking questions related to
post-apocalyptic fiction.

C.5   GPT-4 O PREDICTOR RESULTS

We run our collected transcripts using GPT-4o as a predictor (see Figure 12). We find generative
open-ended questions still significantly outperforms all baselines in the content recommendation
domain, though lags behind in the email validation domain. Qualitative analysis finds that GPT-4o
is more sensitive to noise than GPT-4, having a higher proclivity to be affected by noisy labels in
the transcript. For example, one user answered:
Assistant: Should an email address contain at least one period (.) after the @ symbol?
User: no
Then in the test cases answered:
Is “user@domain.edu" a valid email address?
User: yes

The noisy answer in the transcript caused GPT-4o to believe the user would answer “no” to the above
test case, while GPT-4 predicted that the user would still answer “yes”.


                                                  23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 12: Using GPT-4o as a predictor on conversation transcripts elicited through GPT-4. We find
the same general results as using GPT-4 is used as a predictor (Figure 3) on content recommendation
and moral reasoning, only with weaker email validation results.


D     M ODEL - MODEL EXPERIMENTS

D.1    M ETHODS

We explore whether LMs can stand-in for human participants, enabling faster iteration loops and
more research in this area. We generate various personas (specified in natural language) for each
domain, and prompt LMs to respond to elicitation queries as their persona would.
For each domain, we construct a set of personas as follows:

Content Recommendation The personas are constructed by providing a brief biographical sketch
of a hypothetical person, and were also constructed by the authors. A sample persona prompt is
“Education: Medical Doctorate. Occupation: Junior Surgeon at a regional hospital. Hobbies:
Running marathons, traveling, and learning new languages.”

Moral Reasoning We construct a variety of personas with a diverse array of moral perspectives,
including Kantianism, Utilitarianism, and ethical egoism. A sample persona prompt is “You sub-
scribe to a Kantian code of ethics.”

Email Validation Personas are instantiated by providing a regex to the model. The test cases
are constructed by the authors. A sample persona prompt is “You are validating that an email
address adheres to a specific format (e.g. for designing a Python regex). The gold regex is . . .
user@domain.co.co.co.co”
We prompt as the LM as follows to answer questions according to their personas:
[Persona] Answer the question in the shortest way with minimal additional explanation.
[Question]

Furthermore, in the content recommendation domain, we implement three different selection strate-
gies for pool-based active learning and explore their trade-offs, including random sampling (ran-
domly selecting the next example to query), uncertainty-based sampling (selecting the example
whose answer the LM is most uncertain about, i.e. the example with the highest-entropy),5 and
diversity sampling (described in Section 4.5).6

    5
      Note that because GPT-4 does not return logits, we use a smaller GPT-3 text-davinci-003 model to
compute entropy over the answer distribution
    6
      To avoid massive costs in uncertainty sampling, the pool was pre-filtered to a sensible size of a few hundred
samples using diversity metrics. For comparability across methods, the same pre-filtered pool was used for all
three sampling methods.


                                                        24
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 13: We plot the Area Under the “∆p(correct) vs. Number of Turns” Curve for model-
model experiments. This plot is analogous to Figure 3, only we are using LMs to simulate human
users, and we are using number of turns as a proxy for interaction time. We see the same general
trends as in Figure 3: GATE methods beat both no elicitation and pool-based active learning.


Figure 14: We plot the Area Under the “∆AUROC vs. Number of Turns” Curve for model-
model experiments. This plot is analogous to Figure 9, only we are using LMs to simulate human
users, and we are using number of turns as a proxy for interaction time. We see the same general
trends as in Figure 9: GATE methods beat both no elicitation and pool-based active learning.


D.2    R ESULTS

Figures 13 and 14 shows results in each domain when we use a LM to simulate humans. Because
human interaction times are unavailable for these experiments, we run interactive elicitation up to
5 turns, where we use number of turns as a proxy for human effort. Note that instead of measuring
AUC of the “∆p(correct) vs. interaction time” curve, we instead measure AUC of the “∆p(correct)
vs. number of turns” curve.

Can models be used to simulate human participants? In Figure 15, we plot the correlation be-
tween human experiment results and model-model experiment results for various elicitation meth-
ods. For both the human experiments and the model-model experiments, we compute the area under
the “∆p(correct) vs. number of turns” curve, in addition to the average change in p(correct) after 5
turns.7
We find that on both metrics we evaluate, the model-model results generally correlate with human
results in the content recommendation and email validation domains (methods that perform better in
the model-model experiments generally also perform better in the human experiments), but not the
   7
     Note that these metrics differ from we use to evaluate the human experiments in Section 4.5 – in particular
by being turn-based instead of time-based – meaning we had to additionally compute these metrics on the
human transcripts. This is necessary here because we must ensure that the model-model results and human
results are measured along the same metric(s).


                                                      25
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 15: Predictivity of model-model for model-human results. We match up the Area Under
“∆p(correct) vs. Number of Turns” Curve metric for each elicitation method in each domain. We
see that using the model to simulate human users is predictive of actual human results in the content
and email domains, but not the moral domain.


moral reasoning domain. This could be for various reasons, including that the subtleties in human
moral reasoning may be difficult to capture in a single persona prompt, and difficult to simulate even
with our biggest LMs.

Which sampling strategy is the best for pool-based active learning? As seen in Figure 13, we
experiment with three different pool-based active learning strategies (random, diversity-based, and
uncertainty-based sampling), which perform comparably, with diversity sampling perhaps perform-
ing slightly better than the rest. This is in line with the findings from Margatina et al. (2023b). Thus,
we use diversity sampling in our main human experiments.

D.3   A NALYSIS

Here, we present some additional analyses to better characterize the experiments.

How much variation there is in people’s preferences? Elicitation is only helpful if there is
variation in people’s preferences; otherwise, a model could simply attain maximum performance
by relying on its prior and ignoring the elicited information. To quantify how much variation there
is in people’s preferences, we compute the entropy in p(yes) for each question across participants.
We find that many questions have high entropy while many others have little entropy, for an average
entropy of 0.77 bits. Broadly, the results validate that our settings have significant variation in human
preferences, enabling models to personalize themselves based on human preferences.

Does language model elicitation influence user preferences? Human preferences may shift
when interacting with language models for a variety of reasons. For example, past work has studied
auto-induced distributional shift, where machine learning models shift human behavior to be easier
to predict (Krueger et al., 2020). To investigate whether this occurs in our experiments (or indeed if
different elicitation methods induce different human preferences for any other reason), we compare
the distribution of human labels on test samples from the three GATE methods with those from the
user-written prompt experiments to see whether interacting with language models influences users’
subsequent judgments. As seen in Figure 4 (right), we see no such effect.

What kinds of questions did the language models ask? We show a few examples of the language
model questions in Figure 8. As the figure shows, these questions are complex and subtle, often
building on the previous questions, representing a broad-based knowledge of the domain as well as
possible nuances therein.

Why does prompting make things worse in the emails domain? In the emails domain in Fig-
ure 3, we observe that user-written preferences slightly decrease performance relative to a no-
elicitation baseline. While it is possible this is an effect of noise, we also observe that some partici-
pants articulated preferences that were actually different from those they experienced when viewing


                                                   26
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


email addresses. For example, one user wrote “an email address should finish with .com or co.uk”
yet later decided that “user@domain.edu” was an acceptable email address. This indicates that users
may not have a clear and comprehensive understanding of their own preferences, especially in more
technical domains.

Can we automate evaluation? To probe whether evaluation could be automated, we conducted
experiments where we simulated different human preferences using language models prompted with
a diverse set of (automatically-generated) personas. These personas varied by domain, but gener-
ally contained information about a hypothetical person’s preferences within that the domain. For
example, in the content recommendation domain, we generated brief biographical sketches of hy-
pothetical people, including their hobbies, interests, and careers, and conditioned GPT-4 on these
biographical sketches to generate answers to queries. We found that model could simulate humans
well in the content recommendation and email validation domains, but not in the moral reasoning
domain. This suggests that while such personas may be a useful guide in some cases, they are not
yet sophisticated enough to stand in for real human participants. See Appendix D for more details.


E     H UMAN RATINGS OF USABILITY ACROSS ELICITATION POLICIES

E.1   M ETHODS

We ask users several questions to assess usability tradeoffs across elicitation policies. The following
are the full list of questions, which we ask at different points in the experiment.
After elicitation but before seeing the test-cases:

      1. How mentally demanding was interacting with the chatbot? (See discussion in Section 5)
      2. To what extent did the chatbot raise issues or aspects about your preferences that you hadn’t
         previously considered?
      3. How comprehensively do you feel the chatbot’s questions characterized your preferences
         about the task?

After seeing and labelling the test cases:

      4. After seeing the examples in the second part of the task, how well do you feel the answer
         you wrote (in the first part of the task) covered the important issues or aspects of these
         examples?
      5. When performing the second part of the task, to what extent did you refer back to your
         conversation history from the first part of the task?
      6. How much experience have you had (if any) with interacting with language models (e.g.
         ChatGPT, GPT4, etc.)?
      7. Do you have any other feedback about the task?

The last question was free response. All other questions were assessed via a Likert scale from 1
(Very Little/Poorly) to 7 (Very High/Well) with radio buttons.

E.2   R ESULTS

The average ratings for the first question across each elicitation method and domain can be found in
Figure 4. The average ratings for questions 2 – 5 are plotted in Figures 16 to 18.
From Fig. 16, we see that humans were on average overconfident on their ability to cover their
preferences in prompts, particularly in the content recommendation and moral reasoning domains,
reflected in the average rating of their perceived coverage dropping from an average of 5.3 to 3.9
(in the content recommendation domain) and an average of 5.4 to 4.8 (in the moral reasoning do-
main) after seeing the test cases. This indicates that humans are usually not aware of their mental
limitations when writing prompts.


                                                      27
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 16: Average perceived coverage of each elicitation method, before (above) and after (below)
seeing the test cases. Higher indicates greater coverage.


                                               28
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 17: Extent participants perceived that each elicitation method drew out novel aspects of a
domain that the user had not previously considered, averaged over each elicitation method. Higher
indicates greater perceived novelty.


Figure 18: Extent participants referred back to the elicitation transcript when labelling test cases,
averaged over each elicitation method. Higher indicates the user more heavily relied on the elicita-
tion transcript.


                                                 29
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


From Figure 17, we see that the generative elicitation methods were on average able to surface
more novel considerations in the moral reasoning and email validation domains than in the content
recommendation domain, as they tend to have trickier and less intuitive edge cases.
Finally, from Figure 18, we see the extent to which users explicitly referred back to the elicitation
history when making decisions on the test cases. This may influence how well-aligned the test case
decisions are with the answers from the elicitation phase. When annotating test cases, we explicitly
instruct participants not to follow the elicitation transcript if it does not align their intuition on a test
sample (e.g. if the test sample surfaced a novel consideration not accounted for in the elicitation
phase), though we were unable to validate how well participants followed this instruction.

F    R EPRODUCIBILITY
We will open-source all code used in creating GATE methods, constructing the user interface, and
conducting the results and analysis. We will also release the pre-registration for our experiments. All
prompts we used for querying GPT-4 (and Mixtral) in the decision-making and elicitation phases,
and all instructions we presented to the user, can be found in the Appendix. In all cases, we queried
GPT-4 (or Mixtral) with temperature 0 for replicability of experiments.
We also note that the model we mainly use is a closed-source model whose versions are periodically
deprecated, which may hinder reproducibility. However, preliminary results with Mixtral indicate
that open-source models are compatible with GATE and a promising avenue for future exploration.


                                                     30
