Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


MQ UAKE-R EMASTERED : M ULTI -H OP K NOWLEDGE
E DITING C AN O NLY B E A DVANCED WITH R ELIABLE
E VALUATIONS

 Shaochen (Henry) Zhong*♣ , Yifan Lu*♣ , Lize Shao ♣ , Bhargav Bhushanam ∞ , Xiaocong
Du ∞ , Yixin Wan † , Yucheng Shi ♢ , Daochen Zha ♣ , Yiwei Wang † , Ninghao Liu ♢ , Kaixiong
 Zhou ♡ , Shuai Xu ♠ , Kai-Wei Chang † , Louis Feng ∞ , Vipin Chaudhary ♠ , and Xia Hu ♣
                      ♣
                       Department of Computer Science, Rice University
                        ♢
                          School of Computing, University of Georgia
     ♡
       Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, North Carolina State University
        ♠
          Department of Computer and Data Sciences, Case Western Reserve University
           †
             Department of Computer Science, University of California, Los Angeles
                                    ∞
                                      Meta Platforms, Inc.


                                          A BSTRACT
        Large language models (LLMs) can give out erroneous answers to factually rooted
        questions either as a result of undesired training outcomes or simply because the
        world has moved on after a certain knowledge cutoff date. Under such scenarios,
        knowledge editing often comes to the rescue by delivering efficient patches
        for such erroneous answers without significantly altering the rest, where many
        editing methods have seen reasonable success when the editing targets are simple
        and direct (e.g., “what club does Lionel Messi currently play for?”). However,
        knowledge fragments like this are often deeply intertwined in the real world,
        making effectively propagating the editing effect to non-directly related questions
        a practical challenge (to entertain an extreme example: “What car did the wife
        of the owner of the club that Messi currently plays for used to get to school in
        the 80s?”1 ). Prior arts have coined this task as multi-hop knowledge editing
        with the most popular dataset being MQ UAKE, serving as the sole evaluation
        benchmark for many later proposed editing methods due to the expensive nature
        of constructing knowledge editing datasets at scale.      In this work, we reveal
        that up to 33% or 76% of MQ UAKE’s questions and ground truth labels
        are, in fact, corrupted in various fashions due to some unintentional clerical
        or procedural oversights. Our work provides a detailed audit of MQ UAKE’s
        error pattern and a comprehensive fix without sacrificing its dataset capacity.
        Additionally, we benchmarked almost all proposed MQ UAKE-evaluated editing
        methods on our post-fix dataset, MQ UAKE-R EMASTERED. We observe that
        many methods try to overfit the original MQ UAKE by exploiting some dataset
        idiosyncrasies of MQ UAKE. We provide a guideline on how to approach such
        datasets faithfully and show that a simple, minimally invasive approach —
        GWalk — can offer beyond SOTA editing performance without such exploita-
        tion.     The MQ UAKE-R EMASTERED datasets and utilities are available at
        huggingface.co/datasets/henryzhongsc/MQuAKE-Remastered
        and github.com/henryzhongsc/MQuAKE-Remastered, respectively.

1   I NTRODUCTION
Given the widespread public-facing popularity of various Large Language Model-powered (LLM)
products (Zhao et al., 2023; Yang et al., 2024b), even an occasional user has likely experienced
LLMs giving out erroneous answers to factually rooted, knowledge-intensive questions. While why
LLMs would hallucinate such kind of misinformation is complex and still an open problem —
     * Equal contribution. Work corresponds to Shaochen (Henry) Zhong <shaochen.zhong@rice.edu>
and done while in collaboration with Meta.
   1
     For interested readers, it was a Rolls-Royce: youtube.com/watch?v=DbwiHC1Fu-E&t=132s.


                                                1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


noisy training data, model bias, out-of-distribution questions, or even simply because the world
has moved on after a certain knowledge cutoff date... all likely contributed their fair share to this
rather undesired character of LLMs (Huang et al., 2023; Zhang et al., 2023) — under a practical
context, knowledge editing is often considered the go-to remedy by delivering efficient patches
for such erroneous answers without significantly altering the LLM’s output on unrelated queries,
nor undergoing another extensive pretraining or finetuning section (Sinitsin et al., 2020; Mitchell
et al., 2022).
With the growing need for more credible and trustworthy LLMs, a vast amount of LLM-specific
knowledge editing methods have been proposed, and many of them have seen reasonable success in
addressing simple and direct editing targets. For example, most modern knowledge editing methods
can reliably edit the answer of “What club does Lionel Messi currently play for?” from “Paris
Saint-Germain” to “Inter Miami CF” and therefore correctly reflecting the occupation status of
Messi (Zhong et al., 2023).
1.1   M ULTI - HOP KNOWLEDGE EDITING POSES PRACTICAL SIGNIFICANCE AND NON - TRIAL
      CHALLENGES .

However, due to the intertwined nature of different knowledge fragments, a small change in one
knowledge fragment can produce ripple-like effects on a vast number of related questions (Zhong
et al., 2023; Cohen et al., 2023). It is often a non-trivial challenge to efficiently propagate the editing
effect to non-directly related questions with proper precision and locality. E.g., — as an intentionally
extreme case — “What car did the wife of the owner of the club that Messi currently plays for used
to get to school in the 80s?” Many knowledge-edited LLMs can still struggle while being fully
aware of Messi’s abovementioned club transfer (Zhong et al., 2023).
Prior arts have realized the practical significance of being able to edit such complex/non-direct
questions upon a certain knowledge update, as different knowledge fragments are almost always
deeply entangled with each other in the real world (Zhong et al., 2023; Cohen et al., 2023; Wei
et al., 2024). Meanwhile, exhausting all potential combinations of questions related to one or a few
updated knowledge fragments is impractical. Even if it is feasible, this poses high operational costs,
and a repeated effort would be required should Messi ever opt to transfer again.
Intuitively, a practical knowledge editing method needs to produce correct answers to relevant fac-
tual questions with only a few updated knowledge fragments available. This task has been coined
as multi-hop knowledge editing or MHKE, with the founding, most popular, and only publicly
available reflective dataset to date being MQ UAKE by Zhong et al. (2023); serving as the sole
evaluation backbone for many proposed modern editing methods due to the expensive nature of
making counterfactual and temporal datasets at such a scale (>10,000 cases provided, see Table 7).
1.2   U NFORTUNATELY, MQ UAKE IS FLAWED DUE TO UNINTENTIONAL CLERICAL AND
      PROCEDURAL ERRORS — WE FIXED / REMADE IT AND RE - BENCHMARKED ALMOST ALL
      PROPOSED MULTI - HOP KNOWLEDGE EDITING METHODS .

While MQ UAKE is the founding dataset of multi-hop knowledge editing tasks and very much
brings life to this vital subject, through a comprehensive audit, we reveal that up to 33% or 76%
of MQ UAKE questions and ground truth labels are, in fact, corrupted in various fashions
due to some unintentional clerical or procedural errors; which inevitably cast doubts on the
effectiveness of the developed methods evaluated on MQ UAKE. The issues with MQ UAKE are
significant and growing, especially as MQ UAKE becomes a widely adopted (and often solely relied
on) evaluation in the editing community. Given its importance for building more reliable LLMs — a
critical aspect of NLP development — we present our work to advance multi-hop knowledge editing
with the following contributions:
• A comprehensive audit of MQ UAKE: We are the first to present a comprehensive audit of
  the existing errors within MQ UAKE (Zhong et al., 2023), bringing awareness to the knowledge
  editing community regarding this popular dataset with significant task importance attached.
• Fix/remake MQ UAKE to MQ UAKE-Remastered: We present the only available fix/remake
  that not only patches all discovered errors, and done so without sacrificing the intended intensity
  and capacity of the original MQ UAKE whenever possible.
• Extensively re-benchmark of almost all existing multi-hop knowledge editing methods:
  Given the currently existing reports based upon the original MQ UAKE are flawed reflections


                                                    2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


  of such proposed methods’ capability, we additionally re-benchmark almost all existing multi-hop
  knowledge editing methods that are available against our MQ UAKE-R EMASTERED datasets.
• Present a faithful yet beyond SOTA pilot method for future multi-hop knowledge editing
  development. We observe that many proposed MHKE methods intentionally or unintentionally
  overfit the original MQ UAKE dataset by applying data-specific operations that are largely unique
  to the MQ UAKE dataset family. We provide guidance on how to approach these datasets faith-
  fully and additionally show that a simple, minimally invasive method — GWalk — with no such
  idiosyncrasies-overfitting operations can also achieve beyond-SOTA editing performance.

2     P RELIMINARY
2.1   BACKGROUND OF MQ UAKE
MQ UAKE (Multi-hop Question Answering for Knowledge Editing) is a knowledge editing dataset
focusing on the abovementioned multi-hop question answering tasks proposed in Zhong et al.
(2023), where every case of MQ UAKE is a multi-hop question made by a chain of single-hop
subquestions. Specifically, MQ UAKE is constructed based on the Wikidata:RDF dataset (Vran-
dečić & Krötzsch, 2014), which, in its rawest format, is a knowledge graph consisting 15+ trillion of
Resource Description Framework (RDF) triples. MQ UAKE essentially builds a much more concise
subgraph with only 37 manually elected common relations and top 20% of the most common enti-
ties, where a walk of {2, 3, 4}-hop on this subgraph can form a case (which is a chain of {2, 3, 4}
single-hop subquestions connected together) in the MQ UAKE dataset.
MQ UAKE is presented as two sub-datasets: MQ UAKE-CF and MQ UAKE- T. The former focuses
on counterfactual tasks, while the latter on temporal changes. We highlight that there is also a
MQ UAKE- CF -3 K dataset, a subset of MQ UAKE-CF that only contains 3,000 cases out of the
original 9171 cases. Authors of MQ UAKE evaluate their proposed method, MeLLo (Zhong et al.,
2023), upon this MQ UAKE- CF -3 K dataset, which then becomes an unspoken standard for the later
proposed multi-hop knowledge editing methods (Gu et al., 2024; Shi et al., 2024; Wang et al., 2024;
Chen et al., 2024; Cheng et al., 2024). Due to the popularity of this sub-sampled dataset, we provide
our error analysis mostly based on MQ UAKE- CF -3 K and MQ UAKE- T in the following §3. For
interested readers, we additionally provide the same error analysis upon the full MQ UAKE- CF in
the Appendix C.3. We also collect the dataset statistics in Table 7.
2.2   E VALUATING USING MQ UAKE
Datasets like MQ UAKE-CF and MQ UAKE- CF -3 K are often tested under varying “editing intensi-
ties” based on the number of cases considered “edited.” This simulates different levels of deviation
between the model’s learned knowledge and the newly edited information. This approach is effec-
tive because strong knowledge editing methods should handle both large-scale updates and smaller,
more localized edits, ensuring that the changes do not interfere with unrelated knowledge.
In its original paper, MQ UAKE- CF -3 K is evaluated when {1, 100, 1000, 3000} of its 3,000 cases
are edited, similarly, MQ UAKE- T is evaluated when {1, 100, 500, 1868} of its 1,868 cases being
edited, forming an experiment report like Table 6. This kind of report granularity is also adopted
by the majority of later proposed multi-hop knowledge editing methods, either in full (Chen et al.,
2024) or in spirit with different “k-edited” settings (Gu et al., 2024; Wang et al., 2024; Shi et al.,
2024; Cheng et al., 2024; Mengqi et al., 2024). In this work, we report at an even finer level of
“k-edited” granularity for maximum cross-reference potentials.

3     AUDITING MQ UAKE
In this section, we present a comprehensive audit of the error pattern that existed in MQ UAKE- CF -
3 K and MQ UAKE- T (Zhong et al., 2023). We specifically note that our audit is there to provide
a better understanding to the knowledge editing community, especially when digesting methods
evaluated on these datasets. Our audit is not to discredit the contribution of MQ UAKE, or any
of the proposed methods evaluated on MQ UAKE. We recognize that no dataset can be perfect,
especially when it is intrinsically hard to collect large-scale counterfactual and temporal datasets.
3.1   I NTRA C ONTAMINATION BETWEEN E DITED C ASES AND U NEDITED C ASES
As discussed in §2.2, having a gradual evaluation coverage from a few to all cases being edited
like Table 6 makes sense as an evaluation granularity. However, one critical issue is that k ∈
{1, 100, 1000, 3000}-edited cases (supposed MQ UAKE- CF -3 K) are randomly sub-sampled from


                                                  3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


the 3,000 total cases. Thus, there is no guarantee that the k-edited cases and (3000−k) unedited
cases would require one consistent set of knowledge and, therefore, risk contamination.


           Figure 1: Example of contamination between an edited case and an unedited case
For a concrete example, consider the above two multi-hop questions from MQ UAKE- CF -3 K il-
lustrated in Figure 1. When case 482 is selected as an edited case, the edited fact in case 482
(“Kamal Hassan is a citizen of the USA”) will contaminate the unedited case 126 since both multi-
hop questions involve a subquestion inquiring along the knowledge of “The citizenship of Kamal
Haasan”, where the corresponding edited fact would be retrieved. This leads to the model generating
an answer in conflict with MQ UAKE- CF -3 K’s label, causing inaccurate experiment readings. See
Appendix C.1 for a detailed walk-through.       We note the above-illustrated contamination is not
a cherry-picked fluke, but rather a wild-spread error. Here, we sample {1, 100, 1000, 2000, 3000}-
editing targets from MQ UAKE- CF -3 K using random seed 100, and summarize the following error
statistics in Table 1.
Table 1: Error statistics of MQ UAKE- CF -3 K and MQ UAKE- T (Zhong et al., 2023) in terms edited
cases contaminating unedited cases. k-edited means k cases out of the total dataset are edited.
                                         MQ UAKE- CF -3 K                                MQ UAKE- T
 # of Contaminated
                     1-edit   100-edit    1000-edit 2000-edit   3000-edit   1-edit   100-edit 500-edit   1868-edit
 Cases                 0       2,013        1,772      910         0         29       1421      1327        0
 Subquestions          0       2,706        3,075     1,664        0         29       1421      1327        0

It is observable from Table 1 that even a small number of edited cases will cause concerningly
large contamination to unedited cases and subquestions, where 67% and 76% of all cases
from MQ UAKE- CF -3 K and MQ UAKE- T are contaminated with just 100 cases being edited,
introducing a significant distortion to the reported experiment results conducted in this fashion.
We also note that this contamination decreases as the number of edited cases (k-edit) increases,
but it’s simply a result of fewer unedited cases being available for contamination as k grows. For
example, in the extreme case of 3000-edit, there is no contamination between edited and unedited
cases in MQ UAKE- CF -3 K because all cases are edited. However, 3000-edit has the highest level of
contamination within edited cases, which we explore further in §3.2.
One additional note-worthy detail is in the original MQ UAKE literature (Zhong et al., 2023) and
most works following its setup, “k-edit” (or “editing batch size” in some literature) means only k
of edited cases are evaluated, without any unedited cases tested. Thus, by such evaluation design,
there is no Intra Contamination as discussed in this section since no edited cases are evaluated with
any unedited case involved. In this work, we evaluated both types of cases to better reflect the
locality of different knowledge editing methods (i.e., even in the “1-edit” setting of MQ UAKE-
CF -3 K or MQ UAKE-R EMASTERED - CF -3 K , we evaluate the 1 edited cases as well as the 2,999
unedited cases). We consider evaluating an editing method’s performance with both unedited
and edited cases while having edited facts present a paramount setting. Since only edited cases


                                                         4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


are being evaluated, one might easily end up with a method that is proficient at dealing with edited
facts at the cost of the inability to answer questions citing unedited knowledge. This is practically
catastrophic under a real-world scenario as typically there are way more unedited facts - e.g., Earth
is mostly round2 — than edited facts. Only evaluating on edited cases might present a false sense
of reliability. In fact, we found that existing knowledge editing methods often fail by retrieving
unrelated edited facts when a subquestion demanding unedited knowledge is inquired. See plots
highlighting “Incorrect Unedited Retrieval” in Appendix H.
3.2 I NNER C ONTAMINATION BETWEEN D IFFERENT E DITED C ASES
Contamination might also happen among multiple edited cases because a certain subquestion pre-
sented in different edited cases can be edited in some but unedited in others3 as illustrated in Figure 2.
Similar to §3.1, an edited fact from case 1968 would alter the answer to an unedited hop in the edited
case 1570. So, the model would generate an answer in conflict with the dataset ground truth label,
causing inaccurate experiment readings. See Appendix C.2 for a detailed walk-through.


                   Figure 2: Example of contamination between two edited cases
This type of contamination is, once again, universally visible in MQ UAKE as shown in Table 2;
which is very much a flipped version of Table 1. With k-edit growing, there are more edited cases,
thus more edited-to-edited contamination. Notably, under the 3000-edit tasks, almost one-third
(998/3000, ≈33%) of the evaluated cases are contaminated, which again introduces distortion to
the reported experiment results. We omit the report on MQ UAKE- T here because there is only one
edit-to-edit contamination when all 1,868 cases from MQ UAKE- T are edited (case_id:424).
Table 2: Error statistics of MQ UAKE- CF -3 K (Zhong et al., 2023) in terms edited cases contaminat-
ing each others. k-edited means k cases out of the total 3,000 cases are edited.

                     # of Contaminated     1-edit   100-edit   1000-edit   2000-edit   3000-edit
                     Cases                   0        14         265          619         998
                     Subquestions            0        14         337          854        1,399

3.3      C ONFLICTING E DITS
The two types of contamination introduced in §3.1 and §3.2 are indeed subtle and hard to detect.
However, MQ UAKE- CF -3 K also includes some straightforward edit conflicts, such as for the sub-
question “Which company is Ford Mustang produced by?” we have the following edits:
      ⋄ case_id:2566 (edited): Ford Moter Company Nintendo.
      ⋄ case_id:231/2707 (edited): Ford Moter Company Fiat S.p.A.
This is going to cause a direct conflict when case_id:2566 and any of the case_id:231 or
case_id:2707 are both selected as edited cases, as they shall confuse any knowledge edited
   2
       We can’t speak for the future, but let’s hope this fact stays unedited.
   3
       Note, an edited case does not require all of its subquestions being edited, but merely one of it (Table 7).


                                                           5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


LLM for having two different answers to the same questions. Fortunately, such types of errors are
rather minuscule in MQ UAKE- CF -3 K, with the abovementioned Ford Mustang question and three
cases being the only affected data samples.
3.4   M ISSING I NFORMATION IN M ULTI - HOP Q UESTION I NSTRUCTIONS
As mentioned in §2, the MQ UAKE dataset is built upon a severely filtered Wikidata:RDF knowl-
edge graph (Vrandečić & Krötzsch, 2014). Specifically, the triples of a certain {2, 3, 4}-hop walk
on this subgraph are then fed into a GPT-3.5-turbo model to generate three multi-hop question
instructions in a natural language format. During evaluation, an LLM is considered right should it
correctly answer against any one of the three multi-hop question instructions (Zhong et al., 2023).
However, while repeating generation three times definitely reduces the chances of having incompre-
hensible question instructions, we noticed some of such instructions in MQ UAKE are still incom-
plete. We take case_id:546’s triple set and its generated 3 question instructions as an example:
• case_id:546 (unedited): We have a 2-hop question with “Albert Mohler” as the subject and
  (employer, religion or worldview) as the relation chain. MQ UAKE- CF -3 K pro-
  vides the following generated multi-hop questions:
    ⋄ Generation #1: What religion is Albert Mohler associated with?
    ⋄ Generation #2: Which religion does Albert Mohler follow?
    ⋄ Generation #3: With which religious faith does Albert Mohler identify?
All three generated questions omit the part mentioning which company/institution Albert Mohler is
employed by and essentially reduce themselves to single-hop questions, where a correct generation
should read like “What religion is Albert Mohler’s employer associated with?” and it is not equiva-
lent to any of the above three instructions. Without the complete question instruction, suppose there
is an edit on Albert Mohler’s employer (which there indeed are some), the final answer would likely
change. However, with this omission of information, even the best knowledge-edited LLM cannot
answer the question correctly with a faithful approach because Alber’s employer is not in the picture.
As a general analysis, we find the natural language question instructions of 672 cases in
MQ UAKE- CF -3 K are missing information in comparison to their raw triplet chain. This
number is counted in the sense that one or more pieces of information present in the triple chain
are missing from all three variants of the generated natural language instruction. Similarly, there are
2,830 and 233 cases of erroneous instructions in MQ UAKE- CF and MQ UAKE- T, respectively.
3.5   D UPLICATED C ASES
The last kind of error we discovered in MQ UAKE is simply unintended duplication — i.e., two or
more cases sharing the same start subject, edited facts, chain of triples, and the final answer — i.e.,
they are the carbon copy of each other, yet simultaneously exist in the dataset. We discovered 47, 4,
and 4 cases of duplication, respectively, in MQ UAKE- CF, MQ UAKE- CF -3 K, and MQ UAKE- T.
4     R EMASTERING MQ UAKE
In this section, we illustrate how we modified and improved the MQ UAKE dataset to MQ UAKE-
R EMASTERED with various fixes on the data samples themselves, as well as providing utility mod-
ules to facilitate how one interacts with such datasets. We provide an audit correctness analysis in
Appendix D. Furthermore, we demonstrate the impact of our improvements through ablation studies
that analyze the types of errors addressed, as discussed in Appendix E.
4.1   H ARD C ORRECTIONS
Three types of error existing in MQ UAKE can be fixed once and for all with some careful hard
corrections, they are namely Conflicting Edits (§3.3), Missing Information in Multi-hop Question
Instructions (§3.4), and Duplicated Cases (§3.5). For Conflicting Edits and Duplicated Cases, since
there are only a few such errors (<50 per type per dataset), we employ some manual corrections
to address them: in the former case, we flip the minority edits to align with the majority edits (and
adjust their answers to their subsequence subquestions, should there be any); in the latter case, we
simply remove such duplicated cases (for MQ UAKE- CF -3 K, we then manually select 4 more cases
from MQ UAKE- CF to keep the dataset having 3,000 cases in total and a 1,000 cases for {2, 3, 4}-
hops — as the original MQ UAKE- CF -3 K intended). For errors regarding Missing Information in
Multi-hop Question Instructions, we rewrite the natural language question instructions for all cases
in the datasets using meta-llama/Llama-3.1-405B (Dubey et al., 2024) for consistency sake.


                                                  6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


4.2   DYNAMIC M ASKING FOR M AXIMUM C OVERAGE : MQ UAKE-R EMASTERED - CF ,
      MQ UAKE-R EMASTERED - CF -3 K , AND MQ UAKE-R EMASTERED - T

Due to the contamination count of Intra Edited-to-Unedited Contamination (§3.1) and Inner Edited-
to-Edited Contamination (§3.2) tend to grow in the opposite direction as shown in Table 1 and 2,
it is impossible to find a fix within the current MQ UAKE that can address both issues without
significantly decreasing the dataset size. As an alternative, we develop an API that will take a
case_id and an edited_flag as input, indicating the evaluating case-in-question and whether
this case is considered edited; our API shall then return a set of triples that are contamination free by
dynamically masking out the conflicting edits from other cases. After such, the user may build up an
editing knowledge bank upon such returned triplets and conduct evaluations for any memory-based
knowledge editing methods without losing any cases caused by contamination. Due to the nature of
the N -hop question, at most N edited facts would be removed for each case, a marginal reduction
compared to (typically thousands of) total edited facts as summarized in Table 13.
Specifically, once case_id-of-interest is given, our API would loop through all of its subquestions
and identify if any is considered edited under another case. If there is a hit, the triple for such edited
subquestions is removed from the bank of edited triples. This dynamic masking mechanism would
ensure all cases within the original MQ UAKE be usable against memory-based knowledge edit-
ing methods. However, the drawback of masking is it won’t support parameter-based knowl-
edge editing methods, where weight update is required. We additionally provide a MQ UAKE-
R EMASTERED - CF -6334 to address the need for such methods (Appendix F.1).
5     M AKING S AFE AND FAITHFUL A PPROACH TO MQ UAKE AND
      MQ UAKE-R EMASTERED
In addition to our benchmark results we’d show in §6, it is our observation that many MHKE
methods with decent performance on MQ UAKE or MQ UAKE-R EMASTERED are (often coinci-
dentally) utilizing designs that leverage dataset idiosyncrasies unique to MQ UAKE. For example,
methods like RAE (Shi et al., 2024) and GLAME (Mengqi et al., 2024) utilize Wikidata (Vran-
dečić & Krötzsch, 2014) as the external KG to better detect the edit-induced conflicts, which happen
to be the source of MQ UAKE as discussed in §2.1 — where whether sourcing the same Wiki-
data KG as MQ UAKE might bring them data-specific advantages remains to be confirmed. Sim-
ilarly, PokeMQA (Gu et al., 2024) utilizes the 6,218 cases included in MQ UAKE- CF but not in
MQ UAKE- CF -3 K as the train set to train its auxiliary components, then tested on MQ UAKE- CF -
3 K. Given MQ UAKE is a dataset with relatively low diversity (e.g., with only 37 types of relations),
whether having a heavily overlapped train and test set will result in data-specific advantages unique
to MQ UAKE and its variants, again remains to be confirmed (we also note, without considera-
tions like MQ UAKE-R EMASTERED - CF -6334, this training split is surely contaminated across and
within the two sets, which would likely introduce conflicting knowledge via its training scheme).
On the same note, important consideration when using a KG to store unedited facts — a common
approach in methods like RAE (Shi et al., 2024), GLAME (Mengqi et al., 2024), and StruEdit (Bi
et al., 2024) — is the additional operational cost of maintaining a large unedited KG. Since unedited
facts typically far outnumber edited ones, managing such a KG requires continuously reconciling it
with the KG storing edited facts. That said, one could fairly argue that storing unedited and edited
facts allows for the gradual expansion of a unified, ever-evolving "ground truth for all" KG, elimi-
nating the need to maintain separate model-specific edited KGs for each LLM. However, effectively
querying such a vast unified KG and adapting its knowledge to LLMs presents additional challenges,
particularly if the method also aims to leverage an LLM’s internal knowledge. We highlight this is-
sue because there are clear trade-offs between these two approaches, and they are rarely discussed
in the existing MHKE literature. While we chose not to use an external unedited KG in our pilot
method, we believe it is both fair and beneficial to acknowledge this consideration.
5.1 A M INIMALLY I NVASIVE BUT P ERFORMANT A PPROACH : GWALK
Here, we provide a brief walkthrough of a simple method we designed, namely GraphWalk. GWalk
does not leverage any idiosyncrasies unique to MQ UAKE or MQ UAKE-R EMASTERED. Yet, it
still presents beyond SOTA performance, surpassing many, if not all, established baselines. We
illustrate this pilot method as concrete guidance and potential inspiration to our future multi-
hop knowledge editing scholars. The design of GWalk hinges on the fundamental pipeline of
memory-based knowledge editing methods: where the pool of source only contains edited facts.


                                                    7
     Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


     This school of editing methods has proven to be successful, mainly because it can leverage the power
     of retrieval-argument generation (RAG) combined with the in-context learning (ICL) capability of
     LLMs, yet an edited-only knowledge bank is typically minuscule, much like done so in MeLLo
     (Zhong et al., 2023).     Different from MeLLo, where all edited facts are converted from triples
     to natural language (NL) descriptions in its edited bank, GWalk preserves the edited facts in
     their original triples fashion and leverages the graph topology. This makes maintaining this
     edited bank much easier — as one can easily adjust the entity or relation on a knowledge graph
     without rewriting every natural language description of every related edited fact. It also brings
     more precise retrieval mapping when a question of a certain edited fact is asked. Methods like
     MeLLo (Zhong et al., 2023) rely on RAG from a pool of edited facts in NL format. This can lead
     to unintended retrievals, where irrelevant facts with similar embeddings are retrieved, potentially
     causing hallucinations. However, if we simply query the entity and relations implied in a question
     against a knowledge graph, there is less chance of retrieving unintended materials. We share the
     detailed pseudocode of GWalk in Algorithm 1 and demonstrate some further studies in Appendix H.
   Algorithm 1: General Procedure of GWalk on One Multi-hop Question
   Input:
       M , the Question Answering Language Model;
       T , a Text-embedding model;
       Q, a Multi-hop Question;
       E, a bank of edited facts as a knowledge graph.
   Output:
       op , the answer to Q.
   Initialize:
       i = 1, the subquestion counter;
       op = None, the answer from the previous subquestion.
 1 s ← Extracted subject from Q;
 2 rels ← Prompt M to breakdown Q into a sequence of relations.
   /* If Q is ‘What is the official language of the country where Karl Alvarez
        holds citizenship?’, then s would be ‘Karl Alvarez’ and a possible rels is
        [‘citizenship’, ‘official language’]                                                                             */
 3 for r ∈ rels do
 4     Query < s, r, ? > against E using T , namely we do T (s) first to determine if there is a retrievable s ∈ E, then
         inspect if the s ∈ E has an relation edge retrievable by T (r).
       /* We set a threshold on embedding similarity for T to determine whether an
             item is retrievable or not.                                                                                 */
 5     Prompt M to generate subquestion qi with s and r.
 6     op ← the M -generated answer to qi .
 7     if T (s, r) has a valid retrieval < s, r, o∗ > then
 8          op ← o ∗ ;
         /* The answer to this subquestion will be the start subject of the next
             subquestion.                                                                                               */
 9       s ← op ;
10       i ← i + 1;
11   Return op ;

     6     B ENCHMARK AND D ISCUSSION
     Given almost all proposed MHKE methods are (often solely) evaluated on the original, error-
     contained, MQ UAKE datasets. Here, we provide a re-benchmark of those methods against our
     post-fix MQ UAKE-R EMASTERED datasets to provide some more reliable results.
     Compared Methods In this work, we aim to cover most, if not all, open-sourced knowledge
     editing methods specifically evaluated on the original MQ UAKE. This includes MeLLo (Zhong
     et al., 2023), PokeMQA (Gu et al., 2024), RAE (Shi et al., 2024), and DeepEdit (Wang et al.,
     2024) as methods specifically proposed to target this MHKE problem and evaluated on MQ UAKE.
     We additionally include ICE (Cohen et al., 2023) and IKE (Zheng et al., 2023a) as these are also
     methods purposed for the (single-edit) MHKE task, though not specifically evaluated on MQ UAKE
     in their original publications. General editing methods like ROME (Meng et al., 2022) and MEND
     (Mitchell et al., 2022) are also featured. We note that we are aware methods like GLAME (Mengqi
     et al., 2024), StableKE (Wei et al., 2024), Temple-MQA (Cheng et al., 2024), GMeLLo (Chen et al.,
     2024), and StruEdit (Bi et al., 2024) are also evaluated on MQ UAKE, but they are purposely omitted
     from our re-benchmark coverage due to lack of timely open-sourced implementation, likely because
     many of these works are still in-submission by our work’s first appearance.
     Covered Models We opt to use lmsys/vicuna-7b-v1.5 (Zheng et al., 2023b), mistralai/Mistral-
     7B-Instruct-v0.2 (Jiang et al., 2023), and meta-llama/Meta-Llama-3-8B-Instruct (AI@Meta, 2024)
     as the choice of question-answering models, both for alignment with existing works (Zhong et al.,
     2023; Shi et al., 2024; Gu et al., 2024) as well as providing coverage the most recent language


                                                                      8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


models. For methods that require a text-embedding model as a retriever, we use facebook/contriever-
msmarco (Izacard et al., 2022) for alignment with MeLLo (Zhong et al., 2023).
Covered Datasets We will provide coverage on our post-fix dataset, namely MQ UAKE-
R EMASTERED - CF, MQ UAKE-R EMASTERED - CF -3 K, and MQ UAKE-R EMASTERED - T in the
masking fashion illustrated in §4.2; as well as MQ UAKE-R EMASTERED - CF -6334 in its vanilla
form. These datasets are respectively corresponding to the original MQ UAKE- CF, MQ UAKE- CF -
3 K, and MQ UAKE- T from Zhong et al. (2023) (with 6334 as an extra for parameter-based methods),
but with the types of error mentioned in §3 fixed in the via means illustrated in §4.
6.1 R ESULTS AND D ISCUSSION
Table 3: Performance Comparison of Original MQ UAKE and our MQ UAKE-R EMASTERED datasets using
vicuna-7b-v1.5 (Zheng et al., 2023b). For the CF-3k dataset families, we utilized the 1000-edit setting, whereas
for the T dataset families, we applied the all-edit setting. The original MQ UAKE cannot faithfully reflect the
true capacities of the methods due to errors specified in §3, especially if the method-in-question is performant.

                                                                  MQuAKE-CF-3k                             MQuAKE-T
                      Method
                                                       Original   Original-v2 Remastered              Original Remastered
                      MeLLo (Zhong et al., 2023)         14.4         14.1              14.63          30.84           44.37
                      GWalk (Ours)                      36.07         41.0              57.37          46.41           54.88

Given that our MQ UAKE-R EMASTERED is mostly provided as a fix to MQ UAKE, we would like
to highlight the drastic result differences when the same method is evaluated on these two datasets
(Table 3); where the differences are especially pronounced for stronger methods. Such differences
suggest all previous reporting on MQ UAKE has room for reliability improvements, which we filled
here with MQ UAKE-R EMASTERED.

Table 4: Experiments on MQ UAKE-R EMASTERED - CF -6334 with numbers of edited cases and methods.
                                                           Total Accuracy
Results are reported in the format: (Test Edited Accuracy, Train Edited Accuracy, Unedited Accuracy)

                                                                     MQ UAKE-R EMASTERED - CF -6334
       Method
                                            100-edit                  1000-edit        3000-edit                               6344-edit
                                               lmsys/vicuna-7b-v1.5 (Zheng et al., 2023b)
                                              19.16                       19.27                        11.17                     6.83
       MeLLo (Zhong et al., 2023)
                                        (0, 10.99, 19.37)          (5.1, 9.58, 24.53)            (4.31, 8.55, 23.3)      (4.58, 7.72, 19.05)
       ICE (Cohen et al., 2023)               OOM                        OOM                           OOM                      OOM
       IKE (Zheng et al., 2023a)              OOM                        OOM                           OOM                      OOM
                                                                                                                                21.77
       PokeMQA (Gu et al., 2024)                   -                         -                           -
                                                                                                                         (3.25, 30.82, 1.59)
       DeepEdit Wang et al. (2024)             <1                          <1                            <1                       <1
                                              57.55                       61.79                         59.1                    56.62
       GWalk (Ours)
                                      (22.22, 64.84, 57.48)       (29.08, 66.17, 63.23)         (39.3, 63.74, 64.33)    (44.64, 62.11, 68.25)
                                          mistralai/Mistral-7B-Instruct-v0.2 (Jiang et al., 2023)
                                              27.5                       27.54                      24.37                       21.26
       MeLLo (Zhong et al., 2023)
                                       (<1, 23.08, 27.65)           (12.76, 24, 30.4)       (11.88, 25.51, 32.06)        (13.29, 24.9, 30.16)
       ICE (Cohen et al., 2023)              OOM                         OOM                        OOM                         OOM
                                              8.82
       IKE (Zheng et al., 2023a)                                         OOM                           OOM                      OOM
                                       (11.11,6.59,8.86)
                                                                                                                                20.38
       PokeMQA (Gu et al., 2024)                   -                         -                           -
                                                                                                                         (3.99, 27.41, 69.84)
       DeepEdit Wang et al. (2024)             <1                          <1                        <1                           <1
                                              56.25                       58.9                      56.03                       54.43
       GWalk (Ours)
                                      (33.33, 57.14, 56.28)       (34.69, 60.57, 60.6)      (42.69, 59.04, 59.85)       (47.49, 57.74, 52.38)

In Table 4, we present benchmark results on MQ UAKE-R EMASTERED - CF -6334. GWalk con-
sistently outperforms other methods in terms of models and edit numbers. The “OOM”s in ICE
and IKE are due to memory overload from concatenating all edited facts in the in-context learn-
ing prompt. Whereas the "<1" results likely stem from the LLM’s failure to recognize the few-
shot examples, often generating irrelevant tokens or failing to follow the few-shot format. This
issue was observed with MeLLo using Meta-Llama-3-8B-Instruct, and with DeepEdit using vicuna-
7b-v1.5 and Mistral-7B-Instruct-v0.2. Due to page limitation, we refer our readers to Ap-
pendix I for benchmarks of MQ UAKE-R EMASTERED - CF, MQ UAKE-R EMASTERED - CF -3 K,
and MQ UAKE-R EMASTERED - T. We present MQ UAKE-R EMASTERED - CF -6334 in the main
text solely because it can feature the most methods. Last, we highlight that due to the feedback of the
reviewers and the community, as well as company policies, we have then updated our datasets for
better polishness, which might mean slightly different results than currently reported as we cannot
complete a full rerun before camera-ready. We will make the official run soon and update with more
comprehensive experiment reports with one-click reproducible scripts in our repository.

                                                                        9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


7   R ELATED W ORKS
Audit and Fix of MQ UAKE To the best of our knowledge, no work has conducted a compre-
hensive audit to MQ UAKE as we do, but two prior arts have touched on the errors existing in
MQ UAKE: GMeLLo (Chen et al., 2024) and DeepEdit (Wang et al., 2024).
     Table 5: Comparison of error analysis/quantification/fix of MQ UAKE provided in different works.
            Ref.            Error Types Found         Error Quantified             Error Scopes Fixed     Cost of Fixing
            GMeLLo          Missing Instruction       No                           No                     N/A
            (Chen et al.,
            2024)
            DeepEdit        Inner Contamination       CF-3K in 3000-edit           CF-3K in 3000-edit     998 out of 3000
            (Wang et al.,                                                                                 cases removed from
            2024)                                                                                         CF-3K
            Ours            Intra Contamination,      CF-3K in {1, 100, 1000,      CF-3K,     T,    CF-   No case removed
                            Inner Contamination,      3000}-edit, T in {1, 100,    9K in any-edit;        from CF-3K, CF-
                            Conflicting      Edits,   500, all}-edit, CF-9K in     Remastered-CF-         9K, or T.
                            Missing Instructions,     {1, 100, 1000, 3000, 6000,   6334 in any-edit
                            Duplicated Cases          all}-edit


Specifically, GMeLLo (specifically, its anonymous submission to ACL ARR 2024 Feb) briefly dis-
cusses the inconsistency between the triple chain and the corresponding generated instructions in its
§4.5.1, which is the same type of error we discussed in §3.4. However, GMeLLo merely presents
two examples of such an error without providing any quantitative error analysis or fix; we did both
in §3.4 and §4.1. DeepEdit (Wang et al., 2024) discovered the same inner contamination error
(edited-to-edited) as we discussed in §3.2, but limited to one dataset (MQ UAKE- CF -3 K) under one
setting (when all 3000 cases are considered edited). Further, DeepEdit removed all 998 inner con-
taminated cases from the MQ UAKE- CF -3 K dataset — which is (supposedly) the same 998 cases
we detect in Table 2 under the 3000-edit column — and named it MQ UAKE-2002. While this
fix is, of course, helpful, we argue our R EMASTERED fixes are much more comprehensive and
effective since they patched many more errors revealed in §3 (the other four types of errors
still exist in MQ UAKE-2002), and most importantly, done so without scarifying almost 1/3
of the capacity of the original dataset thanks to masking utility we proposed in §4.2. We further
demonstrate the quantifiable difference between our work, GMeLLo, and DeepEdit in Table 5.
MQ UAKE- CF -3 K - V 2 Other than the above two works, we have privately consulted with the first
authors of MQ UAKE (Zhong et al., 2023) and confirmed the legitimacy of our findings and those
of the prior arts. The MQ UAKE team has then rolled out their update: MQ UAKE- CF -3 K - V 2.
Upon investigation, MQ UAKE- CF -3 K - V 2 indeed resolves the edited-to-edited Inner Contamination
(§3.2) and Conflicting Edits (§3.3). However, we respectfully note it still falls short in terms of Intra
Contamination as reflected in Table 11 (53%+ cases contaminated under 1000-edit), which makes
it ineligible in evaluating edited and unedited cases at the same time — a paramount setting for
reasons highlighted at the end of §3.1. Further, MQ UAKE- CF -3 K - V 2 still involves unfixed Dupli-
cated Cases (§3.5) and Missing Instructions (§3.4); more on this in Appendix C.4. Beyond unfixed
errors, we note the original MQ UAKE- CF -3 K was subsampled from MQ UAKE- CF to have 1,000
cases per {2, 3, 4}-hop in order to provide a balanced representation. However, this is no longer
true under MQ UAKE- CF -3 K - V 2 as shown in Table 7. And, as the MQ UAKE- CF -3 K - V 2 name
implied, it is error resolution is limited within the MQ UAKE- CF -3 K dataset, but not MQ UAKE-
CF nor MQ UAKE- T . While we authors, again, pay our utmost respect to the MQ UAKE team for
bringing the MHKE task to the community, we earnestly argue MQ UAKE- CF -3 K - V 2 offers noth-
ing more than our MQ UAKE-R EMASTERED - CF -3 K, as the latter fixed substantially more errors,
supports an important setting, and is faithful to the balanced 1,000 cases per {2, 3, 4}-hop design.
Benchmark and Guidance Our work re-benchmarks nearly all open-sourced knowledge editing
methods on MQ UAKE and guides on safely and faithfully approaching such datasets. To the best
of our knowledge, no other work offers this level of benchmarking or touches on the same issues.
Notably, we are likely the only work to evaluate on MQ UAKE- CF/MQ UAKE- CF -9 K, the largest
dataset that even the original MQ UAKE paper did not assess due to resource constraints. Table 14
illustrates the significant difference in evaluation coverage between our work and previous efforts.
8 C ONCLUSION
We audited MQ UAKE and present MQ UAKE-R EMASTERED with many errors fixed. We re-
benchmarked many MHKE methods with MQ UAKE-R EMASTERED and presented a simple, ef-
ficient, yet extremely capable baseline — GWalk — for future MHKE studies.


                                                                 10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This research was partially supported by NSF Awards ITE-2429680, IIS-2310260, CNS-2431516,
OAC-2112606, and OAC-2117439. Furthermore, this work was supported by the US Department
of Transportation (USDOT) Tier-1 University Transportation Center (UTC) Transportation Cyber-
security Center for Advanced Research and Education (CYBER-CARE) grant #69A3552348332.
Further, this work made use of the High Performance Computing Resource in the Core Facility
for Advanced Research Computing at Case Western Reserve University (CWRU). We give special
thanks to the CWRU HPC team for their prompt and professional help and maintenance. The views
and conclusions in this paper are those of the authors and do not represent the views of any funding
or supporting agencies.
Outside funding agencies, our work benefits from the great support of the knowledge editing com-
munity of LLMs. We appreciate the efforts of the PokeMQA team (Gu et al., 2024), the RAE team
(Shi et al., 2024), and the DeepEdit team (Wang et al., 2024) for confirming our findings and provid-
ing support in testing their knowledge editing methods on our post-fix MQ UAKE-R EMASTERED
datasets. Last, we give our special shout-out to Zexuan Zhong and Zhengxuan Wu — the first au-
thors of the original MQ UAKE paper (Zhong et al., 2023) — for validating our findings and sharing
their insights into our work. We pay our greatest respect to them for their founding efforts in bring-
ing the important MHKE task to the field, while being engaged and supportive of future community
scrutiny and improvements.

R EFERENCES
AI@Meta. Llama 3 model card. 2024. URL https://github.com/meta-llama/
  llama3/blob/main/MODEL_CARD.md.
Afra Feyza Akyürek, Eric Pan, Garry Kuwanto, and Derry Wijaya. Dune: Dataset for unified editing.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2311.16087, 2023.
Akari Asai, Zeqiu Wu, Yizhong Wang, Avirup Sil, and Hannaneh Hajishirzi. Self-rag: Learning to
  retrieve, generate, and critique through self-reflection. In The Twelfth International Conference
  on Learning Representations, 2023.
Baolong Bi, Shenghua Liu, Yiwei Wang, Lingrui Mei, Hongcheng Gao, Junfeng Fang, and Xueqi
  Cheng. Struedit: Structured outputs enable the fast and accurate knowledge editing for large
  language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2409.10132, 2024.
Ruirui Chen, Weifeng Jiang, Chengwei Qin, Ishaan Singh Rawal, Cheston Tan, Dongkyu Choi,
  Bo Xiong, and Bo Ai. Llm-based multi-hop question answering with knowledge graph integration
  in evolving environments. arXiv preprint arXiv:2408.15903, 2024.
Keyuan Cheng, Gang Lin, Haoyang Fei, Yuxuan zhai, Lu Yu, Muhammad Asif Ali, Lijie Hu, and
  Di Wang. Multi-hop question answering under temporal knowledge editing. arXiv, 2024.
Roi Cohen, Eden Biran, Ori Yoran, Amir Globerson, and Mor Geva. Evaluating the ripple effects
  of knowledge editing in language models. Transactions of the Association for Computational
  Linguistics, 2023.
Abhimanyu Dubey, Abhinav Jauhri, Abhinav Pandey, Abhishek Kadian, Ahmad Al-Dahle, Aiesha
  Letman, Akhil Mathur, Alan Schelten, Amy Yang, Angela Fan, Anirudh Goyal, Anthony
  Hartshorn, Aobo Yang, Archi Mitra, Archie Sravankumar, Artem Korenev, Arthur Hinsvark,
  Arun Rao, Aston Zhang, Aurelien Rodriguez, Austen Gregerson, Ava Spataru, Baptiste Roziere,
  Bethany Biron, Binh Tang, Bobbie Chern, Charlotte Caucheteux, Chaya Nayak, Chloe Bi, Chris
  Marra, Chris McConnell, Christian Keller, Christophe Touret, Chunyang Wu, Corinne Wong,
  Cristian Canton Ferrer, Cyrus Nikolaidis, Damien Allonsius, Daniel Song, Danielle Pintz, Danny
  Livshits, David Esiobu, Dhruv Choudhary, Dhruv Mahajan, Diego Garcia-Olano, Diego Perino,
  Dieuwke Hupkes, Egor Lakomkin, Ehab AlBadawy, Elina Lobanova, Emily Dinan, Eric Michael
  Smith, Filip Radenovic, Frank Zhang, Gabriel Synnaeve, Gabrielle Lee, Georgia Lewis Ander-
  son, Graeme Nail, Gregoire Mialon, Guan Pang, Guillem Cucurell, Hailey Nguyen, Hannah
  Korevaar, Hu Xu, Hugo Touvron, Iliyan Zarov, Imanol Arrieta Ibarra, Isabel Kloumann, Ishan


                                                 11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


  Misra, Ivan Evtimov, Jade Copet, Jaewon Lee, Jan Geffert, Jana Vranes, Jason Park, Jay Ma-
  hadeokar, Jeet Shah, Jelmer van der Linde, Jennifer Billock, Jenny Hong, Jenya Lee, Jeremy
  Fu, Jianfeng Chi, Jianyu Huang, Jiawen Liu, Jie Wang, Jiecao Yu, Joanna Bitton, Joe Spisak,
  Jongsoo Park, Joseph Rocca, Joshua Johnstun, Joshua Saxe, Junteng Jia, Kalyan Vasuden Al-
  wala, Kartikeya Upasani, Kate Plawiak, Ke Li, Kenneth Heafield, Kevin Stone, Khalid El-Arini,
  Krithika Iyer, Kshitiz Malik, Kuenley Chiu, Kunal Bhalla, Lauren Rantala-Yeary, Laurens van der
  Maaten, Lawrence Chen, Liang Tan, Liz Jenkins, Louis Martin, Lovish Madaan, Lubo Malo,
  Lukas Blecher, Lukas Landzaat, Luke de Oliveira, Madeline Muzzi, Mahesh Pasupuleti, Man-
  nat Singh, Manohar Paluri, Marcin Kardas, Mathew Oldham, Mathieu Rita, Maya Pavlova,
  Melanie Kambadur, Mike Lewis, Min Si, Mitesh Kumar Singh, Mona Hassan, Naman Goyal,
  Narjes Torabi, Nikolay Bashlykov, Nikolay Bogoychev, Niladri Chatterji, Olivier Duchenne, Onur
  Çelebi, Patrick Alrassy, Pengchuan Zhang, Pengwei Li, Petar Vasic, Peter Weng, Prajjwal Bhar-
  gava, Pratik Dubal, Praveen Krishnan, Punit Singh Koura, Puxin Xu, Qing He, Qingxiao Dong,
  Ragavan Srinivasan, Raj Ganapathy, Ramon Calderer, Ricardo Silveira Cabral, Robert Stojnic,
  Roberta Raileanu, Rohit Girdhar, Rohit Patel, Romain Sauvestre, Ronnie Polidoro, Roshan Sum-
  baly, Ross Taylor, Ruan Silva, Rui Hou, Rui Wang, Saghar Hosseini, Sahana Chennabasappa,
  Sanjay Singh, Sean Bell, Seohyun Sonia Kim, Sergey Edunov, Shaoliang Nie, Sharan Narang,
  Sharath Raparthy, Sheng Shen, Shengye Wan, Shruti Bhosale, Shun Zhang, Simon Vandenhende,
  Soumya Batra, Spencer Whitman, Sten Sootla, Stephane Collot, Suchin Gururangan, Sydney
  Borodinsky, Tamar Herman, Tara Fowler, Tarek Sheasha, Thomas Georgiou, Thomas Scialom,
  Tobias Speckbacher, Todor Mihaylov, Tong Xiao, Ujjwal Karn, Vedanuj Goswami, Vibhor Gupta,
  Vignesh Ramanathan, Viktor Kerkez, Vincent Gonguet, Virginie Do, Vish Vogeti, Vladan Petro-
  vic, Weiwei Chu, Wenhan Xiong, Wenyin Fu, Whitney Meers, Xavier Martinet, Xiaodong Wang,
  Xiaoqing Ellen Tan, Xinfeng Xie, Xuchao Jia, Xuewei Wang, Yaelle Goldschlag, Yashesh Gaur,
  Yasmine Babaei, Yi Wen, Yiwen Song, Yuchen Zhang, Yue Li, Yuning Mao, Zacharie Delpierre
  Coudert, Zheng Yan, Zhengxing Chen, Zoe Papakipos, Aaditya Singh, Aaron Grattafiori, Abha
  Jain, Adam Kelsey, Adam Shajnfeld, Adithya Gangidi, Adolfo Victoria, Ahuva Goldstand, Ajay
  Menon, Ajay Sharma, Alex Boesenberg, Alex Vaughan, Alexei Baevski, Allie Feinstein, Amanda
  Kallet, Amit Sangani, Anam Yunus, Andrei Lupu, Andres Alvarado, Andrew Caples, Andrew
  Gu, Andrew Ho, Andrew Poulton, Andrew Ryan, Ankit Ramchandani, Annie Franco, Aparajita
  Saraf, Arkabandhu Chowdhury, Ashley Gabriel, Ashwin Bharambe, Assaf Eisenman, Azadeh
  Yazdan, Beau James, Ben Maurer, Benjamin Leonhardi, Bernie Huang, Beth Loyd, Beto De
  Paola, Bhargavi Paranjape, Bing Liu, Bo Wu, Boyu Ni, Braden Hancock, Bram Wasti, Bran-
  don Spence, Brani Stojkovic, Brian Gamido, Britt Montalvo, Carl Parker, Carly Burton, Catalina
  Mejia, Changhan Wang, Changkyu Kim, Chao Zhou, Chester Hu, Ching-Hsiang Chu, Chris Cai,
  Chris Tindal, Christoph Feichtenhofer, Damon Civin, Dana Beaty, Daniel Kreymer, Daniel Li,
  Danny Wyatt, David Adkins, David Xu, Davide Testuggine, Delia David, Devi Parikh, Diana
  Liskovich, Didem Foss, Dingkang Wang, Duc Le, Dustin Holland, Edward Dowling, Eissa Jamil,
  Elaine Montgomery, Eleonora Presani, Emily Hahn, Emily Wood, Erik Brinkman, Esteban Ar-
  caute, Evan Dunbar, Evan Smothers, Fei Sun, Felix Kreuk, Feng Tian, Firat Ozgenel, Francesco
  Caggioni, Francisco Guzmán, Frank Kanayet, Frank Seide, Gabriela Medina Florez, Gabriella
  Schwarz, Gada Badeer, Georgia Swee, Gil Halpern, Govind Thattai, Grant Herman, Grigory
  Sizov, Guangyi, Zhang, Guna Lakshminarayanan, Hamid Shojanazeri, Han Zou, Hannah Wang,
  Hanwen Zha, Haroun Habeeb, Harrison Rudolph, Helen Suk, Henry Aspegren, Hunter Gold-
  man, Ibrahim Damlaj, Igor Molybog, Igor Tufanov, Irina-Elena Veliche, Itai Gat, Jake Weissman,
  James Geboski, James Kohli, Japhet Asher, Jean-Baptiste Gaya, Jeff Marcus, Jeff Tang, Jennifer
  Chan, Jenny Zhen, Jeremy Reizenstein, Jeremy Teboul, Jessica Zhong, Jian Jin, Jingyi Yang, Joe
  Cummings, Jon Carvill, Jon Shepard, Jonathan McPhie, Jonathan Torres, Josh Ginsburg, Junjie
  Wang, Kai Wu, Kam Hou U, Karan Saxena, Karthik Prasad, Kartikay Khandelwal, Katayoun
  Zand, Kathy Matosich, Kaushik Veeraraghavan, Kelly Michelena, Keqian Li, Kun Huang, Kunal
  Chawla, Kushal Lakhotia, Kyle Huang, Lailin Chen, Lakshya Garg, Lavender A, Leandro Silva,
  Lee Bell, Lei Zhang, Liangpeng Guo, Licheng Yu, Liron Moshkovich, Luca Wehrstedt, Madian
  Khabsa, Manav Avalani, Manish Bhatt, Maria Tsimpoukelli, Martynas Mankus, Matan Hasson,
  Matthew Lennie, Matthias Reso, Maxim Groshev, Maxim Naumov, Maya Lathi, Meghan Ke-
  neally, Michael L. Seltzer, Michal Valko, Michelle Restrepo, Mihir Patel, Mik Vyatskov, Mikayel
  Samvelyan, Mike Clark, Mike Macey, Mike Wang, Miquel Jubert Hermoso, Mo Metanat, Mo-
  hammad Rastegari, Munish Bansal, Nandhini Santhanam, Natascha Parks, Natasha White, Navy-
  ata Bawa, Nayan Singhal, Nick Egebo, Nicolas Usunier, Nikolay Pavlovich Laptev, Ning Dong,
  Ning Zhang, Norman Cheng, Oleg Chernoguz, Olivia Hart, Omkar Salpekar, Ozlem Kalinli,


                                               12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


  Parkin Kent, Parth Parekh, Paul Saab, Pavan Balaji, Pedro Rittner, Philip Bontrager, Pierre Roux,
  Piotr Dollar, Polina Zvyagina, Prashant Ratanchandani, Pritish Yuvraj, Qian Liang, Rachad Alao,
  Rachel Rodriguez, Rafi Ayub, Raghotham Murthy, Raghu Nayani, Rahul Mitra, Raymond Li,
  Rebekkah Hogan, Robin Battey, Rocky Wang, Rohan Maheswari, Russ Howes, Ruty Rinott,
  Sai Jayesh Bondu, Samyak Datta, Sara Chugh, Sara Hunt, Sargun Dhillon, Sasha Sidorov, Sa-
  tadru Pan, Saurabh Verma, Seiji Yamamoto, Sharadh Ramaswamy, Shaun Lindsay, Shaun Lind-
  say, Sheng Feng, Shenghao Lin, Shengxin Cindy Zha, Shiva Shankar, Shuqiang Zhang, Shuqiang
  Zhang, Sinong Wang, Sneha Agarwal, Soji Sajuyigbe, Soumith Chintala, Stephanie Max, Stephen
  Chen, Steve Kehoe, Steve Satterfield, Sudarshan Govindaprasad, Sumit Gupta, Sungmin Cho,
  Sunny Virk, Suraj Subramanian, Sy Choudhury, Sydney Goldman, Tal Remez, Tamar Glaser,
  Tamara Best, Thilo Kohler, Thomas Robinson, Tianhe Li, Tianjun Zhang, Tim Matthews, Tim-
  othy Chou, Tzook Shaked, Varun Vontimitta, Victoria Ajayi, Victoria Montanez, Vijai Mohan,
  Vinay Satish Kumar, Vishal Mangla, Vítor Albiero, Vlad Ionescu, Vlad Poenaru, Vlad Tiberiu
  Mihailescu, Vladimir Ivanov, Wei Li, Wenchen Wang, Wenwen Jiang, Wes Bouaziz, Will Con-
  stable, Xiaocheng Tang, Xiaofang Wang, Xiaojian Wu, Xiaolan Wang, Xide Xia, Xilun Wu,
  Xinbo Gao, Yanjun Chen, Ye Hu, Ye Jia, Ye Qi, Yenda Li, Yilin Zhang, Ying Zhang, Yossi Adi,
  Youngjin Nam, Yu, Wang, Yuchen Hao, Yundi Qian, Yuzi He, Zach Rait, Zachary DeVito, Zef
  Rosnbrick, Zhaoduo Wen, Zhenyu Yang, and Zhiwei Zhao. The llama 3 herd of models, 2024.
  URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2407.21783.
Hengrui Gu, Kaixiong Zhou, Xiaotian Han, Ninghao Liu, Ruobing Wang, and Xin Wang. Pokemqa:
  Programmable knowledge editing for multi-hop question answering. arXiv, 2024.
Lei Huang, Weijiang Yu, Weitao Ma, Weihong Zhong, Zhangyin Feng, Haotian Wang, Qianglong
  Chen, Weihua Peng, Xiaocheng Feng, Bing Qin, and Ting Liu. A survey on hallucination in large
  language models: Principles, taxonomy, challenges, and open questions. arXiv, 2023.
Gautier Izacard, Mathilde Caron, Lucas Hosseini, Sebastian Riedel, Piotr Bojanowski, Armand
  Joulin, and Edouard Grave. Unsupervised dense information retrieval with contrastive learning.
  Transactions on Machine Learning Research, 2022.
Albert Q. Jiang, Alexandre Sablayrolles, Arthur Mensch, Chris Bamford, Devendra Singh Chap-
  lot, Diego de las Casas, Florian Bressand, Gianna Lengyel, Guillaume Lample, Lucile Saulnier,
  Lélio Renard Lavaud, Marie-Anne Lachaux, Pierre Stock, Teven Le Scao, Thibaut Lavril, Thomas
  Wang, Timothée Lacroix, and William El Sayed. Mistral 7b. arXiv, 2023.
Tianjie Ju, Yijin Chen, Xinwei Yuan, Zhuosheng Zhang, Wei Du, Yubin Zheng, and Gongshen Liu.
  Investigating multi-hop factual shortcuts in knowledge editing of large language models, 2024.
  URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2402.11900.
Yi Lu, Jing Nathan Yan, Songlin Yang, Justin T Chiu, Siyu Ren, Fei Yuan, Wenting Zhao, Zhiyong
  Wu, and Alexander M Rush. A controlled study on long context extension and generalization in
  llms. arXiv preprint arXiv:2409.12181, 2024.
Kevin Meng, David Bau, Alex Andonian, and Yonatan Belinkov. Locating and editing factual
  associations in GPT. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 35, 2022.
Zhang Mengqi, Ye Xiaotian, Liu Qiang, Ren Pengjie, Wu Shu, and Chen Zhumin. Knowledge graph
  enhanced large language model editing. arXiv, 2024.
Eric Mitchell, Charles Lin, Antoine Bosselut, Chelsea Finn, and Christopher D Manning. Fast model
  editing at scale. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2022.
Yucheng Shi, Qiaoyu Tan, Xuansheng Wu, Shaochen Zhong, Kaixiong Zhou, and Ninghao Liu.
  Retrieval-enhanced knowledge editing for multi-hop question answering in language models.
  arXiv, 2024.
Anton Sinitsin, Vsevolod Plokhotnyuk, Dmitry Pyrkin, Sergei Popov, and Artem Babenko. Editable
  neural networks. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2020.
Denny Vrandečić and Markus Krötzsch. Wikidata: a free collaborative knowledgebase. Communi-
  cations of the ACM, 2014.


                                               13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Yiwei Wang, Muhao Chen, Nanyun Peng, and Kai-Wei Chang. Deepedit: Knowledge editing as
  decoding with constraints. arXiv, 2024.
Zihao Wei, Liang Pang, Hanxing Ding, Jingcheng Deng, Huawei Shen, and Xueqi Cheng. Stable
  knowledge editing in large language models. arXiv, 2024.
An Yang, Baosong Yang, Binyuan Hui, Bo Zheng, Bowen Yu, Chang Zhou, Chengpeng Li,
  Chengyuan Li, Dayiheng Liu, Fei Huang, Guanting Dong, Haoran Wei, Huan Lin, Jialong Tang,
  Jialin Wang, Jian Yang, Jianhong Tu, Jianwei Zhang, Jianxin Ma, Jianxin Yang, Jin Xu, Jin-
  gren Zhou, Jinze Bai, Jinzheng He, Junyang Lin, Kai Dang, Keming Lu, Keqin Chen, Kexin
  Yang, Mei Li, Mingfeng Xue, Na Ni, Pei Zhang, Peng Wang, Ru Peng, Rui Men, Ruize Gao,
  Runji Lin, Shijie Wang, Shuai Bai, Sinan Tan, Tianhang Zhu, Tianhao Li, Tianyu Liu, Wen-
  bin Ge, Xiaodong Deng, Xiaohuan Zhou, Xingzhang Ren, Xinyu Zhang, Xipin Wei, Xuancheng
  Ren, Xuejing Liu, Yang Fan, Yang Yao, Yichang Zhang, Yu Wan, Yunfei Chu, Yuqiong Liu,
  Zeyu Cui, Zhenru Zhang, Zhifang Guo, and Zhihao Fan. Qwen2 technical report, 2024a. URL
  https://arxiv.org/abs/2407.10671.
Jingfeng Yang, Hongye Jin, Ruixiang Tang, Xiaotian Han, Qizhang Feng, Haoming Jiang, Shaochen
   Zhong, Bing Yin, and Xia Hu. Harnessing the power of llms in practice: A survey on chatgpt and
   beyond. ACM Trans. Knowl. Discov. Data, 2024b.
Jiayi Yuan, Hongyi Liu, Shaochen Zhong, Yu-Neng Chuang, Songchen Li, Guanchu Wang, Duy Le,
   Hongye Jin, Vipin Chaudhary, Zhaozhuo Xu, Zirui Liu, and Xia Hu. KV cache compression, but
   what must we give in return? a comprehensive benchmark of long context capable approaches.
   In Yaser Al-Onaizan, Mohit Bansal, and Yun-Nung Chen (eds.), Findings of the Association
   for Computational Linguistics: EMNLP 2024, pp. 4623–4648, Miami, Florida, USA, Novem-
   ber 2024. Association for Computational Linguistics. URL https://aclanthology.org/
   2024.findings-emnlp.266.
Yue Zhang, Yafu Li, Leyang Cui, Deng Cai, Lemao Liu, Tingchen Fu, Xinting Huang, Enbo Zhao,
  Yu Zhang, Yulong Chen, Longyue Wang, Anh Tuan Luu, Wei Bi, Freda Shi, and Shuming Shi.
  Siren’s song in the ai ocean: A survey on hallucination in large language models. arXiv, 2023.
Wayne Xin Zhao, Kun Zhou, Junyi Li, Tianyi Tang, Xiaolei Wang, Yupeng Hou, Yingqian Min,
 Beichen Zhang, Junjie Zhang, Zican Dong, Yifan Du, Chen Yang, Yushuo Chen, Zhipeng Chen,
 Jinhao Jiang, Ruiyang Ren, Yifan Li, Xinyu Tang, Zikang Liu, Peiyu Liu, Jian-Yun Nie, and
 Ji-Rong Wen. A survey of large language models. arXiv, 2023.
Ce Zheng, Lei Li, Qingxiu Dong, Yuxuan Fan, Zhiyong Wu, Jingjing Xu, and Baobao Chang. Can
  we edit factual knowledge by in-context learning? arXiv, 2023a.
Lianmin Zheng, Wei-Lin Chiang, Ying Sheng, Siyuan Zhuang, Zhanghao Wu, Yonghao Zhuang,
  Zi Lin, Zhuohan Li, Dacheng Li, Eric P. Xing, Hao Zhang, Joseph E. Gonzalez, and Ion Stoica.
  Judging llm-as-a-judge with mt-bench and chatbot arena. arXiv, 2023b.
Zexuan Zhong, Zhengxuan Wu, Christopher D Manning, Christopher Potts, and Danqi Chen.
  MQuAKE: Assessing knowledge editing in language models via multi-hop questions. In The
  2023 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, 2023.


                                               14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A    L IMITATIONS
While we strive to make a solid and comprehensive contribution to the MHKE field and the
knowledge editing community at large, we must acknowledge certain shortcomings in our post-fix
MQ UAKE-R EMASTERED datasets. Notably, MQ UAKE-R EMASTERED remains focused solely
on knowledge-intensive tasks where both unedited and edited facts can be represented as triples in
a KG. However, this assumption does not always hold, as some facts are not practically feasible to
deconstruct into a triple.
For example, consider the question-answer pair: “Which actor in a Marvel movie has the same
initial for both their first and last name?” — “Paul Rudd (for Ant-Man).” A real-world KG is
unlikely to contain such a specific and elaborate relation edge. As a result, it remains an open
question of how MHKE methods would perform when faced with a multi-hop question (or a
subquestion) that references such non-triple-representable unedited or edited knowledge; or,
on an even broader scale, a multifaceted question that can’t be easily decomposed into multiple
standalone subquestions.
This challenge is akin to the common struggle of deciding when to RAG and when to engage in
CoT reasoning. Should retrieval/reasoning be applied to every query, or should there be an oversight
mechanism that determines when an extra operation (in our case, an editing resolution/confirmation)
should be triggered, as explored in works like Self-RAG (Asai et al., 2023)? Right now, MHKE
methods typically check for editing resolutions for every subquestion (and assume such a subques-
tion breakdown is obtainable in the first place), which is a mechanism with strong assumptions and
requires significant support if it is to be deployed at scale.
Although this limitation is not unique to MQ UAKE-R EMASTERED but rather a general shortcom-
ing of almost all works in MHKE, we believe it is both fair and necessary to highlight it, as it
warrants dedicated studies of its own. We are encouraged to see the community moving in a more
comprehensive direction, with evaluations like DUnE (Akyürek et al., 2023) being constructed. We
expect a reasonable complement to simply evaluate MHKE methods — with edited facts present —
on typical datasets that demand no editing operations and observe if they significantly degrade an
LLM’s performance.


                                                15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


B     E XTENDED P RELIMINARY
B.1   D EMO R EPORT OF MQ UAKE


Table 6: Standard reporting format of MQ UAKE- CF -3 K, and MQ UAKE- T demoed with MeLLo
on Vicuna-7B (Zheng et al., 2023b); k-edited means k cases out of the total cases are edited. Ab-
breviated table courtesy of Zhong et al. (2023) (Table 3).

                                               MQ UAKE- CF -3 K                                       MQ UAKE- T
 Model            Method
                                    1-edit   100-edit 1000-edit 3000-edit             1-edit      100-edit 500-edit         1868-edit
                  MeLLo
 Vicuna-7B                          20.3      11.9          11.0            10.2       84.4           56.3           52.6     51.3
             (Zhong et al., 2023)


B.2   DATASET S TATISTICS

Table 7: Dataset Statistics of MQ UAKE. Numbers are in terms of cases (a case in MQ UAKE is a
chain consisting of multiple subquestions).

                     Dataset                     # of Edits         2-hop     3-hop     4-hop           Total
                                                       1             513       356       224            1,093
                                                       2             487       334       246            1,067
                     MQ UAKE- CF -3 K                  3              -        310       262             572
                                                       4              -         -        268             268
                                                      All           1,000     1,000     1,000           3,000
                                                       1             599       423           51         1,073
                                                       2             536       374          136         1,046
                     MQ UAKE- CF -3 K - V 2            3              -        339          229          568
                                                       4              -         -           313          313
                                                      All           1,135     1,136         729         3,000
                                                       1            2,454      855       446            3,755
                                                       2            2,425      853       467            3,745
                     MQ UAKE-CF                        3              -        827       455            1,282
                                                       4              -         -        436             436
                                                      All           4,879     2,535     1,804           9,218
                     MQ UAKE- T                      1 (All)        1,421      445           2          1,868



Table 8: Dataset Statistics of MQ UAKE-R EMASTERED. Numbers are in terms of cases (a case in
MQ UAKE is a chain consisting of multiple subquestions).

                  Dataset                                   # of Edits      2-hop    3-hop       4-hop       Total
                                                                 1           513      356         224        1,093
                                                                 2           487      334         246        1,067
                  MQ UAKE-R EMASTERED - CF -3 K                  3            -       310         262         572
                                                                 4            -        -          268         268
                                                                All         1,000    1,000       1,000       3,000
                                                                 1          2,446     850         441        3,737
                                                                 2          2,415     852         463        3,730
                  MQ UAKE-R EMASTERED - CF                       3            -       823         451        1,274
                                                                 4            -        -          430         430
                                                                All         4,861    2,525       1,785       9,171
                  MQ UAKE-R EMASTERED - T                      1 (All)      1,421     441         2          1,868
                                                                 1          1,971      77          0         2,048
                                                                 2          2,415     476         14         2,905
                  MQ UAKE-R EMASTERED - CF -6334                 3            -       823         128         951
                                                                 4            -         -         430         430
                                                                All         4,386    1,376        572        6,334


                                                               16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


C     E XTENDED AUDITING

C.1   E XAMPLE OF I NTRA C ONTAMINATION BETWEEN AN E DITED C ASE TO AN U NEDITED
      C ASE (§3.1)

For a concrete example, consider the following two multi-hop questions from MQ UAKE- CF -3 K
(we also additionally provide the subquestion breakdown and intermediate answers of the two ques-
tions for better presentation, we note that such auxiliary information is not part of the instruction
visible to the question-answering LLM):
• case_id:126 (unedited): What is the continent of the country where Kamal Haasan holds
  citizenship?
     ⋄ What is the country of citizenship of Kamal Haasan? India.
     ⋄ What is the continent of India? Asia.
• case_id:482 (unedited): What is the capital of the country where Kamal Haasan holds citi-
  zenship?
    ⋄ What is the country of citizenship of Kamal Haasan? India.
    ⋄ What is capital of India? New Delhi.
The correct pre-edited answer should be “Asia” and “New Delhi” respectively. As Kamal Haasan
is an Indian citizen, India is located in Asia and is the capital of New Delhi. However, suppose
case_id:482 is sampled as an edited case while case_id:126 remains unedited, we will be
provided with the additional triple containing the knowledge of “The official language of United
States of America is Arabic.”
Since the unedited case_id:126 and the edited case_id:482 share the same subquestion of
“What is the country of citizenship of Kamal Haasan?” The answer of case_id:482 will be
rightfully updated to “USA” per the new knowledge. However, the unedited case_id:126 still
considers the original answer “India” to be correct, and is therefore contaminated by the edited
case case_id:482 in an unintended fashion. This is problematic because a successful knowledge
editing method should be able to retrieve the edited knowledge — “Kamal Haasan is a citizen of
USA?” — upon the relevant questions (in this case the shared one), and thus answering “North
America” to case_id:126. This is technically correct, but in conflict with MQ UAKE- CF -3 K’s
label, causing inaccurate experiment readings.

C.2   E XAMPLE OF I NNER C ONTAMINATION BETWEEN D IFFERENT E DITED C ASES (§3.2)

Again, we walk through two cases from MQ UAKE- CF -3 K as a concrete example. First, we show
them in their unedited format (again, subquestion breakdowns and intermediate answers are here for
demonstration purposes and are not visible to the question-answering LLM during evaluation):
• case_id:1570 (unedited): Who was the creator of the official language used in the work loca-
  tion of Matti Vanhanen?
     ⋄ Which city did Matti Vanhanen work in? Helsinki.
     ⋄ What is the official language of Helsinki? Finnish.
     ⋄ Who was Finnish created by? Mikael Agricola.
• case_id:1968 (unedited): Who created the official language of Housemarque’s headquarters
  location?
     ⋄ Which city is the headquarter of Housemarque located in? Helsinki.
     ⋄ What is the official language of Helsinki? Finnish.
     ⋄ Who was Finnish created by? Mikael Agricola.
Suppose case_id:1570 and case_id:1968 are both selected as editing cases, two triples
containing the following knowledge will be available: “The official language of Helsinki is Black
Speech” (intended for case_id:1570), and “Finnish was created by William Shakespeare” (in-
tended for case_id:case_id:1968), leading to the following edited breakdown.
• case_id:1570 (edited): Who was the creator of the official language used in the work location
  of Matti Vanhanen?
     ⋄ Which city did Matti Vanhanen work in? Helsinki.


                                                 17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


     ⋄ What is the official language of Helsinki? Finnish Black Speech.
     ⋄ Who was Finnish Black Speech created by? J. R. R. Tolkien.
• case_id:1968 (edited): Who created the official language of Housemarque’s headquarters
  location?
     ⋄ Which city is the headquarter of Housemarque located in? Helsinki.
     ⋄ What is the official language of Helsinki? Finnish.
     ⋄ Who was Finnish created by? Mikael Agricola William Shakespeare.
Much like the previous conflict between unedited and edited cases, these two edited cases share a
common subquestion: “What is the official language of Helsinki?” However, such subquestion is
edited in case_id:1570 while unedited in case_id:1968, causing unintended contamination.

C.3   E RROR A NALYSIS OF MQ UAKE- CF

Table 9: Error statistics of MQ UAKE- CF (Zhong et al., 2023) in terms of edited cases contaminating
unedited cases §3.1. k-edited means k cases are edited out of the total 9218 cases.

                                                 MQ UAKE- CF
  # of Contaminated
                       1-edit   100-edit    1000-edit 2000-edit       3000-edit   5000-edit   9218-edit
  Cases                  62       3307        5275          5110        4578         3346        0
  Subquestions           62       4525        8751          8989        8326         6364        0


Table 10: Error statistics of MQ UAKE- CF (Zhong et al., 2023) in terms edited cases contaminating
each others §3.2. k-edited means k cases are edited out of the total 9218 cases.

  # of Contaminated    1-edit   100-edit    1000-edit     2000-edit   3000-edit   5000-edit   9218-edit
  Cases                  0          8         192           441         732          1397       2873
  Subquestions           0         12         270           606         1027         1986       4250


C.4   E RROR A NALYSIS OF MQ UAKE- CF -3 K - V 2

MQ UAKE- CF -3 K - V 2 (Zhong et al., 2023) is a dataset based on MQ UAKE- CF -3 K aimed to fix the
dataset corruption issues we identified in §3. It fixed the inner-contamination (§3.2) and conflict
edit errors (§3.3). However, as shown below, this dataset is still vulnerable to intra-contamination as
illustrated in §3.1. Meanwhile, MQ UAKE- CF -3 K - V 2 has 17 duplicate cases (§3.5) and 633 cases
of missing information in the problem instructions (§3.4).

Table 11: Error statistics of MQ UAKE- CF -3 K - V 2 (Zhong et al., 2023) in terms of edited cases
contaminating unedited cases §3.1. k-edited means k cases are edited out of the total 3000 cases.

                                                  MQ UAKE- CF -3 K - V 2
              # of Contaminated
                                   1-edit   100-edit 1000-edit 1000-edit          3000-edit
              Cases                     0     1643         1591         830          0
              Subquestions              0     2028         2398        1357          0


                                                     18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


D     E RROR D ETECTION P ROCEDURE AND P OST-AUDIT C HECKING
In this section, we discuss how exactly we carry out our audit and fixes and how we conduct our
post-audit checking to ensure our audited datasets are error-free to the best of our ability.

D.1   I NTRA AND I NNER C ONTAMINATION

As discussed in §3.1 and §3.2, we observed that some edited facts were retrieved for subquestions
that were not intended to involve an edit. We categorized this issue as contamination, where edited
facts inadvertently influence the correct reasoning path. To carry out the audit, we made the fol-
lowing observation: regardless of whether a case is edited or unedited, a valid reasoning path must
always exist from the initial subquestion to the last subquestion. Thus, suppose any unedited sub-
question on this reasoning path shares the same subject and relation with a triple reflecting an edited
fact; then this unedited subquestion is contaminated and therefore flagged.
We programmed the abovementioned filtering mechanism and identified the contaminated edit facts
against different subquestions/cases. We then employed the API described in §4.2 to dynamically
mask out contaminated cases. Last, we confirmed that there is no contamination remaining by re-
executing our filtering program upon the dynamically masked dataset.

D.2   C ONFLICTING E DITS

As illustrated in §3.3, we noticed some edits within the editing knowledge bank are self-
contradicting, where edits with the same subject and relation led to different tail entities. Again,
we follow the intended reasoning path as introduced above and check if there are multiple edit-
reflecting triples that share the source and relation with an edited subquestion. If so, this suggests
there are conflicting edits. We flagged all those edited triples, put ones with shared sources and
relations into the same group, then flipped the minority edit to the majority edit and updated their
subquestions accordingly. We then reran the program to ensure no more flagged triples.

D.3   M ULTI - HOP Q UESTION I NSTRUCTION R EWRITE

As highlighted in §3.4, we identified some questions lacked a complete set of relations in their in-
structions, thus essentially omitting necessary information for a model to provide the correct answer.
We collect a list of synonyms of all relations of an editing path, then evaluate if a certain instruction
is not using any of the corresponding synonyms when its reasoning path indicates it should reflect a
certain relation.
Subsequently, we prompted the original meta-llama/Llama-3.1-405B to regenerate all instructions
with the few-shot demonstration prompt demoed in Appendix F.2 and reran the detection procedure.
This process resulted in only a small number of instructions that still didn’t meet our predefined
rules due to the fact that our lists of synonyms per each relation cannot be exhaustive by design. We
then manually inspect and, in a few occupations, manually fix those flagged cases.

D.4   D UPLICATE C ASES

Upon investigating conflicting edits, we accidentally discovered that there exist cases with identical
reasoning paths to each other, as illustrated in §3.5. We simply opt to retain only one of such cases
and remove the duplicated rests. We then keep track of a set of reasoning paths from all cases and
see if the cardinality of the set is equivalent to the number of cases.


                                                   19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


E     E RROR T YPE A BLATION S TUDY

In this section, we provide ablation studies demonstrating the benefits of addressing errors in the
MQuAKE dataset, aligning with the observed error patterns in Tables 2 and 1. Using our proposed
GWalk and the Llama-3.1-8B-Instruct model, we evaluate datasets corrected for major error types,
including Inner Contamination, Intra Contamination, and Missing Information in Multi-hop Ques-
tion Instructions. These error types significantly affect the performance of both edited and unedited
accuracies. We opt to exclude minor errors, such as duplicate questions and conflict edits, which are
automatically addressed across all settings due to their limited prevalence in the original datasets.
The observed impact is consistent with our analysis: The Inner Contamination fix has the most
impact when editing intensity is high (e.g., 3000-edit). Yet, the Intra Contamination fix has the
most impact with lower editing intensity (e.g., 100-edit). The Missing Instruction fix consistently
improves performance across all editing intensities.

Table 12:     Performance comparison across dataset variants of MQ UAKE- CF -3 K on meta-
                                                                       Total Accuracy
llama/Llama-3.1-8B-Instruct. Results are reported as (Test Edited Accuracy, Unedited Accuracy) .

                                                          MQ UAKE- CF -3 K
                        Type of Errors Fixed
                                                  100-edit   1000-edit   3000-edit
                           Meta-Llama/Llama-3.1-8B-Instruct (Dubey et al., 2024)
                                                    45.47           42.73         39.57
                        None
                                                 (38, 45.72)    (41.3, 43.45)   (39.57, -)
                                                    46.83           53.3          71.36
                        Inner Contamination
                                                 (70, 46.03)      (73.9, 43)    (71.36, -)
                                                    71.17           61.73         39.87
                        Intra Contamination
                                                 (37, 72.35)    (40.9, 72.15)   (39.87, -)
                                                    49.33           47.2           45.1
                        Missing Instruction
                                                 (41, 49.62)      (45.6, 48)     (45.1, -)
                                                    76.83           75.03         71.53
                        All (Our proposed)
                                                  (69, 77.1)    (74.6, 75.25)   (71.53, -)



F     E XTENDED R EMASTERING

F.1   C ONTAMINATION F REE S UBSET: MQ UAKE-R EMASTERED - CF -6334

While MQ UAKE-R EMASTERED - MASKED with masking operation can well support memory-
based knowledge editing methods, it will not be compatible with parameter-based methods. This is
because, for parameter-based methods, the set of edited facts used for training and evaluation needs
to be constant yet consistent with each other at all times; whereas dynamic masking cannot suffice
as it is essentially adjusting the dataset on the fly during inference time.
To effectively evaluate parameter-based knowledge editing methods, we present MQ UAKE-
R EMASTERED - CF -6334.         MQ UAKE-R EMASTERED - CF -6334 is a dataset extracted from
MQ UAKE- CF, where all 6,334 cases are edited cases; and they are completely contamination-free
from each other. This dataset is suitable for LLM editing with parameter-based approaches, as one
can make careful splits among the 6,334 cases of MQ UAKE-R EMASTERED - CF -6334 to serve as
train, validation, and evaluation sets.

Table 13: The number of unique edited facts for a varied number of edited cases in MQ UAKE-
R EMASTERED - CF

             Number of Edited Cases                  100       1000    3000     6000         All (9171)
             Number of Unique Edited Facts           150       1171    2991     5137           7252


                                                      20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Table 14: Experiment coverage comparison among our and other works. For brevity and better rele-
vance, “Method Coverage” only includes open-sourced methods specifically designed for multi-hop editing,
as adopted single-hop editors are often too weak to deliver usable results. “Separate Metrics?” means that
both the accuracy of edited cases and unedited cases are reported. We consider the inclusion of both metrics
paramount, as editing is often a double-edged sword, causing potential hallucinations under unedited scenarios.
Prior work often only tests on the former but ignores the latter. We did both in our work.

      Ref.               Dataset Coverage                        Method Coverage    Separate      Error
                                                                                    Metrics?      Fix?
      MQuAKE             CF-3K {1, 100, 1000, all}-edit; T       MeLLo              No            No
      (Zhong et al.,     {1, 100, 500, all}-edit
      2023)
      Temple-MQA         CF-3K {1, 100, all}-edit; T {1, all}-   MeLLo, PokeMQA     No            No
      (Cheng et al.,     edit
      2024)
      Ju et al. (2024)   CF-3K {all}-edit                        N/A                No            No
      PoleMQA (Gu        CF-3K {1, 100, all}-edit; T {1, 100,    MeLLo, PokeMQA     No            No
      et al., 2024)      all}-edit
      Ours               CF-3K {1, 100, 1000, all}-edit; T       MeLLo, ICE, IKE,   Yes           Yes
                         {1, 100, 500, all}-edit; CF-9K {1,      PokeMQA, GWalk,
                         1000, 3000, 6000, all}-edit; CF-        RAE, DeepEdit
                         6334 {100, 1000, 3000, all}-edit

F.2    P ROMPT FOR R EWRITING I NSTRUCTIONS

      Few-shot Prompt

      Instruction: Given a chain of relations, generate 3 multi-hop questions that comprehen-
      sively include the semantics of the relations.
      Example 1:
      Relation Chain:
      XXX -> ’The author of                  is’ -> ’ is a citizen of’ -> ?
      Generated Questions:
             1. What is the country of citizenship of the author of XXX?
             2. What country is the author of XXX a citizen of?
             3. What is the nationality of the author of XXX?
      Example 2:
      Relation Chain:
      XXX -> ’ was developed by’ -> ’The chairperson of is’ -> ’
      is a citizen of’ -> ’ is located in the continent of’ -> ?
      Generated Questions:
             1. What continent is the country located in, where the chairperson of the developer of
                XXX is a citizen?
             2. On which continent is the country located, whose citizen is the chairperson of the
                company that developed XXX?
             3. Which continent houses the country of the chairperson of the developer of XXX?
      Example 3:
      Relation Chain:
      <The relational chain we want the generated questions to be
      based on>


                                                         21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


G    R IPPLE E DIT
We consider MQuAKE’s task design and setup to be more reflective of real-world editing tasks,
as naturally, there will always be more than one edited fact stored for any system with reasonable
complexity. That being said, we are happy to report our proposed pilot method, GWalk, performs
decently on RippleEdit. Here are some snapshot results on Llama-2-7b-chat:

Table 15: Single-edit result of RippleEdit-Popular/Recent/Random. C1/2 means the edit is happen-
ing at the 1st or the 2nd hop (RippleEdit cases only have 2 hops).

 Method         Popular C1 Acc.   Popular C2 Acc.   Recent C1 Acc.   Recent C2 Acc.   Random C1 Acc.   Random C2 Acc.
 ROME                37.4              16.2              47.8             50.0             35.5             49.5
 ICE                 85.1              67.6              74.8             85.0             73.8             80.3
 MeLLo               45.1              77.1              50.2             80.0             40.2             68.3
 GWalk (ours)        85.7              81.8              80.9             87.6             76.1             82.9


We additionally convert RippleEdit to a multi-edit setup — i.e., there are multiple edited facts within
the editing knowledge bank at the same time — to a) make it more challenging and, b) show that our
audit can also “fix” issues within a different dataset. Note we put the “fix” in quotes as RippleEdit
is not designed with multi-edit in mind, so the things we fixed are not necessarily errors but just
some adjustments required for making a proper multi-edit dataset. In any case, here are the snapshot
results on Llama-3-8b-Instruct:
Table 16: Multi-edit result of RippleEdit-Popular/Recent/Random. In this case, we fixed 21/2/0
conflict edits and 3/120/1 case-to-case contamination within RippleEdit-Ropular/Recent/Random
datasets, respectively.

 Method         Popular C1 Acc.   Popular C2 Acc.   Recent C1 Acc.   Recent C2 Acc.   Random C1 Acc.   Random C2 Acc.
 MeLLo               35.1              40.3              41.1             42.4             49.5             50.0
 GWalk (ours)        79.0              66.9              79.2             63.9             72.9             60.0


                                                           22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


H    C ASE S TUDY OF GWALK
We believe GWalk is performant and practical because of two ingredients:

       • It only stores edited facts in its Editing Knowledge Bank (Figure 2), contrary to some
         baselines (e.g., RAE (Shi et al., 2024)), where unedited facts are also stored. This is more
         practical to maintain as there are always fewer edited facts to keep track of, yet the total
         search space is much smaller, allowing more precise and efficient retrieval.
       • Unlike most baselines, which store edited facts in natural language (NL) format (e.g.,
         MeLLo (Zhong et al., 2023) and the majority of existing works) and conduct retrieval based
         on NL sentence embeddings, we store such editing facts on a Knowledge Graph (KG). The
         topology-based retrieval greatly reduces unintended retrieval, which almost always causes
         hallucinations.

Here is a concrete example from MQuAKE-Remastered-CF (case #16), where MeLLo retrieves an
incorrect edited fact on an edited subquestion.
    Edited Subquestion Example

    Question: What is the country of citizenship of Twitter’s CEO?
    1st Subquestion: Who is Twitter’s CEO?
    Generated Answer (by LLM): Twitter’s CEO is Elon Musk.
    MeLLo-retrieved edited fact: The chief executive officer of CBS Corporation is Steve
    Jobs.
    // Incorrect edited fact retrieved because this edited fact is close to the subquestion from an
    embedding standpoint, even if it doesn’t provide relevant information.
    GWalk-retrieved edited fact: The chief executive officer of Twitter is Parag Agrawal.
    // This is a correct retrieval because we first identify (in a lossy fashion) entity twitter and
    relation executive officer in the KG storing edited facts.

    MeLLo 2nd Subquestion: What is the country of citizenship of Elon Musk?
    GWalk 2nd Subquestion: What is the country of citizenship of Parag Agrawal?
    // MeLLo eventually provides the wrong final answer because the rest of its subquestion is
    about Elon Musk, though it should be about Parag Agrawal. We note that this is an editing
    dataset, so the ground truth answers often don’t reflect the situation in the real world.


Similarly, here’s MeLLo retrieving an unrelated edited fact on an unedited subquestion (MQuAKE-
Remastered-CF, case #70).
    Unedited Subquestion Example

    Question: What is the capital of the country where Premam originated?
    1st Subquestion: Where Premam was originated?
    Generated Answer (by LLM): Premam was originated in India.
    MeLLo-retrieved fact: Carnatic music was created in the country of Poland.
    // Unrelated edited fact retrieved even if this subquestion is not edited.
    GWalk-retrieved fact: None.
    // No edited fact is retrieved because no triple (via lossy mapping) on the KG has a source
    of Premam with a relation of originated in.

    MeLLo 2nd Subquestion: What is the name of the capital city of Poland?
    GWalk 2nd Subquestion: What is the capital city of India?
    // MeLLo again eventually provides the wrong final answer because the rest of its subques-
    tion is about Poland, though it should be about India.


                                                  23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


We also present the quantitative result of the case study between MeLLo (Zhong et al., 2023) and
our GWalk. The experiment is conducted using Qwen/Qwen2.5-7B-Instruct (Yang et al., 2024a)
on MQ UAKE-R EMASTERED - CF -3 K. We chose QWen2.5-7B-Instruct as the evaluation model pri-
marily because it is the second-best model we evaluated after llama3.1-8b which MeLLo fails to
make any edits, according to Table 18.

    Figure 3: This is the color legend, where “Correct Case” means the case is answered cor-
    rectly. “Incorrect Breakdown Path” refers to a case having an incorrect subquestion break-
    down path. “Incorrect Edited Retrieval” means the case has an incorrect fact retrieved on
    an edited subquestion. “Incorrect Unedited Retrieval” means the method retrieves an ir-
    relevant fact where there should be no edited facts. “Others” refers to other issues that
    occurred evaluating this case, primarily knowledge aggregation. A failing case may con-
    tain multiple types of error, but we only count the type that occurs the first.

                                        Correct Case
                                        Incorrect Breakdown Path
                                        Incorrect Edited Retrieval
                                        Incorrect Unedited Retrieval
                                        Others Errors


                 Figure 4: Comparison of MeLLo and GWalk for Editnum of 1


                                                                          12.1%
                     23.0%
                                                                                  17.8%
                                 0.4%
                            0.4%
                            0.0% 0.8%
                            0.8%                                                            0.0%
            75.9%                                                      53.1%
                                                                                   17.0%


                 MeLLo                                                     GWalk

                  Figure 5: Comparison of MeLLo and GWalk for Editnum 100



                                                                           14.3%
                    23.7%        0.9%
                                 0.6%                                              14.5%
                            0.9%
                            0.6%
                            1.0% 1.0%                                                 0.9% 0.9%
            73.9%                                                      51.8%
                                                                                  18.5%
                                                                                           18.5

                 MeLLo                                                     GWalk


                                                24
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                       Correct Case
                                       Incorrect Breakdown Path
                                       Incorrect Edited Retrieval
                                       Incorrect Unedited Retrieval
                                       Others Errors

                  Figure 6: Comparison of MeLLo and GWalk for Editnum 1000

                                 2.3%
              19.6% 7.4%                                                 15.7%
                       2.3%           9.8%                                       13.1%
                              9.8%
                                                                                       6.8%

               60.9%                                                   50.8%       13.6%


                  MeLLo                                                  GWalk

                  Figure 7: Comparison of MeLLo and GWalk for Editnum 3000


                       9.2%
                                                                               13.8%
             20.3%                                                    18.5%
                              17.8%                                                12.2%

          12.0%                                                                        5.1%
                                                                         50.5%
                     40.8%



                  MeLLo                                                  GWalk



I   A DDITIONAL E XPERIMENT R ESULTS
One observation we made in §6.1 is in-context learning-based methods — like ICE (Cohen et al.,
2023) and IKE (Zheng et al., 2023a) tend to “OOM” when facing a larger amount of edited facts.
This is because these two methods — originally designed for single-edit tasks — essentially dump
all edited facts as a long concatenated prompt and expect the model to figure out the corresponding
editings naturally. They face OOM issues because when the number of editing facts grows, the
prompt becomes extremely long and, therefore, introduces a large amount of KV cache and poses
significant memory footprint issues.
While efficiently and effectively handling long input is out-of-scope of our work, as general guid-
ance, we refer interested readers to efficient long context-handing survey/benchmark works like
Yuan et al. (2024), which cover the schools and performance of several popular long context-
handling methods. Other than the system challenges, another necessary aspect is to improve LLM
long context performance, as most LLMs are pre-trained on limited context length and thus cannot
effectively handle long input even if the system challenge is addressed. In this regard, we again
recommend survey/benchmark works like Lu et al. (2024) for insights. Further, one can certainly
convert this long context scenario to leverage the power of the RAG pipeline, much like the majority
of multi-hop knowledge editing methods featured in this work.



                                                    25
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


 Table 17: This is the benchmark results of MQ UAKE-R EMASTERED - T. The reported format is:
                                                  Total Accuracy
                                         (Edited Accuracy, Unedited Accuracy)

                                                             MQ UAKE-R EMASTERED - T
             Method
                                                1-edit        100-edit   500-edit    1864-edit
                                  lmsys/vicuna-7b-v1.5 (Zheng et al., 2023b)
                                                 19.31              18.88           22.16           44.37
             MeLLo (Zhong et al., 2023)
                                              (100, 19.27)        (45.0, 17.4)   (40.4, 15.47)   (44.37, N/A)
             ICE (Cohen et al., 2023)             <1                  <1              <1            OOM
             IKE (Zheng et al., 2023a)            <1                  <1              <1            OOM
             DeepEdit Wang et al. (2024)          <1                  <1              <1              <1
                                                 35.52              46.51           48.93           54.88
             GWalk (Ours)
                                              (100, 35.48)       (49.0, 46.37)   (56.0, 46.33)   (54.88, N/A)
                             mistralai/Mistral-7B-Instruct-v0.2 (Jiang et al., 2023)
                                                  10.3             10.25            18.78           47.75
             MeLLo (Zhong et al., 2023)
                                               (0, 10.31)        (59.0, 7.48)     (48.4, 7.92)   (47.75, N/A)
             ICE (Cohen et al., 2023)              <1                <1               <1            OOM
             IKE (Zheng et al., 2023a)             <1                <1               <1            OOM
             DeepEdit Wang et al. (2024)           <1                <1               <1              <1
                                                 34.07             45.76            46.78            50.7
             GWalk (Ours)
                                               (0, 34.08)        (47, 45.69)     (51.2, 45.16)    (50.7, N/A)
                            meta-llama/Meta-Llama-3-8B-Instruct (AI@Meta, 2024)
                                                                     1.13           4.72            16.58
             MeLLo (Zhong et al., 2023)           <1
                                                                   (17, <1)       (17.4, <1)     (16.58, N/A)
             ICE (Cohen et al., 2023)             <1                  <1             <1             OOM
             IKE (Zheng et al., 2023a)            <1                  <1             <1             OOM
                                                 6.49                8.48           14.74           34.71
             DeepEdit Wang et al. (2024)
                                                (0, 6.49)         (36.0, 6.92)   (36.20, 6.89)   (34.71, N/A)
                                                 70.12              73.28            76.61          84.01
             GWalk (Ours)
                                              (100, 70.1)        (84.0, 72.68)     (87, 72.8)    (84.01, N/A)
                            meta-Llama/Llama-3.1-8B-Instruct (Dubey et al., 2024)
                                                 74.68             76.34            77.74           83.32
             GWalk (Ours)
                                              (100, 74.66)       (85, 75.85)     (85.4, 74.91)   (83.32, N/A)
                               Qwen/Qwen2.5-7B-Instruct (Yang et al., 2024a)
                                                 44.23             46.03             55.1           86.32
             GWalk (Ours)
                                              (100, 44.21)       (87, 43.71)     (85.4, 43.99)   (86.32, N/A)


                                                            26
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


   Table 18: This is the benchmark result for MQ UAKE-R EMASTERED - CF -3 K reported in the
                                                        Total Accuracy
                                 format of: (Edited Accuracy, Unedited Accuracy)

                                                        MQ UAKE-R EMASTERED - CF -3 K
             Method
                                               1-edit       100-edit 1000-edit     3000-edit
                                  lmsys/vicuna-7b-v1.5 (Zheng et al., 2023b)
                                                16.54             18            14.63            6.77
             MeLLo (Zhong et al., 2023)
                                             (100, 16.51)    (9.0, 18.31)    (8.0, 17.95)    (6.77, N/A)
             ICE (Cohen et al., 2023)            <1               <1            OOM             OOM
             IKE (Zheng et al., 2023a)           <1             OOM             OOM             OOM
             DeepEdit (Wang et al., 2024)        <1               <1              <1              <1
                                                54.89            60.9           57.37           66.33
             GWalk (Ours)
                                             (100, 54.87)    (54, 61.14)    (54.4, 58.85)   (66.33, N/A)
                             mistralai/Mistral-7B-Instruct-v0.2 (Jiang et al., 2023)
                                                19.73            18.6         16.33            15.93
             MeLLo (Zhong et al., 2023)
                                             (100, 19.71)    (21, 18.52)    (17.8, 15.6)    (15.93, N/A)
             ICE (Cohen et al., 2023)            <1               <1          OOM              OOM
                                                                 4.43
             IKE (Zheng et al., 2023a)           <1                            OOM            OOM
                                                               (4,4.49)
             DeepEdit (Wang et al., 2024)        <1               <1            <1              <1
                                                56.57           61.93          57.17           51.0
             GWalk (Ours)
                                             (100, 56.55)    (47, 62.45)    (51.5, 60.0)    (51.0, N/A)
                            meta-llama/Meta-Llama-3-8B-Instruct (AI@Meta, 2024)
                                                                 <1             1.03             2.3
             MeLLo (Zhong et al., 2023)          <1
                                                              (2.0, <1)       (3.0, <1)      (2.3, N/A)
             ICE (Cohen et al., 2023)            <1              <1            OOM             OOM
             IKE (Zheng et al., 2023a)           <1              <1            OOM             OOM
                                                22.93          17.27           15.03           12.63
             DeepEdit (Wang et al., 2024)
                                              (0, 22.94)     (11, 17.48)    (15.1, 15.0)    (12.63, N/A)
                                                 69.0          76.73          75.47             70.6
             GWalk(Ours)
                                             (100, 68.99)    (67, 77.07)    (74.2, 76.1)     (70.6, N/A)
                            meta-Llama/Llama-3.1-8B-Instruct (Dubey et al., 2024)
                                                                                                  2.5
             MeLLo (Zhong et al., 2023)          <1              <1              <1
                                                                                              (2.5, N/A)
                                                17.80           15.50          11.87             9.47
             DeepEdit (Wang et al., 2024)
                                             (100, 17.77)    (15, 15.52)     (10, 12.8)      (9.47, N/A)
                                                 73.3           76.83          75.03            71.53
             GWalk (Ours)
                                              (100, 73.3)     (69, 77.1)    (74.6, 75.25)   (71.53, N/A)
                               Qwen/Qwen2.5-7B-Instruct (Yang et al., 2024a)
                                                40.63             40           35.23             23.1
             MeLLo (Zhong et al., 2023)
                                             (100, 40.61)    (34, 40.21)    (23.9, 40.9)     (23.1, N/A)
                                                36.43           29.77          23.37             5.43
             DeepEdit (Wang et al., 2024)
                                             (100, 36.41)     (5, 30.62)     (6.3, 31.9)     (5.43, N/A)
                                                65.33           65.27          65.07            66.74
             GWalk (Ours)
                                             (100, 65.35)    (65, 65.28)    (68.4, 63.4)    (66.74, N/A)


                                                        27
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Table 19: Experiments on MQ UAKE-R EMASTERED - CF with numbers of edited cases and methods.
                                                     Total Accuracy
Results are reported in the format: (Edited Accuracy, Unedited Accuracy)

                                                            MQ UAKE-R EMASTERED - CF
       Method
                                        1-edit          1000-edit  3000-edit  6000-edit                   9171-edit
                                     lmsys/vicuna-7b-v1.5 (Zheng et al., 2023b)
                                        22.55             21.54            17.79            12.62            6.95
       MeLLo (Zhong et al., 2023)
                                      (100, 22.54)       (8, 23.2)      (7.43, 22.83)    (7.28, 22.58)    (6.95, N/A)
       ICE (Cohen et al., 2023)          <1               OOM              OOM              OOM             OOM
       IKE (Zheng et al., 2023a)         <1               OOM              OOM              OOM             OOM
       DeepEdit Wang et al. (2024)       <1                <1               <1               <1              <1
                                        61.89             56.98            56.37            54.93           54.15
       GWalk (Ours)
                                      (100, 61.89)     (56.2, 57.07)    (53.97, 57.54)   (53.27, 58.06)   (54.15, N/A)
                               mistralai/Mistral-7B-Instruct-v0.2 (Jiang et al., 2023)
                                        19.83             19.08             18.9            18.27            18.09
       MeLLo (Zhong et al., 2023)
                                      (<1, 19.84)       (20.6, 18.9)    (19.47, 18.62)   (19.02, 16.87)   (18.09, N/A)
       ICE (Cohen et al., 2023)          <1               OOM              OOM              OOM             OOM
       IKE (Zheng et al., 2023a)         <1               OOM              OOM              OOM             OOM
       DeepEdit Wang et al. (2024)       <1                <1               <1               <1              <1
                                        61.42             57.79            56.35            53.73           51.53
       GWalk (Ours)
                                      (100, 61.42)     (51.8, 58.52)    (52.3, 58.32)    (50.93, 59.04)   (51.53, N/A)
                              meta-llama/Meta-Llama-3-8B-Instruct (AI@Meta, 2024)
       MeLLo (Zhong et al., 2023)        <1                <1               <1               <1              <1
       ICE (Cohen et al., 2023)          <1               OOM              OOM              OOM             OOM
       IKE (Zheng et al., 2023a)         <1               OOM              OOM              OOM             OOM
                                        22.16             19.26            21.09            23.04           24.25
       DeepEdit Wang et al. (2024)
                                      (100, 22.15)     (21.29, 19.01)   (24.48, 19.44)   (23.77, 21.67)   (24.25, N/A)
                                        74.09             73.67             72.4            71.62            70.08
       GWalk (Ours)
                                      (100, 74.09)     (71.1, 73.98)    (70.9, 73.13)    (70.33, 74.05)   (70.08, N/A)
                              meta-Llama/Llama-3.1-8B-Instruct (Dubey et al., 2024)
                                        76.27             73.48            72.86            72.03            70.94
       GWalk (Ours)
                                       (1, 76.27)      (73.1, 73.53)    (71.98, 73.29)   (70.96, 74.08)   (70.94, N/A)
                                  Qwen/Qwen2.5-7B-Instruct (Yang et al., 2024a)
                                         64.4             62.61            63.35            64.93            66.79
       GWalk (Ours)
                                       (0, 64.41)      (66.6, 62.12)    (66.34, 61.9)    (66.28, 62.4)    (66.79, N/A)


                                                            28
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Table 20: Additional experiments on meta-llama/Llama-3.1-8B-Instruct (Dubey et al., 2024) and
Qwen/Qwen2.5-7B-Instruct (Yang et al., 2024a) on MQ UAKE-R EMASTERED - CF -6334. Results
                                                          Total Accuracy
are reported in the format: (Test Edited Accuracy, Train Edited Accuracy, Unedited Accuracy) .

                                                             MQ UAKE-R EMASTERED - CF -6334
  Method
                                         100-edit             1000-edit       3000-edit                          6344-edit
                                        lmsys/vicuna-7b-v1.5 (Zheng et al., 2023b)
  ROME (Meng et al., 2022)                 <1                        <1                      <1                      <1
                                          12.75                     10.36                   9.56                    7.24
  MEND (Mitchell et al., 2022)
                                     (11.11, 11, 13.25)       (7.33, 9.6, 13.64)       (6.1, 7.2, 11.9)      (6.38, 6.49, 10.3)
                                          57.55                    61.79                     59.1                 56.62
  GWalk (Ours)
                                   (22.22, 64.84, 57.48)    (29.08, 66.17, 63.23)   (39.3, 63.74, 64.33)    (44.64, 62.11, 68.25)
                                   mistralai/Mistral-7B-Instruct-v0.2 (Jiang et al., 2023)
  ROME (Meng et al., 2022)                 <1                        <1                      <1                      <1
                                          11.84                     11.57                   8.39                    6.82
  MEND (Mitchell et al., 2022)
                                     (11.11, 9, 12.36)        (6.95, 8.7, 12.12)      (3.41, 6.6, 10.1)        (2.33, 6.4, 8.4)
                                          56.25                      58.9                  56.03                   54.43
  GWalk (Ours)
                                   (33.33, 57.14, 56.28)     (34.69, 60.57, 60.6)   (42.69, 59.04, 59.85)   (47.49, 57.74, 52.38)
                                 meta-llama/Meta-Llama-3-8B-Instruct (AI@Meta, 2024)
  ROME (Meng et al., 2022)                 <1                        <1                      <1                      <1
                                          13.04                     13.3                    9.81                    7.42
  MEND (Mitchell et al., 2022)
                                     (11.11, 10, 13.47)       (5.33, 8.4, 14.33)     (4.21, 8.63, 11.1)       (5.12, 7.45, 7.3)
                                          67.01                    71.89                  73.76                    74.22
  GWalk (Ours)
                                   (33.33, 74.73, 66.92)    (47.45, 80.94, 70.65)   (54.05, 81.6, 71.12)    (61.02, 80.47, 73.02)
                                 meta-Llama/Llama-3.1-8B-Instruct (Dubey et al., 2024)
                                          66.79                    73.66                   72.09                    73.3
  GWalk (Ours)
                                     (33.33, 72, 66.66)     (49.47, 73.68, 73.02)    (51.23, 75.1, 70.6)    (55.39, 73.84, 71.55)
                                     Qwen/Qwen2.5-7B-Instruct (Yang et al., 2024a)
                                          60.59                    65.42                  68.75                    70.49
  GWalk (Ours)
                                     (33.33, 62, 60.56)      (30.13, 68.6, 63.83)   (43.65, 69.9, 64.99)    (59.12, 70.51, 68.25)


                                                               29
