Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


P REBLE : E FFICIENT D ISTRIBUTED P ROMPT S CHEDULING
FOR LLM S ERVING

    Vikranth Srivatsa∗1 , Zijian He∗1 , Reyna Abhyankar1 , Dongming Li1 , Yiying Zhang1,2
    1
    University of California, San Diego, 2 GenseeAI Inc.



                                                       A BSTRACT

                 Prompts to large language models (LLMs) have evolved beyond simple user questions.
                 For LLMs to solve complex problems, today’s practices are to include domain-specific
                 instructions, illustration of tool usages, and/or long context such as textbook chapters in
                 prompts. As such, many parts of prompts are repetitive across requests. Recent works
                 propose to cache and reuse KV state of prompts. However, they are all confined to a single-
                 GPU optimization, while production LLM serving systems are distributed by nature.
                 This paper proposes Preble, the first distributed LLM serving platform that targets and op-
                 timizes for prompt sharing. We designed a distributed scheduling system that co-optimizes
                 KV state reuse and computation load-balancing with a new scheduling algorithm and a
                 hierarchical scheduling mechanism. Our evaluation of Preble with real workloads and re-
                 quest arrival patterns on two open-source LLMs shows that Preble outperforms the SOTA
                 serving systems by 1.5× to 14.5× on average latency and 2× to 10× on p99 latency.

1           Introduction
Recently, new capabilities and use cases of LLMs have created two common features not seen in traditional
LLM usages. First, prompts to LLMs are significantly longer than generated sequences. For example,
questions about a long document (Li et al., 2023a) or a video clip Xiao et al. (2021) are answered by
LLMs with short answers. As another example, detailed instructions and illustrations for LLMs are vital in
accomplishing complex tasks like solving advanced math problems Yao et al. (2023b). The latest LLMs like
OpenAI o1 have built-in reasoning capabilities; even though the end users’ prompts do not need to be long,
these models internally add more context like chain-of-thought prompting Wei et al. (2024), lengthening the
total context length OpenAI (2024a). As demonstrated by o1 and other model usage, oftentimes, the longer
a prompt is, the better quality the model can generate. Long prompts with short generations imply that the
prefill phase significantly outweighs the decoding phase. Thus, improving the prefill phase performance is
crucial to the overall performance of LLM serving systems.
Second, prompts are partially shared across requests. For example, a long document or video is often
queried many times with different questions Li et al. (2023a); different requests using the same tools share
tool instructions in tool-augmented LLMs Hao et al. (2023); chain- or tree-structured prompting calls an
LLM in steps, with each subsequent step reusing context from previous steps Yao et al. (2023b); Zhang
et al. (2023); Yao et al. (2023a). Real-world production systems like Anthropic have also reported the wide
existence of long and shared prompts Anthropic (2024).
Recent works Zheng et al. (2023b); Gim et al. (2024) propose to cache computed key-value (KV) state in
GPU memory and reuse the cached KV when a new request sharing a prompt prefix arrives. These works
aim to improve the serving performance of LLMs with long and shared prompts in a single model replica.
        *
            Equal contribution


                                                         1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


However, in-production LLM serving systems typically utilize a distributed set of GPUs to serve user re-
quests. Current distributed LLM serving systems are not prompt-cache-aware; they attempt to distribute
LLM computation load equally across GPUs to achieve high cluster-level GPU utilization. Yet, this distri-
bution could result in requests with shared prefixes being sent to different GPUs, causing KV computation at
all these GPUs that could otherwise be avoided if prefixes are cached and reused on the same GPU. On the
other hand, a naive solution that always sends requests with shared prefixes to the same GPU would result
in imbalanced loads and low overall GPU utilization because the GPU that initially serves a request with a
popular prefix will accumulate a huge load of new requests all trying to reuse the calculated prefix KV.
To properly design a distributed LLM serving system for long and shared prompts, we first perform a com-
prehensive study of five typical LLM workloads: LLM with tool calling Guo et al. (2024), LLM as embodied
agents in virtual environments Huang et al. (2022), LLM for code generation Nijkamp et al. (2023), embed-
ded video QA Xiao et al. (2021), and long document QA Li et al. (2023a). We find their prompts to be
37× to 2494× longer than generated sequences, and 85% to 97% tokens in a prompt are shared with other
prompts. Additionally, a request often shares prompts with multiple other requests at different amounts (e.g.,
one prefix sharing being the initial system prompt, one sharing being the system prompt plus tool A’s demon-
stration, and one being the system prompt plus tool A and tool B’s demonstrations). We also analyze the
Azure LLM request trace Patel et al. (2024) and found these end-user traces to have large prompt-to-output
ratios as well. Additionally, this trace shows that requests arrive at varying speeds over time and across LLM
usages, making designing a distributed LLM serving system challenging.
Based on our findings, we propose a distributed LLM request scheduling algorithm called E2 (standing for
Exploitation + Exploration) that co-designs model computation load-balancing and prefix-cache sharing.
E2 allows requests to exploit (i.e., reuse) computed prompt prefixes on the same GPU but also gives chances
for requests with shared prefixes to explore other GPUs. E2 chooses exploitation when the amount of
recomputation saved is larger than that of new computation, which happens when the number of shared prefix
tokens is larger than the remaining non-shared tokens. Otherwise, E2 chooses exploration. For exploitation,
we send the request to the GPU that caches the longest-matched prefix.
When E2 decides to explore GPUs, it chooses the GPU with the lightest “load”, using a prompt-aware load
definition we propose. This prompt-aware load includes three parts all calculated as GPU computation time.
The first part is a GPU’s computation load in a recent time window H, which is measured by the total prefill
time and decode time incurred by all the requests in H. The second part is the cost of evicting existing KVs
on the GPU to make memory space to run the new request. The third part is the cost of running the new
request on the GPU. When calculating these three parts, we account for prompt sharing that have or would
occur on the GPU by treating the reusable computation as zero cost. E2 picks the GPU with the lowest sum
of the three parts to explore, which balances loads while accounting for cached prompt behavior.
Centered around the E2 scheduling algorithm, we build Preble, a distributed LLM serving system that aims
to provide high serving throughput and low request average and tail latency for long and shared prompts.
Preble consists of a global, request-level scheduler and a per-GPU, iteration-level scheduler. Apart from
E2, Preble incorporates several novel designs to tackle practical LLM challenges. First, with the basic E2
algorithm, a prefix is cached at a GPU after its initial assignment until its eviction. However, the amount
of requests sharing it can change over time, which can cause load imbalance. To mitigate this issue, Preble
detects load changes and redirects requests from a heavily loaded GPU to a light GPU. If the load hitting a
popular prefix increases beyond what a single GPU can handle, Preble automatically scales (autoscales) the
prefix by replicating it on multiple GPUs.
Second, prefill and decoding phases have different computation needs, as discovered and tackled by a set
of recent works Zhong et al. (2024); Patel et al. (2024); Agrawal et al. (2024). We propose a new way to
solve this problem based on our insight that a prompt hitting a cached prefix can be treated as decoding-
phase computation, while a missed prompt can be treated as prefill-phase computation because of the high



                                                  2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


      tool use          1835:42; 85%; 39                                                  call             program generation            3871:190; 97%; 126                 call
                                                                   User: .. Could you                                                                                                    1st parallel code
                                                                                          LLM      ans                                                         User         LLM
    System: You are AutoGPT,                   Tool 1.             provide me basic                        “You are a computer science programmer …                                         generation
                                                                                                   wer                                                     Programming
    you can use many tools…           financial_statement..          daily data…?                                      Here is an example:                  Problem 1       call           2nd parallel
     You have access of the                {‘parameters’:                                                  problem, --Input--, --outpu—, example code                       LLM          code generation
         following tools:               {‘type’: ‘object’, …                            User: …?                   Here is another example: …             User Problem
                                                                  Tool 2. ..
                                                               {‘parameters’:
                                                                                                                                                                2                            …
                                           Tool 3. ..
                                                                     …                  User: …?
                                       {‘parameters’: …
                                                                                                           video QA            9865:4; 88%; 8.6                               call LLM        answer: 0.
     virtual environment               2285:16; 97%; 48                                                                                “What happened to the baby…?                           walk away
                                             number of steps depends on LLM generation                       Tokenized Video            0. walk away, 1. run after it, …”
“You are in the middle of a    call     gen             env
                                                                call                                                                                                           call LLM       answer: 1.
 room with kitchen items       LLM     action act in feedback                                      final                               “Why did the woman bend down..?
                                               VE      on the LLM pick up           env     … action         Long Documen
                                                                                                                                         0. to jump.., 1. excercise, …”
                                                                                                                                                                                              excercise
    Your task is to: …                 go to
                                                      stove 1,       pan 2 from    feed
 Here are two examples…               stove 1
                                                    see a pan 2       stove 1      back                    document QA           23474:16; 91%; 18


Figure 1: Prompt Sharing Features of Five Workloads. Green boxes represent shared prefixes. Grey boxes
are non-shared prompts. White boxes are output generation. Red boxes contain statistics in average values: “prompt-
length:output-length; shared token percentage; number of requests sharing a sequence”.


prompt-to-decoding token length ratio. Thus, our global scheduler tries to mix the two types of requests on
a GPU to balance prefill and decoding computation needs.
Finally, unlike existing works that either honor request fairness or maximize prefix matching, Preble aims to
achieve high prefix reusing while ensuring fairness, which is important in multi-tenancy environments. We
achieve this by assigning priorities to waiting requests based on their prefix cache hit ratio and giving each
priority their respective quota of requests to serve.
We implement Preble as a standalone layer on top of slightly modified vLLM Kwon et al. (2023) and
SGLang Zheng et al. (2023b), two popular open-source LLM serving systems both supporting single-GPU
prefix caching. We evaluate Preble using our studied five workloads and the Azure request arrival pat-
tern with the Mistral 7B model Jiang et al. (2023) and the Llama-3 70B model Meta (2024) on a four-
Nvidia-A6000 GPU cluster and an eight-Nvidia-H100 GPU server. Our results show that Preble outper-
forms SGLang by 1.5×-14.5× and 2×-10× on average and p99 average request latency and similarly when
compared to vLLM.
Overall, this paper makes the following key contributions: (1) The first study of LLM workloads with long
and shared prompts, resulting in four key insights. (2) E2, a new LLM request scheduling algorithm with
the idea of exploitation and exploration integration. (3) Preble, the first distributed LLM serving system that
targets long and shared prompts. (4) A comprehensive evaluation of Preble and SOTA LLM serving systems
on two popular open-source LLMs, five real workloads, and two GPU clusters. Preble is publicly available
at https://github.com/WukLab/preble.

2       Real-World Long and Shared Prompts
This section briefly presents our study results of five LLM use cases and an end-user LLM use trace: tool
use Schick et al. (2023), embodied agent in a virtual environment Hao et al. (2023), software program gen-
eration Nijkamp et al. (2023), video QA Xiao et al. (2021), long document QA Li et al. (2023a), and the
Azure LLM usage trace Patel et al. (2024) (which contains chat and code-generation usages). We pick the
five workloads to study and evaluate, as they resemble long-and-shared-prompt use cases reported in pro-
duction Anthropic (2024). Figure 8 demonstrates the prompt usages and overall features of these workloads.
Appendix A presents our full study methodology and results.
Overall, our study shows that prompts are significantly longer than output lengths in the five workloads and
the Azure trace, ranging from 4× (Azure chat) to 2494× (video QA). Moreover, prompt sharing ranges from
85% (i.e., 85% prefix tokens in a prompt are shared with at least one more request) to 97% across the five
workloads, with embodied agents and program generation having the highest sharing amount. Additionally,
a common sequence in a workload is shared by 8.6 to 126 requests on average, with different deviations

                                                                                                   3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


across workloads. Finally, the Azure trace indicates high variations in total request loads manifested as
different end-user request inter-arrival times that range from 2 microseconds to 217 seconds.
Our study results indicate that LLM serving systems for such workloads should focus on optimizing prefill
computation, and a viable way is to cache and share prefixes. However, the variations in prompt-sharing
features and request arrival patterns make it challenging to build an efficient distributed serving system.

3     Preble Design
We now present the E2 algorithm and the design of Preble, beginning with the overall system architecture of
Preble, followed by its global scheduler and local scheduler designs. Preble significantly improves serving
speed and reduces request latency for workloads with long and shared prompts. For workloads without any
shared prompts, its behavior and performance are the same as SOTA LLM serving systems like vLLM.

3.1    Overall System Architecture

Preble is a distributed GPU-based LLM serving system supporting both data parallelism and model
parallelism.   While its model parallelism support is standard (e.g., tensor parallelism), Preble’s
scheduling of requests on data-parallel GPUs is designed specifically for long and shared prompts.

               incoming request
                                                                                           We propose a two-level scheduling system where a
                                   global radix tree
                 Tokenizer                             [GPU1:7req,GPU2:6req,               global scheduler performs request-level scheduling
                                                            GPU3:8req]
                                                  [GPU1:4req,
                                                   GPU2:5req]
                                                         [GPU3:6req]                       decisions and orchestrates the overall load balanc-
                      Global Scheduler:
                        E2 Scheduling           [GPU1:1req]
                                                                     [GPU2:2req]           ing across GPUs, while a per-model-instance local
              scheduled                                            [GPU2:1req]             scheduler performs iteration-level scheduling for
               requests       req finish,
                           tree node evict                                                 requests assigned to the GPU, as shown in Figure 2.
   local tree                                                                              Depending on the GPU cluster topology, the global
                                                                [6req]      Local
             [7req]     Local:              Local                                          scheduler may be deployed on a separate server for
                      Iteration,          Scheduler         [5req]       Scheduler
           [4req]      Priority                                             GPU4
                                                                                           a multi-server GPU cluster or on the same server as
                                                               [2req]
      [1req]        Scheduling                                          (model copy 3)     a single-server-multi-GPU cluster. The local sched-
                                          GPU     GPU        [1req]
  wait req                GPU1             2        3                            [8req]    uler manages one model instance (multiple GPUs
  priority           (model copy 1) (model parallelism
  queues                                  model copy 3)
                                                                                    [6req] when using model parallelism, single GPU when
                                                                                           not) and runs on the CPU of the same server as the
                  Figure 2: Preble Architecture.                                           GPUs. Our current implementation of Preble scales
to at least 70 to 391 GPUs. To offer larger, data-center-level scales, one can deploy several Preble clusters,
each having one global scheduler.
This design offers several benefits: 1) by having all requests in a cluster go through the global scheduler, we
have a centralized place to maintain a global view of cluster load and prompt caching information, both being
essential for E2; 2) by performing coarse-grained, request-level scheduling, a single global scheduler can
scale to hundreds of GPUs, avoiding the complexity of maintaining multiple distributed global schedulers
for a cluster; and 3) by performing fine-grained, iteration-level scheduling at each GPU, the local scheduler
can quickly adapt to GPU resource and request availability changes and make precise decisions.

3.2    E2 Global Scheduler

We now present our global scheduler design, which centers around the E2 distributed scheduling algorithm.
Global scheduler data structures. The global scheduler maintains several data structures to assist its
prompt-aware request scheduling. The primary data structure is global prefix trees, implemented as radix
trees Wikipedia (2024). Each tree has a distinct root storing the shared prefix of all prompts under the tree.

                                                                      4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


When inserting a new request to the tree, we match its tokens from the beginning (i.e., prefix matching) until
no match exists, and we insert the remaining tokens as a new leaf node. If no match exists at all, we create
a new tree with this request’s prompt as the root node. If an existing tree node only matches partially to the
new request (i.e., the prefix of a node matches a sub-sequence of the new request), we split the node into the
matched part and the remaining part. For each tree node, we record three pieces of information: the number
of tokens in the tree node, the set of GPUs caching the tree node KVs, and the per-GPU number of requests
sharing the tree node in a history window H. When a tree node has no caching GPU and there is no request
within the window H in the whole system sharing it, we remove it from the tree.
Per-request scheduling policy. To schedule a request, the global scheduler uses our proposed E2 scheduling
algorithm, as illustrated in Algorithm 1. It first matches the request’s prompt in the global prefix trees. When
the amount of recomputation saved (number of tokens in the matched prefix) is larger than the amount of new
computation (number of tokens in the remaining prompt), we favor exploitation over exploration because
the gain of saved GPU resources (computation for matched tokens) is higher than the load (computation for
unique tokens) that can potentially be balanced in the GPU cluster. For such requests, E2 exploits existing
cache by assigning the request to the GPU that caches the tree node with the longest tokens in the matched
prefix. If multiple such GPUs exist, E2 chooses the GPU with the lightest request load using the load
calculation to be introduced next.
If the matched prefix is shorter than the remaining tokens, E2 explores the best GPU to run the request
based on our proposed new prompt-aware “load cost” definition. Exploration gives E2 a chance to distribute
load to different GPUs, which is the key to striking long-term cluster execution efficiency. E2 unifies three
types of costs when calculating the per-GPU load: the computation cost aggregated across all requests
within a time window, the recomputation cost needed for evicting memory to run the new request, and the
computation cost of the new request. E2 calculates all three costs as GPU computation time and finds the
GPU with the lowest sum. Instead of profiling the actual computation time, we only maintain token counts
at the global scheduler, which largely reduces the system overhead. We leverage transformer-based LLMs’
properties that the computation amount of prefill and decoding are proportional to the number of prompt
tokens and generated tokens (Figures 9 and 10). Below and in Algorithm 2, we detail the three calculations
for scheduling a new request Rk .
The first cost is the overall GPU computation load Li for GP Ui . We capture a recent load history on GP Ui
with a time window H with a default value of 3 minutes (we test different H lengths and find the results
insensitive to it). We do not use GP Ui ’s load at the exact request scheduling time for two reasons: 1) a
GPU’s load can change between the time of scheduling Rk to the time of running it, and 2) the placement of
a prefix has a longer-term effect than a single load in time because of other requests’ future exploitation of
it. For each request Rr in the history, we estimate its prefill time P Tr with a regression function using the
number of tokens in Rr that do not match any prefixes on GP Ui ; we estimate its decoding time DTr with
another regression function using the P average request output length observed on GP Ui in window H. We
have the first category of load, Li = r∈W (P Tr + DTr ), where W is the set of requests in the window
H. The regression functions used in this calculation are captured from offline profiling for each GPU type.
Note that even though the number of output tokens is not known a priori, our workload study (Appendix A)
shows that it is small and similar across a type of workload. Thus, we use the average output length in H as
the estimated decoding length for DTr .
The second cost is the potential cost to free GPU memory so that the new request, Rk , can run. Given that
GPUs run at full capacity with our and existing serving policies Agrawal et al. (2023), we expect this cost
to always occur. Intuitively, the more tokens in a sequence that are shared and by more requests, the more
costly it is to evict the sequence. Thus, to calculate the eviction cost, Mi , the global scheduler first uses the
eviction algorithm to be discussed in Section 3.3 to find the tree nodes on GP Ui that would be evicted to run
Rk . For each such tree node j, its eviction cost is the
                                                       Precomputation time of the evicted tokens multiplied by
the hit rate of the node, Nj . Thus, we have Mi = j∈E P Tj × Nj where E is the eviction node set, P Tj


                                                    5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


is the prefill time for the length of tree node j, and Nj is the the number of requests sharing tree node j in
history H over the total number of requests on GP Ui in H. Note that we do not include the decoding time,
as a request’s decoding time is unaffected by prefix cache eviction, and decoding costs have already been
counted in Li .
The third cost is the actual cost, Pi , to run the new request Rk on GP Ui , which is simply the prefill time of
the missed tokens in request Rk . We do not count its decoding time, as it is the same across GPUs, and our
goal is to compare the per-GPU load across GPUs.
The total cost of assigning the current request to GP Ui is Li + Mi + Pi and we choose the GPU with the
lowest total cost to assign the request to.
Post-assignment load adjustment. With the above algorithm, after the global scheduler assigns a request
to a GPU, its prefix lives there until its eviction. This greedy approach works well in cases where the load
to a prefix is relatively stable but not otherwise. We propose two ways of managing post-assignment load
changes. The first way shifts load between GPUs and is applicable when the load surge can be handled by a
single GPU in the cluster. The global scheduler maintains a per-GPU load as discussed above. If the most
heavily loaded GPU’s load is more than T hbal times higher than the lightest GPU, it shifts load from the
former to the latter until their difference is below T hbal . T hbal is configurable and can be deducted from
profiling GPU and LLM types. To perform this load rebalancing, we direct future requests that are supposed
to exploit the heavy GPU to the light GPU.
The second way is to auto-scale a prefix by replicating it and splitting its subtree by load when we detect
that a certain prefix’s request load is still too high (average queueing time doubles over H) even after the
above load rebalancing. We calculate the subtree’s load using Algorithm 2.
Prefill-decoding balancing. From our study results in Appendix A and reported by others, LLM prefill has
a larger compute-to-memory ratio than decoding, causing inefficient GPU resource utilization and perfor-
mance degradation. While various recent works tackle the prefill-decoding imbalance problem by chunking
prefills Agrawal et al. (2023) and prefill-decoding disaggregation Zhong et al. (2024); Patel et al. (2024);
Strati et al. (2024); Hu et al. (2024); Qin et al. (2024a), we propose a new way of solving the problem lever-
aging prompt sharing features at a cluster level. Our insight is that a request with its entire prompt shared
and cached would only perform the decoding phase. Thus, it can be treated as a decoding-phase comput-
ing unit. Meanwhile, a request with a long prompt not cached and a short output length can be treated
as a prefill-phase computing unit. A partially cached prompt can be treated as being between the prefill-
and decoding-phase units. Thus, we can balance prefill-decoding by combining requests with more or less
prompt sharing instead of or in addition to existing balancing techniques.
Specifically, when a request is about to be explored, the global scheduler first considers the prefill and de-
coding balancing for each GPU. If a GPU is heavily loaded with decoding-phase computing units, the global
scheduler directs the current request to it, as a request to be explored will incur recomputation for prompt
and is considered a prefill-phase unit. We prioritize this policy over the load-cost comparison (Algorithm 2)
because a GPU with heavy decoding has unused computation capacity that we can almost freely use. The
global scheduler performs the load-cost comparison if all GPUs have relatively balanced decoding-prefill
loads. Apart from this prefill-decoding balancing performed at the global scheduler, our local scheduler also
performs traditional chunked prefill for each GPU (Section 3.3).
3.3   Local Scheduler

Local scheduler mechanism. The local scheduler schedules the requests that the global scheduler assigns
to its managed GPU(s). Similar to existing LLM serving systems Yu et al. (2022); Kwon et al. (2023); Zheng
et al. (2023b); Aminabadi et al. (2022), we run one local scheduler per GPU and schedule requests at the
iteration level. Each local scheduler maintains a request wait queue, a prefix (radix) tree, and the number of
active requests sharing each prefix tree node.

                                                   6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


When a new request arrives, the local scheduler matches it to the local prefix tree and updates the tree
accordingly. It also inserts the request into the waiting queue. After each model iteration, the local scheduler
forms the next batch by selecting waiting requests using a priority-based algorithm to be discussed next. If
a selected request has a long and non-shared prompt, we chunk the prompt similar to Sarathi Agrawal et al.
(2023). If the GPU memory is not enough to run the batch, the local scheduler selects a tree node(s) or part
of a tree node (if a part is enough) to evict based on the request accessing time (LRU) of tree nodes. The
local scheduler then asynchronously informs the global scheduler about the eviction, and the latter processes
it in the background.
Waiting queue request ordering. Today’s LLM serving systems schedule requests in the waiting queue
according to FCFS Kwon et al. (2023) or prefix sharing Zheng et al. (2023b) (serve the request with the
highest sharing amount the first). The former ignores prompt sharing and results in more recomputation; the
latter ignores fairness and could result in starvation Wu et al. (2023). We propose a priority-based wait queue
scheduling policy that considers both prefix sharing and fairness. Specifically, we create P (a configurable
parameter) priority groups and assign a request to the priority group according to its cached token percentage.
For example, if 63 out of 100 tokens in a request’s prompt are cached on the GPU and P is 10, it will be
assigned priority six. When selecting requests to form the next batch, the scheduler proportionally selects
requests from each priority group, with the higher priority group getting more requests selected than lower
priority ones. For example, if 55 requests are to be selected to form a batch, the scheduler picks ten from
priority group 10, nine from priority 9, etc.

4     Implementation and Evaluation Results

4.1   Implementation

We implemented Preble as a standalone layer to perform distributed LLM serving. As such, Preble can be
added to any existing serving systems with no or minimal changes — we currently support vLLM Kwon
et al. (2023) and SGLang Zheng et al. (2023b) as two backends.
Global scheduler scalability. In implementing the global scheduler, we use a few techniques to improve
its scalability. Incoming requests are first tokenized by a parallel tokenization layer. Afterward, the global
scheduler spawns asynchronous request handlers to schedule requests. Access to the global radix tree during
request handling is lock-free, as most operations are read-only. The only exceptions are updating a GPU
to be assigned to a tree node and the increment of request count hitting the tree node, both of which can
be expressed as atomic instructions. Additionally, the global scheduler maintains a current load count for
each GPU by updating it every time a new request is assigned to it or when it evicts a tree node. Thus, our
realization of the E2 algorithm is performance-efficient. Finally, to ensure foreground request performance,
the global scheduler runs non-request-scheduling tasks such as rebalancing and eviction bookkeeping in the
background with separate threads.

4.2   Workloads and Environments

Workloads. We evaluate our results on five LLM use cases: LLM generation with tool demonstration and
calling Schick et al. (2023), LLM interacting with virtual environments as an embodied agent Hao et al.
(2023), LLM for program generation Nijkamp et al. (2023), answering questions about videos Xiao et al.
(2021), and answer questions about long documents Li et al. (2023a). Their properties are in Appendix A.
For each workload, we sample enough requests to fulfill the request-per-second (RPS) needs and GPU setup
(e.g., a larger GPU or more GPUs can handle more). For experiments other than the ones using the Azure
Inference Trace, we set the inter-arrival time using a Poisson distribution with a mean that around the RPS
(X-axis in most figures). We then run the experiments until stable state is reached and for a significant length.

                                                   7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


LLMs and environments. We test Preble and baselines using two popular open-source LLMs, the Mistral
7B model Jiang et al. (2023) and the Llama-3 70B model Meta (2024). We run our experiments in one of
the two environments: a two-server cluster with two NVidia A600 GPUs and one eight NVidia-H100-GPU.
Baseline. Our baselines are serving systems that support single-GPU prefix sharing, including
SGLang Zheng et al. (2023b) and vLLM (which recently added a beta feature for prefix sharing Moore
& Li (2024)). To run SGLang and vLLM in a distributed fashion, we set up a load balancer that sends
requests in a round-robin fashion to individual SGLang/vLLM instances (i.e., non-prompt-aware data paral-
lelism). As round- robin distributes requests evenly, these baselines capture a distributed serving system that
balances request loads and then performs prefix sharing within each parallel instance.
Metrics. We use three key metrics: request per second, which measures serving capacity; average end-to-
end request latency (including scheduling time, queueing time, prefill, and decoding time); and p99 request
latency. Note that our metrics differ slightly from some existing LLM serving works Kwon et al. (2023); Yu
et al. (2022), as we do not use TPOT (time per output token) or TTFT (time to first token) as key metrics.
This is because our target LLM use has short output lengths, rendering TPOT not as meaningful and TTFT
close to the request latency. We consider p99 latency since it is important to control the tail latency in LLM
serving as with all other user-facing services DeCandia et al. (2007); Ongaro et al. (2011).


4.3   End-to-End Workload Performance


We first present the overall performance of Preble and the baselines. Below, we focus on the comparison
with SOTA SGLang as it is specifically designed for (single-GPU) prefix sharing. We provide Preble’s
comparison to vLLM and to different SGLang versions in the Appendix D.
Single workload results. We now present the average and p99 latency against increasing requests arriving
per second (RPS) of Preble and SGLang on the five workloads, two LLMs, and two GPU environments,
as shown in Figure 3. Overall, Preble significantly outperforms the data-parallel SGLang baseline for all
settings, as can be seen from Preble’s lower average and p99 latency, especially under higher RPS (or the
other way around, for the same latency target, Preble can serve higher RPS). Our improvements over SGLang
range from 1.5× to 14.5× in terms of average latency and 2× to 10× in p99 latency.
Comparing across workloads, we see bigger improvements of Preble over SGLang on the Toolbench, em-
bodied agent, video QA, and LooGLE workloads than the programming workloads. The programming
workload has the longest decoding length among all the workloads. As decoding time starts to dominate
total request latency, and we do not improve decoding performance, the room for improvement for Preble is
smaller. Nonetheless, Preble still achieves 1.56× to 1.8× improvement in average latency and 3× to 4× in
p99 latency over SGLang in the programming workload.
Comparing across the number of GPUs, Preble’s relative improvement over the baselines stays similar when
going from 2 to 4 A6000 GPUs. Considering absolute values, we see Preble successfully maintain similar
latency even as RPS doubles, showing its strong scalability. When changing from A6000 to 8 H100 and
switching the Mistral 7B to Llama-3 70B, we find relative improvements of Preble to increase.
Azure trace and mixed workloads. Our experiments above use a Poisson request arrival distribution
(which is the same as most existing LLM works’ experimental methodology Kwon et al. (2023); Li et al.
(2023b)). To understand Preble’s performance under real-world request load, we run the tool use and video
QA workloads using Azure’s LLM request arrival pattern (Appendix A.6) instead of Poisson distributions.
Here, we mix the two workloads to mimic Azure’s mixed chat and code traces. As shown in Figure 4, Preble
has significant improvements in average and p99 latencies and on average TTFT and TPOT.

                                                  8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                                                              Preble           SGLang


                                       Tool Use               Embodied Agent                       Programming                          Video QA                                     LooGLE
                                                         15                             200                                  60
       2xA6000 Avg (s)                                                                                                                                                80
                         100
                                                                                        150
          Mistral 7B


                                                         10                                                                  40                                       60
                                                                                        100
                            50                                                                                                                                        40
                                                                                                                             20
                                                          5
                                                                                         50                                                                           20
                             0                                                                                                0
                                  5       10       15         5          10        15         1        2        3       4           2           4         6                0.25     0.50        0.75         1.00
                                                         80                             800
                         300
       2xA6000 p99 (s)


                                                         60                             600                                 100                                      400
          Mistral 7B


                         200
                                                         40                             400
                                                                                                                             50                                      200
                         100                             20                             200

                             0                            0                               0                                   0                                        0
                                  5       10       15         5          10        15         1        2        3       4           2           4         6                0.25     0.50        0.75         1.00
                                                         20
                         150                                                            200                                                                          100
       4xA6000 Avg (s)


                                                                                                                             60
                                                         15
          Mistral 7B


                                                                                        150                                                                           75
                         100
                                                                                                                             40
                                                         10                             100                                                                           50
                            50                                                                                               20
                                                          5                              50                                                                           25
                             0                                                                                                0
                                  10      20       30         10         20        30         2        4        6       8         2.5     5.0       7.5       10.0         0.5      1.0         1.5          2.0
                         400                                                            800
                                                                                                                            150                                      600
       4xA6000 p99 (s)


                         300                             40                             600
          Mistral 7B


                                                                                                                            100                                      400
                         200                                                            400
                                                         20                                                                  50                                      200
                         100                                                            200

                             0                            0                               0                                   0                                        0
                                  10      20       30         10         20        30         2        4        6       8         2.5     5.0       7.5       10.0         0.5      1.0         1.5          2.0

                                                         15                                                                                                            8
                         10.0
      8xH100 Avg (s)


                                                                                         60                                  60
       Llama3 70B


                            7.5                          10                                                                                                            6
                                                                                                                             40
                                                                                         40
                            5.0
                                                          5                                                                  20                                        4
                                                                                         20
                            2.5
                                                                                                                              0
                                  5       10       15              10         15              3            4        5               2           4         6                   0.4         0.6          0.8

                                                                                                                            300                                       30
                            30
           8xH100 p99 (s)


                                                         30
                                                                                        300
            Llama3 70B


                                                                                                                            200
                            20                           20                                                                                                           20
                                                                                        200
                                                                                                                            100
                            10                           10                             100                                                                           10
                                                                                                                              0
                                  5       10        15             10         15              3          4          5               2         4           6                   0.4       0.6      0.8
                                       Rate (req/s)                Rate (req/s)                        Rate (req/s)                     Rate (req/s)                                Rate (req/s)


Figure 3: End-to-end Workload Performance The top and middle two rows run on 2-4 A6000s with Mistral 7B.
The bottom two rows run on 8 H100s set up as 4-GPU tensor parallelism plus data parallelism with Llama-3 70B.


4.4   Deep Dive

We now provide a detailed analysis of Preble, including an ablation study and global scheduler scalability
test. Because of H100 GPUs’ high cost and low availability, we run all experiments in below with A6000s.
Ablation study. To understand where the benefits of Preble come from, we evaluate Preble by incrementally
adding features presented in Section 3. We chose the tool use workload with a Zipf-1.1 popularity distri-
bution among the prompts in the dataset to represent real-life skewed tool popularity. Other workloads and
distributions benefit from a different set of techniques. We start with using the SGLang round-robin base-
line. We first add the per-request E2 policy (Section 3.2), which results in an improvement on both average
and p99 request latency because of E2’s dynamic load partitioning. We then add the post-assignment global
rebalancing and autoscaling, which successfully balances out load even more, resulting in further improve-
ment, especially with p99. Further adding the prefill/decode-aware handling results in more improvement
on both average and p99, since it considers the current batch composition and is able to better utilize the
GPU resources. Finally, we add the local-scheduler priority-based wait-queue scheduling (§3.3), which, as
expected, improves p99 but not average latency, as its goal is fairness.

                                                                                              9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                                                                                                                                           400
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           p99
                                                                                                                                                                           350                                                                                             avg
                  12                                     70                                      0.30                                  1.0
                                                                                                                                                                           300

                  10                                     60


                                                                                                                                                             Latency (s)
                                                                                                 0.25                                                                      250
                                                                                                                                       0.8
                                                         50


                                                                              Avg TPOT (s/tok)
                                       p99 Latency (s)
Avg Latency (s)


                   8                                                                                                                                                       200
                                                                                                 0.20


                                                                                                                        Avg TTFT (s)
                                                         40                                                                            0.6                                 150
                   6                                                                             0.15                                                2.42x
                                                         30                                                                                                                100
                                                                                                                                       0.4
                   4                                                                             0.10                                                                       50
                                                         20           4.61x
                               6.02x                                                                            5.60x
                   2                                                                                                                   0.2                                   0
                                                         10                                      0.05
                                                                                                                                                                                       ang                              ent             me
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          nt              cod
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             e
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         y-W
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Q
                                                                                                                                                                                  SGLeline)                          stm         just                  /De          iorit )
                                                                                                                                                                                     s                         dju            -ad                 efill          +Pr (=ALL
                   0                                      0                                      0.00                                  0.0                                       (ba                    re-a               +re                 +Pr
                                                                                                                                                                                                   no
                       SGLang Preble                          SGLang Preble                             SGLang Preble                        SGLang Preble                                    E2



Figure 4: Mixed Workload With Azure Trace A mix of                                                                                                           Figure 5: Ablation Results Running ToolBench
Tool and Video workloads with Azure arrival trace on 4 A6000s.                                                                                               with Zipf-1.1 running on 4 A6000s
Global scheduler performance and scalability. We measure Preble’s global scheduler max throughput by
sending large (e.g., 50,000) requests at once, eliminating arrival pattern effects and ensuring saturation.
Since the global prefix tree search is the most time-consuming task at the global scheduler, we test the
Toolbench and VideoQA workloads, which have the most complex and simplest prefix tree structures in our
five workloads. Preble’s global scheduler achieves a processing rate of 245 and 2931 requests per second for
Toolbench and VideoQA. We also measure the network processing speed and find it not to be the bottleneck.
With the peak GPU processing rate (30-150 tokens per second decoding speed with Mistral 7B on A100) and
our workloads’ output length (Table 1), one Preble global scheduler can sustain at least 70 to 391 concurrent
A100s. If accounting for prefill time or bigger models, our scheduler would sustain even more GPUs.

5                      Related Works
LLMs’ usages are shifting to be more prompt-heavy. As a result, the problem of prefill and decoding having
different compute-to-memory ratios is exacerbated. Several recent works have targeted LLM usages with
long prompts and proposed solutions to solve the imbalance problem. The first approach, called chunked
prefill, chunks a prompt and runs each chunk with other decoding requests in a batch in a single iteration
to reduce waiting Agrawal et al. (2023; 2024). The second approach is to separate prefill and decoding to
different GPUs to avoid prefill-decoding interference Patel et al. (2024); Zhong et al. (2024). These solutions
target long prompts but ignore prompt sharing. Preble consider prompt length and sharing, and we use a
novel sharing-based approach on top of chunked prefill to solve the prefill-decoding imbalance problem.
Many state-of-art LLM inference systems Zheng et al. (2023b); Moore & Li (2024) enable prefix sharing to
improve KV cache reuse. However, these systems limit the sharing at the scale of individual model instance,
overlooking the cluster-level prefix-sharing opportunities and challenges. More recent works Hu et al.
(2024); Qin et al. (2025) corroborate our insight in adding prompt-sharing awareness to the cluster-level
scheduler. Unlike Preble, MemServe Hu et al. (2024) prioritizes cache reuse regardless of current loads and
thus could result in imbalanced and inefficient GPU usage. Mooncake Qin et al. (2025) is a concurrent work
of Preble and similarly balances cache exploitation and load distribution. Differently, Preble factors the
potential KV eviction in the load estimation, which can be more accurate. Moreover, Preble also improves
fairness in prefix-caching with better waiting request ordering.
6                      Conclusion
This paper identified the problem of distributed serving for long and sharing prompts. To solve this problem,
we performed a study on five LLM workloads and one real LLM trace. We presented E2, a distributed
LLM request scheduling algorithm targeting LLM usages with long and shared prompts. We built Preble, a
distributed LLM serving system on top of the E2 algorithm and a hierarchical scheduling architecture. Our
results show that Preble significantly improves LLM serving performance over SOTA serving systems while
ensuring request fairness and controlling the tail latency.

                                                                                                                                              10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Acknowledgment
We would like to thank the anonymous reviewers for their tremendous feedback and comments, which have
substantially improved the content and presentation of this paper. We are also thankful to Yufei Ding and
Geoff Voelker for their support and feedback of this work. This material is based upon work supported by
gifts from AWS, Google, and Meta. Any opinions, findings, conclusions, or recommendations expressed in
this material are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of these institutions.

References
Amey Agrawal, Ashish Panwar, Jayashree Mohan, Nipun Kwatra, Bhargav S Gulavani, and Ramachandran Ramjee.
  Sarathi: Efficient llm inference by piggybacking decodes with chunked prefills. arXiv preprint arXiv:2308.16369,
  August 2023.
Amey Agrawal, Nitin Kedia, Ashish Panwar, Jayashree Mohan, Nipun Kwatra, Bhargav S Gulavani, Alexey Tumanov,
  and Ramachandran Ramjee. Taming throughput-latency tradeoff in llm inference with sarathi-serve. Proceedings of
  18th USENIX Symposium on Operating Systems Design and Implementation, 2024, Santa Clara, 2024.
Reza Yazdani Aminabadi, Samyam Rajbhandari, Ammar Ahmad Awan, Cheng Li, Du Li, Elton Zheng, Olatunji
  Ruwase, Shaden Smith, Minjia Zhang, Jeff Rasley, et al. Deepspeed-inference: enabling efficient inference of
  transformer models at unprecedented scale. In SC22: International Conference for High Performance Computing,
  Networking, Storage and Analysis, Dallas, Texas, November 2022. IEEE.
Anthropic. Prompt caching with claude. https://www.anthropic.com/news/prompt-caching, 2024.
Giuseppe DeCandia, Deniz Hastorun, Madan Jampani, Gunavardhan Kakulapati, Avinash Lakshman, Alex Pilchin,
  Swaminathan Sivasubramanian, Peter Vosshall, and Werner Vogels. Dynamo: Amazon’s highly available key-value
  store. ACM SIGOPS operating systems review, 41(6):205–220, oct 2007.
Patrick Esser, Robin Rombach, and Björn Ommer. Taming transformers for high-resolution image synthesis. In 2021
  IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), Los Alamitos, CA, June 2020.
In Gim, Guojun Chen, Seung seob Lee, Nikhil Sarda, Anurag Khandelwal, and Lin Zhong. Prompt cache: Modular
   attention reuse for low-latency inference. In Proceedings of the 7th MLSys Conference, Santa Clara, CA, May 2024.
Zhicheng Guo, Sijie Cheng, Hao Wang, Shihao Liang, Yujia Qin, Peng Li, Zhiyuan Liu, Maosong Sun, and Yang Liu.
  Stabletoolbench: Towards stable large-scale benchmarking on tool learning of large language models. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2403.07714, Mar 2024.
Shibo Hao, Tianyang Liu, Zhen Wang, and Zhiting Hu. Toolkengpt: Augmenting frozen language models with massive
  tools via tool embeddings. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 36, New Orleans, Louisiana, De-
  cember 2023. URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper files/paper/2023/file/8fd1a81c882cd45f64958da6284f4a3f-
  Paper-Conference.pdf.
Dan Hendrycks, Steven Basart, Saurav Kadavath, Mantas Mazeika, Akul Arora, Ethan Guo, Collin Burns, Samir Pu-
  ranik, Horace He, Dawn Song, and Jacob Steinhardt. Measuring coding challenge competence with apps. In Pro-
  ceedings of the Neural Information Processing Systems Track on Datasets and Benchmarks, December 2021.
Cunchen Hu, Heyang Huang, Junhao Hu, Jiang Xu, Xusheng Chen, Tao Xie, Chenxi Wang, Sa Wang, Yungang Bao,
  Ninghui Sun, and Yizhou Shan. MemServe: Context Caching for Disaggregated LLM Serving with Elastic Memory
  Pool. arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.17565, June 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2406.17565.
Wenlong Huang, Pieter Abbeel, Deepak Pathak, and Igor Mordatch. Language models as zero-shot planners: Extracting
  actionable knowledge for embodied agents. In Kamalika Chaudhuri, Stefanie Jegelka, Le Song, Csaba Szepesvari,
  Gang Niu, and Sivan Sabato (eds.), Proceedings of the 39th International Conference on Machine Learning, Hon-
  olulu, volume 162 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pp. 9118–9147. PMLR, 17–23 Jul 2022. URL
  https://proceedings.mlr.press/v162/huang22a.html.


                                                    11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Sam Ade Jacobs, Masahiro Tanaka, Chengming Zhang, Minjia Zhang, Shuaiwen Leon Song, Samyam Rajbhandari, and
  Yuxiong He. Deepspeed ulysses: System optimizations for enabling training of extreme long sequence transformer
  models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2309.14509, October 2023.
Albert Q. Jiang, Alexandre Sablayrolles, Arthur Mensch, Chris Bamford, Devendra Singh Chaplot, Diego de las Casas,
  Florian Bressand, Gianna Lengyel, Guillaume Lample, Lucile Saulnier, Lélio Renard Lavaud, Marie-Anne Lachaux,
  Pierre Stock, Teven Le Scao, Thibaut Lavril, Thomas Wang, Timothée Lacroix, and William El Sayed. Mistral 7b.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.06825, October 2023.
Jordan Juravsky, Bradley Brown, Ryan Ehrlich, Daniel Y. Fu, Christopher Ré, and Azalia Mirhoseini. Hydragen: High-
   throughput llm inference with shared prefixes. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.05099, May 2024.
Woosuk Kwon, Zhuohan Li, Siyuan Zhuang, Ying Sheng, Lianmin Zheng, Cody Hao Yu, Joseph Gonzalez, Hao Zhang,
 and Ion Stoica. Efficient memory management for large language model serving with pagedattention. In Proceedings
 of the 29th Symposium on Operating Systems Principles, Koblenz, Germany, October 2023.
Jiaqi Li, Mengmeng Wang, Zilong Zheng, and Muhan Zhang. Loogle: Can long-context language models understand
   long contexts? arXiv preprint arXiv:2311.04939, November 2023a.
Junkai Li, Siyu Wang, Meng Zhang, Weitao Li, Yunghwei Lai, Xinhui Kang, Weizhi Ma, and Yang Liu. Agent hospital:
  A simulacrum of hospital with evolvable medical agents. arXiv preprint arXiv:2405.02957, May 2024a.
Junyou Li, Qin Zhang, Yangbin Yu, Qiang Fu, and Deheng Ye.           More agents is all you need.     arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2402.05120, February 2024b.
Zhuohan Li, Lianmin Zheng, Yinmin Zhong, Vincent Liu, Ying Sheng, Xin Jin, Yanping Huang, Zhifeng Chen, Hao
  Zhang, Joseph E. Gonzalez, and Ion Stoica. AlpaServe: Statistical multiplexing with model parallelism for deep
  learning serving. In 17th USENIX Symposium on Operating Systems Design and Implementation (OSDI 23), Boston,
  MA, July 2023b.
Hao Liu, Matei Zaharia, and Pieter Abbeel. Ringattention with blockwise transformers for near-infinite context.
  In Proceedings of the 12th International Conference on Learning Representations, Vienna, 2024. URL https:
  //openreview.net/forum?id=WsRHpHH4s0.
Meta. Meta llama 3. https://llama.meta.com/llama3/, 2024.
Sage Moore and Zhouhan Li. Automatic prefix caching. https://github.com/vllm-project/vllm/issues/2614, March 2024.
Tsendsuren Munkhdalai, Manaal Faruqui, and Siddharth Gopal. Leave no context behind: Efficient infinite context
  transformers with infini-attention. arXiv preprint arXiv:2404.07143, April 2024.
Erik Nijkamp, Hiroaki Hayashi, Caiming Xiong, Silvio Savarese, and Yingbo Zhou. Codegen2: Lessons for training
   llms on programming and natural languages. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.02309, July 2023.
Diego Ongaro, Stephen M. Rumble, Ryan Stutsman, John Ousterhout, and Mendel Rosenblum. Fast Crash Recovery
  in RAMCloud. In Proceedings of the 23rd ACM Symposium on Operating Systems Principles (SOSP ’11), Cascais,
  Portugal, October 2011.
OpenAI. Learning to reason with llms. https://openai.com/index/learning-to-reason-with-llms/, September 2024a.
OpenAI. Video generation models as world simulators. https://openai.com/index/video-generation-models-as-world-
  simulators, 2024b.
Pratyush Patel, Esha Choukse, Chaojie Zhang, Aashaka Shah, Íñigo Goiri, Saeed Maleki, and Ricardo Bianchini. Split-
   wise: Efficient generative llm inference using phase splitting. In 2024 ACM/IEEE 51st Annual International Sympo-
   sium on Computer Architecture (ISCA), pp. 118–132. IEEE, 2024.
Ruoyu Qin, Zheming Li, Weiran He, Mingxing Zhang, Yongwei Wu, Weimin Zheng, and Xinran Xu. Mooncake:
  A kvcache-centric disaggregated architecture for llm serving. arXiv preprint arXiv:2407.00079, Jul 2024a. URL
  https://arxiv.org/abs/2407.00079.


                                                    12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Ruoyu Qin, Zheming Li, Weiran He, Jialei Cui, Feng Ren, Mingxing Zhang, Yongwei Wu, Weimin Zheng, and Xinran
  Xu. Mooncake: Trading more storage for less computation — a KVCache-centric architecture for serving LLM
  chatbot. In 23rd USENIX Conference on File and Storage Technologies (FAST 25), pp. 155–170, Santa Clara, CA,
  February 2025. USENIX Association. ISBN 978-1-939133-45-8. URL https://www.usenix.org/conference/fast25/
  presentation/qin.

Yujia Qin, Shihao Liang, Yining Ye, Kunlun Zhu, Lan Yan, Yaxi Lu, Yankai Lin, Xin Cong, Xiangru Tang, Bill Qian,
  Sihan Zhao, Lauren Hong, Runchu Tian, Ruobing Xie, Jie Zhou, Mark Gerstein, dahai li, Zhiyuan Liu, and Maosong
  Sun. ToolLLM: Facilitating large language models to master 16000+ real-world APIs. In The Twelfth International
  Conference on Learning Representations, Vienna, 2024b. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=dHng2O0Jjr.

Timo Schick, Jane Dwivedi-Yu, Roberto Dessi, Roberta Raileanu, Maria Lomeli, Eric Hambro, Luke Zettlemoyer,
  Nicola Cancedda, and Thomas Scialom. Toolformer: Language models can teach themselves to use tools. In Thirty-
  seventh Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems, New Orleans, 2023. URL https://openreview.net/
  forum?id=Yacmpz84TH.

Mohit Shridhar, Xingdi Yuan, Marc-Alexandre Cote, Yonatan Bisk, Adam Trischler, and Matthew Hausknecht.
 {ALFW}orld: Aligning text and embodied environments for interactive learning. In International Conference on
 Learning Representations, Virtual, 2021. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=0IOX0YcCdTn.

Foteini Strati, Sara Mcallister, Amar Phanishayee, Jakub Tarnawski, and Ana Klimovic. Déjàvu: KV-cache streaming
  for fast, fault-tolerant generative LLM serving. In Ruslan Salakhutdinov, Zico Kolter, Katherine Heller, Adrian Weller,
  Nuria Oliver, Jonathan Scarlett, and Felix Berkenkamp (eds.), Proceedings of the 41st International Conference
  on Machine Learning, volume 235 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pp. 46745–46771, Vancouver,
  Canada, 21–27 Jul 2024. PMLR. URL https://proceedings.mlr.press/v235/strati24a.html.

FlashInfer Team. Flashinfer, October 2024a. URL https://github.com/flashinfer-ai/flashinfer.

SGLang Team. SGLang, October 2024b. URL https://github.com/sgl-project/sglang.

Xingyao Wang, Zihan Wang, Jiateng Liu, Yangyi Chen, Lifan Yuan, Hao Peng, and Heng Ji. Mint: Evaluating llms
  in multi-turn interaction with tools and language feedback. In The Twelfth International Conference on Learning
  Representations, Vienna, Austria, May 2024.

Xuezhi Wang, Jason Wei, Dale Schuurmans, Quoc V Le, Ed H. Chi, Sharan Narang, Aakanksha Chowdhery, and Denny
  Zhou. Self-consistency improves chain of thought reasoning in language models. In The Eleventh International
  Conference on Learning Representations, 2023. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=1PL1NIMMrw.

Jason Wei, Xuezhi Wang, Dale Schuurmans, Maarten Bosma, Brian Ichter, Fei Xia, Ed H. Chi, Quoc V. Le, and Denny
   Zhou. Chain-of-thought prompting elicits reasoning in large language models. In Proceedings of the 36th Interna-
   tional Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems, New Orleans, LA, November 2024.

Wikipedia. Radix tree. https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Radix tree, 2024. [Online; accessed 1-October-2024].

Bingyang Wu, Yinmin Zhong, Zili Zhang, Gang Huang, Xuanzhe Liu, and Xin Jin. Fast distributed inference serving
  for large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.05920, May 2023.

Qingyun Wu, Gagan Bansal, Jieyu Zhang, Yiran Wu, Beibin Li, Erkang Zhu, Li Jiang, Xiaoyun Zhang, Shaokun Zhang,
  Jiale Liu, Ahmed Hassan Awadallah, Ryen W White, Doug Burger, and Chi Wang. Autogen: Enabling next-gen
  LLM applications via multi-agent conversation. In ICLR 2024 Workshop on Large Language Model (LLM) Agents,
  Vienna, 2024. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=uAjxFFing2.

Junbin Xiao, Xindi Shang, Angela Yao, and Tat-Seng Chua. Next-qa: Next phase of question-answering to explaining
  temporal actions. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR),
  pp. 9777–9786, June 2021.


                                                      13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Shunyu Yao, Dian Yu, Jeffrey Zhao, Izhak Shafran, Tom Griffiths, Yuan Cao, and Karthik Narasimhan. Tree
  of thoughts: Deliberate problem solving with large language models. In A. Oh, T. Naumann, A. Globerson,
  K. Saenko, M. Hardt, and S. Levine (eds.), Thirty-seventh Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems,
  volume 36, New Orleans, Louisiana, December 2023a. URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper files/paper/2023/
  file/271db9922b8d1f4dd7aaef84ed5ac703-Paper-Conference.pdf.

Shunyu Yao, Jeffrey Zhao, Dian Yu, Nan Du, Izhak Shafran, Karthik R Narasimhan, and Yuan Cao. React: Synergizing
  reasoning and acting in language models. In The Eleventh International Conference on Learning Representations,
  Kigali, Rwanda, April 2023b. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=WE vluYUL-X.

Gyeong-In Yu, Joo Seong Jeong, Geon-Woo Kim, Soojeong Kim, and Byung-Gon Chun. Orca: A Distributed Serving
  System for Transformer-Based Generative Models. In 16th USENIX Symposium on Operating Systems Design and
  Implementation (OSDI ’22), Carlsbad, CA, July 2022.

Shoubin Yu, Jaemin Cho, Prateek Yadav, and Mohit Bansal. Self-chained image-language model for video localization
  and question answering. In Thirty-seventh Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems, New Orleans,
  Louisiana, December 2023.

Zhuosheng Zhang, Aston Zhang, Mu Li, and Alex Smola. Automatic chain of thought prompting in large language
  models. In The Eleventh International Conference on Learning Representations, Kigali, Rwanda, May 2023. URL
  https://openreview.net/forum?id=5NTt8GFjUHkr.

Lianmin Zheng, Wei-Lin Chiang, Ying Sheng, Siyuan Zhuang, Zhanghao Wu, Yonghao Zhuang, Zi Lin, Zhuohan Li,
   Dacheng Li, Eric Xing, Hao Zhang, Joseph E. Gonzalez, and Ion Stoica. Judging LLM-as-a-judge with MT-bench
   and chatbot arena. In Thirty-seventh Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems Datasets and Benchmarks
   Track, New Orleans, Louisiana, December 2023a. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=uccHPGDlao.

Lianmin Zheng, Liangsheng Yin, Zhiqiang Xie, Jeff Huang, Chuyue Sun, Cody Hao Yu, Shiyi Cao, Christos Kozyrakis,
   Ion Stoica, Joseph E. Gonzalez, Clark Barrett, and Ying Sheng. Efficiently programming large language models using
   sglang. arXiv preprint arXiv:2312.07104, December 2023b.

Yinmin Zhong, Shengyu Liu, Junda Chen, Jianbo Hu, Yibo Zhu, Xuanzhe Liu, Xin Jin, and Hao Zhang. Distllm:
  Disaggregating prefill and decoding for goodput-optimized large language model serving. In Proceedings of the 18th
  USENIX Symposium on Operating Systems Design and Implementation (OSDI ’24), Santa Clara, CA, July 2024.


                                                    14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


7     Appendix

A      Study on LLM Prompts
Today’s LLM usage goes beyond simple chatting. As LLM usage becomes more commercialized, LLM
prompts become more structured and complex, outshadowing the text an LLM generates. This section
presents our study results of five popular new LLM use cases: tool (or API, agent) use Schick et al. (2023),
interacting with virtual environments as an embodied agent Hao et al. (2023); Huang et al. (2022), software
program generation Nijkamp et al. (2023), answering questions about videos Xiao et al. (2021), and answer
questions about long documents Li et al. (2023a). Figure 8 demonstrates the prompt usages of these work-
loads. We study each case with real public datasets and understand their prompt features from a systems
perspective. For datasets that do not provide outputs, we use Llama-3 7B model as the LLM to generate
outputs. For each dataset, we construct a prefix tree for all the requests in the dataset (i.e., assuming an
infinite prefix cache).
Table 1 and Figure 6 summarize our study results, including prompt and decoding (output) length, amount
of sharing in a prompt, key portion size in a prompt, and number of requests sharing a key portion. We
define the “key portion” of a request as the deepest node in a path that has more tokens than the sum of its
predecessors.
To understand real-world LLM user request features, we study a recently released public cloud LLM trace.
This section ends with our summary insights.

        Workload        Prompt Len      Output Len     Shared Prefix      KeyPort.      Req Share KeyPort.
                                                         in Prompt       in Prompt
        Toolbench         (1835, 742)     (43, 16)      (85%, 13%)      (76%, 16%)            (39, 64)
      Embodied Agent      (2285, 471)     (16, 13)      (97%, 14%)      (76%, 12%)             (48, 8)
       Programming       (3871, 1656)    (190, 343)     (97%, 7.4%)     (78%, 13%)          (126, 2157)
         Video QA        (9865, 5976)      (4, 1.5)     (88%, 32%)      (99%, 0.2%)            (8.6, 2)
         LooGLE         (23474, 6105)     (16, 9.9)     (91%, 24%)      (94%, 15%)            (18, 8.6)
Table 1: LLM Prompt Properties Each cell except for number of requests shows (mean, standard deviation).
Length represented using number of tokens. “KeyPort.” stands for Key Portion.

A.1    Tool Use

Today, LLMs are often augmented by various tools such as calculators and web searches. To equip a model
with the ability to invoke a tool, it must be given the correct syntax for querying the tool, along with examples
(or “demonstrations”) of tool use. We evaluate the Toolbench Guo et al. (2024) dataset, which consists of
more than 210k queries that call over 16k unique tools. Each query shares the same system prompt followed
by tool-specific instructions. The final part of the query is the user’s specific question or task. These are
all concatenated together to form the final prompt. We find that most of the sharing comes from queries
that all share the same tool, and these instructions can be 43x longer than the output length. The Toolbench
workload is also representative of other tasks that “prep” an LLM in a similar fashion. For example, instead
of tool-calling, LLMs can have roles layered on top of the system prompt, which is popular in emerging
systems that utilize the same LLM with multiple roles to create an ensemble Wu et al. (2024); Li et al.
(2024b;a).

A.2    Embodied Agents

LLMs are increasingly found in agents that can interact with environments, such as a player in a role-playing
game or controlling a robot. In this scenario, the LLM receives feedback from the environment, forms an
action, and then “performs” the action. This is conducted in a loop until the model has achieved the goal.

                                                  15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                               Toolbench                  Embodied Agent                 Programming                   Video QA                  LooGLE
      1.0                                     1.0                                              1.0                                         1.0
      0.8                                     0.8                                              0.8                                         0.8
      0.6                                     0.6                                              0.6                                         0.6
CDF


                                        CDF


                                                                                         CDF


                                                                                                                                     CDF
      0.4                                     0.4                                              0.4                                         0.4
      0.2                                     0.2                                              0.2                                         0.2
      0.0                                     0.0                                              0.0                                         0.0
            1     10   100   1000   10000           0.0   0.2   0.4   0.6   0.8    1.0               0.2   0.4   0.6     0.8   1.0                0   50   100   150   200   250
      Prompt-to-Decode Ratio  Shared Prefix in Prompt      Key Portion in Prompt      Req Share Key Portion
Figure 6: CDF Plot of Key Metrics Showing CDF for all five workloads on prompt-to-decode ratio, shared prefix

The workload we utilize is sourced from the ALFWorld Shridhar et al. (2021) dataset and has 7.5k requests.
Prompts first describe the environment and the task, followed by a demonstration of steps to solve the task.
The model then solves its given task by looping over a planning step followed by an action step. After each
action, the text-based environment returns an observation that the model incorporates into its next planning
step. Every new invocation to the LLM in this loop is treated as a new request, resulting in each step sharing
the context of previous steps. Interestingly, the number of steps is determined by LLM generation, creating
an unpredictable sharing pattern. Because steps are chained together, prompts are still 157x longer than
output tokens.
The embodied agent workload can represent a wide variety of other use cases, such as chain of thought Yao
et al. (2023b); Wei et al. (2024), multi-turn tool usage Wang et al. (2024); Qin et al. (2024b), and chat-
bots Zheng et al. (2023a). Any dependency between the model and the outside environment can be consid-
ered an agent receiving feedback.

A.3             Program Generation

One of the popular uses of LLMs is to generate software programs Nijkamp et al. (2023). We study the APPS
competitive programming dataset Hendrycks et al. (2021), a dataset of programming problems. To generate
better-quality programs, an approach taken by a recent paper Juravsky et al. (2024) is to add a demonstration
of several generic code examples before the user problem to instruct an LLM. This added demonstration is
the same across all problems and becomes the system prompt. Following the system prompt is the program-
ming problem description. Afterward, this approach invokes the LLM several times in parallel to generate
multiple candidate programs, out of which the best is chosen to return to the user. As generated code is
relatively long (compared to outputs of other workloads we study), the prompt-to-output ratio (20x) is rel-
atively low. Prompt sharing comes from two places: the system prompt of code demonstration is shared
across all requests, and the programming problem is shared across all parallel generations. Depending on
how complex the problem is, its description could be longer or shorter than the system prompt; a prob-
lem description can also be partially the same as another problem description. Such complexity results in
competitive programming having diverse key-portion properties. Such example demonstration and parallel
generation technique is common in recent prompt engineering, for example, with ReAct Yao et al. (2023b),
Tree-of-Thoughts Yao et al. (2023a), and Self Consistency Wang et al. (2023).

A.4             Video Question and Answer

The advent of video models like OpenAI Sora OpenAI (2024b) has created an explosion of interest in multi-
modal models. The use of LLMs, then, goes beyond natural language. A recent usage is to answer questions
about videos by tokenizing a video segment and inputting it to an LLM Yu et al. (2023); Esser et al. (2020).
To study this, we analyze the NExT-QA benchmark Xiao et al. (2021), which consists of 8.5K questions
for 1000 video segments. Prompts to the LLM consist of a tokenized video followed by a multiple-choice
question. Because of the multiple-choice nature, the outputs of this dataset only have six tokens. Long tokens
for representing videos plus short outputs result in this dataset having the highest prompt-to-decoding token

                                                                                  16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                             1.0                                      1.0
                                          Conversation
                             0.8                                      0.8
                                          Programming
                             0.6                                      0.6


                       CDF
                             0.4                                      0.4

                             0.2                                      0.2

                             0.0                                      0.0
                                   0.01         1       100   10000         0.1    1     10    100 1000
                                          Inter-Arrival Time (ms)             Prompt-to-Decode Ratio

                                   Figure 7: Azure LLM Trace Analysis Results.

ratio of all workloads we explored, with nearly 2500× more prompt tokens. Apart from videos, images and
audio can also be tokenized to have LLMs answer questions, and we expect them to have similar properties
as video QA.

A.5   Long Document Question and Answer

With newer models, the maximum context length has increased substantially Munkhdalai et al. (2024); Liu
et al. (2024); Jacobs et al. (2023), with the latest development supporting 1M tokens Munkhdalai et al.
(2024). Longer contexts enable new LLM applications such as asking questions about a long document or
even a book. We evaluate this usage with the LooGLE dataset Li et al. (2023a), a collection of 776 long
documents and over 6.4k questions. LooGLE has a small system prompt of 13 tokens followed by a long
document and then a question about the document. As a common practice, a user or multiple users often
ask multiple questions to the same document, resulting in large amounts of shared tokens. Meanwhile, the
answers are usually short (e.g., a true or false). These features result in high prompt-to-decode ratio and high
sharing ratio in LooGLE.

A.6   LLM Usages in the Wild

To understand LLM usage in the wild, we analyze the recently released Azure LLM Inference Trace Patel
et al. (2024). The trace includes two types of LLM usages: program generation and chat conversation.
It provides request arrival time, prompt length, and decode length. As it does not provide actual request
content, it is not feasible for us to evaluate prompt content or sharing. Figure 7 plot our analysis results
in CDF. We find that the arrival rate is approximately 5 requests per second for chat conversation and 7
requests per second for programming. On average, chat requests arrive 118 ms apart while programming
requests arrive 63 ms apart. The mean prompt-to-decode ratio for chat conversations is 4. Since we have no
details about shared context from follow-up conversations, this number is expected to be much lower. For
the longest 20% of all chat prompts, the mean prompt-to-decode ratio is 175, which is consistent with our
observations on other workloads. For programming, the mean prompt-to-decode ratio is 92 for all prompts.
This falls within the range of all the workloads we evaluated.

A.7   Summary Insights

Our analysis of the five real-world LLM workloads and a real user LLM request trace reveals several key
findings.
Insight 1: Contrary to popular belief, prompts are significantly longer than output lengths because LLMs
support longer context and new LLM usages keep emerging. We believe this trend will continue as LLMs are
augmented with more capabilities. Implication 1: Optimizing prefill computation can largely improve over-
all application performance, and imbalanced prefill and decoding computation features should be considered
in LLM serving.

                                                               17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                              tool use                                                                                   call
                                                                                               User: .. Could you        LLM
                                                                                               provide me basic                 ans
                          System: You are AutoGPT,                     Tool 1.
                                                                                                 daily data…?                   wer
                          you can use many tools…             financial_statement..
                           You have access of the                  {‘parameters’:
                               following tools:                 {‘type’: ‘object’, …          Tool 2. ..            User: …?
                                                                                           {‘parameters’:
                                                                   Tool 3. ..
                                                                                                 …                  User: …?
                                                               {‘parameters’: …


                            virtual environment                       number of steps depends on LLM generation
                         “You are in the middle of a   call     gen             env
                                                                                        call
                          room with kitchen items      LLM     action act in feedback                                           final
                                                                       VE      on the LLM pick up                  env     … action
                             Your task is to: …                go to
                                                                              stove 1,       pan 2 from           feed
                          Here are two examples…              stove 1
                                                                            see a pan 2       stove 1             back


                            program generation                                                    call
                                                                                    User                         1st parallel code
                                                                                                  LLM
                          “You are a computer science programmer …              Programming                         generation
                                      Here is an example:                        Problem 1        call             2nd parallel
                          problem, --Input--, --outpu—, example code                              LLM            code generation
                                  Here is another example: …                   User Problem
                                                                                     2                               …


                            video QA                      “What happened to the baby…?               call LLM         answer: 0.
                                                           0. walk away, 1. run after it, …”                          walk away

                              Tokenized Video
                                                          “Why did the woman bend down..?             call LLM        answer: 1.
                                                            0. to jump.., 1. excercise, …”                            excercise


                           document                                                                                   call
                              QA                                                     Question: How many               LLM
                                                                                                                                six
                                                        Long Document             people…? 1. seven, 2. six, ..
                            Please answer the                 1
                                                                                                                      call
                            question based on                                          Question: In which year
                                                              Long                                                    LLM
                           the long texts below.                                               did…?                            1982
                                                              Doc 2


Figure 8: Workload Demonstration. Green boxes represent shared prefixes. Grey boxes are non-shared prompts.
White boxes are output generation. Yellow star represents key portions that always happen at fixed parts; pink stars at
non-fixed parts. Blue clouds represent the parts that would be used for distributing prefixes if knowing the oracle.

Insight 2: Prompt sharing, or reuse, is common, and the sharing amount is high. Sharing can come from
different user requests needing the same tools or instructions to solve a task. It can come from a user asking
multiple questions about the same document or video. Context sharing can also happen within the same user
task that is solved with a chain or a tree of steps. Implication 2: Reuse computation across shared prefixes
can largely improve real workloads’ performance and should be efficiently supported by distributed LLM
serving systems.
Insight 3: Most requests have a portion of the prompt sequence that gets a different degree of sharing and
is longer than its prefix, reflected as a key portion in prefix trees. Key portions account for the majority of
prompts and are shared by a significant amount of requests. Implication 3: Identifying the key portion of
prompts and optimizing the placement of requests according to their key portions is a viable way of reducing
the complexity of scheduling while achieving good performance.
Insight 4: Real-world LLM usages have varying load intensity, and different usages (programming vs.
conversation) have different loads. Real-world prompts are also much longer than decoding length, but
different usages have different prompt-to-decode ratios. Still, the longest prompts are significantly longer.
Implication 4: An efficient LLM serving system should consider complex, mixed-usage scenarios and
factor in both load and prompt sharing variations.


                                                                      18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                         2.0        Linear Layers
    Execution time (s)                                                                                        Linear Layers


                                                                             Execution time (ms)
                                    Self-Attention
                                                                                                              Self-Attention
                         1.5        Total                                                          40         Total
                         1.0
                                                                                                   20
                         0.5

                         0.0                                                                        0
                               0         5         10                                                   0       10        20      30
                                Prompt Length (x1000 #token)                                            Context length (x1000 #tokens)

Figure 9: Prefill Time Decomposition                                              Figure 10: Decoding Time

B              Prefill/Decoding Times
The prefill and decoding stages exhibit different computation behaviors, with the former being computation-
bound and the latter being memory-bandwidth bounded. To understand their behaviors and to acquire pre-
fill/decoding computation time functions to be used by E2, we profile the prefill and decoding stage per-
formance with Mistral 7B on the A6000 GPU. Figure 9 plots the prefill time and its breaking downs when
prompt length increases. As seen, longer prompts increase prefill time, suggesting that the more savings we
can get from prefix sharing, the lower prefill time will be. Moreover, since the linear layer dominates the
model forwarding at the prefill stage, the prefill time is overall linear to the prompt length. Figure 10 shows
the performance of a single request’s decoding performance with varying context lengths (the length of the
prompt sequence plus the sequence generated thus far). We observe a similar linear relationship to context
token length. Overall, these profiling results suggest that attention computation is regular. Thus, we could
use the token length with a profile regression function to estimate computation time.


                                                               19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


C    Algorithms
Below, we provide the global and local scheduling algorthim used by Preble.


Algorithm 1 E2 Global Scheduling Algorithm
   function S CHEDULE R EQUEST(Rk )
       Match Rk to global radix tree
       cached len ← sum of matched length
       missed len ← prompt len − cached len

       if missed len < cached len then                                        ▷ Exploit Rk
           K ← GPUs with longest node in matched path
           for each GPU i in K do
               Costi ← L OAD C OST(i, Rk )
           end for
           return i with lowest Costi
       else                                                                   ▷ Explore Rk
           for each GPU i in all GPUs do
               Ratioi ← D ECODE R ATIO(i)
           end for
           ▷ I MBAL R: calc based on GPU type and LLM
           if highest Ratiomax > I MBAL R then
               return max
           end if

           for each GPU i in all GPUs do
               Costi ← L OAD C OST(i, Rk )
           end for
           return i with lowest Costi
       end if
    end function


                                               20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Algorithm 2 GPU Load Cost Calculation
  ▷ Load cost calculation for GPU i and request Rk
  function L OAD C OST(i, Rk )
     L ← 0; M ← 0; P ← 0;

      ▷ Calculate total load on GPU i
      for each Rj in history H do
          missed len ← non-cached prompt length for j
          L ← L + P REFILLT IME(missed len)
          decode len ← average request output length in H
          L ← L + D ECODE T IME(decode len)
      end for

      ▷ Calculate eviction cost
      E ← tree nodes to evict on GPU i to run Rk
      for each j in E do
          Nj ← number of requests sharing j in H / number of total requests in H
          M ← M + P REFILLT IME(length of j) × Nj
      end for

      ▷ Calculate cost to run Rk
      missed len k ← non-cached prompt length for Rk
      P ← P REFILLT IME(missed len k)

     return L + M + P
  end function


Algorithm 3 E2 Local Scheduling Algorithm
  function S CHEDULE R EQUESTS
     for all requests in waiting queue do
         Determine prefix hit ratio
         Assign to priority group based on hit ratio
     end for
     Process groups in round-robin fashion with limits
  end function


                                               21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                                  Preble                 SGLang

                               200                                                  400


                 Avg Latency
                               150                                                  300


                                                                              P99
                               100                                                  200

                                  50                                                100

                                   0                                                     0
                                              2           4              6                            2           4            6
                                                  Rate (req/s)                                            Rate (req/s)


Figure 11: vLLM Backend Performance Evaluated on the Video QA workload using the Mistral 7B model on 2
GPUs.

                                                                     Preble                  SGLang

                                                   Tool Use                                                LooGLE

                                                                                    60
                                  30
                2xA6000 Avg (s)
                   Mistral 7B


                                                                                    40
                                  20


                                  10                                                20



                                       6      8      10     12      14                          0.4           0.6        0.8


                                  80
                                                                                200
                2xA6000 p99 (s)


                                  60
                   Mistral 7B


                                                                                150

                                  40
                                                                                100

                                  20
                                                                                    50


                                       6      8     10       12     14                          0.4           0.6        0.8
                                                  Rate (req/s)                                            Rate (req/s)

                                                                         SGLang v0.3



                                           Figure 12: Latest SGLang v0.3 and Flashinfer 0.1.6

D    Comparison with vLLM and Other SGLang Versions
To demonstrate Preble’s versatility with multiple LLM backends, we evaluate Preble on vLLM with the
vanilla vLLM as the baseline. vLLM recently added support for prefix caching, which we include in the
baseline. We use a slightly different version of the Mistral 7B model (v0.2) for this experiment, as vLLM
only supports this version. Figure 11 plots the results of running the VideoQA workload on 2 GPUs and the
Mistral 7B v0.2 model for both Preble and vLLM. Compared to SGLang as a backend, vLLM as a backend

                                                                    22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                             MemServe               Preble

                                                    Tool Use                                   LooGLE

                                                                             100


                       2xA6000 Avg (s)
                                         400
                          Mistral 7B                                          75

                                         200                                  50

                                                                              25
                                           0
                                               5           10           15         0.3   0.4    0.5     0.6   0.7
                                                                             300
                                     1500
                   4xA6000 p99 (s)
                      Mistral 7B


                                                                             200
                                     1000


                                         500                                 100


                                           0                                   0
                                               10          20           30         0.6   0.8    1.0     1.2   1.4
                                                    Rate (req/s)                            Rate (req/s)



Figure 13: Compare with MemServe Evaluated on the Tool Use and Video QA workloads using the Mistral 7B
model with TP=1.
gives Preble less relative improvement for several reasons: 1) local-GPU prefix sharing is in beta version
and not as performant as SGLang; 2) vLLM does not use the flash infer kernel which makes prefix sharing
more efficient; and 3) vLLM does not support chunked prefill together with prefix caching. 4) vLLM has
significant scheduling delay
To demonstrate Preble’s versatility across multiple SGLang versions, we evaluate the latest SGLang version
(v0.3) Team (2024b) and the latest FlashInfer kernel (v1.6) Team (2024a) in addition to the v0.1.12 we used
in Section 4. SGLang made two major changes between these two versions: 1) the new FlashInfer kernel
improved the performance of sharing 32K context length in the same batch, and 2) SGLang reduced its
scheduling overhead and applied other engine optimizations. Figure 12 plots the results of running LooGLE
and Toolbench with SGLang v0.3 and Preble. Overall, Preble’s improvements over SGLang persist across
SGLang versions.

E   Comparison with Memserve
We also provide a comparison against MemServe, a distributed serving system with prefix awareness, in
Figure 13. Preble achieved significantly better average latency in all scenarios. This is due to the over-
exploitation of prompt sharing in MemServe’s scheduler policy as they route requests based on the longest-
prefix-match regardless of the existing load on that node.


                                                                   23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                   Preble          SGLang
                                                                                                                                 LooGLE sustainable RPS under latency target
                                            LooGLE                                                                                 SGLang
                                                                                                                         10        Preble
                       150
    8xA6000 Avg (s)
       Mistral 7B


                       100                                                                                                8

                        50
                                                                                                                          6


                                                                                                                   RPS
                         0
                             1.5    2.0          2.5                  3.0            3.5

                                                                                                                          4
                       600
    16xA6000 Avg (s)
       Mistral 7B


                       400                                                                                                2

                       200
                                                                                                                          0
                         0                                                                                                         5          10   15       20    25     30
                             3       4              5                 6              7                                                             Instances
Figure 14: Mixed Workload With Azure Trace                                                                       Figure 15: Ablation Results Running ToolBench
A mix of Tool and Video workloads with Azure arrival                                                             with Zipf-1.1 running on 4 A6000s
trace on 4 A6000s.
                                                                                         Preble         Preble Dynamic E2

                                                                                 Tool Use                                       LooGLE
                                                                 20
                                                                                                            20
                                               2xA6000 Avg (s)


                                                                 15
                                                  Mistral 7B


                                                                                                            15

                                                                 10
                                                                                                            10

                                                                  5
                                                                                                             5

                                                                      4          6         8      10   12            0.2         0.4         0.6


                                                                 30                                         20
                                               4xA6000 Avg (s)
                                                  Mistral 7B


                                                                 20                                         15


                                                                 10                                         10


                                                                                                             5
                                                                            10       15           20                      0.5          1.0


                                          Figure 16: GPU Utilization Based Dynamic E2 Algorithm

F                Scheduler Scalability
As the number of GPUs and unique prefixes increases, the global prefix tree (and thus the amount of work
that the global scheduler needs to handle) also grows. To verify Preble’s scalability, we test the system using
an 8-GPU and a 16-GPU cluster with proportionally more unique prefixes from the LooGLE workload. We
provide the average latency in Figure 14. We also show the max sustainable RPS with the 20-second latency
requirement of Preble and Round Robin baseline in Figure 15. Based on the results, we can see that there’s
a linear scalability as instances increase.

G                      Dynamic E2 Scheduling
We also provide an experiment with dynamically selecting exploitation vs exploration based on the total
load of the cluster as well as token count in Figure 16. The results between the two approaches are relatively
similar. In LooGLE dataset, the default Preble performs (min: -4%, max: 9.2%, avg: 3%) better than the
knob based Preble. In the Toolbench dataset, the default Prebleperforms (min: -1.6%, max: 15%, avg:
5.43%) than the dynamic knob based Preble.

                                                                                                  24
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                                                     Preble                 Oracle partition           SGLang


                                       Tool Use               Embodied Agent                                  Programming                             Video QA                                      LooGLE
                                                                                              200                                        60
                                                         15
                                                                                                                                                                                    80
       2xA6000 Avg (s)
                         100
                                                                                              150
          Mistral 7B


                                                                                                                                         40                                         60
                                                         10
                                                                                              100
                            50                                                                                                                                                      40
                                                                                                                                         20
                                                          5                                    50                                                                                   20

                             0                                                                                                            0                                          0
                                  5       10       15         5         10      15                      1        2         3       4              2           4         6             0.2          0.4            0.6
                                                         80                                   800                                                                                  600
       2xA6000 p99 (s)


                         300
                                                         60                                   600                                       100
          Mistral 7B


                                                                                                                                                                                   400
                         200
                                                         40                                   400
                                                                                                                                         50                                        200
                         100                             20                                   200

                             0                            0                                     0                                         0                                          0
                                  5       10       15         5         10      15                      1        2         3       4              2           4         6             0.2          0.4            0.6
                                                                                                                                                                                   100
                         150                             20                                   200
       4xA6000 Avg (s)


                                                                                                                                         60
                                                                                                                                                                                    75
          Mistral 7B


                                                         15                                   150
                         100
                                                                                                                                         40
                                                         10                                   100                                                                                   50
                            50                                                                                                           20
                                                          5                                    50                                                                                   25

                             0                                                                  0                                         0                                          0
                                  10      20       30         10        20      30                      2        4         6       8            2.5     5.0       7.5       10.0         0.50     0.75     1.00   1.25
                                                         60                                   800                                                                                  600
                         400                                                                                                            150
       4xA6000 p99 (s)


                         300                                                                  600
          Mistral 7B


                                                         40                                                                                                                        400
                                                                                                                                        100
                         200                                                                  400
                                                         20                                                                              50                                        200
                         100                                                                  200

                             0                            0                                     0                                         0                                          0
                                  10      20       30         10        20      30                      2        4         6       8            2.5     5.0       7.5       10.0         0.50     0.75     1.00   1.25

                                                         15                                                                                                                         10
                         10.0
      8xH100 Avg (s)


                                                                                               60                                        60
       Llama3 70B


                                                                                                                                                                                     8
                            7.5                          10
                                                                                                                                         40
                                                                                               40                                                                                    6
                            5.0
                                                          5                                                                              20
                                                                                               20                                                                                    4
                            2.5
                                                                                                                                          0                                          2
                                  5       10       15              10          15                   3                4         5                  2           4         6                   0.4          0.6      0.8

                                                                                                                                        300                                         40
                            30
           8xH100 p99 (s)


                                                         30
                                                                                              300
            Llama3 70B


                                                                                                                                        200                                         30
                            20                           20                                   200
                                                                                                                                                                                    20
                                                                                                                                        100
                            10                           10                                   100
                                                                                                                                                                                    10
                                                                                                                                          0
                                  5       10        15             10           15                  3             4            5                  2         4           6                   0.4       0.6         0.8
                                       Rate (req/s)                Rate (req/s)                                 Rate (req/s)                          Rate (req/s)                                Rate (req/s)



Figure 17: End-to-end Workload Performance The top and middle two rows run on 2-4 A6000s with Mistral
7B. The bottom two rows run on 8 H100s set up as 4-GPU tensor parallelism plus data parallelism with Llama-3 70B.


H    Oracle Baseline

We provide an Oracle Partitioning baseline inspired by consistent hashing. Unlike partitioning requests, an-
other way of distributing load is to partition state (i.e., prefix trees in our case). As prefix trees are dynamic,
and perfect partitioning requires solving an NP-hard problem, we use an oracle approach to construct this
baseline. Specifically, at offline time, we combine all requests in a workload in a single prefix tree, manually
examine the key-portion tree layer, and partition the tree into K (number of data-parallel instances) subtrees
by evenly splitting this layer (e.g., with the hash values of tokens). For certain workloads, no single layer is
clearly or always the key portion; we then partition the tree according to the top layer that can be a key por-
tion. The blue clouds in Figure 8 mark the tree node layers that we manually choose as the partitioning layer
for this oracle baseline. Note that such oracle information cannot be acquired in a real serving system. After
a tree has been partitioned, we let the online serving system consistently send requests hitting a partition to
the corresponding GPU

                                                                                              25
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


From the results in 17, we can see that Preble is better or on par with the oracle partition baseline for all
setups. This is because key portions cannot always be easily identified and partitioned statically and because
even when a tree can be evenly partitioned by size, requests hitting each partition can be different and can
change over time.
Preble has more improvements over the Oracle baseline on the VideoQA and Programming workloads than
the other three workloads. The VideoQA workload has more questions for longer videos, causing non-even
distribution of request load across videos. Even though the Oracle can evenly split videos, the load is not
evenly split. The Programming workload’s Oracle split is at the layer of user problem, which is not a good,
stable indicator of the key portion or the request load. Thus, for these two workloads, Oracle performs much
worse than Preble. On the other hand, the embodied agent workload’s key portion is the initial instruction,
and each request has a different instruction. Thus, by splitting the initial instruction, Oracle can almost
perfectly split the load and cache prefixes. The Tool workload has a relatively uniform request distribution
across different tool uses, allowing Oracle to partition load evenly.


                                                 26
