Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


P REDICTIVE I NVERSE DYNAMICS M ODELS ARE S CAL -
ABLE L EARNERS FOR ROBOTIC M ANIPULATION

 Yang Tian1,4,∗ Sizhe Yang6,1,∗ Jia Zeng1 Ping Wang3,4,5 Dahua Lin6
 Hao Dong2 Jiangmiao Pang1,†
 1
   Shanghai AI Laboratory 2 CFCS, School of CS, Peking University
 3
   National Engineering Research Center for Software Engineering, Peking University
 4
   School of Software & Microelectronics, Peking University
 5
   Key Laboratory of High Confidence Software Technologies (PKU), Ministry of Education
 6
   Chinese University of Hong Kong
 ∗
   Equal contribution, Author ordering determined by coin flip † Corresponding authors
 Project page: https://nimolty.github.io/Seer/

                                                                                                              +43% +31%
                                                                        I!                 I!"#

     Large-scale
       Robot                    Behavior Cloning Policy
                                                                                                              Real-world robot
      Episodes
                         𝑎!"#             𝑎!              𝑎!$#                prediction
                                                                                                               +13% +10%


                                                                                                  condition
                           (a) End-to-End naïve BC
     Pre-training                                                      Visual Prediction Module
                                Visual Prediction Model                        Vision
                                                                                                              LIBERO-LONG
                                                                              Action                          +21% +12%
                                                                     Inverse Dynamics Module


       Limited
                                Inverse Dynamics Model                                                        CALVIN ABC-D
     Downstream
      Task Data                                                                  𝑎!
                                   𝑎!            𝑎!$#                                                           Previous SOTA
                                                                                                                Seer (w/o PT)
     Fine-tuning                (b) Two-Stage PIDM                     (c) End-to-End PIDM                      Seer (w/ PT)



Figure 1: In contrast to previous methods that (a) conduct end-to-end naive behavior cloning from
large-scale robotic data or (b) use decoupled visual prediction and inverse dynamics models to set
goals and guide actions, we present end-to-end Predictive Inverse Dynamics Models (PIDM) that
closes the loop between vision and action. Seer, the model we built, surpasses previous states of the
art and demonstrates consistent improvements over the ablated version without pre-training.

                                                           A BSTRACT

          Current efforts to learn scalable policies in robotic manipulation primarily fall into
          two categories: one focuses on “action,” which involves behavior cloning from ex-
          tensive collections of robotic data, while the other emphasizes “vision,” enhancing
          model generalization by pre-training representations or generative models, also re-
          ferred to as world models, using large-scale visual datasets. This paper presents an
          end-to-end paradigm that predicts actions using inverse dynamics models condi-
          tioned on the robot’s forecasted visual states, named Predictive Inverse Dynamics
          Models (PIDM). By closing the loop between vision and action, the end-to-end
          PIDM can be a better scalable action learner. In practice, we use Transformers to
          process both visual states and actions, naming the model Seer. It is initially pre-
          trained on large-scale robotic datasets, such as DROID, and can be adapted to real-
          world scenarios with a little fine-tuning data. Thanks to large-scale, end-to-end
          training and the synergy between vision and action, Seer significantly outperforms
          previous methods across both simulation and real-world experiments. It achieves
          improvements of 13% on the LIBERO-LONG benchmark, 21% on CALVIN
          ABC-D, and 43% in real-world tasks. Notably, Seer sets a new state-of-the-art on
          CALVIN ABC-D benchmark, achieving an average length of 4.28, and exhibits
          superior generalization for novel objects, lighting conditions, and environments
          under high-intensity disturbances on real-world scenarios. Code and models are
          publicly available at https://github.com/OpenRobotLab/Seer/.


                                                                 1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


1   I NTRODUCTION

Learning scalable and generalizable policies has become a main focus in robotic manipulation. Re-
cent efforts primarily fall into two categories: one focuses on “action,” like RT-1 (Brohan et al.,
2022), Octo (Ghosh et al., 2024), and OpenVLA (Kim et al., 2024), which perform naive behav-
ior cloning from large-scale robotic data such as Open X-Embodiment and DROID (Padalkar et al.,
2024; Khazatsky et al., 2024). The other emphasizes “vision” and may learn representations through
discriminative or generative ways and integrate with the control policy in a two-stage manner. For
example, R3M (Nair et al., 2022) and MVP (Xiao et al., 2022) learn discriminative representa-
tions from large-scale video datasets such as Ego4D (Grauman et al., 2022), while UniPI (Du et al.,
2024), Susie (Black et al., 2023), and CLOVER (Bu et al., 2024) develop generative models as
“world models” to facilitate manipulation policies. Apparently, the scaling laws in robot learning
are still evolving, with researchers exploring strategies through diverse data and methods.
We revisit these approaches and propose that a scalable manipulation policy should integrate vision
and action in a closed loop. This integration is natural and necessary, as humans typically coordinate
their hands and eyes to manipulate objects. Therefore, closing the loop during training and inference
are both necessary for a better scalable action learner.
This paper achieves this by introducing a simple yet effective end-to-end Predictive Inverse Dy-
namics Models (PIDM) that can unify the advantages of previous methods. As shown in Figure 1, it
predicts actions using Inverse Dynamics Models (IDM) conditioned on the “Predictive” visual states
of the robot. During training, both the visual prediction module and the inverse dynamics module
are optimized synergistically in an end-to-end manner. During inference, PIDM ensures continuous
synergy between vision and action at each execution step. In contrast to previous methods that use
IDM, our approach is the first to optimize vision and action in an end-to-end manner. Throughout
this paper, unless otherwise specified, PIDM is assumed to be end-to-end.
In practice, we use Transformers to process both visual states and actions and name the model Seer.
Seer benefits from PIDM by simultaneously leveraging visual, temporal, and action information
from large-scale datasets, and can be more scalable due to the Transformer architecture. We intro-
duce a foresight token to predict future RGB images and an action token to estimate intermediate
actions between current and predicted future observations. Both tokens are fused with input RGB
images, robot state, and language tokens through a multi-modal encoder. Importantly, we design a
unidirectional attention mask that allows the action token to deeply integrate past and future predic-
tive information, facilitating end-to-end training.
We conduct extensive experiments on both simulation and real-world benchmarks. On two widely
adopted simulation benchmarks, LIBERO-LONG (Liu et al., 2024) (10 tasks) and CALVIN ABC-
D (Mees et al., 2022) (34 tasks), our method demonstrates a 10.4% improvement in success rate
and a 0.75 increase in average task completion length compared to state-of-the-art baselines. Our
results further indicate superiority in long-horizon task completion, unseen scene generalization, and
data efficiency. Additionally, We evaluate our method on six challenging real-world tasks with over
900 trials. Leveraging the public large robot dataset DROID (Khazatsky et al., 2024), our method
consistently shows robustness, even under disturbances and with limited fine-tuning data.

2   R ELATED W ORK

Action-Centric Pre-training for Manipulation. Recent advancements in action-centric pre-
training have significantly enhanced manipulation policies. Approaches like SMART (Sun et al.,
2023) and DualMind (Wei et al., 2023) emphasize understanding the dynamics within environments.
Some studies (Agrawal et al., 2016; Brandfonbrener et al., 2024) integrate current and goal infor-
mation to extract effective features or serve as an auxiliary objective. Subsequently, a standard
behavior cloning approach is applied during downstream task implementations. Additionally, RT-
X (Padalkar et al., 2024) and Octo (Ghosh et al., 2024) focus on pre-training robot policies using
diverse datasets to facilitate extensive generalization capabilities. Recently, vision-language mod-
els (VLMs) have demonstrated considerable common-sense knowledge about the world and strong
capabilities in understanding both language and images. OpenVLA (Kim et al., 2024) further pre-
trains VLMs using robotic data, leveraging their prior knowledge to achieve robust performance
on downstream language-conditioned manipulation tasks. While these methods primarily supervise


                                                  2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


actions, they do not fully exploit the rich visual and temporal information inherent in robot demon-
strations. In contrast, we pre-train policies by integrating conditional visual foresight and inverse
dynamics prediction, allowing for comprehensive utilization of robotic data.
Vision-Centric Pre-training for Manipulation. Extensive research has focused on visual pre-
training for visuomotor control (Karamcheti et al., 2023; Zeng et al., 2024). One major direction
involves representation learning using techniques such as masked image modeling (Xiao et al., 2022;
Radosavovic et al., 2023; Seo et al., 2023), contrastive learning (Nair et al., 2022; Ma et al., 2022;
2023), and generative video pre-training (Wu et al., 2024). Another line of work focuses on visual
expectations guiding actions, termed the Predictive Inverse Dynamics Model (PIDM) (Bharadhwaj
et al., 2024; Wang et al., 2024; Soni et al., 2024; Chen et al., 2024). Firstly, a video generation
model predicts future visual sub-goals and is pre-trained on general visual datasets. Then, an in-
verse dynamics (goal-conditioned) low-level policy is trained on downstream robot data to predict
the intermediary actions. Compared to these two-stage PIDM, we propose an end-to-end PIDM
paradigm that leverages large-scale robot data for pre-training, showing better performance.
Pre-training Datasets for Manipulation. High-quality, large-scale, and diverse pre-training data is
crucial for acquiring manipulation skills. Image datasets (Deng et al., 2009), video datasets (Damen
et al., 2018; Goyal et al., 2017); (Grauman et al., 2022), and robot datasets are commonly utilized
for this purpose. Image datasets provide rich semantic information, while video datasets contain
temporal information. Both enhance visual representations for manipulation, however, their lack of
action labels and robot states limits their utility in decision-making. Some studies focus on collecting
robot behavior data (Mandlekar et al., 2019; Walke et al., 2023; Dasari et al., 2019; Bahl et al.,
2023; Jang et al., 2022), but the data diversity remains relatively constrained. Recent efforts aim to
further scale and diversify robot datasets. For instance, the Open X-Embodiment dataset (Padalkar
et al., 2024) aggregates data from 22 different robots across 21 institutions, covering 527 skills and
160,266 tasks. DROID (Khazatsky et al., 2024) includes 76,000 trajectories collected across 564
scenes and 86 tasks. In this work, we leverage DROID to pre-train policies for real-world validation,
demonstrating that rich behavioral data significantly enhances success rates in downstream tasks.


3     M ETHOD

In this section, we describe Seer in detail. We begin with a brief problem formulation (Section 3.1).
Next, we discuss keys in our end-to-end PIDM—conditional visual foresight and inverse dynamics
prediction (Section 3.2), enabling Seer to forecast the future and adjust actions accordingly. We then
elaborate on the carefully designed model architecture (Section 3.3), through which we formulate
Seer in an end-to-end manner. Finally, we provide implementation details (Section 3.4).

3.1   P ROBLEM F ORMULATION

Given a large-scale dataset of diverse manipulation demonstrations D1 = {(l, ot , st , at )Tt=0   i
                                                                                                    }N  1
                                                                                                      i=0 ,
                                                              Tj
and a smaller downstream dataset D2 = {(l, ot , st , at )t=0 }N    j=0 (where N1 >> N2 ), our goal is
                                                                     2

to enhance downstream task performance through effective pre-training on D1 , followed by fine-
tuning on D2 . Each trajectory {(l, ot , st , at )Tt=0 } provides the time step t, language instruction l,
RGB images ot from the eye-on-hand and eye-on-base views, robot states st and robot actions at ,
which include arm actions aarm (6D pose) and gripper actions agripper (open or close). It is important
to note that current large pre-training robot data may contain incomplete language annotations l
and task-agnostic actions at , such as random exploration in the environment (Mees et al., 2022).
However, Seer could handle this scenario effectively due to the following specific design choices.

3.2   E ND -T O -E ND PIDM

Vision: Conditional Visual Foresight. A key insight is that informative future states guide actions.
Therefore, we propose conditional visual foresight ffore to effectively anticipate future visual repre-
sentations. Seer takes as input a goal g in the form of language instructions or robot states, along
with historical observations ht , and predicts the RGB images at the time step t + n, denoted by ôt+n
                                          ôt+n = ffore (g, ht ).                                      (1)


                                                    3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                             Language      Robot State      Foresight Token   Action Token
                                 𝒍             𝑺𝒕                [FRS]            [INV]


  Current RGB image
          𝑶𝒕

                                                                               Unidirectional
                              Multi-Modal Encoder                                Attention


                                                add Mask Token
                                                                                                 Action


                             Conditional Visual                        Inverse Dynamics
                                                Vision        Action
                                Foresight                                  Prediction
  Predicted Image


Figure 2: Pipeline of Seer. Seer consists of three parts: Multi-Modal Encoder, Conditional Visual
Foresight and Inverse Dynamics Prediction. In Multi-Modal Encoder, Seer incorporates the fore-
sight token [FRS] and the action token [INV]. Both tokens attend to the RGB images, language
tokens, and robot state tokens, with [INV] also attending to [FRS]. In Conditional Visual Foresight,
the encoded [FRS], along with new mask tokens, aims to reconstruct future RGB images. In Inverse
Dynamics Prediction, the encoded [INV] and other tokens speculate intermediary actions.
The historical observations ht consist of the RGB images ot−m+1:t and robot states st−m+1:t over
the last m time steps. Due to the rich information contained in RGB images, their abundance, and
easy accessibility, we select them as future representatives. Following (He et al., 2022), the loss
function Lfore computes the mean squared error (MSE) at the pixel level
                                    Lfore = ∥ffore (g, ht ) − ot+n ∥22 .                             (2)
Action: Inverse Dynamics Prediction. Given two temporally ordered observations ot and ot+1 ,
inverse dynamics prediction estimates the intermediate action ât . Here, we extend inverse dynam-
ics finv to predict the action sequence ât:t+n−1 given goal g, historical observations ht and ot+n .
Specifically, we replace ground truth ot+n with the predicted representation ôlt+n in the latent space

                                     ât:t+n−1 = finv (g, ht , ôlt+n ).                             (3)
The loss function Linv comprises the arm action loss Larm and the gripper action loss Lgripper
                                        Linv = Larm + λLgripper ,                                    (4)
where Larm is a Smooth-L1 loss, Lgripper is a Binary Cross Entropy (BCE) loss and λ is set to 0.01.
Close the Loop between Vision and Action. Seer integrates conditional visual foresight with in-
verse dynamics prediction effectively through training, enabling full utilization of both vision and
action information in robot data. In detail, ffore incorporates a clear goal g and historical observa-
tions ht to predict future RGB images ôt+n . A latent representation ôlt+n (leading to ôt+n ) and ht
facilitate action prediction via finv . Due to the model design of Seer, all these processes are executed
in an end-to-end manner. The overall training loss L comprises Lfore and Linv
                                          L = αLfore + Linv ,                                        (5)
where α is a hyperparameter set to 0.5. Compared to single-step action prediction, predicting mul-
tiple steps provides temporal action consistency and robustness to idle actions (Chi et al., 2023).
During inference, we can either discard actions beyond the first step or apply temporal ensemble
techniques to compute a weighted average of the multi-step actions.

3.3   M ODEL ARCHITECTURE

Input Tokenizers. As illustrated in Figure 2, the model processes three types of inputs: language,
images, and robot states. We use different encoders to tokenize each modality accordingly. For
language inputs, we first tokenize the text and then use a CLIP text encoder (Radford et al., 2021) to
obtain text embeddings, which are subsequently projected into a latent space using a linear layer. For


                                                     4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


image inputs, the images are first patchified and passed through a pre-trained Vision Transformer
(ViT) (He et al., 2022) to generate visual embeddings. Since the ViT produces hundreds of em-
beddings per image, imposing a significant computational burden on the transformer backbone, and
much of the visual information is irrelevant to the manipulation task, we employ a perceiver resam-
pler (Alayrac et al., 2022) to extract task-relevant visual features and reduce the number of image
tokens. For the robot state, we encode it into state tokens using a multi-layer perceptron (MLP).
Multi-Modal Encoder. The multi-modal encoder in our model is based on a GPT-2 style trans-
former architecture. Before feeding the sequential language-image-state pairs into the transformer,
we append readout tokens [INV] and [FRS] to each timestep. These readout tokens attend to em-
beddings from different modalities, serving as image and action latents used for conditional visual
foresight and inverse dynamics prediction. To incorporate temporal information, we also add a
learnable position embedding to the tokens for each timestep.
The [FRS] token aims to facilitate conditional visual foresight, corresponding to aforementioned
ôlt+n . It attends to language, historical image and state tokens. Conversely, the [INV] token performs
inverse dynamics prediction conditioned on the predicted visual foresight, attending to the input
tokens and, crucially, the foresight token [FRS]. This special unidirectional attention mask in a
transformer encoder, highlighted in Figure 2, brings two benefits. First, this will help the [INV]
token deeply integrate both past and future predictive information within a multi-layer network.
Second, this enables an end-to-end training paradigm through the fusion in the latent space.
Readout Decoders. Encoded by the multi-modal encoder, the action and image latents generated by
the [INV] and [FRS] readout tokens are fed into the readout decoders to predict images and actions.
The action decoder utilizes an MLP to transform the action latent into the action vector at . For
image decoding, we employ a vision transformer (ViT) as the image decoder, following (He et al.,
2022). The image decoder takes the image latent along with masked tokens as input. Processed by
ViT, the output corresponding to each masked token represents a specific patch of the image.


3.4   I MPLEMENTATION D ETAILS

Training. The training objectives, conditional visual foresight and inverse dynamics prediction,
remain consistent between pre-training and fine-tuning. Notably, two key differences in model con-
figurations exist between these phases. First, missing language instructions are common in robotic
pre-training datasets. In such cases, during pre-training, the robot state token at the future time step
t + n + 1 acts as a goal. The [FRS] would attend to it instead of the language token, ensuring [FRS]
to acquire unambiguous information. Second, pre-training data may include random or meaning-
less behaviors, such as environmental exploration. Consequently the [INV] and [FRS] tokens do not
attend to previous image and robot state tokens to prevent overfitting to any specific behaviors.
Inference. During inference, the complete language instruction l, robot states s, and image obser-
vations o are provided as inputs. The [FRS] token attends to the historical image, state, and language
instruction tokens to perform conditional visual foresight, predicting the future images. In turn,
the [INV] token attends to the input tokens and one more foresight [FRS] token to perform inverse
dynamics prediction, outputting the action. Further details are available in the Appendix.
Model. Throughout the training process, the pre-trained visual and text encoders are kept frozen,
comprising a total of 251M untrainable parameters. The rest components are fully trainable. The
standard version of Seer possesses 65M trainable parameters. Additionally, we have scaled up the
parameter size and developed a Seer-Large variant, which contains 315M trainable parameters. Un-
less specified otherwise, the mention of Seer refers to the version with 65M trainable parameters.


4     S IMULATION E XPERIMENTS

We conduct experiments on two simulation benchmarks LIBERO-LONG (Liu et al., 2024),
CALVIN ABC-D (Mees et al., 2022). Our aim is to answer: 1) How does our method perform
on challenging simulation benchmarks? 2) Does our pipeline maintain consistent effectiveness as
the amount of downstream fine-tuning data varies? 3) Are the training objectives in Seer effective?


                                                   5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025



Table 1: LIBERO-LONG results. For each task, we present the average performance of top-3
checkpoints averaged over 20 rollouts. The metric “Avg. Success” measures the average success
rate across ten tasks. Seer outperforms baselines with higher Avg. Success and better results on
most tasks. The best results are bolded.

                                      Put soup            Put box        Turn on        Put bowl in
                      Avg.
      Method                           and box           and butter     stove and       drawer and
                    Success ↑
                                      in basket          in basket       put pot          close it
    MTACT             41.0              30.0               50.0           75.0             85.0
      MVP             68.2              83.3               90.0           80.0             88.3
      MPI             77.3              66.6               86.6           96.6             95.0
   OpenVLA            54.0              35.0               95.0           65.0             45.0
  Seer (scratch)      78.7              80.0               90.0           91.7             81.7
      Seer            87.7              91.7               90.0           98.3             100
  Put mugs on       Pick book       Put mug on           Put soup                      Put mug in
                                                                      Put both pots
    left and       and place it    plate and put         and sauce                    microwave and
                                                                        on stove
  right plates       in back      pudding to right       in basket                       close it
       20.0           75.0              0.00               0.00           10.0             65.0
       46.7           63.3              45.0               78.3           60.0             46.7
       83.3           83.3              56.6               86.6           40.0             78.3
       40.0           80.0              60.0               45.0           20.0             55.0
       85.0           65.0              86.7               88.3           51.7             66.7
       91.7           93.3              85.0               88.3           61.7             71.7

4.1    B ENCHMARKS , BASELINES AND M ETRICS

Benchmarks. LIBERO-LONG (Liu et al., 2024) encompasses diverse object interactions and versa-
tile motor skills. We pre-train our model on the LIBERO-90 dataset, which includes demonstrations
for 90 short-horizon tasks with full annotations, and then fine-tune and evaluate it on LIBERO-
LONG, which features long-horizon tasks. CALVIN ABC-D (Mees et al., 2022) is a benchmark
focusing on language-conditioned visual robot manipulation. It contains 34 tasks across four dis-
tinct environments (Env A, B, C, and D), each varying in object and scene visual appearance. For
pre-training, we utilize the official robot play data with no language instructions, while the remain-
ing data with full annotations is used for fine-tuning.
Baselines. For LIBERO-LONG, we implement a vanilla multi-task policy MTACT without pre-
training, general image-based pre-trained policy MVP (Xiao et al., 2022), video-based pre-trained
policy MPI (Zeng et al., 2024) and robot-data-based pre-trained policy OpenVLA (Kim et al.,
2024). For CALVIN ABC-D, we select baselines that have demonstrated top competitive perfor-
mance in prior reports. Roboflamingo (Li et al., 2023) is a method stepped from a vision-language
model (Alayrac et al., 2022). Susie (Black et al., 2023) and CLOVER (Bu et al., 2024) are selected as
the representative of two-stage PIDM methods. GR-1 (Wu et al., 2024) enhances manipulation with
generative video pre-training, while the 3D Diffusor Actor (Ke et al., 2024) specializes in capturing
3D representations to enhance manipulation.
Metrics. In LIBERO-LONG, each method is evaluated across 20 rollouts with varying initial states
for each task. We report both per-task and average success rates. In CALVIN ABC-D, the robot
executes 1,000 task sequences, with each sequence comprising five consecutive tasks. We report the
average success rates and the average length of completed sequences.

4.2    S IMULATION M AIN R ESULTS

We conduct experiments on the LIBERO-LONG benchmark. As presented in Table 1, our policy
achieved an average success rate of 78.7% without pre-training. After pre-training, the success rate
increases by 9%, significantly outperforming the baselines. Compared to MTACT, our policy is
more effective and benefits further from pre-training. The visual pre-training methods MVP and
MPI achieve performance levels only comparable to our policy without pre-training, suggesting
that visual pre-training alone is insufficient for manipulation tasks. Pre-training the entire policy
using robotic data is necessary to enhance both perception and decision-making capabilities. In
comparison to OpenVLA, Seer (316M total parameter, 65M trainable parameter) uses only 4% of its
parameters (7B) yet achieves a 62% relative improvement in performance. These results underscore
the advantages Seer and demonstrate the effectiveness of our pre-training objectives.


                                                     6
  Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


  Table 2: CALVIN ABC-D results. We present the average success rates of top-3 checkpoints
  computed over 1000 rollouts for each task and the average number of completed tasks to solve
  5 instructions consecutively (Avg. Len.). Seer shows consistent and significant superiority over
  baselines. The best results are bolded.

                                                                                              Task completed in a row
                             Method
                                                            1                     2               3                  4                 5          Avg. Len. ↑
                       Roboflamingo                    82.4                      61.9           46.6           33.1                   23.5            2.47
                            Susie                      87.0                      69.0           49.0           38.0                   26.0            2.69
                            GR-1                       85.4                      71.2           59.6           49.7                   40.1            3.06
                      3D Diffusor Actor                92.2                      78.7           63.9           51.2                   41.2            3.27
                          CLOVER                       96.0                      83.5           70.8           57.5                   45.4            3.53
                        Seer (scratch)                 93.0                      82.4           72.3           62.6                   53.3            3.64
                            Seer                       94.4                      87.2           79.9           72.2                   64.3            3.98
                     Seer-Large (scratch)              92.7                      84.6           76.1           68.9                   60.3            3.83
                         Seer-Large                    96.3                      91.6           86.1           80.3                   74.0            4.28


  We evaluate various methods on CALVIN ABC-D. Evaluation is conducted in Environment D,
  which differs visually from Environments A, B, and C where the training data was collected. No-
  tably, the pre-training data lacks language annotations and includes meaningless actions and random
  explorations within these environments. As shown in Table 2, our method significantly outperforms
  the baselines. Our method surpasses the two-stage PIDM Susie (Wu et al., 2024) by a large margin,
  and is markedly superior to CLOVER (Bu et al., 2024), probably due to our delicate model design
  and end-to-end training paradigm. It also outperforms the video generative pre-training method
  GR-1 (Wu et al., 2024), demonstrating the advantage of end-to-end joint pre-training of visual pre-
  diction and action execution. Moreover, the results reveal that our pre-training method delivers
  considerable gains even on datasets lacking language annotations and containing noise, highlighting
  its adaptability and flexibility. The Seer-Large variant achieves Avg. Len. of 4.28, establishing a
  new state-of-the-art on CALVIN ABC-D benchmark.

   4.3                   DATA E FFICIENCY


                   100          LIBERO-LONG                                            CALVIN ABC-D                            4.5    Scaling Experiments
                                                                            4                                                          w/o pretrain
                                                                                                                                       w/ pretrain
                    75
Success Rate (%)


                                                                            3                                                  4.0
                                                                Avg. Len.


                                                                                                                   Avg. Len.


                    50                                                      2
                                  Previous SOTA                                          Previous SOTA                         3.5
                    25            Ours (w/o Pre-training)                   1            Ours (w/o Pre-training)
                                  Ours (w/ Pre-training)                                 Ours (w/ Pre-training)
                     0 10 20      40        70     100                      0 10 20      40        70     100 3.0                    65M         107M      316M
                               Data Proportion (%)                                    Data Proportion (%)                                  Trainable Param.

  Figure 3: Data efficiency and Scalability. The two figures on the left depict Seer’s performance on
  LIBERO and CALVIN using different proportions of the downstream data. And the figure on the
  right illustrates Seer’s performance on CALVIN with various model sizes.
  Collecting robot data is both time-consuming and labor-intensive, making data efficiency crucial for
  robot learning. We evaluate our method on two benchmarks: LIBERO-LONG and CALVIN ABC-
  D, using 10%, 20%, 40%, 70%, and 100% of the available data to fine-tune pre-trained policies or to
  train policies from scratch. The results, shown in Figure 3, demonstrate that our method consistently
  enhances policy performance across varying data sizes. Notably, under data-scarce conditions with
  only 10% of the training data, the pre-trained policy achieves a 187% relative improvement in suc-
  cess rate on LIBERO-LONG and a 150% relative improvement in average task length on CALVIN
  ABC-D compared to training from scratch. Additionally, our method only requires 70% data on
  LIBERO-LONG and on CALVIN ABC-D respectively to surpass state-of-the-art baselines. These
  results highlight the potential of Seer in scenarios with limited fine-tuning data.


                                                                                          7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025



Table 3: Ablation studies on fine-tuning and pre-training objectives. Integrating the conditional
visual foresight objective Lfore and inverse dynamics prediction objective Linv yields the best perfor-
mance among pre-training and fine-tuning.

               (a) Fine-tuning objectives.                         (b) Pre-training objectives.

    Fine-tuning                                  Avg.    Pre-train                                    Avg.
                    1     2      3     4     5                         1     2      3      4      5
    Lfore Linv                                   Len.   Lfore Linv                                    Len.
    ×      ×       89.9 77.6 64.6 54.4 44.8 3.31        ×      ×      93.0 82.4 72.3 62.6 53.3 3.64
    ✓      ×       91.2 78.6 67.1 56.6 47.8 3.41        ✓      ×      92.3 83.0 74.2 65.9 57.5 3.73
    ✓      ✓       93.0 82.4 72.3 62.6 53.3 3.64        ✓      ✓      94.4 87.2 79.9 72.2 64.3 3.98


4.4     S CALABILITY

We evaluate Seer with different model size on the CALVIN ABC-D benchmark. Their results for
the “Avg. Len.” metrics are presented in Figure 3. It is observed that, regradless of the involvement
of pre-training, the performances improve with the increase in trainable parameters, showcasing the
scalability of Seer.
4.5     A BLATION S TUDIES

We investigate the contributions of conditional visual foresight objective Lfore and inverse dynamics
prediction objective Linv during pre-training and fine-tuning on CALVIN ABC-D. The objectives
during the fine-tuning phase are most closely related to performance in downstream tasks. Thus, we
prioritize ablating the fine-tuning objectives before examining the pre-training objectives.
Fine-tuning objectives. We study the importance of Lfore and Linv during fine-tuning. As shown in
Table 3a, compared to the vanilla baseline, which directly performs behavioral cloning (w/o Lfore ,
w/o Linv ), separately predicting additional future images (w/ Lfore , w/o Linv ) yields improvements.
This indicates the benefits of involving future image predictions (Wu et al., 2024). More importantly,
integrating Lfore and Linv results in a further boost in performance. This demonstrates that utilizing
visual expectations to guide action predictions is a more effective strategy for leveraging the rich
visual and temporal information inherent in robot data than the ablated version (w/ Lfore , w/o Linv ).
Pre-training objectives. Once the fine-tuning objectives (Lfore + Linv ) are established, we start to
ablate pre-training objectives. The results in Table 3b indicate that pre-training only the vision pre-
diction module (w/ Lfore , w/o Linv ) yields certain benefits, probably due to the vision priors learned
from the extensive data. Moreover, pre-training the whole policy (w/ Lfore , w/ Linv ) through the inte-
gration of visual foresight and inverse dynamics results in greater improvements. This underscores
the importance of the synergy between action and vision priors distilled from large robot datasets in
enhancing performance on downstream tasks.

5     R EAL -W ORLD E XPERIMENTS

We evaluated Seer on six real-world tasks, including four focused on generalization and two focused
on high precision and rich contact. We aim to answer: 1) Is Seer effective in real-world tasks? 2)
Does pre-training consistently improve performance under intense disturbances?

5.1     R EAL - WORLD B ENCHMARK

Real-world Setup. We evaluate on a Franka Research 3 robot with a Robotiq-2f-85 gripper across
six tasks, using two RealSense D435i cameras configured as Eye-on-Hand and Eye-on-Base for
visual input. Four generalization-centric tasks are shown in Figure 4, and two high-precision and
contact-rich tasks are presented in Figure A-3 in the appendix.
Datasets. For pre-training, we select the DROID dataset with Franka robots performing tasks in
varied scenes. In the fine-tuning phase, we capture RGB images, robot states, and actions at 15 Hz,
collecting 100 demonstrations per task.
Baselines and Metrics. We benchmark against MVP (image-based pre-trained), MPI (video-based
pre-trained), and OpenVLA (robot-data-based pre-trained). Each method is evaluated over 15 trials


                                                   8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                             (1) Flip White Bowl             (2) Stack Cups


         Real-world Setup & Objects                            (3) Wipe Board             (4) Pick, Place, Close

Figure 4: Real-world Benchmark of four generalization-centric tasks. Left: We use a Franka
Research 3 robot with a Robotiq-2f-85 gripper and two RealSense D435i cameras. Right: We
design four real-world manipulation tasks: (1) Flip White Bowl, (2) Stack Cups, (3) Wipe Board,
(4) Pick, Place, Close. The detailed description of these tasks are included in A.6.1.
per task, with variations in the initial states of the objects. Each method is allowed three executions
per trial, with the mean performance reported. Given the long-horizon and challenging nature of the
tasks, we define two metrics: Success Rate (SR) and Score (as referenced in (Kim et al., 2024)).
The Score accumulates during the completion of specific intermediary stages, while SR is recorded
as 100% only upon successful completion of the entire task. Details are available in the Appendix.

5.2    R EAL - WORLD MAIN RESULTS

Table 4: Real-world main results. We evaluate all the methods with 15 (cases) × 3 (repeated trials)
rollouts per task. Our method achieves better performances among all tasks than baselines.
                   Demos                                     SR (%) ↑ / Score ↑
      Method
                  Per Task
                             Flip White Bowl   Stack Cups      Wipe Board       Pick, Place, Close       Avg.
     MVP            100        80.0 / 24.0     26.7 / 26.0      53.3 / 38.0        60.0 / 31.0        55.0 / 29.8
     MPI            100        66.7 / 21.0     26.7 / 29.0      33.3 / 35.0        66.7 / 32.0        48.4 / 29.3
  OpenVLA           100        53.3 / 19.0     0.00 / 8.00      0.00 / 4.00        13.3 / 13.0        16.7 / 11.0
 Seer (scratch)     100        60.0 / 19.0     46.7 / 35.0      60.0 / 37.0        73.3 / 40.0        60.0 / 32.8
     Seer           100        86.7 / 26.0     60.0 / 42.0      73.3 / 41.0        86.7 / 42.0        78.4 / 39.5

As can be seen in Table 4, our pre-trained policy could outperform all the baselines over all tasks.
Specifically, our method improves the average success rate and the accumulated score from 60.0% to
78.4% and from 32.8 to 39.5 compared to the version trained from scratch. In comparison with MVP
and MPI, which only pre-train vision encoders, our results reinforce the importance of pre-training
the entire policy, aligning with findings from simulation experiments. Regarding the performance
of OpenVLA in the real world, it has a significantly larger tunable model size (3B here) during full
fine-tuning and relies solely on an eye-on-base camera. This could lead to severe overfitting and
coarse action predictions, particularly in tasks where objects are small (as in Stack Cups) or located
far from the camera (as in Wipe Board). In contrast, our method demonstrates better handling of
these tasks due to its moderate model size and comprehensive data utilization. We also conduct
evaluation on two high-precision and contact-rich tasks, with the results presented in Table A-III.

5.3    ROBUSTNESS

We propose several generalization types to assess the effectiveness of our pre-trained policy across
multiple settings. As shown in Figure 5, in Flip White Bowl, we introduce bowls of different col-
ors alongside the original white bowl. These bowls share identical shape, size, and material, which


                                                     9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


    Evaluation w/o Multi Objects        Evaluation w/ Multi Objects        Evaluation w/ Clean Background     Evaluation w/ Natural Background

        Type                   Method            SR (%) / Score                  Type                    Method           SR (%) / Score

                       Ours (w/o pre-train)         33.3 / 11.0                                Ours (w/o pre-train)          6.67 / 13.0
    Multi Objects                                                            Background
                              Ours                  60.0 / 18.0                                       Ours                   33.3 / 29.0


    Evaluation w/o Novel Objects        Evaluation w/ Novel Objects           Evaluation w/o Lightning             Evaluation w/ Lightning

        Type                   Method             SR (%) / Score                 Type                Method             SR (%) / Score

                        Ours (w/o pre-train)        46.7 / 37.0                              Ours (w/o pre-train)          46.7 / 30.0
    Novel Objects                                                             Lightning
                               Ours                 60.0 / 39.0                                     Ours                   66.7 / 37.0

Figure 5: Generalization evaluation. We design a generalization test per task with different dis-
turbances. Top Left: In Flip Bowl, we put several bowls with the same shape, size, material and
different colors around the original white one. Top Right: In Stack Cups, we remove the original
black backdrop and keep the natural background. Bottom Left: In Wipe Board, we replace the
chocolate balls with diverse novel small objects. Bottom Right: In Pick, Place, Close, we introduce
an additional light source. Among all tests, our pre-trained method brings consistent benefits.
could potentially mislead the algorithm. In Wipe Board, we replace the original chocolate balls
with novel objects that vary in mass, shape, and coefficients of friction, thereby increasing the task’s
difficulty. In both scenarios, our pre-trained policy demonstrates significant improvements in suc-
cess rate (SR) and Score. We attribute these enhancements to the extensive variety of interactable
and distractible objects present in the pre-training dataset, which strengthens the model’s semantic
understanding. Additionally, in Pick, Place, Close, we incorporate a strong light source that alters
the visual appearance of objects in RGB images. In Stack Cups, we remove the clean black back-
drop and replace it with a natural background, introducing complex disturbances such as variable
lighting, unseen distractions, and effects on camera exposure. Even under these challenging condi-
tions, our pre-trained policy continues to deliver satisfactory results. These results demonstrate that
extensive pre-training on large-scale robot datasets with diverse scenes enhances robustness.

6     C ONCLUSION AND L IMITATIONS

In this work, we introduce Seer, an end-to-end predictive inverse dynamics model that synergizes
conditional visual foresight with inverse dynamics prediction for manipulation. Seer achieves state-
of-the-art results on two simulation benchmarks, and shows significant improvements and robustness
in real-world experiments after pre-training on the large DROID robot dataset. The limitations
mainly lie in two aspects. Firstly, we only evaluate six downstream tasks. A broader spectrum of
high-precision and contact-rich tasks remains to be explored. Secondly, evaluating across different
robots is also necessary to test Seer’s cross-embodiment capability.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

This work is supported by the National Key R&D Program of China (2022ZD0160201), Shanghai
Artificial Intelligence Laboratory, and China Postdoctoral Science Foundation (2023M741848).


                                                                      10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


R EFERENCES

Pulkit Agrawal, Ashvin Nair, P. Abbeel, Jitendra Malik, and Sergey Levine. Learning to poke by
  poking: Experiential learning of intuitive physics. In NeurIPS, 2016.
Jean-Baptiste Alayrac, Jeff Donahue, Pauline Luc, Antoine Miech, Iain Barr, Yana Hasson, Karel
  Lenc, Arthur Mensch, Katherine Millican, Malcolm Reynolds, et al. Flamingo: a visual language
  model for few-shot learning. In NeurIPS, 2022.
Shikhar Bahl, Russell Mendonca, Lili Chen, Unnat Jain, and Deepak Pathak. Affordances from
  human videos as a versatile representation for robotics. In CVPR, 2023.
Homanga Bharadhwaj, Debidatta Dwibedi, Abhinav Gupta, Shubham Tulsiani, Carl Doersch, Ted
  Xiao, Dhruv Shah, Fei Xia, Dorsa Sadigh, and Sean Kirmani. Gen2act: Human video generation
  in novel scenarios enables generalizable robot manipulation. In Arxiv, 2024.
Kevin Black, Mitsuhiko Nakamoto, Pranav Atreya, Homer Walke, Chelsea Finn, Aviral Kumar, and
  Sergey Levine. Zero-shot robotic manipulation with pretrained image-editing diffusion models.
  In NeurIPS, 2023.
David Brandfonbrener, Ofir Nachum, and Joan Bruna. Inverse dynamics pretraining learns good
  representations for multitask imitation. In NeurIPS, 2024.
Anthony Brohan, Noah Brown, Justice Carbajal, Yevgen Chebotar, Joseph Dabis, Chelsea Finn,
  Keerthana Gopalakrishnan, Karol Hausman, Alex Herzog, Jasmine Hsu, et al. Rt-1: Robotics
  transformer for real-world control at scale. In RSS, 2022.
Qingwen Bu, Jia Zeng, Li Chen, Yanchao Yang, Guyue Zhou, Junchi Yan, Ping Luo, Heming Cui,
  Yi Ma, and Hongyang Li. Closed-loop visuomotor control with generative expectation for robotic
  manipulation. In NeurIPS, 2024.
Xiaoyu Chen, Junliang Guo, Tianyu He, Chuheng Zhang, Pushi Zhang, Derek Cathera Yang,
  Li Zhao, and Jiang Bian. Igor: Image-goal representations are the atomic control units for foun-
  dation models in embodied ai. In ArXiv, 2024.
Cheng Chi, Siyuan Feng, Yilun Du, Zhenjia Xu, Eric Cousineau, Benjamin Burchfiel, and Shuran
  Song. Diffusion policy: Visuomotor policy learning via action diffusion. In RSS, 2023.
Dima Damen, Hazel Doughty, Giovanni Maria Farinella, Sanja Fidler, Antonino Furnari, Evangelos
  Kazakos, Davide Moltisanti, Jonathan Munro, Toby Perrett, Will Price, et al. Scaling egocentric
  vision: The epic-kitchens dataset. In ECCV, 2018.
Sudeep Dasari, Frederik Ebert, Stephen Tian, Suraj Nair, Bernadette Bucher, Karl Schmeckpeper,
  Siddharth Singh, Sergey Levine, and Chelsea Finn. Robonet: Large-scale multi-robot learning.
  In Arxiv, 2019.
Jia Deng, Wei Dong, Richard Socher, Li-Jia Li, Kai Li, and Li Fei-Fei. Imagenet: A large-scale
   hierarchical image database. In CVPR, 2009.
Yilun Du, Sherry Yang, Bo Dai, Hanjun Dai, Ofir Nachum, Josh Tenenbaum, Dale Schuurmans, and
  Pieter Abbeel. Learning universal policies via text-guided video generation. In NeurIPS, 2024.
Dibya Ghosh, Homer Walke, Karl Pertsch, Kevin Black, Oier Mees, Sudeep Dasari, Joey Hejna,
  Tobias Kreiman, Charles Xu, et al. Octo: An open-source generalist robot policy. In Arxiv, 2024.
Raghav Goyal, Samira Ebrahimi Kahou, Vincent Michalski, Joanna Materzynska, Susanne West-
  phal, Heuna Kim, Valentin Haenel, Ingo Fruend, Peter Yianilos, Moritz Mueller-Freitag, et al.
  The” something something” video database for learning and evaluating visual common sense. In
  ICCV, 2017.
Kristen Grauman, Andrew Westbury, Eugene Byrne, Zachary Chavis, Antonino Furnari, Rohit Gird-
  har, Jackson Hamburger, Hao Jiang, Miao Liu, Xingyu Liu, et al. Ego4d: Around the world in
  3,000 hours of egocentric video. In CVPR, 2022.


                                               11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Kaiming He, Xinlei Chen, Saining Xie, Yanghao Li, Piotr Dollár, and Ross Girshick. Masked
  autoencoders are scalable vision learners. In CVPR, 2022.
Eric Jang, Alex Irpan, Mohi Khansari, Daniel Kappler, Frederik Ebert, Corey Lynch, Sergey Levine,
  and Chelsea Finn. Bc-z: Zero-shot task generalization with robotic imitation learning. In CoRL,
  2022.
Siddharth Karamcheti, Suraj Nair, Annie S Chen, Thomas Kollar, Chelsea Finn, Dorsa Sadigh, and
  Percy Liang. Language-driven representation learning for robotics. In RSS, 2023.
Tsung-Wei Ke, Nikolaos Gkanatsios, and Katerina Fragkiadaki. 3d diffuser actor: Policy diffusion
  with 3d scene representations. In CoRL, 2024.
Alexander Khazatsky, Karl Pertsch, Suraj Nair, Ashwin Balakrishna, Sudeep Dasari, Siddharth
  Karamcheti, Soroush Nasiriany, Mohan Kumar Srirama, Lawrence Yunliang Chen, Kirsty Ellis,
  et al. Droid: A large-scale in-the-wild robot manipulation dataset. In RSS, 2024.
Moo Jin Kim, Karl Pertsch, Siddharth Karamcheti, Ted Xiao, Ashwin Balakrishna, Suraj Nair,
 Rafael Rafailov, Ethan Foster, Grace Lam, Pannag Sanketi, et al. Openvla: An open-source
 vision-language-action model. In CoRL, 2024.
Xinghang Li, Minghuan Liu, Hanbo Zhang, Cunjun Yu, Jie Xu, Hongtao Wu, Chilam Cheang,
  Ya Jing, Weinan Zhang, Huaping Liu, et al. Vision-language foundation models as effective robot
  imitators. In ICLR, 2023.
Bo Liu, Yifeng Zhu, Chongkai Gao, Yihao Feng, Qiang Liu, Yuke Zhu, and Peter Stone. Libero:
  Benchmarking knowledge transfer for lifelong robot learning. In NeurIPS, 2024.
Yecheng Jason Ma, Shagun Sodhani, Dinesh Jayaraman, Osbert Bastani, Vikash Kumar, and Amy
  Zhang. Vip: Towards universal visual reward and representation via value-implicit pre-training.
  In ICLR, 2022.
Yecheng Jason Ma, Vikash Kumar, Amy Zhang, Osbert Bastani, and Dinesh Jayaraman. Liv:
  Language-image representations and rewards for robotic control. In ICML, 2023.
Ajay Mandlekar, Jonathan Booher, Max Spero, Albert Tung, Anchit Gupta, Yuke Zhu, Animesh
  Garg, Silvio Savarese, and Li Fei-Fei. Scaling robot supervision to hundreds of hours with robo-
  turk: Robotic manipulation dataset through human reasoning and dexterity. In IROS, 2019.
Oier Mees, Lukas Hermann, Erick Rosete-Beas, and Wolfram Burgard. Calvin: A benchmark for
  language-conditioned policy learning for long-horizon robot manipulation tasks. In RA-L, 2022.
Suraj Nair, Aravind Rajeswaran, Vikash Kumar, Chelsea Finn, and Abhinav Gupta. R3m: A univer-
  sal visual representation for robot manipulation. In CoRL, 2022.
Abhishek Padalkar, Acorn Pooley, Ajinkya Jain, Alex Bewley, Alex Herzog, Alex Irpan, Alexan-
  der Khazatsky, Anant Rai, Anika Singh, Anthony Brohan, Antonin Raffin, Ayzaan Wahid, Ben
  Burgess-Limerick, Beomjoon Kim, Bernhard Schölkopf, Brian Ichter, Cewu Lu, Charles Xu,
  Chelsea Finn, Chenfeng Xu, Cheng Chi, Chenguang Huang, Christine Chan, Chuer Pan, Chuyuan
  Fu, Coline Devin, Danny Driess, Deepak Pathak, Dhruv Shah, Dieter Büchler, Dmitry Kalash-
  nikov, Dorsa Sadigh, Edward Johns, Federico Ceola, Fei Xia, Freek Stulp, Gaoyue Zhou, Gau-
  rav S. Sukhatme, Gautam Salhotra, Ge Yan, Giulio Schiavi, Hao Su, Haoshu Fang, Haochen Shi,
  Heni Ben Amor, Henrik I Christensen, Hiroki Furuta, Homer Walke, Hongjie Fang, Igor Mor-
  datch, Ilija Radosavovic, Isabel Leal, Jacky Liang, Jaehyung Kim, Jan Schneider, Jasmine Hsu,
  Jeannette Bohg, Jeff Bingham, Jiajun Wu, Jialin Wu, Jianlan Luo, Jiayuan Gu, Jie Tan, Jihoon Oh,
  Jitendra Malik, Jonathan Tompson, Jonathan Yang, Joseph J. Lim, João Silvério, Junhyek Han,
  Kanishka Rao, Karl Pertsch, Karol Hausman, Keegan Go, Keerthana Gopalakrishnan, Ken Gold-
  berg, Kendra Byrne, Kenneth Oslund, Kento Kawaharazuka, Kevin Zhang, Keyvan Majd, Krishan
  Rana, Krishna Parasuram Srinivasan, Lawrence Yunliang Chen, Lerrel Pinto, Liam Tan, Lionel
  Ott, Lisa Lee, Masayoshi Tomizuka, Maximilian Du, Michael Ahn, Mingtong Zhang, Mingyu
  Ding, Mohan Kumar Srirama, Mohit Sharma, Moo Jin Kim, Naoaki Kanazawa, Nicklas Hansen,
  Nicolas Manfred Otto Heess, Nikhil J. Joshi, Niko Suenderhauf, Norman Di Palo, Nur Muham-
  mad Mahi Shafiullah, Oier Mees, Oliver Kroemer, Pannag R. Sanketi, Paul Wohlhart, Peng Xu,


                                               12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


  Pierre Sermanet, Priya Sundaresan, Quan Ho Vuong, Rafael Rafailov, Ran Tian, Ria Doshi, Rus-
  sell Mendonca, Rutav Shah, Ryan Hoque, Ryan C. Julian, Samuel Bustamante, Sean Kirmani,
  Sergey Levine, Sherry Moore, Shikhar Bahl, Shivin Dass, Shuran Song, Sichun Xu, Siddhant
  Haldar, Simeon Adebola, Simon Guist, Soroush Nasiriany, Stefan Schaal, Stefan Welker, Stephen
  Tian, Sudeep Dasari, Suneel Belkhale, Takayuki Osa, Tatsuya Harada, Tatsuya Matsushima, Ted
  Xiao, Tianhe Yu, Tianli Ding, Todor Davchev, Tony Zhao, Travis Armstrong, Trevor Darrell,
  Vidhi Jain, Vincent Vanhoucke, Wei Zhan, Wenxuan Zhou, Wolfram Burgard, Xi Chen, Xiaolong
  Wang, Xinghao Zhu, Xuanlin Li, Yao Lu, Yevgen Chebotar, Yifan Zhou, Yifeng Zhu, Ying Xu,
  Yixuan Wang, Yonatan Bisk, Yoonyoung Cho, Youngwoon Lee, Yuchen Cui, Yueh hua Wu, Yu-
  jin Tang, Yuke Zhu, Yunzhu Li, Yusuke Iwasawa, Yutaka Matsuo, Zhuo Xu, and Zichen Jeff Cui.
  Open x-embodiment: Robotic learning datasets and rt-x models. In ICRA, 2024.
Alec Radford, Jong Wook Kim, Chris Hallacy, Aditya Ramesh, Gabriel Goh, Sandhini Agarwal,
  Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, Pamela Mishkin, Jack Clark, et al. Learning transferable visual
  models from natural language supervision. In ICML, 2021.
Ilija Radosavovic, Tete Xiao, Stephen James, Pieter Abbeel, Jitendra Malik, and Trevor Darrell.
   Real-world robot learning with masked visual pre-training. In CoRL, 2023.
Younggyo Seo, Danijar Hafner, Hao Liu, Fangchen Liu, Stephen James, Kimin Lee, and Pieter
  Abbeel. Masked world models for visual control. In CoRL, 2023.
Achint Soni, Sreyas Venkataraman, Abhranil Chandra, Sebastian Fischmeister, Percy Liang, Bo Dai,
  and Sherry Yang. Videoagent: Self-improving video generation. In ArXiv, 2024.
Yanchao Sun, Shuang Ma, Ratnesh Madaan, Rogerio Bonatti, Furong Huang, and Ashish Kapoor.
  Smart: Self-supervised multi-task pretraining with control transformers. In ICLR, 2023.
Homer Rich Walke, Kevin Black, Tony Z Zhao, Quan Vuong, Chongyi Zheng, Philippe Hansen-
  Estruch, Andre Wang He, Vivek Myers, Moo Jin Kim, Max Du, et al. Bridgedata v2: A dataset
  for robot learning at scale. In CoRL, 2023.
Boyang Wang, Nikhil Sridhar, Chao Feng, Mark Van der Merwe, Adam Fishman, Nima Fazeli, and
  Jeong Joon Park. This&that: Language-gesture controlled video generation for robot planning.
  In ArXiv, 2024.
Yao Wei, Yanchao Sun, Ruijie Zheng, Sai Vemprala, Rogerio Bonatti, Shuhang Chen, Ratnesh
  Madaan, Zhongjie Ba, Ashish Kapoor, and Shuang Ma. Is imitation all you need? generalized
  decision-making with dual-phase training. In CVPR, 2023.
Hongtao Wu, Ya Jing, Chilam Cheang, Guangzeng Chen, Jiafeng Xu, Xinghang Li, Minghuan Liu,
  Hang Li, and Tao Kong. Unleashing large-scale video generative pre-training for visual robot
  manipulation. In ICLR, 2024.
Tete Xiao, Ilija Radosavovic, Trevor Darrell, and Jitendra Malik. Masked visual pre-training for
  motor control. In Arxiv, 2022.
Jia Zeng, Qingwen Bu, Bangjun Wang, Wenke Xia, Li Chen, Hao Dong, Haoming Song, Dong
   Wang, Di Hu, Ping Luo, et al. Learning manipulation by predicting interaction. In RSS, 2024.


                                               13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A     A PPENDIX


A.1   I MPLEMENTATION D ETAILS


In this section, we outline the implementation details of our framework.
Vision. We employ a MAE-pretrained ViT-B (He et al., 2022) as the vision encoder. At each
timestep, images are captured from two views: eye-on-hand and eye-on-base. Each image is pro-
cessed by the vision encoder to produce 196 latent vectors, which represent local patch information,
along with a [CLS] token that encodes the global representation of the image. Directly inputting all
197 tokens into the transformer backbone would create a significant computational burden, particu-
larly when processing long histories. Moreover, many image details are redundant for accomplish-
ing manipulation tasks. To address this, we utilize the Perceiver Resampler (Alayrac et al., 2022)
to condense the image representations and extract task-relevant features. The Perceiver Resampler
employs learnable latent vectors with a shape of (num latents, dim), where num latents is signifi-
cantly smaller than the number of image tokens. Through Perceiver Attention, these latent vectors
condense the input image features, along with the [CLS] token, to form the final image tokens.
Robot state. The robot state consists of the arm state and the gripper state. The arm state includes the
end-effector position and its rotation in Euler angles, resulting in a six-dimensional representation.
The gripper state is a binary value indicating whether the gripper is open or closed. We tokenize the
robot state using an MLP. Specifically, the gripper state is first converted into a one-hot encoding.
The one-hot encoding of the gripper state and the arm state are then each passed through separate
linear layers. The outputs are concatenated and passed through a final linear layer to produce the
state token.
Language. Text instructions are encoded using the CLIP ViT-B/32 text encoder (Radford et al.,
2021) and projected through a linear layer to generate the language token.
Readout tokens. At each timestep, we append [F RS] and [IN V ] tokens to read out foresight
and actions. Specifically, [F RS] tokens are appended to extract representations for two views, and
three [IN V ] tokens are appended to predict actions across three steps, ensuring temporal action
consistency and robustness to idle actions.
Decoder. After passing through the transformer backbone, the action and image latents generated
by the [INV] and [FRS] tokens are input to the action decoder and image decoder to predict actions
and images for conditional visual foresight and inverse dynamics prediction.
The action decoder is an MLP that decodes the action latent into a seven-dimensional action vector.
First, the action latent is processed by a linear layer followed by a ReLU activation function. Then,
it passes through a second linear layer with ReLU activation. The output is fed into two independent
decoders: the arm action decoder and the gripper action decoder. The arm action decoder maps
the high-dimensional vector to a six-dimensional output through a linear layer, applying a Tanh
activation function to constrain the arm action within the range [-1, 1]. The gripper action decoder
also employs a linear layer to map the latent vector to a one-dimensional output, applying a Sigmoid
activation function to constrain the gripper action between [0, 1]. A gripper action value of 0.5 or
higher is interpreted as 1 (closed), while a value below 0.5 is interpreted as 0 (open).
For image decoding, following (He et al., 2022), we use a vision transformer (ViT) as the image
decoder. The image decoder receives the image latent and mask tokens from the transformer back-
bone as input. Positional information is provided through fixed sine-cosine positional encodings.
The inputs are processed by multiple transformer encoder blocks. Finally, a linear layer predicts the
pixels for each patch, generating the image that represents the predicted future state.
We present relevant hyperparameters during both pretraining and finetuning in Table A-I.
The standard version of Seer contains 316M parameters, where only 65M is tunable. For all simu-
lation results, we use eight 4090 GPUS to pre-train and fine-tune. The pre-training process requires
about 40 hours for CALVIN ABC-D and and 30 hours for LIBERO-LONG. The fine-tuning process
requires about 24 hours for CALVIN ABC-D and 6 hours for LIBERO-LONG.


                                                  14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                                   Table A-I: Training hyperparameters.

 Hyperparameters                                                    Pre-training                                             Fine-tuning

     Batch Size                            640 (LIBERO & CALVIN) / 2048 (Real)                                                  512

  Learning Rate                                                        1e-4                                                     1e-3

      Optimizer                                                      AdamW                                                    AdamW

  Learning Rate
                                                                   Cosine decay                                             Cosine decay
    Schedule

 Training Epochs                            30 (LIBERO & Real) / 20 (CALVIN)                                    40 (LIBERO & Real) / 20 (CALVIN)

 History Length                              7 (LIBERO & Real) / 10 (CALVIN)                                       7 (LIBERO & Real) / 10 (CALVIN)

  Action Chunk
                                                                         3                                                       3
     Length


                                                                                                                                     Transformer Block
                                                                                                                                          Output

                                                                                                                                            +
                               ViT-Base


                                                                                                                                         Dropout
                                                       Resampler
                                                       Perceiver


                                                                                                 FC768                                      MLP
                                                                           Arm       Gripper
                                                                          Action     Action
                                                                                                                                          Layer
                                                                             FC6         FC1
                                                                                                                                       Normalization
                         Arm State
                                                                                                         ViT
                                               FC384


 [0.13, 0.02, 0.24, 0.05, 0.03, 0.59]                                              MLP                                                      +
                                                           MLP


                                                                                                                                         Dropout
                       Gripper State
                                              FC384


                                 [0.0]
                                                                          24 x GPT-2 Transformer Blocks                                Multi-Head
                                                                                                                                     Masked Attention
     Language Instruction
                                                       ViT-B/32


                                                                                                                                          Layer
                                                        CLIP


    “Pick the apple and put it in the drawer”                                                                                          Normalization
                                                                               [                                   ]×N
                                                                                                 [INV]     [FRS]
                                                                                                                                  Transformer Block
                                                                                                                                        Input



                                                                    Figure A-1: Network Architecture.



                                          Table A-II: Hyperparameters for the transformers in our policy.

                                                                    Hidden size                 Number of layers               Number of heads
            image encoder                                               768                                12                          12
         perceiver resampler                                            768                                 3                           8
        transformer backbone                                            384                                24                          12
            image decoder                                               384                                2                           16


                                                                                           15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A.2   N ETWORK A RCHITECTURE

As presented in Figure A-1, Seer consists of the following modules: image encoder, perceiver re-
sampler, robot state encoder, language encoder, transformer backbone, action decoder and image
decoder. Here we describe each module in detail:

      • image encoder: a MAE pre-trained ViT-Base (He et al., 2022) encoder. Details can be seen
        in Table A-II.
      • perceiver resampler: a module to compress the image tokens efficiently. Details can be
        seen in Table A-II.
      • robot state encoder: MLPs that encode robot states into a latent space.
      • language encoder: a CLIP (Radford et al., 2021) ViT-B/32 text encoder.
      • transformer backbone: 24 layers of GPT-2 transformer blocks, with a hidden size of 384
        and 12 heads. It takes image tokens, language tokens, robot states tokens, [INV], [FRS] as
        inputs. Details can be seen in Table A-II.
      • action decoder: MLPs that decode the latent feature into 7-DOF action.
      • image decoder: a ViT-based transformer followed by a linear layer. Details can be seen in
        Table A-II.

A.3   BASELINE I MPLEMENTATION

In the simulation benchmark, we report the scores for Roboflamingo, Susie, GR-1, and the 3D
Diffusor Actor from their respective papers. For MTACT and OpenVLA, we reproduce the results
using the official code. For MVP and MPI, we replace the vision encoder in our policy with their
pretrained versions. Thanks to the strong design of our policy, MVP and MPI show competitive
performance, though they only approach the results of our policy without pretraining.

A.4   LIBERO-L ONG E XPERIMENT DETAILS

LIBERO (Liu et al., 2024) is a novel benchmark for lifelong learning in robot manipulation, com-
prising four task suites: LIBERO-SPATIAL, LIBERO-OBJECT, LIBERO-GOAL, and LIBERO-
100. The first three task suites are designed to disentangle the transfer of declarative and proce-
dural knowledge, while LIBERO-100 consists of 100 tasks involving entangled knowledge trans-
fer. LIBERO-100 includes 100 tasks that require diverse object interactions and versatile motor
skills. LIBERO-100 is divided into 90 short-horizon tasks (LIBERO-90) and 10 long-horizon tasks
(LIBERO-LONG). We use LIBERO-90 as the pretraining dataset, while LIBERO-LONG is utilized
for the downstream finetuning and evaluation.
The policy use images from both fixed and gripper cameras to observe the environment, which were
resized to 224x224 pixels. We also incorporated the robot state to help the policy understand the
robot’s self-state, including the position and orientation of the end effector and the gripper state
indicating the width between the grippers. The action space consists of a seven-dimensional vector:
six dimensions represent arm actions, and one dimension indicates the gripper’s open/close state.
The arm action represents the 6D pose (position and orientation) of a controlled frame. This frame
is located between the fingers of robots.

A.5   CALVIN ABC-D E XPERIMENT DETAILS

CALVIN (Mees et al., 2022) is a simulated benchmark designed for learning long-horizon, language-
conditioned tasks. Its goal is to enable the development of agents capable of solving various robotic
manipulation tasks using only onboard sensors and instructions provided in natural human language.
The tasks in CALVIN are complex, involving long sequences and intricate language instructions. It
supports flexible configurations of sensor suites. Agents are evaluated in a zero-shot manner on
novel language instructions and unfamiliar environments.
The CALVIN benchmark includes four distinct but structurally similar environments–Env A, B,
C and D. Each environment features a Franka Emika Panda robot arm equipped with a parallel
gripper, as well as a desk with a sliding door and a drawer that can be opened and closed. And


                                                 16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


there are several objects, such as blocks and buttons, on the desk. To more effectively assess the
generalization of the learned policies, each environment features distinct textures, and objects like
the sliding door, drawer, and light button, are placed in different positions.
CALVIN offers rich observations for robot learning. We use images from both fixed and gripper-
mounted cameras, resized to 224x224 pixels, along with robot state information, which includes
end-effector position, orientation, and gripper state (open/close). The action space is a 7-dimensional
vector: six dimensions correspond to end-effector displacement (position and orientation), and one
dimension controls the gripper’s open/close state. The unstructured data includes exploratory and
sub-optimal behaviors, comprising approximately 2.4 million interaction steps and 40 million short-
horizon windows. Data from Env A, B, and C, which lacks language annotations, is used to pretrain
the policy, while data with language annotations is used for downstream task learning. Env D is
reserved for policy evaluation.

A.6     R EAL W ORLD E XPERIMENT DETAILS

A.6.1     G ENERALIZATION -C ENTRIC TASKS


                                                     Task Progress


  Flip White Bowl


      Stack Cups


 Pick, Place, Close


      Wipe Board


               Figure A-2: Progress and configuration of generalization-centric tasks.

Tasks. In Flip White Bowl, the robot picks up a randomly overturned bowl and places it on a
coaster, testing basic 6DoF pick & place capability. In Stack Cups, the robot stacks three randomly
placed cups of different colors and sizes. It firstly covers the small cup with the middle one, and
then covers the middle cup with the big one. Since the cup surface is smooth and covering requires a
close fit, this task challenges fine-grained action predictions. In Wipe Board, the robot collects 3 to
7 chocolate balls arranged in 1 to 3 clusters. It uses a brush to sweep the balls into a dustpan, testing
its ability to handle multi-modal settings and perform repetitive motions. In Pick, Place, Close, the
robot picks a randomly set carrot, transports it into an opened drawer and closes the drawer. This
evaluates skills of executing consecutive actions in a large space with articulated objects.
Flip White Bowl: the robot needs to ⃝pick1     an overturned bowl and ⃝place
                                                                          2       it on the coaster. In
this task, the white bowl is randomly placed on the table within a 40cm × 40cm square, and the
coaster is randomly placed within a 15cm × 15cm square. The robot needs to pick up the white
bowl and put it on the coaster. In the generalization test, 1 to 3 bowls with identical shapes, sizes
and materials are added to disturb the policy. Success rate (SR) is recorded as 100% only when the
white bowl is placed on the coaster safely. If the bowl is successfully grasped, the score will plus
one (+1). If the bowl is successfully placed on the coast, the score will also plus one (+1). The full
score in this task is 2.


                                                   17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Stack Cups: the robot needs to ⃝pick
                                  1      the middle cup, ⃝cover
                                                           2        the small one, ⃝pick
                                                                                   3     the big one,
and ⃝cover
     4       the middle one. In this task, three cups of different sizes are randomly placed on the
table within a 40cm × 40cm square. The robot needs to cover the small cup with the middle one,
and cover the middle cup with the big one. Only when all the cups are stacked precisely and in a
correct order will the SR be recorded as 100%. The score will plus one (+1) when each primitive
action (pick or place) is accomplished. The full score in this task is 4.
Pick, Place, Close: the robot needs to ⃝pick1     the carrot, ⃝put
                                                               2     it in the drawer, and ⃝close
                                                                                           3       the
drawer. In this task, a drawer with three layers is fixed on the table. During each test, one of three
layers is open. A carrot on the coaster is randomly placed within a 20cm × 20cm square. The
orientation of the carrot is randomized. The robot needs to pick the carrot, place it into a certain
layer, and close the drawer. The score will plus one (+1) when successfully (1) picking the carrot,
(2) placing the carrot, and (3) closing the drawer. The full score in this task is 3.
Wipe Board: the robot needs to ⃝grasp
                                   1        the brush, and ⃝ 2 ⃝sweep
                                                                3     all the chocolate balls into the
dustpan. In this task, a board (30cm × 40cm) and dustpan is fixed on the table. A brush is randomly
placed within a 5cm × 5cm square. 3 to 7 chocolate balls (diameter 1cm) are divided into 1 to
3 clusters and randomly placed on the whole board. Only when all the chocolate balls are swept
into the dustpan safely will the SR be recorded as 100%. The score will plus one (+1) when (1)
grasping the brush successfully, (2) sweeping partial chocolates into the dustpan, and (3) sweeping
all chocolates into the dustpan. The full score in this task is 3.

A.6.2   H IGH - PRECISION AND CONTACT- RICH TASKS


                                      Task Progress                                      Objects


Press Button                                                                            2cm
                                                                                              2cm



                                                                                 2.8cm                    2cm
  Insertion                                                                                         9cm
                                                                                         9.5cm


          Figure A-3: Process and configuration of high-precision and contact-rich tasks.


                       Table A-III: Results on high-precision and contact-rich tasks.

                                       Demos               Press Button             Insertion
              Method
                                      Per Task
                                                         SR (%) ↑ / Score ↑     SR (%) ↑ / Score ↑
            MVP                         100                 46.7 / 17.0            26.7 / 11.0
     Ours (w/o pre-train)               100                 40.0 / 13.0            40.0 / 16.0
            Ours                        100                 60.0 / 18.0            60.0 / 19.0


Press Button: In this task, the toaster is randomly placed in a 30cm × 30cm square. The robot is
required to approach the toaster, close the fingers, push the button from a top-down view, and exceed
3/4 of the scale (Figure A-3). The score will plus one (+1) when (1) pushing the button successfully
with no collision, and (2) exceeding 3/4 of the scale. The full score in this task is 2.
Insertion: In this task, a 2cm × 9cm camera model is randomly placed in a 20cm × 20cm square.
The robot is required to pick the camera model and insert it into a 2.8cm × 9.5cm groove without


                                                    18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


any collision (Figure A-3). The score will plus one (+1) when (1) grasping the camera model, and
(2) inserting successfully with no collision. The full score in this task is 2.
Results: As seen in Table A-III, pre-training on the DROID dataset brings obvious improvements,
compared to the scratch version and previous state-of-the-art baselines. Notably, both tasks require
quite precise action predictions and collision-free interactions, showing our model’s potential in
high-precision and contact-rich tasks.

A.6.3     R EAL - WORLD I MPLEMENTATION D ETAILS
During real-world training, we set the sequence length as 7, visual foresight steps and action pre-
diction steps as 3. We utilize the MAE pre-trained ViT-B encoder and configured it as bfloat16 to
accelerate inference. We find this quantization won’t produce side effects on manipulation tasks.
The pre-training dataset, e.g., DROID involves 76K successful trajectories, and the downstream
fine-tuning data involves 400 demos. Key hyperparameters are listed in Table A-I. We utilize the
9-th pre-trained checkpoint for fine-tuning, and evaluate performance using the 17-th fine-tuned
checkpoint.
In real-world experiments involving the MVP and MPI baselines, we replace the MAE pre-trained
vision encoder in our network with the MVP pre-trained and MPI pre-trained counterparts, respec-
tively. We then fine-tune these two baselines on the downstream tasks and report performances. For
OpenVLA, we choose to fully finetune its public released checkpoint with model size 7B pre-trained
on OXE. The fine-tuning config is identical to the one trained on Bridge dataset in OpenVLA’s pub-
lic codebase. We fine-tune this large model using eight A100 GPUs with more than 24 hours and
use the checkpoint with lowest average validation loss to evaluate.

A.6.4     ACROSS EMBODIMENTS EXPERIMENTS
To investigate the impact of Seer on cross-embodiment, we conduct an additional real-world exper-
iment, where Seer is pre-trained on OXE and fine-tuned on self-collected data. We refer the subset
mix-up recipe in Octo (Ghosh et al., 2024), remove all the subset that includes franka robots, filter
subsets with odd action labels, and save the rest subsets as OXE pre-training dataset.

                         Table A-IV: Results of across embodiments experiments.
                                                                  SR (%) ↑ / Score ↑
      Method
                    Flip White Bowl   Stack Cups    Wipe Board       Pick, Place, Close   Press Button   Insertion        Avg.
   Seer (scratch)     60.0 / 19.0     46.7 / 35.0   60.0 / 37.0         73.3 / 40.0       40.0 / 13.0    40.0 / 16.0   53.3 / 26.7
    Seer (OXE)        73.3 / 22.0     40.0 / 30.0   66.7 / 40.0         80.0 / 41.0       33.3 / 10.0    46.7 / 18.0   56.7 / 26.8
   Seer (Droid)       86.7 / 26.0     60.0 / 42.0   73.3 / 41.0         86.7 / 42.0       60.0 / 18.0    60.0 / 19.0   71.1 / 31.3


As seen in the Table A-IV, pre-training on the OXE dataset only provides marginal improvements
in most tasks. Moreover, in some high-precision tasks, the OXE pre-trained version even brings
negative effects. We attribute marginal improvements in general manipulation tasks to the diversity
of objects, tasks, scenes, and language instructions in OXE. For the slight decrease in some high-
precision tasks, we suspect two reasons: Firstly, for high-precision tasks, images from the eye-on-
hand camera (wrist view) are quite important, since this camera captures a lot of local and detailed
information for policy. However, in most OXE subsets, only images from third-person view with
diverse camera poses are provided, with most wrist view images missing. Secondly, the gap in cross-
embodiments and cross-action-controller types exists in our settings. High-precision tasks require
a concentrated and precise action distribution. However, pre-training on OXE may offer a distant
action prior due to the aforementioned physics gap.

A.6.5     D ETAILED R EAL - WORLD R ESULTS
The raw records of the real-world experiments are shown in Table A-V, Table A-VI, Table A-VII,
and Table A-VIII, which we use to calculate the success rate and score.


                                                              19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                           Table A-V: Detailed results (SR (%) / Score) in Flip White Bowl.

Case Index     MVP            MPI        OpenVLA       Ours (w/o pre-train, 20 demos)   Ours (20 demos)   Ours (w/o pre-train, 100 demos)   Ours (100 demos)
    1        0.00 / 0.00   100 / 2.00    0.00 / 1.00            0.00 / 1.00               100 / 2.00                100 / 2.00                 100 / 2.00
    2        100 / 2.00    100 / 2.00    100 / 2.00              0.00 / 0.0               100 / 2.00                100 / 2.00                 100 / 2.00
    3        100 / 2.00    100 / 2.00    0.00 / 1.00             0.00 / 0.0                0.00 / 0.0               100 / 2.00                 100 / 2.00
    4        100 / 2.00    0.00 / 0.00   100 / 2.00              0.00 / 0.0                0.00 / 0.0               100 / 2.00                 100 / 2.00
    5        100 / 2.00    0.00 / 0.00   100 / 2.00             100 / 2.00                100 / 2.00                0.00 / 0.00                100 / 2.00
    6        100 / 2.00    100 / 2.00    100 / 2.00              0.00 / 0.0                0.00 / 0.0               0.00 / 0.00                100 / 2.00
    7        100 / 2.00    100 / 2.00    0.00 / 1.00             0.00 / 0.0                0.00 / 0.0               100 / 2.00                 100 / 2.00
    8        100 / 2.00    100 / 2.00    100 / 2.00             100 / 2.00                100 / 2.00                0.00 / 1.00                100 / 2.00
    9        100 / 2.00    100 / 2.00    100 / 2.00             100 / 2.00                100 / 2.00                100 / 2.00                 100 / 2.00
   10        100 / 2.00    100 / 2.00    0.00 / 0.00             0.00 / 0.0                0.00 / 0.0               100 / 2.00                 0.00 / 0.00
   11        100 / 2.00    0.00 / 0.00   0.00 / 0.00             0.00 / 0.0               100 / 2.00                0.00 / 0.00                100 / 2.00
   12        0.00 / 0.00   0.00 / 1.00   0.00 / 0.00            100 / 2.00                100 / 2.00                0.00 / 0.00                0.00 / 0.00
   13        100 / 2.00    100 / 2.00    100 / 2.00             0.00 / 0.0                0.00 / 1.00               0.00 / 0.00                100 / 2.00
   14        100 / 2.00    100 / 2.00    0.00 / 0.00            0.00 / 1.00               100 / 2.00                100 / 2.00                 100 / 2.00
   15        0.00 / 0.00   0.00 / 0.00   100 / 2.00             0.00 / 0.0                0.00 / 0.0                100 / 2.00                 100 / 2.00


                             Table A-VI: Detailed results (SR (%) / Score) in Stack Cups.

Case Index     MVP            MPI        OpenVLA       Ours (w/o pre-train, 20 demos)   Ours (20 demos)   Ours (w/o pre-train, 100 demos)   Ours (100 demos)
    1        0.00 / 3.00   100 / 4.00    0.00 / 2.00            0.00 / 0.00               0.00 / 1.00               100 / 4.00                 100 / 4.00
    2        100 / 4.00    0.00 / 3.00   0.00 / 0.00            0.00 / 0.00               0.00 / 0.00               0.00 / 1.00                100 / 4.00
    3        0.00 / 3.00   0.00 / 3.00   0.00 / 0.00            0.00 / 1.00               0.00 / 0.00               0.00 / 2.00                100 / 4.00
    4        100 / 4.00    0.00 / 1.00   0.00 / 1.00            0.00 / 1.00               0.00 / 0.00               100 / 4.00                 100 / 4.00
    5        0.00 / 1.00   0.00 / 3.00   0.00 / 2.00            0.00 / 1.00               0.00 / 1.00               100 / 4.00                 0.00 / 2.00
    6        0.00 / 1.00   100 / 4.00    0.00 / 0.00            0.00 / 1.00               0.00 / 2.00               100 / 4.00                 100 / 4.00
    7        0.00 / 0.00   100 / 4.00    0.00 / 0.00            0.00 / 1.00               0.00 / 0.00               0.00 / 1.00                100 / 4.00
    8        0.00 / 0.00   0.00 / 0.00   0.00 / 1.00            0.00 / 0.00               0.00 / 0.00               0.00 / 0.00                0.00 / 0.00
    9        100 / 4.00    100 / 4.00    0.00 / 0.00            100 / 4.00                0.00 / 0.00               100 / 4.00                 100 / 4.00
   10        0.00 / 1.00   0.00 / 1.00   0.00 / 0.00            0.00 / 0.00               0.00 / 0.00               0.00 / 0.00                0.00 / 2.00
   11        0.00 / 0.00   0.00 / 1.00   0.00 / 0.00            0.00 / 1.00               0.00 / 1.00               0.00 / 0.00                0.00 / 0.00
   12        0.00 / 0.00   0.00 / 0.00   0.00 / 0.00            0.00 / 0.00               0.00 / 0.00               0.00 / 0.00                0.00 / 0.00
   13        0.00 / 0.00   0.00 / 0.00   0.00 / 1.00            0.00 / 0.00               0.00 / 0.00               100 / 4.00                 0.00 / 2.00
   14        0.00 / 1.00   0.00 / 0.00   0.00 / 1.00            0.00 / 0.00               0.00 / 1.00               0.00 / 0.00                100 / 4.00
   15        100 / 4.00    0.00 / 1.00   0.00 / 0.00            0.00 / 1.00               0.00 / 1.00               100 / 4.00                 100 / 4.00


                       Table A-VII: Detailed results (SR (%) / Score) in Pick, Place, Close.

Case Index     MVP            MPI        OpenVLA       Ours (w/o pre-train, 20 demos)   Ours (20 demos)   Ours (w/o pre-train, 100 demos)   Ours (100 demos)
    1        100 / 3.00    100 / 3.00    0.00 / 0.00            100 / 3.00                100 / 3.00                100 / 3.00                 100 / 3.00
    2        100 / 3.00    100 / 3.00    100 / 3.00             0.00 / 0.00               100 / 3.00                100 / 3.00                 100 / 3.00
    3        100 / 3.00    100 / 3.00    0.00 / 0.00            0.00 / 2.00               100 / 3.00                0.00 / 2.00                100 / 3.00
    4        0.00 / 0.00   100 / 3.00    0.00 / 0.00            0.00 / 0.00               0.00 / 0.00               0.00 / 2.00                100 / 3.00
    5        0.00 / 0.00   100 / 3.00    0.00 / 2.00            100 / 3.00                100 / 3.00                100 / 3.00                 100 / 3.00
    6        0.00 / 1.00   0.00 / 0.00   0.00 / 1.00            0.00 / 1.00               0.00 / 1.00               0.00 / 2.00                100 / 3.00
    7        100 / 3.00    100 / 3.00    0.00 / 0.00            0.00 / 0.00               100 / 3.00                100 / 3.00                 100 / 3.00
    8        100 / 3.00    100 / 3.00    0.00 / 0.00            100 / 3.00                100 / 3.00                100 / 3.00                 100 / 3.00
    9        0.00 / 1.00   0.00 / 0.00   100 / 3.00             0.00 / 0.00               0.00 / 0.00               0.00 / 1.00                0.00 / 2.00
   10        100 / 3.00    100 / 3.00    0.00 / 0.00            0.00 / 0.00               0.00 / 2.00               100 / 3.00                 100 / 3.00
   11        100 / 3.00    0.00 / 0.00   0.00 / 1.00            0.00 / 0.00               0.00 / 1.00               100 / 3.00                 100 / 3.00
   12        0.00 / 1.00   0.00 / 1.00   0.00 / 1.00            0.00 / 1.00               0.00 / 0.00               100 / 3.00                 0.00 / 1.00
   13        100 / 3.00    100 / 3.00    0.00 / 0.00            100 / 3.00                100 / 3.00                100 / 3.00                 100 / 3.00
   14        100 / 3.00    100 / 3.00    0.00 / 2.00            0.00 / 0.00               0.00 / 0.00               100 / 3.00                 100 / 3.00
   15        0.00 / 1.00   0.00 / 1.00   0.00 / 0.00            0.00 / 0.00               100 / 3.00                100 / 3.00                 100 / 3.00


                            Table A-VIII: Detailed results (SR (%) / Score) in Wipe Board.

Case Index     MVP            MPI        OpenVLA       Ours (w/o pre-train, 20 demos)   Ours (20 demos)   Ours (w/o pre-train, 100 demos)   Ours (100 demos)
    1        100 / 3.00    100 / 3.00    0.00 / 0.00            0.00 / 0.00               0.00 / 2.00               100 / 3.00                 100 / 3.00
    2        100 / 3.00    100 / 3.00    0.00 / 0.00            0.00 / 2.00               100 / 3.00                0.00 / 2.00                100 / 3.00
    3        100 / 3.00    100 / 3.00    0.00 / 1.00            100 / 3.00                100 / 3.00                0.00 / 0.00                100 / 3.00
    4        100 / 3.00    0.00 / 2.00   0.00 / 0.00            100 / 3.00                0.00 / 2.00               100 / 3.00                 100 / 3.00
    5        0.00 / 2.00   0.00 / 2.00   0.00 / 1.00            0.00 / 2.00               100 / 3.00                100 / 3.00                 100 / 3.00
    6        0.00 / 2.00   0.00 / 2.00   0.00 / 0.00            0.00 / 2.00               0.00 / 2.00               0.00 / 2.00                0.00 / 2.00
    7        0.00 / 2.00   0.00 / 2.00   0.00 / 0.00            0.00 / 1.00               0.00 / 1.00               0.00 / 2.00                100 / 3.00
    8        0.00 / 2.00   0.00 / 2.00   0.00 / 0.00            0.00 / 2.00               0.00 / 2.00               100 / 3.00                 0.00 / 2.00
    9        100 / 3.00    100 / 3.00    0.00 / 0.00            100 / 3.00                100 / 3.00                100 / 3.00                 100 / 3.00
   10        0.00 / 2.00   0.00 / 2.00   0.00 / 0.00            100 / 3.00                0.00 / 2.00               0.00 / 2.00                100 / 3.00
   11        100 / 3.00    0.00 / 2.00   0.00 / 0.00            0.00 / 2.00               0.00 / 2.00               100 / 3.00                 100 / 3.00
   12        100 / 3.00    0.00 / 2.00   0.00 / 0.00            0.00 / 0.00               0.00 / 2.00               100 / 3.00                 0.00 / 2.00
   13        0.00 / 2.00   100 / 3.00    0.00 / 0.00            100 / 3.00                100 / 3.00                100 / 3.00                 100 / 3.00
   14        0.00 / 2.00   0.00 / 2.00   0.00 / 2.00            0.00 / 2.00               0.00 / 2.00               0.00 / 2.00                0.00 / 2.00
   15        100 / 3.00    0.00 / 2.00   0.00 / 0.00            0.00 / 0.00               0.00 / 2.00               100 / 3.00                 100 / 3.00


                                                                              20
