Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


LICORICE: L ABEL -E FFICIENT C ONCEPT-BASED
I NTERPRETABLE R EINFORCEMENT L EARNING
 Zhuorui Ye∗†                                                       Stephanie Milani∗
 Institute for Interdisciplinary Information Sciences               Machine Learning Department
 Tsinghua University                                                Carnegie Mellon University
 Beijing, China                                                     Pittsburgh, PA 15213
 cuizhuyefei@gmail.com                                              smilani@cs.cmu.edu

 Geoffrey J. Gordon                             Fei Fang
 Machine Learning Department                    Software and Societal Systems Department
 Carnegie Mellon University                     Carnegie Mellon University
 Pittsburgh, PA 15213                           Pittsburgh, PA 15213
 ggordon@cs.cmu.edu                             feifang@cmu.edu



                                              A BSTRACT

          Recent advances in reinforcement learning (RL) have predominantly leveraged
          neural network policies for decision-making, yet these models often lack inter-
          pretability, posing challenges for stakeholder comprehension and trust. Con-
          cept bottleneck models offer an interpretable alternative by integrating human-
          understandable concepts into policies. However, prior work assumes that concept
          annotations are readily available during training. For RL, this requirement poses
          a significant limitation: it necessitates continuous real-time concept annotation,
          which either places an impractical burden on human annotators or incurs substan-
          tial costs in API queries and inference time when employing automated labeling
          methods. To overcome this limitation, we introduce a novel training scheme that
          enables RL agents to efficiently learn a concept-based policy by only querying
          annotators to label a small set of data. Our algorithm, LICORICE, involves three
          main contributions: interleaving concept learning and RL training, using an en-
          semble to actively select informative data points for labeling, and decorrelating
          the concept data. We show how LICORICE reduces human labeling efforts to
          500 or fewer concept labels in three environments, and 5000 or fewer in two more
          complex environments, all at no cost to performance. We also explore the use
          of VLMs as automated concept annotators, finding them effective in some cases
          but imperfect in others. Our work significantly reduces the annotation burden for
          interpretable RL, making it more practical for real-world applications that neces-
          sitate transparency. Our code is released.1


1       I NTRODUCTION
In reinforcement learning (RL), agents learn a policy, which is a strategy for making sequential
decisions in complex environments. Agents typically represent the policy as a neural network, as
this representation tends to yield high performance (Mirhoseini et al., 2021). However, this choice
can come at a cost: such policies are challenging for stakeholders to interpret — particularly when
the network inputs are also complex, such as high-dimensional sensor data. This opacity can pose
a significant hurdle, especially in applications where understanding the rationale behind decisions
is critical, such as healthcare (Yu et al., 2021) or finance (Liu et al., 2022). In such applications,
decisions can have significant consequences, so it is essential for stakeholders to fully grasp the
reasoning behind actions to confidently adopt or collaborate on a policy.
    ∗
      Equal Contribution.
    †
      This work was done when Ye was a visiting intern at CMU.
    1
      https://github.com/cuizhuyefei/LICORICE


                                                    1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 1: LICORICE overview. In concept-based RL, the policy first maps from states to the
concepts in a bottleneck layer with g, and then maps from concepts to (distributions over) actions
with f . During training, LICORICE addresses concept label efficiency concerns with three key
components: i) iterative training, ii) data decorrelation, and iii) active learning.


To address interpretability concerns in supervised learning, recent works have integrated human-
understandable concepts into neural networks through concept bottleneck models (Koh et al., 2020;
Espinosa Zarlenga et al., 2022). These models insert a bottleneck layer whose units correspond to in-
terpretable concepts, ensuring that the final decisions depend on these concepts instead of on opaque
raw inputs. By training the model both to have high task accuracy and to accurately match experts’
concept labels, these models learn a high-level concept-based representation that is simultaneously
meaningful to humans and useful for machine learning tasks. As an example, a concept-based
explanation for a bird classification task might include a unit that encodes the bird’s wing color.
Concepts also offer a path to compositional generalization by enabling subtask decomposition into
meaningful, reusable components (Mao et al., 2022; Wang et al., 2023).
More recently, these techniques have been applied to RL by incorporating a concept bottleneck in
the policy (Grupen et al., 2022; Zabounidis et al., 2023), so that the chosen actions are a function
of the human-understandable concepts. However, a significant challenge emerges in this method’s
practical application: past work assumes that concept annotations are readily available during RL
training. To learn a mapping from states to concepts, an RL agent requires concept information
for every state encountered during training, which is often millions or billions of state-action pairs.
Because many domains do not automatically provide these concept labels (e.g., autonomous driv-
ing), we require a means of obtaining them. Relying on human labelers is impractical, risking errors
due to fatigue (Marshall & Shipman, 2013). Using vision language models (VLMs) for automated
concept extraction (Oikarinen et al., 2023), while alleviating the human bottleneck, introduces sig-
nificant API or inference costs that can be prohibitive.
In this work, we address this challenge with LICORICE (Label-efficient Interpretable COncept-
based ReInforCEment learning), a novel training paradigm designed to minimize the number of
concept annotation queries while maintaining high task performance. Figure 1 illustrates our algo-
rithm. LICORICE tackles three key challenges. First, it addresses the problem of concept learning
on off-policy or outdated data. If concepts are learned from data collected by a random policy, the
concept distribution may not reflect the data from an optimal policy. To ensure that concept learning
occurs on more recent and on-policy data, LICORICE interleaves concept learning and RL training
through iterative training: it alternately freezes the network layers corresponding to either the con-
cept learning part or the decision-making part. Second, LICORICE addresses the problem of limited
training data diversity that occurs when an agent interacts with the environment, thereby generat-
ing sequences of highly similar, temporally correlated data points. To tackle this issue, LICORICE
implements a data decorrelation strategy to produce a more diverse set of training samples. Third,
LICORICE addresses the inefficient use of annotation effort, where labeled samples may provide
redundant information. To resolve this problem, we employ disagreement-based active learning
using a concept ensemble to select the most informative data points for labeling.
To evaluate the effectiveness of LICORICE, we conduct experiments in two scenarios—perfect
human annotation and VLM annotation—on five environments with image input: an image-based
version of CartPole, two Minigrid environments, and two Atari environments. First, with assumption
of perfect human annotation, we show that LICORICE yields both higher concept accuracy and
higher reward while requiring fewer annotation queries compared to baseline methods. Second, we
find that VLMs can indeed serve as concept annotators for some, but not all, of the environments.


                                                  2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Our contributions are summarized as follows:
    • To the best of our knowledge, we are the first to investigate the problem of a limited concept
      annotation budget for interpretable RL. We introduce LICORICE, a novel training scheme that
      enables label efficient learning of concept-based RL policies.
    • We conduct extensive experiments to show the effectiveness of LICORICE across five environ-
      ments with varying budget constraints.
    • We study the use of VLMs as automated concept annotators, demonstrating their effectiveness
      in certain environments while highlighting challenges in others.

2     P RELIMINARIES
Reinforcement Learning. In RL, an agent learns to make decisions by interacting with an envi-
ronment (Sutton & Barto, 2018). The environment is commonly modeled as a Markov decision
process (Puterman, 2014), consisting of the following components: a set of states S, a set of actions
A, a state transition function T : S × A × S → [0, 1] that indicates the probability of transitioning
from one state to another given an action, a reward function R : S × A × S → R that assigns a re-
ward for each state-action-state transition, and a discount factor γ ∈ [0, 1] that determines the present
value of future rewards. The agent learns a policy π : S × A → [0, 1], which maps states to dis-
tributions over actions with the aim of maximizing the expected cumulative    P∞discounted reward. We
evaluate a policy via its value function, which is defined as V π (s) = Eπ [ k=0 γ k rt+k+1 | st = s].
The ultimate aim in RL is to determine the optimal policy, π ∗ , through iterative refinement based on
environmental feedback.
Concept Policy Models. Concept-based explanations have emerged as a common paradigm in
explainable AI (Poeta et al., 2023). They explain a model’s decision-making process through human-
understandable attributes and abstractions. In supervised learning, concept bottleneck models (Koh
et al., 2020) implement this approach using two key functions: a concept predictor g : X → C,
mapping inputs to interpretable concepts, and an output predictor f : C → Y , mapping the concept
predictions to a downstream task space, such as labels for classification. As a result, the prediction
takes the form ŷ = f (g(x)), so that the input x influences the output solely through the bottleneck
layer ĉ = g(x). In RL, since we want the policy to be interpretable, we insert a concept bottleneck
layer into the policy network:
                                           π(s) = f (g(s)),
such that π maps from states s ∈ S to concepts c ∈ C to actions a ∈ A (Grupen et al., 2022;
Zabounidis et al., 2023). This setup allows the policy to base its decisions on understandable and
meaningful features. As a result, we can use any RL algorithm that can be modified to include an
additional loss function for concept prediction.
Training Concept Policy Models. Training these models requires a dataset of state-concept-action
triplets (s, c, a) ∈ S × C × A. The functions f and g are typically implemented as neural networks,
with their parameters collectively defined as θ. Previous work (Zabounidis et al., 2023) simply
combines the concept prediction loss LC (θ) and RL loss LRL (θ):
                                     L(θ) = LRL (θ) + λC LC (θ),
where the exact definitions of LRL (θ) and LC (θ) depend on the choice of RL algorithm and concept
learning task. The objective is to find the optimal parameters θ∗ that minimize this combined loss
function with the coefficient λC . However, this approach requires continuous access to ground-truth
concepts for training f , which may not always be feasible or desirable in practical RL scenarios.

3     LICORICE
As we have mentioned, the standard way of training concept-based RL assumes continuous access
to an oracle to provide concept labels. However, this assumption is problematic due to the large
annotation cost incurred by human or automated labeling efforts. To reduce the number of concept
labels required for concept-based RL, we propose LICORICE, a novel algorithm for interpretable
RL consisting of three main components: iterative training, data decorrelation, and disagreement-
based active learning. The full pseudocode is in Algorithm 1.


                                                   3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Algorithm 1 LICORICE (Label-efficient Interpretable COncept-based ReInforCEment learning)
 1: Input: Total budget B, number of iterations M , sample acceptance threshold p, ratio τ for
    active learning, batch size for querying b, number of concept models N to ensemble
 2: Initialize: training set Dtrain ← ∅, and validation set Dval ← ∅
 3: for m = 1 to M do
                                                     B
 4:     Allocate budget for iteration m: Bm ← M
 5:     while |Um | < τ · Bm do
 6:         Execute policy πm to collect unlabeled data Um using acceptance rate p
 7:     end while
                                                                               ′            ′
 8:     Initialize iteration-specific datasets for collecting labeled data: Dtrain ← ∅, Dval  ←∅
 9:     while Bm > 0 do
                                                               ′                   ′
10:         Train N concept models {g̃i }N  i=1 on Dtrain ∪ Dtrain , using Dval ∪ Dval for early stopping
                                                                                ′       ′
11:         Calculate acquisition function value α(s) for all s ∈ Um \ (Dtrain     ∪ Dval )
12:         Choose bm = min(b, Bm ) unlabeled points from Um according to arg maxs α(s)
13:         Query for concept labels to obtain new dataset Dm ← {(s, c)}bm
                                                                       ′     ′
14:         Split Dm into train and validation splits and add to Dtrain   , Dval
15:         Decrement budget: Bm ← Bm − bm
16:     end while
                                                   ′                       ′
17:     Aggregate datasets: Dtrain ← Dtrain ∪ Dtrain   , Dval ← Dval ∪ Dval
18:     Continue training the concept network g on Dtrain , using Dval for early stopping
19:     Freeze g and continue training f using standard RL training to obtain πm+1
20: end for



Iterative Training. As the agent’s policy improves, the distribution of the visited states and their
associated concepts changes. Consider an MDP where states are indexed. With a random (initial)
policy, the agent tends to visit small-index states near the initial state, encountering only the concepts
relevant to those states. However, as the policy improves, the agent explores higher-index states,
leading to a shift in both the state and concept visitation distribution. If we exhaust all queries at the
beginning of training, we risk training the model only on the concepts associated with small-index
states from the random policy, potentially missing important concepts that emerge as the agent
explores. We therefore propose iterative training to enable LICORICE to progressively refine its
understanding of concepts as the policy improves. Iterative training consists of two parts: concept
learning and behavior learning. Assume that we have access to an annotated concept dataset Dtrain
generated by our current policy πm . Then, concept learning focuses on training the concept portion
of the network g on this dataset Dtrain (line 18). Behavior learning involves freezing g and training
the behavior portion of the network f with any standard RL algorithm with its associated loss LRL
(line 19). Upon completion of behavior learning, we obtain an updated policy πm+1 , which serves
to collect more unlabeled concept data to help train g in the next iteration.
Data Decorrelation. We do not obtain ground-truth concept labels for all states when rolling out
the current policy πm . Instead, rollouts produce a dataset Um of unlabeled states as candidates for
querying for ground-truth concepts from an oracle. Simply collecting and labeling all encountered
states would give us long chains of nearly-identical samples, undermining the diversity we need for
effective learning. To resolve this challenge, we introduce data decorrelation with two key compo-
nents: a budget multiplier τ that sets |Um | = τ · Bm , and a per-state acceptance probability p. This
random acceptance/rejection mechanism leverages a fundamental property of Markov processes—
states become increasingly independent as their temporal distance grows according to the mixing
time—allowing us to build more diverse datasets from our policy rollouts.
Disagreement-Based Active Learning. Equipped with Um , we are now prepared to select data
points for querying for concept labels. The purpose of this stage is to make use of our limited la-
beling budget Bm to collect a labeled dataset Dm for training g. We propose to train a concept
ensemble—consisting of N independent concept models—from scratch on the dataset of training
points Dtrain that has been aggregated over all iterations (line 10). We use this ensemble to calculate
the disagreement-based acquisition function α(·), which determines whether each candidate in Um
ought to receive a ground-truth concept label (line 11). This function targets samples where pre-
diction disagreement is highest among ensemble members, as these points often represent areas of
uncertainty or decision boundaries where additional labeled data would be most informative. For


                                                    4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


α(·), we use two different formulations, depending on the concept learning task. For concept classi-
fication, we use a query-by-committee approach (Seung et al., 1992), in which we prioritize points
with a high proportion of predicted class labels that are not the modal class prediction (also called
the variation ratio (Beluch et al., 2018)):
                                                        N
                                                   1 X
                                 α(s) = 1 − max          [g̃i (s) = c].
                                               c∈C N
                                                     i=1

Here, g̃i (s) is the concept prediction of the i-th model on state s. For concept regression, we directly
use the estimate of variance across the concept models as a measure of disagreement:
                                                      N
                                                 1 X
                            α(s) = σ 2 (s) =             (g̃i (s) − µ(s))2 ,
                                               N − 1 i=1
                  PN
where µ(s) = N1 i=1 g̃i (s) is the mean prediction of the N concept models. After querying for
Bm ground-truth concept labels (line 13) using α(·), we are prepared to continue training g during
the concept learning stage.
Implementation Details. For training g (line 18), we employ two types of loss functions depending
on the nature of the concepts: MSE for continuous concepts and cross-entropy loss for categorical
concepts. If the problem requires mixed-type concepts, we either discretize continuous attributes or
simply use a mixed loss. To train f (line 19), we freeze g and use PPO to continue training f from the
previous iterations, resulting in the final policy πM +1 . For complex environments that require many
iterations, we observe that RL-related parameters may get stuck in a local region in early iterations,
becoming hard to optimize later. To mitigate this issue, in the last iteration, we additionally train a
new RL network f ′ from scratch when fixing g with πM +1 as the anchoring policy to get the final
  ′                                         ′
πM  +1 . The anchoring policy ensures πM +1 has a similar distribution to the previous one and the
annotated observations are still highly relevant. Specifically, we initialize another policy πθ with
the same frozen g parameters and randomly initialized f , then train it with the standard PPO loss
function and an additional KL-divergence penalty between the current policy and πM +1 :
                          L(θ) = LPPO (θ) + β · KL[πM +1 (· | s), πθ (· | s)].

4     E XPERIMENTS
In our experiments, we investigate the following questions:

    RQ 1 Under a limited concept annotation budget, does LICORICE enable both high concept
         accuracy and high environment reward?
    RQ 2 How effective are VLMs as automated concept annotators when used with LICORICE?
    RQ 3 How label efficient is LICORICE compared with other methods?
    RQ 4 Does LICORICE support test-time concept interventions?

4.1    E XPERIMENT S ETUP

In each experiment, we run each algorithm 5 times, each with a random seed. All algorithms use
PPO (Schulman et al., 2017; Raffin et al., 2021) with a concept bottleneck. More implementation
details and hyperparameters are in Appendix A.2.
Environments. We investigate these questions across five environments: PixelCartPole (Yang et al.,
2021), DoorKey (Chevalier-Boisvert et al., 2023), DynamicObstacles (Chevalier-Boisvert et al.,
2023), Boxing (Bellemare et al., 2013), and Pong (Bellemare et al., 2013). Each environment in-
cludes a distinct challenge and features a set of interpretable concepts describing key objects and
properties. We summarize the concepts in Table 1, with more details in Appendix A.1. These
environments are characterized by their dual representation: a complex image-based input and a
symbolic concept-based representation. PixelCartPole, DoorKey, and DynamicObstacles are sim-
pler because we can extract noiseless ground-truth concept labels from their source code. In contrast,
Boxing, as implemented in OCAtari (Delfosse et al., 2023), uses reverse engineering to extract po-
sitions of important objects from the game’s RAM state. This extraction process introduces a small


                                                   5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


             Environment            # Concepts      Concept Type      Binarized # Concepts
             PixelCartPole            4         Continuous                N/A
             DoorKey                 12           Discrete                 46
             DynamicObstacles        11           Discrete                 30
             Boxing                   8           Discrete                1480
             Pong                     7           Discrete                1848
Table 1: Summary of environments, including their associated concepts. Counts for the binarized
version of the concepts provided where applicable to illustrate the problem size.


amount of noise. The concepts in Pong are derived from the VIPER paper (Bastani et al., 2018) that
also uses reverse engineering.
Baselines. To our knowledge, there exist no previous algorithms that seek to minimize the number
of concept labels for interpretable RL, so we implement three: Sequential-Q, Disagreement-Q, and
Random-Q. In Sequential-Q, the agent spends B queries on the first B states encountered during
the initial policy rollout. In Disagreement-Q, the agent also spends its budget at the beginning of
training; however, it uses active learning with the same α(·) as LICORICE to strategically choose
the training data for annotation. In Random-Q, the agent receives B concept labels at random points
using a probability to decide whether to query in each state. As a budget-unconstrained baseline,
we implement CPM from previous work in multi-agent RL (Zabounidis et al., 2023) for the single-
agent setting. As mentioned in §2, CPM jointly trains g and f , assuming unlimited access to concept
labels, so it also represents an upper bound on concept accuracy.
VLM Details. For our VLM experiments, we use GPT-4o (gpt). During training, we query GPT-4o
each time LICORICE requires a concept label. As an example, for the concept related to the position
of an object, we prompt GPT-4o with instructions to report the coordinates (x y). More details about
our prompts can be found in Appendix A.3.
Performance Metrics. We compare our reward to an upper bound calculated by training PPO
with ground-truth concept labels (PixelCartPole: 500, DoorKey: 0.97, DynamicObstacles: 0.91,
Boxing: 86.05, Pong: 21). In the first four environments, percentages (or ratios) make sense since
the minimum reasonable reward is 0.2 In Pong, a random policy has -21 reward so we first get the
difference between rewards and -21 and then calculate the ratio. We additionally report the concept
error (MSE for regression; 1 − accuracy for classification). In Boxing, following the practice of
OCAtari, we consider a concept prediction correct if it is within 5 pixels of the ground truth label. In
Pong, we simply use classification error. All reported numbers are calculated using 100 evaluation
episodes.

4.2   R ESULTS

RQ 1: R EWARD AND CONCEPT ACCURACY UNDER A LIMITED ANNOTATION BUDGET
LICORICE achieves similarly high reward and concept performance to the state-of-the-art
budget-unconstrained baseline. We first seek to understand how LICORICE performs compared
to the state-of-the-art in concept-based RL, CPM, which is not constrained by concept label budgets.
Surprisingly, LICORICE and CPM achieve nearly 100% of the maximum reward in all environments
in this unfair comparison (Figure 2). They also achieve a similar concept error rate, only seeing a
clear difference in error for the most complex environment, Pong. We emphasize that CPM is given
an unlimited budget; in practice, it uses 1M-15M concept labels for all environments, which is
around 2000 to 13000× the budget used by LICORICE. In contrast, LICORICE operates under a
strict budget constraint, with 3000 labels for Boxing and 5000 for Pong, and at most 500 concept
labels for the simpler environments (PixelCartPole: 500, DoorKey: 300, DynamicObstacles: 300).
LICORICE generally achieves higher reward and lower concept error than budget-
constrained baselines. We study all budget-constrained algorithms (LICORICE plus those in §4.1)
    2
      In PixelCartPole and DoorKey, all rewards are nonnegative; in DynamicObstacles, an agent can ensure
nonnegative reward by simply staying in place; in Boxing, a random policy can get around 0 reward and all of
the trained policies have positive reward.


                                                     6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                          1.0



      Reward ( )
                          0.5

                          0.0
                                PixelCartPole   DoorKey   DynamicObstacles   Boxing   Pong
                          1.0
      Concept Error ( )


                          0.8
                          0.6
                          0.4
                          0.2
                          0.0
                   PixelCartPole      DoorKey   DynamicObstacles      Boxing         Pong
      Sequential-Q        Disagreement-Q      Random-Q         LICORICE      LICORICE+GPT-4o CPM
Figure 2: LICORICE generally achieves higher reward and lower concept error than all other budget-
constrained algorithms (Sequential-Q, Disagreement-Q, Random-Q). The budgets for each environ-
ment are PixelCartpole: 500, DoorKey: 300, DynamicObstacles: 300, Boxing: 3000, Pong: 5000.
CPM has an unlimited budget (in practice, it uses 4M, 4M, 1M, 15M, 10M labels, respectively).
Despite this extreme budget difference, LICORICE achieves comparable reward and concept error.
Full results in Table 5, Appendix B.


under the same fixed concept labeling budget as above. Figure 2 shows that LICORICE outperforms
all baselines in terms of reward and concept error on all but arguably the easiest environment, Dy-
namicObstacles. In that environment, LICORICE performs similarly to the baselines. The greatest
performance differences occur in PixelCartPole and DoorKey, where LICORICE achieves 100% and
99% of the maximum reward, while the second-best algorithm achieves 36% and 89%, respectively.
We therefore answer RQ 1 affirmatively: not only does LICORICE achieve the same high concept
accuracy and high reward as the state-of-the-art in concept-based RL, it also performs on-par to
budget-constrained baselines in one environment and outperforms them in the other four.

RQ 2: VLM S AS CONCEPT ANNOTATORS

We now seek to answer the question of whether VLMs can successfully provide concept labels in
lieu of a human annotator within our LICORICE framework. Because using VLMs incurs costs, we
operate within the same budget-constrained setting as above. We present these results in Figure 2.
VLMs can serve as concept annotators for
some environments. In DoorKey and Dy-
                                                                                    c Error
namicObstacles, LICORICE with GPT-4o la-
bels achieves 83% and 88% of the maximum           Environment         LICORICE+GPT-4o GPT-4o
reward, respectively. To assess the quality of     PixelCartPole                0.25           0.24
VLM-generated labels, we compare the con-          DoorKey                      0.31           0.30
cept error rate of our trained model against       DynamicObstacles             0.13           0.13
GPT-4o’s labeling error, both evaluated on the     Boxing                       0.98           0.82
same rollout observations, while GPT-4o evalu-     Pong                         0.73           0.87
ation is on a random subset of 50 observations, Table 2: Concept error comparison. The con-
due to API cost constraints. Table 2 shows that cept error of LICORICE+GPT-4o matches that of
the concept error of LICORICE is comparable GPT-4o alone in all environments except Boxing.
to that of GPT-4o when GPT-4o labeling error
is not high, which suggests that LICORICE can effectively utilize these concept labels. VLMs,
particularly GPT-4o, could serve as concept annotators for certain concepts in certain environments.
VLMs struggle to provide accurate concepts in more complex environments. In PixelCartPole,
Boxing, and Pong environments, however, GPT-4o struggles to provide accurate labels. In these
environments, not only does LICORICE+GPT-4o achieve less than 25% of the maximum reward,
it also incurs a large concept error. The challenge with PixelCartPole is the continuous nature of
the concepts and the lack of necessary knowledge of physical rules and quantities in this specific


                                                              7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


             1.00 PixelCartPole        1.00     DoorKey        1.00DynamicObstacles 1.00      Boxing      1.00     Pong

             0.75                      0.75                    0.75                 0.75                  0.75
Reward ( )
             0.50                      0.50                    0.50                 0.50                  0.50
             0.25                      0.25                    0.25                 0.25                  0.25
             0.00300 400 500 0.00100 200 300 0.00100 200 300 0.001000 2000 3000 0.001000 3000 5000
              0.3             0.6             0.3             1.0                1.0
                                                              0.8                0.8
   Concept Error ( )


              0.2             0.4             0.2             0.6                0.6
              0.1             0.2             0.1             0.4                0.4
                                                              0.2                0.2
              0.0300 400 500 0.0100 200 300 0.0100 200 300 0.01000 2000 3000 0.01000 3000 5000
                       Budget                    Budget                   Budget              Budget              Budget
                        Sequential-Q          Disagreement-Q          Random-Q     LICORICE       LICORICE+GPT-4o      GPT-4o
Figure 3: Reward (top) and concept error (bottom) of all algorithms for different budgets.
LICORICE more efficiently makes use of the varying budgets, achieving higher reward and lower
concept error. Full results with standard deviation are in Tables 6 to 8, Appendix B.


environment. Boxing is particularly challenging due to the large number of possible concept values
that each of the 8 discrete concepts can take on (160 or 210 possible values). Similarly, concepts in
Pong have hundreds of possible values and some physics quantities require multi-frame inference.
We therefore answer RQ 2 with cautious optimism: there are indeed cases in which LICORICE
could be used alongside VLMs, though not all yet. Generally speaking, a less complex environment
is more likely to work well with VLMs by enabling clear and detailed labeling instructions in the
prompt. However, VLM capabilities need improvement before they can fully alleviate the human
annotation burden, especially in safety-critical settings.



RQ 3: I NVESTIGATION OF B UDGET R EQUIREMENTS FOR P ERFORMANCE

Given these results, we now investigate the minimum budget required for all environments to achieve
99% of the reward upper bound. To do so, we incrementally increase the budget for each environ-
ment starting from a reasonably small budget until LICORICE reaches 99% of the reward upper
bound. In Pong, we further increase the budget until the concept error is below 0.25. In addi-
tion to the baselines, we study LICORICE under perfect (human) annotation and noisy VLM labels
in Figure 3.
LICORICE more rapidly achieves high reward compared to baselines. Across all environ-
ments, LICORICE is the most query-efficient. In three of the environments, it consistently achieves
higher reward than baselines across all budget levels. In DynamicObstacles and Pong, LICORICE
outperforms baselines at the smallest query budget, after which some baseline method achieves com-
parable reward. LICORICE is similarly performant with respect to concept error. Except for one
budget setting for one environment, LICORICE consistently achieves lower concept error than the
baselines.
For LICORICE+GPT-4o, more concept labels is not always better.                         In DoorKey,
LICORICE+GPT-4o exhibits predictable behavior in terms of concept error: as the budget increases,
the reward increases and the concept error decreases. Counterintuitively, for some environments, the
concept error and reward fluctuate with more budget, likely due to the additional labeling noise in-
troduced. We therefore provide a more nuanced answer to RQ 3: LICORICE is indeed label efficient
across varying budgets, but the benefit is annotator-dependent.


                                                                          8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                   PixelCartPole                            DoorKey              1.00
                                                                                                           DynamicObstacles                         Boxing
                   1.0

% Optimal Reward
                   0.8                                       0.95                                0.75
                                                                                                                                    0.85
                   0.6                                                                           0.50
                                                             0.90                                                                   0.80
                   0.4                                                                           0.25
                   0.2                                       0.85                                0.00
                                                                                                                                    0.75
                          0       1      2      3        4          0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 101112          0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11          0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8
                              # of Concepts Intervened               # of Concepts Intervened            # of Concepts Intervened           # of Concepts Intervened
                         Figure 4: Concept intervention results: LICORICE enables test-time concept intervention.


Figure 5: Test-time intervention examples, where intervening on a single concept corrects the action.


 RQ 4: I NTERPRETABILITY A NALYSIS : T EST-T IME C ONCEPT I NTERVENTIONS

A great property of concept-based networks is the ability for people to successfully intervene on the
concepts to correct them. In RL, this intervention enables the inspection of how different concepts
influence the immediate decisions of the agent.
LICORICE enables test-time concept intervention. To validate that LICORICE supports test-
time concept intervention, we simulate using a noisy concept model ĝ with f to study the impact
of concept interventions on reward. For PixelCartPole, we add Gaussian noise to each predicted
concept with a standard deviation of 0.2. For the other three environments with discrete concepts,
each concept label is randomly changed with probability 0.2. Following previous work (Koh et al.,
2020), we first intervene individually on concepts, setting them to ground truth, and sort the con-
cepts in descending order of reward improvement. We then sequentially intervene on the concepts
following this ordering, such that any previously intervened concepts remain intervened. According
to Figure 4, using a noisy concept model significantly degrades reward. However, the performance
increases with more interventions, meaning LICORICE supports test-time concept intervention, af-
firmatively answering RQ 4.
Concept interventions show how the policy decisions change. We now show how domain experts
could interact with the model. Specifically, we simulate a counterfactual question: What if a concept
value is incorrectly predicted? Figure 5 depicts two examples in DoorKey. Just intervening on the
concept of the door being open or closed is sufficient to change the agent’s behavior, both highlight-
ing the importance of this specific concept and the ability of a user to intervene on the concepts to
interrogate and understand agent behavior.

 A DDITIONAL EXPERIMENTS

Ablation study: all components of LICORICE contribute positively to its performance. We
now conduct an ablation study of our three main contributions: iterative training, decorrelation, and
disagreement-based active learning. LICORICE-IT uses only one iteration, LICORICE-DE does
not perform data decorrelation, and LICORICE-AC uses the entire unlabeled dataset for querying
instead of a subset chosen by active learning. All components are critical to achieving both high
reward and low concept error (Table 3; learning curves in Appendix B). However, the component
that most contributes to the performance differs depending on the environment. For example, com-
pared with LICORICE, LICORICE-IT exhibits the largest reward gap for PixelCartPole; however,
LICORICE-AC yields the largest reward gap for DynamicObstacles, and LICORICE-DE yields the
largest gap for DoorKey. This difference may occur because the concepts in DynamicObstacles are
simple enough that one iteration is sufficient, so the largest gains can be made with active learn-
ing. In contrast, PixelCartPole requires further policy refinement to better estimate on-distribution
concept values, so the largest gains can be made by leveraging multiple iterations.


                                                                                                9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                      PixelCartPole         DoorKey         DynamicObstacles              Boxing
     Algorithm       R↑     c MSE ↓      R↑     c Error ↓    R↑      c Error ↓     R↑       c Error ↓
    LICORICE-IT      0.53      0.08     0.99      0.09      1.00       0.00        0.98       0.14
    LICORICE-DE      0.97      0.03     0.78      0.20      0.98       0.00        1.00       0.04
    LICORICE-AC      0.91      0.02     0.82      0.16      0.58       0.00        0.99       0.09
     LICORICE        1.00      0.02     0.99      0.05      0.99       0.00        1.00       0.05
Table 3: Ablation study results for LICORICE. All components generally help achieve better reward
and lower concept error. Full results with standard deviation are in Table 9, Appendix B.


LICORICE is robust to various hyperparameter values. LICORICE involves a few key hyperpa-
rameters, described in §3 and summarized here for convenience. In data decorrelation, τ governs the
size of the unlabeled dataset collected by the current policy and p controls the rate of acceptance of
data points. Active learning involves a concept ensemble with N models. We study the effect of the
values of these hyperparameters on DynamicObstacles, finding that LICORICE achieves 96 − 99%
of the maximum reward across 2 values for N , 3 values for p, and 3 values for τ (Appendix B.5).

5    R ELATED W ORK
Interpretable RL. Interpretable RL has gained significant attention in recent years (Glanois et al.,
2024). One prominent area uses rule-based methods—such as decision trees (Silva et al., 2020;
Topin et al., 2021), logic (Delfosse et al., 2024), and programs (Verma et al., 2018; Penkov &
Ramamoorthy, 2019)—to represent policies. These works either assume that the state is already
interpretable or that the policy is pre-specified. Unlike prior work, our method involves learning the
interpretable representation (through concept training) for policy learning.
Concept Learning for RL. Due to successes in the supervised setting (Collins et al., 2023; Sheth
& Ebrahimi Kahou, 2023; Zarlenga et al., 2023), concept models have recently been used in RL.
Das et al. (2023) trains a joint embedding model between state-action pairs and concept-based ex-
planations to expedite learning via reward shaping. Unlike LICORICE, their policy is not a strict
function of the concepts, allowing our techniques to be combined to provide concept-based expla-
nations alongside an interpretable policy. Another example, CPM (Zabounidis et al., 2023), is a
multi-agent RL approach that assumes that concept labels are continuously available during train-
ing. As we have shown, this approach uses over 1M concept labels, whereas LICORICE achieves
similar performance while using 2000× fewer labels.
Learning Concepts with Human Feedback. Prior research has explored leveraging human concept
labels, but not for RL and without focusing on reducing the labeling burden. For instance, Lage &
Doshi-Velez (2020) has users label additional information about the relevance of certain feature di-
mensions to the concept label to facilitate concept learning for high-dimensional data. In a different
vein, Chauhan et al. (2023) develop a test-time intervention policy for querying for concept labels to
improve the final prediction. These methods do not directly tackle the issue of reducing the overall
labeling burden during training and could be used alongside our method. A concurrent work (Shao
et al., 2024) also studies sample efficiency but mainly focus on human task demonstrations.

6    D ISCUSSION AND C ONCLUSION
In this work, we proposed LICORICE, a novel RL algorithm that addresses the critical issue of
model interpretability while minimizing reliance on continuous human annotation. We introduced a
training scheme that enables RL algorithms to learn concepts efficiently from little labeled concept
data. We demonstrated how this approach reduces manual labeling effort. We conducted initial
experiments to demonstrate how we can leverage powerful VLMs to infer concepts from raw visual
inputs without explicit labels in some environments. There are broader societal impacts of our work
that must be considered, including both the impacts of using VLMs in real-world applications and
more general considerations around interpretability. For a more detailed discussion of limitations
and future work, please refer to Appendix C.


                                                 10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

This work was supported in part by NSF grant IIS-2046640 (CAREER). Co-author Fang is sup-
ported in part by a Sloan Research Fellowship. We thank NVIDIA for providing computing re-
sources. We thank Zhicheng Zhang for some helpful discussions, Naveen Raman for pointing us to
relevant literature, and Rex Chen and Zhiyu (Zoey) Chen for their constructive comments on a draft
of this work.

R EFERENCES
Hello gpt-4o. https://openai.com/index/hello-gpt-4o/.

Josh Achiam, Steven Adler, Sandhini Agarwal, Lama Ahmad, Ilge Akkaya, Florencia Leoni Ale-
  man, Diogo Almeida, Janko Altenschmidt, Sam Altman, Shyamal Anadkat, et al. Gpt-4 technical
  report. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.08774, 2023.

O Bastani, Y Pu, and A Solar-Lezama. Verifiable reinforcement learning via policy extraction.
  Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2018.

M. G. Bellemare, Y. Naddaf, J. Veness, and M. Bowling. The arcade learning environment: An
 evaluation platform for general agents. Journal of Artificial Intelligence Research, 47:253–279,
 jun 2013.

William H. Beluch, Tim Genewein, A. Nürnberger, and Jan M. Köhler. The power of ensembles
 for active learning in image classification. 2018 IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and
 Pattern Recognition, pp. 9368–9377, 2018. URL https://api.semanticscholar.org/
 CorpusID:52838058.

Kushal Chauhan, Rishabh Tiwari, Jan Freyberg, Pradeep Shenoy, and Krishnamurthy Dvijotham.
  Interactive concept bottleneck models. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intel-
  ligence, volume 37, pp. 5948–5955, 2023.

Maxime Chevalier-Boisvert, Bolun Dai, Mark Towers, Rodrigo de Lazcano, Lucas Willems,
 Salem Lahlou, Suman Pal, Pablo Samuel Castro, and Jordan Terry. Minigrid & miniworld:
 Modular & customizable reinforcement learning environments for goal-oriented tasks. CoRR,
 abs/2306.13831, 2023.

Katherine Maeve Collins, Matthew Barker, Mateo Espinosa Zarlenga, Naveen Raman, Umang
  Bhatt, Mateja Jamnik, Ilia Sucholutsky, Adrian Weller, and Krishnamurthy Dvijotham. Human
  uncertainty in concept-based ai systems. In Proceedings of the 2023 AAAI/ACM Conference on
  AI, Ethics, and Society, pp. 869–889, 2023.

Devleena Das, Sonia Chernova, and Been Kim. State2explanation: Concept-based explanations
  to benefit agent learning and user understanding. Advances in Neural Information Processing
  Systems, 36, 2023.

Quentin Delfosse, Jannis Blüml, Bjarne Gregori, Sebastian Sztwiertnia, and Kristian Kersting.
  Ocatari: Object-centric atari 2600 reinforcement learning environments. 2023.

Quentin Delfosse, Hikaru Shindo, Devendra Dhami, and Kristian Kersting. Interpretable and ex-
  plainable logical policies via neurally guided symbolic abstraction. Advances in Neural Informa-
  tion Processing Systems, 36, 2024.

Mateo Espinosa Zarlenga, Pietro Barbiero, Gabriele Ciravegna, Giuseppe Marra, Francesco Gian-
 nini, Michelangelo Diligenti, Zohreh Shams, Frederic Precioso, Stefano Melacci, Adrian Weller,
 et al. Concept embedding models: Beyond the accuracy-explainability trade-off. Advances in
 Neural Information Processing Systems, 35:21400–21413, 2022.

Claire Glanois, Paul Weng, Matthieu Zimmer, Dong Li, Tianpei Yang, Jianye Hao, and Wulong Liu.
  A survey on interpretable reinforcement learning. Machine Learning, pp. 1–44, 2024.


                                                11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Niko Grupen, Natasha Jaques, Been Kim, and Shayegan Omidshafiei. Concept-based understanding
  of emergent multi-agent behavior. In Deep Reinforcement Learning Workshop NeurIPS 2022,
  2022.

Harmanpreet Kaur, Harsha Nori, Samuel Jenkins, Rich Caruana, Hanna Wallach, and Jennifer Wort-
  man Vaughan. Interpreting interpretability: understanding data scientists’ use of interpretability
  tools for machine learning. In Proceedings of the 2020 CHI conference on human factors in
  computing systems, pp. 1–14, 2020.

Pang Wei Koh, Thao Nguyen, Yew Siang Tang, Stephen Mussmann, Emma Pierson, Been Kim, and
  Percy Liang. Concept bottleneck models. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp.
  5338–5348. PMLR, 2020.

Isaac Lage and Finale Doshi-Velez. Learning interpretable concept-based models with human feed-
   back. International Conference on Machine Learning: Workshop on Human Interpretability in
   Machine Learning, 2020.

Xiao-Yang Liu, Ziyi Xia, Jingyang Rui, Jiechao Gao, Hongyang Yang, Ming Zhu, Christina Wang,
  Zhaoran Wang, and Jian Guo. Finrl-meta: Market environments and benchmarks for data-driven
  financial reinforcement learning. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 35:1835–
  1849, 2022.

Jiayuan Mao, Tomás Lozano-Pérez, Josh Tenenbaum, and Leslie Kaelbling. Pdsketch: Integrated
   domain programming, learning, and planning. Advances in Neural Information Processing Sys-
   tems, 35:36972–36984, 2022.

Catherine C Marshall and Frank M Shipman. Experiences surveying the crowd: Reflections on
  methods, participation, and reliability. In Proceedings of the 5th Annual ACM Web Science Con-
  ference, pp. 234–243, 2013.

Azalia Mirhoseini, Anna Goldie, Mustafa Yazgan, Joe Wenjie Jiang, Ebrahim Songhori, Shen Wang,
  Young-Joon Lee, Eric Johnson, Omkar Pathak, Azade Nazi, et al. A graph placement methodol-
  ogy for fast chip design. Nature, 594(7862):207–212, 2021.

Hussein Mozannar, Hunter Lang, Dennis Wei, Prasanna Sattigeri, Subhro Das, and David Sontag.
  Who should predict? exact algorithms for learning to defer to humans. In AISTATS, 2023.

Tuomas Oikarinen, Subhro Das, Lam M Nguyen, and Tsui-Wei Weng. Label-free concept bottle-
  neck models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2304.06129, 2023.

Bruno A Olshausen and David J Field. Emergence of simple-cell receptive field properties by
  learning a sparse code for natural images. Nature, 381(6583):607–609, 1996.

Svetlin Penkov and Subramanian Ramamoorthy. Learning programmatically structured represen-
  tations with perceptor gradients. In Proceedings of the International Conference on Learning
  Representations, 2019.

Eleonora Poeta, Gabriele Ciravegna, Eliana Pastor, Tania Cerquitelli, and Elena Baralis. Concept-
  based explainable artificial intelligence: A survey. arXiv preprint arXiv:2312.12936, 2023.

Martin L Puterman. Markov decision processes: discrete stochastic dynamic programming. John
 Wiley & Sons, 2014.

Antonin Raffin, Ashley Hill, Adam Gleave, Anssi Kanervisto, Maximilian Ernestus, and Noah Dor-
  mann. Stable-baselines3: Reliable reinforcement learning implementations. Journal of Machine
  Learning Research, 22(268):1–8, 2021.

John Schulman, Filip Wolski, Prafulla Dhariwal, Alec Radford, and Oleg Klimov. Proximal policy
  optimization algorithms. arXiv preprint arXiv:1707.06347, 2017.

H Sebastian Seung, Manfred Opper, and Haim Sompolinsky. Query by committee. In Proceedings
  of the fifth annual workshop on Computational learning theory, pp. 287–294, 1992.


                                                12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Jie-Jing Shao, Hao-Ran Hao, Xiao-Wen Yang, and Yu-Feng Li. Learning for long-horizon planning
   via neuro-symbolic abductive imitation, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2411.
   18201.
Ivaxi Sheth and Samira Ebrahimi Kahou. Auxiliary losses for learning generalizable concept-based
  models. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 36, 2023.
Andrew Silva, Matthew Gombolay, Taylor Killian, Ivan Jimenez, and Sung-Hyun Son. Optimiza-
  tion methods for interpretable differentiable decision trees applied to reinforcement learning. In
  International conference on artificial intelligence and statistics, pp. 1855–1865. PMLR, 2020.
Richard S Sutton and Andrew G Barto. Reinforcement learning: An introduction. MIT press, 2018.
Alaa Tharwat and Wolfram Schenck. A survey on active learning: state-of-the-art, practical chal-
  lenges and research directions. Mathematics, 11(4):820, 2023.
Nicholay Topin, Stephanie Milani, Fei Fang, and Manuela Veloso. Iterative bounding mdps: Learn-
  ing interpretable policies via non-interpretable methods. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference
  on Artificial Intelligence, volume 35, pp. 9923–9931, 2021.
Ashish Vaswani, Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Jakob Uszkoreit, Llion Jones, Aidan N Gomez,
  Lukasz Kaiser, and Illia Polosukhin. Attention is all you need. Advances in Neural Informa-
  tion Processing Systems, 10, 2017.
Abhinav Verma, Vijayaraghavan Murali, Rishabh Singh, Pushmeet Kohli, and Swarat Chaudhuri.
  Programmatically interpretable reinforcement learning. In International Conference on Machine
  Learning, pp. 5045–5054. PMLR, 2018.
Rajeev Verma, Daniel Barrejón, and Eric Nalisnick. Learning to defer to multiple experts: Consis-
  tent surrogate losses, confidence calibration, and conformal ensembles. In International Confer-
  ence on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics, 2023.
Renhao Wang, Jiayuan Mao, Joy Hsu, Hang Zhao, Jiajun Wu, and Yang Gao. Programmati-
  cally grounded, compositionally generalizable robotic manipulation. International Conference
  on Learning Representations, 2023.
Chao-Han Huck Yang, I Danny, Te Hung, Yi Ouyang, and Pin-Yu Chen. Causal inference q-
  network: Toward resilient reinforcement learning. In Self-Supervision for Reinforcement Learn-
  ing Workshop-ICLR 2021, 2021.
Chao Yu, Jiming Liu, Shamim Nemati, and Guosheng Yin. Reinforcement learning in healthcare:
  A survey. ACM Computing Surveys (CSUR), 55(1):1–36, 2021.
Renos Zabounidis, Joseph Campbell, Simon Stepputtis, Dana Hughes, and Katia P Sycara. Concept
  learning for interpretable multi-agent reinforcement learning. In Conference on Robot Learning,
  pp. 1828–1837. PMLR, 2023.
Mateo Espinosa Zarlenga, Katherine M Collins, Krishnamurthy Dvijotham, Adrian Weller, Zohreh
 Shams, and Mateja Jamnik. Learning to receive help: Intervention-aware concept embedding
 models. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2023.


                                                13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 6: Example start configurations of the DoorKey environment, along with the associated
concepts for each configuration. This shows that concepts must be general enough to apply to many
different configurations. As a result, the agent cannot memorize the exact position of the door and
key.


A     E XPERIMENTAL R ESULT R EPRODUCIBILITY

In this section, we provide descriptions of our concept definitions, prompts, and other experimental
details toward the goal of reproducibility.

A.1   D EFINITIONS OF C ONCEPTS

Table 4 provides more details regarding the concepts used in each environment, categorizing them
by their names, types, and value ranges. For the PixelCartPole environment, all concepts such as
Cart Position, Cart Velocity, Pole Angle, and Pole Angular Velocity are continuous. In contrast,
the DoorKey environment features discrete concepts like Agent Position (x and y), Key Position (x
and y), and Door Open status, each with specific value ranges. Similarly, the DynamicObstacles
environment lists discrete concepts, including Agent and Obstacle positions, with corresponding
value ranges.
Precise concept definitions are crucial for enabling correct agent behavior. We visualize the
start configurations for DoorKey in Figure 6 to illustrate the importance of well-defined concepts in
reinforcement learning. DoorKey includes a variety of initial states, each with different positions
of the agent, key, and door. This diversity highlights a challenge in concept-based RL: how to
define concepts that are both specific enough to be meaningful and general enough to apply across
all possible scenarios. An agent trained with poorly defined concepts might perform well in some
configurations but fail to generalize to others, leading to suboptimal performance in new or unseen
environments. As a result, concept engineering is its own separate but important problem.

A.2   LICORICE D ETAILS .

In this section, we provide additional implementation details for LICORICE. The model architecture
has been mostly described in the main text and we state all additional details here. The number of
neurons in the concept layer is exactly the number of concepts. For continuous concept values, we
directly use a linear layer to map from features to concept values. For discrete concept values, since
different concepts have different numbers of categories, we create one linear classification head for
each single concept, and to predict the final action, we calculate the class with the largest predicted
probability for each concept.


                                                  14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


   Environment              Concept Name                Type       Value Ranges      GPT-4o Error
                             Cart Position            Continuous     (−2.4, 2.4)      0.01 ± 0.00
                             Cart Velocity            Continuous         R            0.31 ± 0.12
   PixelCartPole
                              Pole Angle              Continuous   (−.2095, .2095)    0.01 ± 0.00
                         Pole Angular Velocity        Continuous         R            0.63 ± 0.14
                           Agent Position x            Discrete          5            0.36 ± 0.08
                           Agent Position y            Discrete          5            0.41 ± 0.12
                           Agent Direction             Discrete          4            0.28 ± 0.06
                            Key Position x             Discrete          6            0.20 ± 0.03
                            Key Position y             Discrete          6            0.32 ± 0.11
                            Door Position x            Discrete          5            0.37 ± 0.07
      DoorKey
                            Door Position y            Discrete          5            0.32 ± 0.04
                              Door Open                Discrete          2            0.38 ± 0.09
                       Direction Movable Right         Discrete          2            0.30 ± 0.03
                       Direction Movable Down          Discrete          2            0.19 ± 0.06
                        Direction Movable Left         Discrete          2            0.33 ± 0.06
                        Direction Movable Up           Discrete          2            0.20 ± 0.08
                           Agent Position x            Discrete          3            0.03 ± 0.06
                           Agent Position y            Discrete          3            0.04 ± 0.06
                           Agent Direction             Discrete          4            0.20 ± 0.05
                         Obstacle 1 Position x         Discrete          3            0.08 ± 0.02
                         Obstacle 1 Position y         Discrete          3            0.19 ± 0.04
 DynamicObstacles        Obstacle 2 Position x         Discrete          3            0.22 ± 0.09
                         Obstacle 2 Position y         Discrete          3            0.12 ± 0.02
                       Direction Movable Right         Discrete          2            0.19 ± 0.06
                       Direction Movable Down          Discrete          2            0.14 ± 0.05
                        Direction Movable Left         Discrete          2            0.13 ± 0.02
                        Direction Movable Up           Discrete          2            0.07 ± 0.08
                      Agent Position x at Frame 1      Discrete         160           0.81 ± 0.14
                      Agent Position y at Frame 1      Discrete         210           0.93 ± 0.05
                      Enemy Position x at Frame 1      Discrete         160           0.78 ± 0.13
                      Enemy Position y at Frame 1      Discrete         210           0.90 ± 0.07
      Boxing
                      Agent Position x at Frame 2      Discrete         160           0.67 ± 0.06
                      Agent Position y at Frame 2      Discrete         210           0.88 ± 0.04
                      Enemy Position x at Frame 2      Discrete         160           0.71 ± 0.05
                      Enemy Position y at Frame 2      Discrete         210           0.83 ± 0.08
                            Ball Position x            Discrete         176           0.99 ± 0.00
                            Ball Position y            Discrete          88           0.98 ± 0.00
                            Ball Velocity x            Discrete         176           0.95 ± 0.00
       Pong                 Ball Velocity y            Discrete         176           0.80 ± 0.00
                            Paddle Velocity            Discrete         176           0.78 ± 0.05
                          Paddle Acceleration          Discrete         352           0.79 ± 0.04
                              Paddle Jerk              Discrete         704           0.83 ± 0.04

Table 4: Concepts and their possible values for all environments. For discrete concepts, we report
the number of categories. We also provide the mean GPT-4o labeling error for each single concept,
averaged across 5 seeds and corresponding to the same evaluation protocols as the ones with the
largest budgets in Table 7. We use MSELoss for continuous values and 1 - accuracy for discrete
ones, and in Boxing, we regard one prediction correct if it is within distance 5 to the ground truth.
The ± [value] part shows the standard deviation. The average errors over concepts are 0.24 ± 0.06,
0.30 ± 0.02, 0.13 ± 0.03, 0.82 ± 0.06, and 0.88 ± 0.02 respectively for the environments.



Architecture. The network begins with a CNN-based feature extractor fθ : X → Rd , comprising
three convolutional layers that map input state x ∈ X to a d-dimensional feature vector h = fθ (x).
We then introduce a linear layer gϕ : Rd → Rk for concept prediction (g), mapping extracted
features to k concept values. For regression tasks, each of the k predicted concept is represented
as a real value; for classification tasks, each concept maps to one categorical value derived from a
classification head. The action prediction component (f ) is implemented as an MLP with two fully


                                                 15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


connected layers, each containing 64 neurons with Tanh activation, taking only c as input to produce
action logits a = MLP(c). Notably, we share the CNN feature extractor fθ between policy and value
functions, a decision informed by improved performance observed in preliminary experiments.

Value-Based Methods.          If we were to use a value-
based method as the RL backbone, we would need to
make the following changes. First, we would need to
modify V (s, a) or Q(s, a) to include a concept bottle-
neck, such that Q(s, a) = f (g(s)). Then, we can conduct
interleaved training in a similar way to LICORICE.
Feature Extractor. If we use the actor-critic paradigm,
we propose to share a feature extractor between the pol-
icy and value networks, shown in Figure 7. Intuitively,
this choice can offer several advantages compared with Figure 7: Architecture of our concept-
using image or predicted concepts as input for both net- bottleneck actor-critic method.
works. Sharing a feature extractor enables both networks
to benefit from a common, rich representation of the input
data, reducing the number of parameters to be trained. More importantly, it balances the updates of
the policy and value networks. In experiments, we observed that directly using the raw image as in-
put for both networks complicated policy learning. Conversely, relying solely on predicted concepts
for the value network may limit its accuracy in value estimation, particularly if the concepts do not
capture all the nuances relevant to the value predictions.

A.3    VLM D ETAILS

We detail our prompts for each environment here.
PixelCartPole

  Prompt: Here are the past 4 rendered frames from the CartPole environment. Please use these
  images to estimate the following values in the latest frame (the last one):
      • Cart Position, within the range (-2.4, 2.4)
      • Cart Velocity
      • Pole Angle, within the range (-0.2095, 0.2095)
      • Pole Angular Velocity
  Additionally, please note that the last action taken was [last action].
  Please carefully determine the following values and give concise answers one by one. Make
  sure to return an estimated value for each parameter, even if the task may look challenging.
  Follow the reporting format:
      • Cart Position: estimated value
      • Cart Velocity: estimated value
      • Pole Angle: estimated value
      • Pole Angular Velocity: estimated value


                                                  16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


DoorKey

  Prompt: Here is an image of a 4x4 grid composed of black cells, with each cell either empty
  or containing an object. Each cell is defined by an integer-valued coordinate system starting at
  (1, 1) for the top-left cell. The coordinates increase rightward along the x-axis and downward
  along the y-axis. Within this grid, there is a red isosceles triangle representing the agent, a
  yellow cell representing the door (which may visually disappear if the door is open), a yellow
  key icon representing the key (which may disappear), and one green square representing the
  goal. Carefully analyze the grid and report on the following attributes, focusing only on the
  black cells as the gray cells are excluded from the active black area.
  Detailed Instructions:
    1. Agent Position: Identify and report the coordinates (x, y) of the red triangle (agent). En-
       sure the accuracy by double-checking the agent’s exact location within the grid.
    2. Agent Direction: Specify the direction the red triangle is facing, which is the orientation
       of the vertex (pointy corner) of the isosceles triangle. Choose from ‘right’, ‘down’, ‘left’,
       or ‘up’. Clarify that this direction is independent of movement options.
    3. Key Position: Provide the coordinates (x, y) where the key is located. If the key is absent,
       report as (0, 0). Verify visually that the key is present or not before reporting.
    4. Door Position:
         • Position: Determine and report the coordinates (x, y) of the door.
         • Status: Assess whether the door is open or closed (closed means the door is visible as
           a whole yellow cell, while open means the door disappears visually). Report as ‘true’
           for open and ‘false’ for closed. Double-check the door’s appearance to confirm if it is
           open or closed.
    5. Direction Movable: Evaluate and report whether the agent can move one cell in each
       specified direction, namely, the neighboring cell in that direction is active and empty (not
       key, closed door, or grey inactive cell):
         • Right (x + 1): Check the cell to the right.
         • Down (y + 1): Check the cell below.
         • Left (x - 1): Check the cell to the left.
         • Up (y - 1): Check the cell above.
       Each direction’s feasibility should be reported as ‘true’ if clear and within the grid, and
       ‘false’ otherwise.
  Reporting Format: Carefully report each piece of information sequentially, following the for-
  mat ‘name: answer’. Ensure each response is precise and reflects careful verification of the
  grid details as viewed.


                                                 17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


DynamicObstacles

  Prompt: Here is an image of a 3x3 grid composed of black cells, with each cell either empty
  or containing an object. Each cell is defined by an integer-valued coordinate system starting at
  (1, 1) for the top-left cell. The coordinates increase rightward along the x-axis and downward
  along the y-axis. Within this grid, there is a red isosceles triangle representing the agent, two
  blue balls representing obstacles, and one green square representing the goal. Please carefully
  determine the following values and give concise answers one by one:
    1. Agent Position: Identify and report the coordinates (x, y) of the red triangle (agent). En-
       sure the accuracy by double-checking the agent’s exact location within the grid.
    2. Agent Direction: Specify the direction the red triangle is facing, which is the orientation
       of the vertex (pointy corner) of the isosceles triangle. Choose from ‘right’, ‘down’, ‘left’,
       or ‘up’. Clarify that this direction is independent of movement options.
    3. Obstacle Position: Identify and report the coordinates of the two obstacles in ascending
       order. Compare the coordinates by their x-values first. If the x-values are equal, compare
       by their y-values.
       (a) First Obstacle: Provide the coordinates (x, y) of the first blue ball.
       (b) Second Obstacle: Provide the coordinates (x, y) of the second blue ball.
    4. Direction Movable: Evaluate and report whether the agent can move one cell in each
       specified direction, namely, the neighboring cell in that direction is active and empty (not
       obstacle or out of bounds):
         • Right (x + 1): Check the cell to the right.
         • Down (y + 1): Check the cell below.
         • Left (x - 1): Check the cell to the left.
         • Up (y - 1): Check the cell above.
       Each direction’s feasibility should be reported as ‘true’ if clear and within the grid, and
       ‘false’ otherwise.
  Reporting Format: Carefully report each piece of information sequentially, following the for-
  mat ‘name: answer’. Ensure each response is precise and reflects careful verification of the
  grid details as viewed.


                                                 18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Boxing

  Prompt: Here are two consecutive rendered frames from the Atari Boxing environment. The
  game screen is 160x210 pixels, with (0, 0) at the top-left corner. The x-coordinate increases
  rightward, and the y-coordinate increases downward. For each frame, estimate the following
  values as integers:
       • The white player’s x and y coordinates
       • The black player’s x and y coordinates

  Please carefully determine the following values and give concise answers one by one. Make
  sure to return an estimated value for each one, even if the task may look challenging.
  Follow the reporting format:
       • frame 1 white x: estimated value
       • frame 1 white y: estimated value
       • frame 1 black x: estimated value
       • frame 1 black y: estimated value
       • frame 2 white x: estimated value
       • frame 2 white y: estimated value
       • frame 2 black x: estimated value
       • frame 2 black y: estimated value

Pong

  Prompt: Here are four consecutive rendered frames from the Atari Pong environment. The
  game screen is 84x84 pixels, with (0, 0) at the top-left corner. You need to look at the ball and
  the paddle in the right. The x-coordinate increases downward, and the y-coordinate increases
  rightward.
  Please determine the following values and give concise answers one by one. Make sure to
  return an estimated value for each one, even if the task may look challenging.
       • x coordinate of the ball relative to the paddle in the first frame
       • y coordinate of the ball in the first frame
       • x velocity of the ball calculated from the first and second frames
       • y velocity of the ball calculated from the first and second frames
       • velocity of the paddle calculated from the first and second frames
       • acceleration of the paddle calculated from the first three frames
       • jerk of the paddle calculated from the four frames
  Follow the reporting format in your response.
       • x coordinate of the ball: estimated value
       • y coordinate of the ball: estimated value
       • x velocity of the ball: estimated value
       • y velocity of the ball: estimated value
       • velocity of the paddle: estimated value
       • acceleration of the paddle: estimated value
       • jerk of the paddle: estimated value


                                                  19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A.4   E XPERIMENTAL D ETAILS

Behavior learning hyperparameters. For the PPO hyperparameters, we set 4 · 106 total timesteps
for PixelCartPole and DoorKey, 106 for DynamicObstacles, 1.5 · 107 for Boxing, and 107 for Pong.
For PixelCartPole, DoorKey, and DynamicObstacles, we use 8 vectorized environments, horizon
T = 4096, 10 epochs for training, batch size of 512, learning rate 3 · 10−4 , entropy coefficient 0.01,
and value function coefficient 0.5. For Boxing and Pong, we use 8 vectorized environments, horizon
T = 1024, 4 epochs for training, batch size of 256, learning rate 3 · 10−4 , entropy coefficient 0.01,
and value function coefficient 0.5. For all other hyperparameters, we use the default values from
Stable Baselines 3 Raffin et al. (2021).
Concept learning hyperparameters. For the concept training, we set 100 epochs with Adam opti-
mizer with the learning rate linearly decaying from 3 · 10−4 to 0 for each iteration in PixelCartPole,
Boxing, and Pong. In DoorKey and DynamicObstacles, we use the same optimizer and initial learn-
ing rate, yet set 50 epochs instead and set early stopping with threshold linearly increasing from 10
to 20, to incentivize the concept network not to overfit in earlier iterations. The batch size is 32. We
model concept learning for PixelCartPole as a regression problem (minimizing mean squared error).
We model concept learning for DoorKey, DynamicObstacles, Boxing,and Pong as classification
problems.
LICORICE-specific hyperparameters. For LICORICE, we set the ratio for active learning τ =
10, batch size to query labels in the active learning module b = 20, and the number of ensemble
models N = 5 for the first three environments. For the complex environments Boxing and Pong, we
choose the ratio for active learning τ = 4, batch size to query labels in the active learning module
b = Bm /5 and number of ensemble models N = 5 to make a balance between performance and
speed. The default number of iterations chosen in our algorithm is M = 4 for PixelCartPole, M = 2
for DoorKey, DynamicObstacles, and M = 5 for Boxing and Pong. The sample acceptance rate
p = 0.02 for PixelCartPoleand p = 0.1 for the other four environments. The Random-Q baseline
uses the same sample acceptance rate p as LICORICE. In the complex environments Boxing and
Pong, we use both the KL-divergence penalty and PPO loss at the end of the algorithm to improve
optimization with β = 0.01, as mentioned in Section 3.
Computational resources. We use NVIDIA A6000 and NVIDIA RTX 6000 Ada Generation. Each
of our training program uses less than 3GB GPU memory. For Boxingand Pong, each run takes less
than 20 hours to finish. For PixelCartPole and DoorKey, each run takes less than 9 hours to finish.
For DynamicObstacles, each run takes less than 2 hours to finish.
Experimental replicability. For all experiments, we use 5 seeds [123, 456, 789, 1011, 1213] to
train the models. We then evaluate on the environment with seed 42 with 100 episodes and take the
average of the reward across the episodes and the concept error across the observations within each
episode.


                                                  20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                         Algorithm               R↑           c Error ↓
                                       Sequential-Q          0.23 ± 0.09    0.10 ± 0.04
                                      Disagreement-Q         0.36 ± 0.20    0.10 ± 0.04
                                        Random-Q             0.34 ± 0.14    0.07 ± 0.02
                PixelCartPole
                                        LICORICE             1.00 ± 0.00    0.02 ± 0.00
                                    LICORICE+GPT-4o          0.06 ± 0.01    0.25 ± 0.08
                                           CPM               1.00 ± 0.00    0.01 ± 0.00
                                       Sequential-Q          0.46 ± 0.09    0.46 ± 0.05
                                      Disagreement-Q         0.76 ± 0.12    0.39 ± 0.07
                                        Random-Q             0.89 ± 0.03    0.27 ± 0.08
                  DoorKey
                                        LICORICE             0.99 ± 0.01    0.05 ± 0.01
                                    LICORICE+GPT-4o          0.83 ± 0.06    0.31 ± 0.01
                                           CPM               1.00 ± 0.00    0.00 ± 0.00
                                       Sequential-Q          0.79 ± 0.44    0.01 ± 0.01
                                      Disagreement-Q         0.99 ± 0.01    0.00 ± 0.00
                                        Random-Q             0.98 ± 0.01    0.02 ± 0.01
             DynamicObstacles
                                        LICORICE             0.99 ± 0.00    0.00 ± 0.00
                                    LICORICE+GPT-4o          0.88 ± 0.09    0.13 ± 0.03
                                           CPM               0.97 ± 0.02    0.00 ± 0.00
                                       Sequential-Q          0.87 ± 0.20    0.32 ± 0.26
                                      Disagreement-Q         0.83 ± 0.14    0.20 ± 0.21
                                        Random-Q             0.96 ± 0.04    0.14 ± 0.10
                   Boxing
                                        LICORICE             1.00 ± 0.02    0.05 ± 0.01
                                    LICORICE+GPT-4o          0.22 ± 0.01    0.98 ± 0.01
                                           CPM               1.00 ± 0.05    0.00 ± 0.00
                                       Sequential-Q          0.98 ± 0.02    0.54 ± 0.03
                                      Disagreement-Q         0.94 ± 0.09    0.57 ± 0.05
                                        Random-Q             0.94 ± 0.05    0.60 ± 0.04
                     Pong
                                        LICORICE             1.00 ± 0.02    0.24 ± 0.16
                                    LICORICE+GPT-4o          0.13 ± 0.17    0.71 ± 0.01
                                           CPM               1.00 ± 0.00    0.00 ± 0.01

Table 5: Evaluation of the reward R and concept error achieved by all methods in all environments.
This is a extended table from Figure 2. The reward is reported as the fraction of the reward upper
bound. For PixelCartPole, the c error is the MSE. For the other environments, the c error is 1
- accuracy. The first five algorithms are given a budget of B = [500, 300, 300, 3000, 5000] for
each environment, from top to bottom; CPM is given an unlimited budget (in practice, it uses 4M,
4M, 1M, 15M, 10M concept labels respectively). The ± [value] part shows the standard deviation.
For each environment, we bold the highest reward and lowest concept error among the budget-
constrained methods.


B     A DDITIONAL R ESULTS
In this section, we present both the numerical results as tables from the figures in the main paper, in
addition to experimental results not reported in the main paper.

B.1   BALANCING C ONCEPT P ERFORMANCE AND E NVIRONMENT R EWARD

In Table 5, we present all of the numerical results from Figure 2, including standard deviation. Our
method enjoys low variance across all environments in terms of both concept error and reward.


                                                  21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                     Environment          B      M         R↑          c Error ↓
                                         300     1    0.28 ± 0.10     0.15 ± 0.07
                     PixelCartPole       400     3    0.77 ± 0.22     0.05 ± 0.01
                                         500     4    1.00 ± 0.00     0.02 ± 0.00
                                         100     1    0.77 ± 0.04     0.26 ± 0.04
                       DoorKey           200     2    0.93 ± 0.02     0.09 ± 0.01
                                         300     2    0.99 ± 0.01     0.05 ± 0.01
                                         100     1    0.96 ± 0.02     0.04 ± 0.01
                  DynamicObstacles       200     1    0.98 ± 0.01     0.01 ± 0.00
                                         300     2    0.99 ± 0.00     0.00 ± 0.00
                                        1000     5    0.94 ± 0.05     0.11 ± 0.01
                        Boxing          2000     5    0.98 ± 0.05     0.10 ± 0.06
                                        3000     5    1.00 ± 0.02     0.05 ± 0.01
                                        1000     5    0.99 ± 0.00     0.65 ± 0.04
                         Pong           3000     5    1.00 ± 0.00     0.43 ± 0.05
                                        5000     5    1.00 ± 0.02     0.24 ± 0.16

Table 6: Performance of LICORICE on all environments for varying budgets. We select M to opti-
mize R - c error without additional weighting since they are observed to have the same magnitude.
The reward is reported as the fraction of the reward upper bound. For PixelCartPole, c error is MSE;
for the other environments, c error is 1 - accuracy. The ± [value] part shows the standard deviation.
This shows a more complete version of the results in Figure 3.


B.2   B UDGET A LLOCATION E FFECTIVENESS

In Table 6, we present an extension of the results in Figure 3, including the standard deviation. As
expected, as the budget increases, the standard deviation for both the reward and concept error tends
to decrease. The one exception is the reward for PixelCartPole. Interestingly, the standard deviation
is highest for B = 400. We suspect this is because the concept errors may be more critical here,
leading to higher variance in the reward performance.


                                                 22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


      Environment            B      M          R↑             LICORICE+GPT-4o c Error ↓               GPT-4o c Error
                             300     1      0.06 ± 0.02                     0.17 ± 0.19                   0.19 ± 0.25
      PixelCartPole          400     2      0.07 ± 0.02                     0.25 ± 0.15                   0.22 ± 0.15
                             500     2      0.06 ± 0.01                     0.25 ± 0.08                   0.24 ± 0.07
                             100     1      0.71 ± 0.04                     0.45 ± 0.04                   0.31 ± 0.03
        DoorKey              200     2      0.74 ± 0.04                     0.33 ± 0.01                   0.31 ± 0.03
                             300     2      0.83 ± 0.06                     0.31 ± 0.01                   0.30 ± 0.03
                             100     1      0.27 ± 0.37                     0.20 ± 0.03                   0.16 ± 0.03
 DynamicObstacles            200     1      0.93 ± 0.05                     0.13 ± 0.03                   0.12 ± 0.05
                             300     1      0.88 ± 0.09                     0.13 ± 0.03                   0.13 ± 0.03
                           1000      5      0.34 ± 0.09                     0.98 ± 0.01                   0.78 ± 0.01
         Boxing            2000      5      0.23 ± 0.11                     0.98 ± 0.01                   0.79 ± 0.01
                           3000      5      0.22 ± 0.01                     0.98 ± 0.01                   0.79 ± 0.02
                           1000      5      0.00 ± 0.00                     0.79 ± 0.08                   0.88 ± 0.01
          Pong             3000      5      0.00 ± 0.00                     0.74 ± 0.07                   0.86 ± 0.03
                           5000      5      0.13 ± 0.17                     0.71 ± 0.01                   0.87 ± 0.02

Table 7: Performance of LICORICE with GPT-4o integrated into the loop for all environments
across different budgets, along with the concept labeling error of GPT-4o as a reference. We select
M to optimize R - c error without additional weighting since they are observed to have the same
magnitude. GPT-4o c error is evaluated on a random sample of 50 observations from the same
rollout set used for LICORICE+GPT-4o, due to API cost constraints. This shows a more complete
version of the results in Figure 3.

      Environment      B            Sequential-Q                 Disagreement-Q                     Random-Q
                                   R↑        c Error ↓           R↑       c Error ↓            R↑         c Error ↓
                      300     0.17 ± 0.03    0.11 ± 0.03      0.22 ± 0.04     0.20 ± 0.04   0.24 ± 0.07    0.14 ± 0.04
    PixelCartPole     400     0.23 ± 0.05    0.10 ± 0.03      0.26 ± 0.06     0.13 ± 0.03   0.28 ± 0.07    0.09 ± 0.05
                      500     0.23 ± 0.07    0.10 ± 0.03      0.39 ± 0.28     0.09 ± 0.03   0.35 ± 0.16    0.07 ± 0.02
                      100     0.33 ± 0.07    0.51 ± 0.08      0.61 ± 0.14     0.33 ± 0.07   0.70 ± 0.07    0.30 ± 0.02
       DoorKey        200     0.43 ± 0.09    0.49 ± 0.03      0.72 ± 0.09     0.28 ± 0.07   0.85 ± 0.04    0.24 ± 0.04
                      300     0.51 ± 0.11    0.45 ± 0.08      0.76 ± 0.12     0.41 ± 0.06   0.90 ± 0.02    0.27 ± 0.08
                      100     0.43 ± 0.47    0.04 ± 0.04      0.82 ± 0.18     0.04 ± 0.00   0.34 ± 0.46    0.05 ± 0.05
 DynamicObstacles     200     0.76 ± 0.43    0.03 ± 0.03      0.99 ± 0.02     0.01 ± 0.00   0.76 ± 0.42    0.03 ± 0.02
                      300     0.78 ± 0.44    0.01 ± 0.01      0.99 ± 0.01     0.00 ± 0.00   0.97 ± 0.01    0.02 ± 0.02
                      1000    0.84 ± 0.20    0.35 ± 0.12      0.93 ± 0.05     0.25 ± 0.11   0.83 ± 0.24    0.25 ± 0.05
        Boxing        2000    0.88 ± 0.12    0.19 ± 0.11      0.93 ± 0.06     0.14 ± 0.04   0.83 ± 0.11    0.30 ± 0.18
                      3000    0.87 ± 0.20    0.32 ± 0.26      0.83 ± 0.14     0.20 ± 0.21   0.96 ± 0.04    0.14 ± 0.10
                      1000    0.91 ± 0.12    0.74 ± 0.07      0.84 ± 0.21     0.68 ± 0.06   0.74 ± 0.21    0.73 ± 0.05
         Pong         3000    0.98 ± 0.02    0.58 ± 0.08      0.98 ± 0.01     0.64 ± 0.03   0.96 ± 0.04    0.60 ± 0.04
                      5000    0.98 ± 0.02    0.54 ± 0.03      0.94 ± 0.09     0.57 ± 0.05   0.94 ± 0.05    0.60 ± 0.04

Table 8: Performance of Sequential-Q, Disagreement-Q, and Random-Q for all environments across
different budgets. The reward is reported as the fraction of the reward upper bound. For PixelCart-
Pole, c error is MSE; for the other environments, c error is 1 - accuracy. The ± [value] part shows
the standard deviation. This shows a more complete version of the results in Figure 3.


B.3     I NTEGRATION WITH V ISION -L ANGUAGE M ODELS

In Table 7, we present an extension of the results in Figure 3 in the main paper, including the standard
deviation. Interestingly, the standard deviation for the reward obtained by using LICORICE with
GPT-4o as the annotator does not always follow the same trend as shown in Table 6 (when we assume
access to a more accurate human annotator). Instead, the standard deviation is relatively consistent
for PixelCartPole, regardless of the budget. It steadily decreases for DoorKey, as expected. However,
in DynamicObstacles, we see an increase when B = 300. We are not sure of the cause of this.
Perhaps at this point the algorithm begins overfitting to the errors in the labels from GPT-4o (the


                                                         23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 8: LICORICE+GPT-4o waits until the coast is clear to move to the goal. It appears to make
a small mistake in the bottom left, requiring it to wait slightly longer than necessary to navigate to
the goal.


concept error rate is the same for 200 and 300 labels). Further investigation is required to understand
the underlying factors contributing to this anomaly.
Different tasks and concepts have various difficulties for GPT-4o. Table 4 list detailed concept
errors for concepts in all environments. In PixelCartPole, cart position and pole angle have smaller
errors, while velocities require understanding multiple frames and thus are harder to predict accu-
rately. For DoorKey and DynamicObstacles, different concepts have slightly varying concept errors,
indicating visual tasks have different difficulties for GPT-4o. Agent direction has as high as around
0.3 prediction error for both DoorKey and DynamicObstacles. Direction movable is also hard for
DoorKey, with a high concept error even if it is a binary concept. We posit it requires the correct
understanding of more than one particular object to ensure correctness. The concept accuracies in
DoorKey are generally higher than DynamicObstacles, suggesting GPT-4o more struggles with a
larger grid.
A GPT-4o-trained RL agent recovers from a mistake. In Figure 8, we show an example of a
GPT-4o-trained RL agent on DynamicObstacles, in which the agent appears to wait until it is safe to
move towards the goal: the green square. The image sequence shows the agent (red triangle) starting
from its initial position and moving to the right. It then is cornered by an obstacle (blue circle), then
both obstacles. In the bottom left corner frame, it appears to make a mistake by turning to the right,
meaning it missed a window to escape. Finally, it moves to the goal when the path is clear in the
second-to-last and last frames (bottom right). This behavior highlights that the agent may still learn
reasonable behavior even if the concept labels may be incorrect (causing it to make a mistake, as in
the bottom left frame).

B.4   A BLATION

In Table 9, we present an extension of the results in Table 3, including standard deviation. Figure 9
shows all learning curves for ablations in all environments. In PixelCartPole, we clearly see the ben-
efit of iterative strategies on reward: LICORICE, LICORICE-DE and LICORICE-AC consistently
increase in reward and converge at high levels, but LICORICE-IT converges at less than 50% of the
optimal reward. We also see that LICORICE-IT also achieves higher concept error, indicating that
it struggles to learn the larger distribution of concepts induced by a non-optimal policy. In DoorKey,
all algorithms steadily increase in reward. However, we can see a dip at around 106 environment
steps where we begin the second iteration for LICORICE, LICORICE-AC, and LICORICE-DE. Al-
though LICORICE-IT achieves similar reward to LICORICE, LICORICE achieves lower concept
error, which is beneficial for the goal of interpretability. Finally, in DynamicObstacles, LICORICE-


                                                   24
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                           Algorithm            R↑           c Error ↓
                                        LICORICE-IT         0.53 ± 0.26     0.08 ± 0.03
                                        LICORICE-DE         0.97 ± 0.05     0.03 ± 0.01
                   PixelCartPole
                                        LICORICE-AC         0.91 ± 0.10     0.02 ± 0.01
                                          LICORICE          1.00 ± 0.00     0.02 ± 0.00
                                        LICORICE-IT         0.99 ± 0.01     0.09 ± 0.02
                                        LICORICE-DE         0.78 ± 0.08     0.20 ± 0.05
                      DoorKey
                                        LICORICE-AC         0.82 ± 0.10     0.16 ± 0.06
                                          LICORICE          0.99 ± 0.01     0.05 ± 0.01
                                        LICORICE-IT         1.00 ± 0.00     0.00 ± 0.00
                                        LICORICE-DE         0.98 ± 0.01     0.00 ± 0.00
                DynamicObstacles
                                        LICORICE-AC         0.58 ± 0.53     0.00 ± 0.00
                                          LICORICE          0.99 ± 0.00     0.00 ± 0.00
                                        LICORICE-IT         0.98 ± 0.04     0.14 ± 0.07
                                        LICORICE-DE         1.00 ± 0.04     0.04 ± 0.02
                       Boxing
                                        LICORICE-AC         0.99 ± 0.01     0.09 ± 0.06
                                          LICORICE          1.00 ± 0.02     0.05 ± 0.01

Table 9: Ablation study results for LICORICE in the first four environments, where we study the
effect of each component to compare with LICORICE. This shows a more complete version of the
results in Table 3.


Figure 9: Learning curves for ablations in the first three environments. Shaded region shows 95%
CI, calculated using 1000 bootstrap samples.


AC lags behind the most in terms of both reward and concept error. This result indicates that the
active learning component is most important for this environment.
Impact on data diversity. We hypothesize that data decorrelation enables better performance by
increasing the diversity of the training data. As a result, we investigate the role of data decorrelation
on state diversity by calculating the average distance to the k nearest samples in the concept label
space for all labeled samples. The intuition is that a larger average distance to nearest neighbors
indicates samples are more spread out in the space, suggesting higher diversity in the training data.
Let D = {(s1 , c1 ), . . . , (sb , cb )} be the labeled dataset and Neighbor(ci , k) be the index set of k
nearest neighbors with k = 10 for all environments, then we calculate diversity as:


                                                   25
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                          LICORICE                            LICORICE-DE
          Environment                 d                  R                    d          R
          PixelCartPole         0.12 ± 0.00       1.00 ± 0.00          0.10 ± 0.01   0.97 ± 0.05
          DoorKey               1.12 ± 0.18       0.99 ± 0.01          0.25 ± 0.00   0.78 ± 0.08
          DynamicObstacles      0.93 ± 0.04       0.99 ± 0.00          0.99 ± 0.09   0.98 ± 0.01
          Boxing                7.20 ± 0.20       0.97 ± 0.04          6.53 ± 0.08   0.97 ± 0.01

Table 10: Training data diversity (d) and reward (R) with and without data decorrelation. Higher d is
better (more diverse). For each environment, the highest d is bolded. When the standard deviations
overlap, we bold both.



                                          b
                                     1 X            X
                               d=                                 ||ci − cj ||.
                                    bk i=1
                                              j∈Neighbor(ci ,k)

We present d along with the reward in Table 10 for LICORICE and LICORICE-DE. As hypoth-
esized, decorrelation increases diversity in 3 of the 4 environments. LICORICE achieves higher
reward than LICORICE-DE. In DynamicObstacles, the state diversity and reward is similar for both
LICORICE and LICORICE-DE. We believe that, in this environment, decorrelation is less critical
because neighboring states are inherently more dissimilar due to the dynamic nature of the obstacles.


                                                    26
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 10: Hyperparameter sensitivity results for DynamicObstacles. Bars represent standard devi-
ation. Here, bars are grouped by the same p values (acceptance probability). Bars of the same color
share the same τ value (budget multiplier), and bars with the same pattern share the same value for
N (committee size). Generally, p = 0.1 tend to perform better overall with greater stability. Having
a larger committee (N = 5 vs. N = 3) also tends to help with performance.

                    Budget               100                 200               300
                                   R      c Error        R    c Error    R      c Error
                 Disagreement     0.96     0.05      0.97      0.01     1.00     0.00
                   Entropy        0.95     0.07      0.98      0.02     0.99     0.00

Table 11: Comparison of disagreement- and entropy-based active learning strategies for Dynam-
icObstacles under different labeling budgets. There is essentially no difference between the two
strategies.


B.5   H YPERPARAMETER S ENSITIVITY

We now seek to understand how sensitive LICORICE is to the choice of hyperparameters. Figure 10
shows the results of this experiment for DynamicObstacles. Interestingly, we find that the main
difference between the settings is the variation. Overall, LICORICE is relatively robust to the choice
of hyperparameter settings in this environment, with the final average reward ranging between 96%
and 99.5% of the optimal. The concept error for all settings was 0.00 ± 0.00, so we do not plot it
here.

B.6   C HOICE OF ACQUISITION S TRATEGY

We now investigate the impact of the choice of acquisition strategy on both reward and concept
accuracy. We implemented an entropy-based disagreement measurement for the committee and
studying its effects on a MiniGrid environment. Specifically, we implement the following vote
                                            1
                                               PK PPk Vijk              Vijk
entropy acquisition function: U (si ) = − K      k=1    j=1 N log N , where si is the input state,
K is the number of concepts we learn, Pk is the number of classes for the k-th concept, Vijk is the
number of votes for the j-th class of the k-th concept for state si , and N is the number of committee
members. Table 11 shows these results on DynamicObstacles. There is essentially no difference
between the two strategies in terms of both reward and concept error.


                                                    27
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


C     A DDITIONAL D ISCUSSION

C.1   L IMITATIONS AND F UTURE W ORK

While our approach has demonstrated promising results, there are several limitations to be addressed
in future work. One significant challenge is the difficulty VLMs face with certain types of concepts,
especially continuous variables. This limitation can impact the overall performance of concept-
based models, especially in domains where continuous data is prevalent. Furthermore, although
VLMs can be successfully used for automatic labeling of some concepts, there are still hallucination
issues (Achiam et al., 2023) and other failure cases, such as providing inaccurate counts. We believe
that future work that seeks to improve general VLM capabilities and mitigate hallucinations would
also help overcome this limitation. Addressing this issue could involve developing specialized tech-
niques or using existing tools and libraries to better complement VLM capabilities.
Another area for future improvement is the refinement of our active learning and sampling schemes.
Our current method employs an disagreement-based acquisition function to select the most informa-
tive data points for labeling. While this approach is effective, there is potential for exploring more so-
phisticated active learning strategies, such as incorporating advanced exploration-exploitation trade-
offs or leveraging recent advancements in active learning algorithms (Tharwat & Schenck, 2023).
Furthermore, scaling challenges may arise from environmental complexity, such as when only a
subset of given concepts are relevant or when learning certain concepts is prerequisite to gathering
training data for others. Future research could explore using attention mechanisms (Vaswani et al.,
2017) or sparse coding (Olshausen & Field, 1996) to identify relevant concepts. Another exciting
direction is the work in human-AI complementarity and learning-to-defer algorithms (Mozannar
et al., 2023; Verma et al., 2023) to train an additional classifier for deferring labeling to a person
when the chance of an error is high. In our work, we assume a known set of concepts for the
environment; future work could investigate the use of human-VLM teams to determine a reasonable
concept set for the environment.
Finally, designing a concept-based representation for RL remains an open challenge. Our work
provides a few illustrative examples, but the exact design of these representations can significantly
impact performance, often for reasons that are not entirely clear — especially when using VLMs as
annotators. Prior work (Das et al., 2023) proposed some desiderata for concepts in RL, but future
work could refine these principles, especially in the face of VLM annotators. Future work could also
include systematically investigating the factors that influence the effectiveness of different concept-
based representations in RL. This could involve extensive empirical studies, theoretical analyses,
and the development of new design principles that guide the creation of effective concept represen-
tations. Understanding these factors better will help in creating more reliable and interpretable RL
models, ultimately advancing the field and broadening the applicability of concept-based approaches
in various RL tasks.

C.2   B ROADER I MPACTS

Interpretability in RL. Incorporating concept learning with RL presents both positive and nega-
tive societal impacts. On the positive side, promoting interpretability and transparency in decision-
making fosters trust and accountability. However, in cases where it yields incorrect results, stake-
holders might be misled into trusting flawed decisions due to the perceived transparency of the
model (Kaur et al., 2020). Unintended misuse could also occur if stakeholders lack the technical
expertise to accurately interpret the models, leading to erroneous conclusions and potentially harm-
ful outcomes. To mitigate these risks, an avenue for future work is developing clear guidelines for
interpreting these models and tools to scaffold non-experts’ understanding of the model outputs.

Using VLMs for concept labeling. On one hand, VLMs have the potential to significantly im-
prove the efficiency and scalability of labeling processes, which can accelerate advancements in
various fields. By automating the labeling of large datasets, VLMs can help reduce the time and cost
associated with manual labeling. However, there are important ethical and social considerations to
address. One major concern is the potential for bias in the concept labels generated by VLMs. If
these models are trained on biased or unrepresentative data, they may perpetuate or even amplify
existing biases, leading to unfair or discriminatory outcomes. This is particularly problematic in


                                                   28
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


sensitive applications like hiring, lending, or law enforcement, where biased decisions can have sig-
nificant negative impacts on individuals and communities. Furthermore, there are privacy concerns
related to the data used to train VLMs. Large-scale data collection often involves personal informa-
tion, and improper handling of this data can lead to privacy violations. To mitigate these risks, future
work could include developing robust data governance frameworks to protect individuals’ privacy
and comply with relevant regulations.


                                                  29
