Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A SSOCIATIVE MEMORY AND DEAD NEURONS
 Vladimir Fanaskov                                                Ivan Oseledets
 AIRI, Skoltech                                                   AIRI, Skoltech
 fanaskov.vladimir@gmail.com



                                            A BSTRACT
         In “Large Associative Memory Problem in Neurobiology and Machine Learning,”
         Dmitry Krotov and John Hopfield introduced a general technique for the system-
         atic construction of neural ordinary differential equations with non-increasing en-
         ergy or Lyapunov function. We study this energy function and identify that it is
         vulnerable to the problem of dead neurons. Each point in the state space where the
         neuron dies is contained in a non-compact region with constant energy. In these
         flat regions, energy function alone does not completely determine all degrees of
         freedom and, as a consequence, can not be used to analyze stability or find steady
         states or basins of attraction. We perform a direct analysis of the dynamical system
         and show how to resolve problems caused by flat directions corresponding to dead
         neurons: (i) all information about the state vector at a fixed point can be extracted
         from the energy and Hessian matrix (of Lagrange function), (ii) it is enough to
         analyze stability in the range of Hessian matrix, (iii) if steady state touching flat
         region is stable the whole flat region is the basin of attraction. The analysis of
         the Hessian matrix can be complicated for realistic architectures, so we show that
         for a slightly altered dynamical system (with the same structure of steady states),
         one can derive a diverse family of Lyapunov functions that do not have flat re-
         gions corresponding to dead neurons. In addition, these energy functions allow
         one to use Lagrange functions with Hessian matrices that are not necessarily posi-
         tive definite and even consider architectures with non-symmetric feedforward and
         feedback connections.


1   I NTRODUCTION
Associative or content-addressable memory is a system that retrieves the most appropriate stored
pattern based on a partially known or distorted input pattern. One particularly influential realization
of associative memory was proposed by John Hopfield in Hopfield (1982) for discrete variables
and in Hopfield (1984) for continuous variables. Both models are distinguished by their biological
plausibility, autonomy, asynchronous operations of constituent parts, robustness to noise, and strong
theoretical guarantees. Later in Krotov & Hopfield (2020), it was shown that one could develop a
general biologically plausible model that unites many previously known models and allows building
novel associative memory systems Krotov (2023).
The model in Krotov & Hopfield (2020) is based on the nonlinear dynamical system that evolves
in time from a given initial state. Nonlinear dynamical systems show an exceptionally diverse set
of behavior Strogatz (2018), so one needs to select an appropriate class of ordinary differential
equations suitable to model associative memory. The most crucial requirement is the ability of the
system to evolve to a single state from many initial conditions that are close according to some
problem-specific metrics. This fact suggests one should use a dynamical system with many stable
steady states. If one selects such a system, each stable steady state corresponds to a particular
memory and basin of attraction – all initial conditions that evolve to a selected state – defines a
measure of similarity between states.
The technique of choice to study the stability of steady state is to construct energy or Lyapunov func-
tion Lyapunov (1992). This function, defined on the state of a dynamical system, is non-increasing
on trajectories of a dynamical system. If it is possible to find such a function, its isolated local
minima will correspond to steady states. Different variants of energy functions with this property
are available in all previous works on associative memory Hopfield (1982), Hopfield (1984), Krotov


                                                  1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


          ReLU                      softmax                       ReLU                       softmax


(a) Energy function from Krotov & Hopfield (2020).           (b) Energy function proposed in this article.

Figure 1: Vector fields of dynamical systems (top row) and level sets of energy functions (bottom
row) for energy functions (2) (the one from Krotov & Hopfield (2020)) and (10) (proposed in this
article). Vector fields suggest that all steady states are stable, but energy function (2) does not
indicate that. The reason is energy function (2) has non-compact flat regions touching each point
where one or more neurons die (see Proposition 1 for precise statement).


& Hopfield (2016) and recent work Krotov & Hopfield (2020) provides the most general energy
function that embraces all previous ones.
Since associative memory from Krotov & Hopfield (2020) has an associated energy function, one
can argue that it is a member of a broad family of energy-based models LeCun et al. (2006), in-
cluding the diffusion models Hoover et al. (2023). In addition to that, the dynamical system used
is clearly related to another subfield of machine learning known as Neural Ordinary Differential
Equation Chen et al. (2018). Finally, in Krotov (2021), Hoover et al. (2022) it was shown that one
can select parameters of model Krotov & Hopfield (2020) in such a way that dynamical variables
correspond to the activation pattern of deep neural network with feedback connection. Given that,
one can argue that modern Hopfield associative memory Krotov & Hopfield (2020) is uniquely tying
up several major paradigms in deep learning.
In this article, we study the Lyapunov function proposed in Krotov & Hopfield (2020) and later
adopted and modified in other recent papers, e.g., Hoover et al. (2024), Hoover et al. (2022), Millidge
et al. (2022a). Our main observation is that energy function is vulnerable to the problem of dead
neurons1 Lu et al. (2019), which result in a flat energy direction. We illustrate this in the left panel of
Figure 1, where one can find both the vector field of the dynamical system and isolines of the energy
function. Clearly, the energy function from Krotov & Hopfield (2020) does not ensure stability and
is not helpful in identifying a steady state when dead neurons are present.
As a remedy, we propose a slightly modified dynamical system that has no flat direction (see right
panel of Figure 1) but retains other good properties of the Krotov and Hopfield model. In particular,
it is still an energy-based model, neural ODE, and has steady states related to deep neural networks.
A more detailed breakdown of our contribution is below:

      1. In Section 2 we provide examples of flat energy directions caused by dead neurons (Fig-
         ure 1; Examples 2, 3, 4) and formally characterize architectures that are vulnerable to that
         problem in Proposition 1.

    1
      Usually, neurons are called dead when activation function saturates, e.g., x < 0 for ReLu or x ≫ 1 for
sigmoid. In this article we use an extended definition of dead neurons and say that a neuron is dead when it
is impossible to reconstruct input to activation function from its output. This is explained in more detail in
Section 2.


                                                      2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


      2. Flat energy directions, as we show in Section 3, cause several undesirable consequences
         for sensitivity and stability:
          (a) Problems with sensitivity described in Section 3.1 include: (i) energy is completely
               independent of degrees of freedom corresponding to dead neurons, because of that
               activation functions are effectively invertible and energy function presented in Krotov
               & Hopfield (2020) is completely equivalent to the old one given in Hopfield (1984);
               (ii) In the flat regions energy function is not sensitive to the change in bias term (Sec-
               tion 3.1).
          (b) Stability is discussed in Section 3.2 with the following main takeaways: (i) for steady
               state with dead neurons, stability condition can not be ensured from the Lyapunov
               function alone; (ii) independent analysis of dynamical system shows dead neurons do
               not compromise stability, and only the motion in the range of Hessian of Lagrange
               function is relevant; (iii) if the steady state is stable, the whole flat direction belongs to
               the basin of attraction; (iv) if in addition of energy, the range of the Hessian is available
               (e.g., as the orthogonal projector), this information is enough to restore degrees of
               freedom that energy alone misses at steady state.
      3. As a remedy, in Section 4, we define a slightly modified dynamical system and a fam-
         ily of energy functions with good properties: (i) proposition 5 shows that in general one
         may construct a large family of Lyapunov function with no flat directions; (ii) example 5
         shows several concrete choices of Lyapunov functions for symmetric weight matrices with
         no restriction Hessian matrix of Lagrange function; (iii) examples 6 and 7 further relax
         restriction on parameters and allow one to consider memory models with non-symmetric
         weight matrices.

2   D EAD NEURONS
In Krotov & Hopfield (2020) authors proposed to rewrite activation function g(y) as gradient of
Lagrange function L(y), i.e., g(y) = ∂L(y)   ∂y . This formalism allows to describe a large class of
memory models with Lyapunov function on the common grounds. Results that we obtain in the
article are applicable to all of them, but for simplicity we consider dense model taken from (Krotov,
2021, Equation (2)) (see Appendix A or further discussion on relations between different models).
This model reads:
                       ẏ(t) = W g(y(t)) − y(t) + b, y(0) = y0 ,                                (1)
                                       ⊤                 1         ⊤
                       E(y) = (y − b) g(y) − L(y) − (g(y)) W g(y).                              (2)
                                                         2
Equation (1) describes a temporal dynamics of feature vector y starting from y0 . The equation
contains weights W , bias b and activation function g(y). Energy function (2) is non-increasing
                                                                                          2
on trajectories of (1) if and only if W = W ⊤ and Hessian of Lagrange function Λ = ∂ ∂y     L(y)
                                                                                             2   is
positive semi-definite (see (Krotov & Hopfield, 2020, Equation (4), Appendix A) and (Krotov, 2021,
Equation (4), Appendix A)).
Dynamical system (1) has several favorable properties (see discussion in Section 1 and Krotov &
Hopfield (2020) , Krotov (2021)): (i) steady states can be used as memory vectors, (ii) dynamics
in the basins of attraction naturally model memory recovery process, (iii) energy function can be
used to ensure the existence of steady states and basins of attraction, (iv) memory is related to neural
ODEs so can be trained end-to-end, (v) with a special choice of W steady states resemble activation
pattern of classical deep learning architectures. The example below illustrates the last point (see
(Krotov, 2021, Section 3)).
Example 1 (MLP with feedback connections). For simplicity, we consider four layers, extensions to
a larger number of layers are straightforward. Weights and state vectors are partitioned on blocks
of conformable size
                            0     W12                             y1            b1
                                                                           
                         W21       0     W23                    y2         b2 
                  W =                                   ,y =  , b =  .
                                                      
                                  W32       0    W34             y3            b3
                                          W43      0              y4            b4

                                                     3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                   ⊤
Note that W is symmetric so W12 = W21 With that choice dynamical system (1) becomes
                     ẏi = Wi,i−1 g (yi−1 ) + Wi,i+1 g (yi+1 ) − yi + bi , i = 2, 3
                     ẏ1 = W12 g (y2 ) − y1 + b1 , ẏ4 = W43 g (y3 ) − y4 + b4 ,
so steady-state indeed resembles MLP but with feedback connections that are symmetric.

Besides MLP described in Example 1 associative memory (1) leads to many more interesting and
fruitful connections. In Krotov & Hopfield (2020) it allowed the authors to reconstruct dense asso-
ciative memory Krotov & Hopfield (2016) and modern Hopfield network Ramsauer et al. (2020). In
Krotov (2021) and Hoover et al. (2022) it was used to build a memory model with dense hidden lay-
ers and convolution neural networks with pooling layers. In Hoover et al. (2024) authors introduced
an energy transformer using the same formalism. The authors of Tang & Kopp (2021) also noticed
that MLP-mixer Tolstikhin et al. (2021) is related to associative memory (1). Clearly, the technique
is valuable and versatile.
As we have seen, steady states of dynamical systems are important to emulate deep learning ar-
chitectures and classical memory models. The role of the Lyapunov function is to ensure stability.
Unfortunately, if one looks closer at the energy function (2), it becomes clear that it shows some
pathological behavior. Before providing a formal description, we illustrate this with three examples.
                                                                                  PN                   2
Example 2 (flat energy with ReLU activations). Lagrange function L(y) = i=1 21 (ReLU(yi ))
                                                                                             1
corresponds to fully-connected neural network with N neurons and ReLU(x) = 2 (x + |x|)
                                                              ⊤               PN                    2
nonlinearity. Energy function becomes E(y) = (y − b) ReLU(y) − i=1 21 (ReLU(yi )) −
1              ⊤
2 (ReLU(y)) W ReLU(y). It is easy to see that if neuron i dies, i.e., yi ≤ 0, energy becomes
zero for all ye = y + αei , where α ≤ 0. ei is a i-th columns of identity matrix and y is a state vector
with yi ≤ 0. In other words, energy is non-discriminative in a non-compact region of state space.
Example 3 (flat energy with sigmoid activations). For sigmoid activation function σ(x) =
               −1
(1 + exp(−x)) Lagrange function reads L(y) = i log (1 + eyi ), and the energy is E(y) =
                                                      P
       ⊤                                         ⊤
(y − b) σ(y) − i log (1 + eyi ) − 12 (σ(y)) W σ(y). Neuron i dies when sigmoid saturates2
                  P
for some yi ≫ 1. After that for all ye = y + αei , with α ≥ 0 the energy has flat region, i.e.,
E(y) = E(e y (α)) for all admissible α.
                                                                                    PN
Example 4 (flat energy with softmax
                                P activations).   Activation softmax (y) = exp(y)    i=1 exp(yi )
                                    N                                            ⊤
corresponds to L(y) = log           i=1 exp(yi )   and energy E(y) = (y − b) softmax (y) −
     P
       N                1               ⊤
log    i=1 exp(yi ) − 2 (softmax (y)) W softmax (y). Consider variable y     e(c) = y + c, where
c is a vector with all components equal c ∈ R. So constant shift, softmax (y) = softmax (e  y (c)),
                                        ⊤
Lagrange function shifts on c and ye(c) softmax(e   y (c)) = y ⊤ softmax(y) + c, so overall energy
remains the same, i.e., E(y) = E(ey (c)) for arbitrary c.

The examples above demonstrate that energy function (2) fails to distinguish states on a large frac-
tion of state space. In Examples 2 and 3 this happens because the activation function saturates for
some inputs, and in Example 4 this is a consequence of invariance. The latter case is typically not
considered as a dead neuron, but since the number of degrees of freedom decreases by one we call
this “effective neuron” dead all the same.3 The formal definition of dead neurons appears below (see
Maas et al. (2013), Lu et al. (2019), Cui & Fearn (2018) for the discussion of dead neurons in the
context of ReLU activation function).
Definition (dead neurons). At a given point y ∈ RN activation function g has k dead neurons if it
is possible to find V ∈ RN ×k such that g (y + V c) = g (y) for all c ∈ Rk+ .

The examples above hint that most of the activation functions will lead to dead neurons. The first
large class is activation functions with saturation: hyperbolic tangent, sigmoid, ReLU, GELU, SiLU,
    2
      Formally, the sigmoid function saturates in the limit y → ±∞. However, for computations in floating-
point arithmetic it is safe to say that sigmoid saturates when the absolute value of the argument is sufficiently
large but finite.
    3
P One can also say that softmax is always saturated. If we consider input y in the new basis where ye1 =
   i yi , it is easy to see that after the softmax this component becomes 1 regardless of the input.



                                                       4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                    (a)                                (b)                               (c)

Figure 2: Sketch of three problematic energy functions: (a) unbounded from below with two stable
states (we analyze this situation in Appendix C), (b) bounded from below but with compact flat re-
gion, (c) bounded from below but with non-compact flat region. According to Proposition 1 case (c)
is realized in models Krotov & Hopfield (2020) when neurons die. In red regions stability proper-
ties do not follow from Lyapunov theorems. LaSalle’s invariance principle (Haddad & Chellaboina,
2008, Theorem 3.3) ensures that in case (b) isolated steady states are stable, but for the case (c)
separate stability analysis is needed (see Section 3.2 for details).


SELU, Gaussian, etc.4 The second class is activation functions with symmetries, e.g., softmax and
layer norm. With the definition of dead neurons, we can formalize a pathological behavior of energy
function (2).
                                                                                              N ×k
                                                              k dead neuron defined by V ∈ R
Proposition 1. If at a given point y activation function g has                                     ,
energy function (2) has constant value in a subspace D = y + V c : c ∈ Rk+ .
Proof: Appendix B.

Flat energy directions are illustrated in Figure 1 and Figure 2c. Intuitively, it is clear that having
large regions with flat energy is not good. In the next section, we explain in detail what will go awry.
As illustrated in Figure 2 energy function can appear problematic for reasons not directly related
to dead neurons. We argue that these two situations are less grim. Energy illustrated in Figure 2a
can still be utilized with proper initial conditions, e.g., ∥y0 ∥2 ≤ R for some small R. Besides,
we demonstrate in Appendix C that restricting parameters to ensure energy is bounded from below
can lead to catastrophic capacity reduction. Energy from Figure 2b is less problematic for stability
analysis because invariance principle (Haddad & Chellaboina, 2008, Theorem 3.3) can be used.

3     C ONSEQUENCES OF DEAD NEURONS
Proposition 1 implies that for most architectures used in practice, there are large regions of state
space with flat energy functions. This has several negative consequences that we somewhat arbitrar-
ily classify as problems with sensitivity and stability.

3.1    S ENSITIVITY

As evident from Figure 1 energy is flat in directions V corresponding to dead
                                                                              neurons. This can
be formalised if one considers new variables yd = V V ⊤ y, ya = I − V V ⊤ y corresponding to
dead and alive neurons. Since y = yd + ya , the energy (2) becomes

                                   ⊤                        1         ⊤
    E(yd , ya ) = (yd + ya − b) g(ya ) − L(yd + ya ) −        (g(ya )) W g(ya )
                                                            2
                                                          ⊤                 1        ⊤
                                                = (ya − b) g(ya ) − L(ya ) − (g(ya )) W g(ya ),
                                                                            2
where we used g(yd + ya ) = g(ya ) and L(yd + ya ) = L(ya ) + g(ya )⊤ yd .
    4
      For sigmoid, hyperbolic tangent and Gaussian function the saturation is precise only in the limit x → ±∞.
However, as explained in the Example 3 in the floating-point arithmetics these functions effectively saturate for
finite values of the argument. Moreover, even with arbitrary precision, approximately flat direction can not be
used to reliably store any information since it will require weights with exponentially large magnitudes.


                                                       5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


We see that energy does not depend on variables yd corresponding to dead neurons, which means
the effective number of degrees of freedom is decreased from N to N − k where k is the number of
dead neurons. If only energy is available it is not possible to recover values on yd and steady states
can not be found as in examples from Figure 1.
Variables yd are from the kernel of g which means the activation function becomes effectively
invertible. In Hopfield (1984), the energy function for this situation has already been introduced.
It is instructive to compare a new energy function Krotov & Hopfield (2020) with the old one.
Lyapunov function from the 1984 paper, in the notation used in this article, reads
                                gi (ui )
                              X Z                                 1      ⊤
                       E(u)
                       e    =           dτi gi−1 (τi ) − b⊤ g(u) − (g(u)) W g(u),                            (3)
                              i
                                                                  2
                                             0
and dynamical system is precisely the same as (1). Activation functions gi are invertible and mono-
tone by assumption. In Appendix D we explain precisely how to adapt the model from Hopfield
(1984) to our context. The first term of (3) is seemingly distinct from any term of (2). To show that
this is an illusion we simplify integrals as follows
 g(u)
 Z                            Zu                     Zu                                  Zu
                                         ′                                 u
             −1
      dτ g        (τ ) =              dρg (ρ)ρ = −          dρg(ρ) + ρg(ρ)|g−1 (0) = −          dρg(ρ) + ug(u),
  0                        g −1 (0)              g −1 (0)                            g −1 (0)

where in the first step we used τ = g(ρ). Using this simplification and additional definition of
Lagrange function L(u) : g(u) = ∂L(u)     ∂u   we immediately recognize that energy function from
Krotov & Hopfield (2020) is precisely the same as from Hopfield (1984) but without the assumption
that g should be invertible. New energy from Krotov & Hopfield (2020) does not formally contain
the inverse of the activation function, but as we see still implies that g is invertible.
Besides insensitivity to values of dead neurons, there is another problematic fact. Proposition 1
implies that, when at least one neuron is dead, the energy function has invariant transformation
E(y) = E(y + V c). The steady state of dynamical system (1) does not have this symmetry,
so, when one transforms y → y + V c and preserve energy, this corresponds to a new dynamical
system with b → b − V c. In other words, in the regions when dead neurons are present, energy is
not sensitive to the changes in the bias term.
We summarise arguments made in this section in the proposition below
Proposition 2. For energy function (2) the following is true:
        1. Energy function does not depend on variables from the kernel of g, so one can always
           assume that activation function g is invertible.
        2. Suppose at a given point y dead neurons are described by matrix V ∈ RN ×k . In this case
                                                                                        b − V c for
           energy function E(y) is Lyapunov function for dynamical systems (1) with b = e
           any c ∈ Rk+ .

3.2     S TABILITY OF DYNAMICAL SYSTEM

One of the main applications of the Lyapunov function is to perform stability analysis Haddad &
Chellaboina (2008). This part is relevant for predictive coding and related approaches Xie & Seung
(2003), Millidge et al. (2022b) to ensure the existence of at least some steady states. Besides, when
associative memory is considered, one can only recover stable steady states, so stability directly
influences memory capacity. Lyapunov function also characterizes a basin of attraction for a given
steady state. In the context of associative memory, basins of attraction define a measure of similarity
between inputs, since inputs from the same basin result in the recovery of the same memory. Below,
we will show that in the regions with dead neurons, Lyapunov function (2) alone fails to help in
stability analysis.
Stability analysis with the Lyapunov function boils down to the study of the energy landscape near
the steady state. Using the Taylor series, we find
                                  ∂E(u)            1   ∂ 2 E(u)
     E(y ⋆ + δ) − E(y ⋆ ) = δ ⊤                  + δ⊤                     δ, t(δ, y ⋆ ) ∈ (0, 1),
                                    ∂u u=y⋆ 2             ∂u2 u=y⋆ +tδ

                                                              6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


where y ⋆ : W g(y ⋆ ) − y ⋆ + b = 0. Computing derivatives, we find E(y ⋆ + δ) − E(y ⋆ ) =
δ ⊤ (Λ(y ⋆ ) − Λ(y ⋆ )W Λ(y ⋆ )) δ, ∥δ∥2 ≪ 1. For stability in the vicinity of a steady state, it is
sufficient that the matrix above is positive definite, and for instability, it is sufficient that at least
one eigenvalue of this matrix is negative. In situations such as in Figure 1 and Figure 2c when
energy has a flat direction nothing can be said about the dynamics in this region5 . It is easy to show
that if dead neurons are present at point u, matrix V lays in zero eigenspace of Λ(u). To show
this we consider the Taylor series g(u + V c) = g(u) + Λ(u + tV c)V c, t ∈ (0, 1), and since
g(u + V c) = g(u) we confirm that ΛV = 0, i.e., zero eigenspace is always present.
Since energy is insufficient to analyze stability, we need to use a dynamical system (1) directly. We
suppose that in the region of interest V , matrix that describes dead neurons, does not change and
use yd , yd defined in the previous section. With that, one can show that dynamical system becomes
            ẏa (t) = Pa W g(ya (t)) − ya + Pa b, ẏd (t) = Pd W g(ya (t)) − yd + Pd b,                    (4)
where Pd = V V ⊤ and Pa = I − Pd .6 One can immediately see that dead neurons do not influence
stability and, when steady state ya⋆ is reached, one can find yd⋆ = Pd W g(ya⋆ ) + Pd b. Moreover,
when ya (t) reaches steady state yd (t) converges exponentially from the arbitrary starting point, i.e.,
the whole flat region is a basin of attraction.
The sufficient condition for stability/instability of ya can be obtained from (4) with linearisation.
More specifically, stability is defined by matrix S = V⊥⊤ W V⊥ V⊥⊤ ΛV⊥ − I ≡ W⊥ Λ⊥ − I ∈
R(N −k)×(N −k) , where V⊥ ∈ RN ×N −k is a matrix with orthogonal columns such that Pa =
V⊥ V⊥⊤ . When matrix S does not have eigenvalues with a positive real part, the steady state is
stable; in case there is at least one eigenvalue with a positive real part, the steady state is unstable
(see (Haddad & Chellaboina, 2008, Theorem 3.19)).
The structure of matrix S suggests that, in fact, dynamics is stable when energy function indicates
                 1/2       1/2
that. Indeed, Λ⊥ W⊥ Λ⊥ has the same spectrum as W⊥ Λ⊥ , so sufficient condition for S is
                                        1/2      1/2
equivalent to sufficient condition for Λ⊥ W⊥ Λ⊥ − I. Finally since Λ⊥ is full rank we find that if
Λ⊥ W⊥ Λ⊥ − Λ⊥ is negatively stable (has non-positive eigenvalues), the dynamics of ya is stable.
Since this matrix is a restriction of ΛW Λ − Λ on the range of Hessian we conclude that one can
analyze the stability of steady-state using energy if projector on the range of Hessian is known.
It is important to note that matrix ΛW Λ − Λ can have other flat directions not corresponding to
nullspace of Hessian, these directions will cause instability, so one need to distinguish them from
directions corresponding to dead neurons.
Clearly, zero modes of Λ do not negatively affect the spectrum of matrix S. On the contrary, one
may expect a stabilizing effect since Cauchy interlacing theorem (Horn & Johnson, 2012, Theorem
4.3.28, Corollary 4.3.37) ensures that the spectrum of W⊥ is in-between minimal and maximal
eigenvalues of W . So when λ (W Λ) ≥ 1 it is likely that λ (W⊥ Λ⊥ ) < 1. To demonstrate
the effect, one needs to make some assumptions about the spectrum of W . Given a standard deep
learning practice to use random matrices for initialization of model weights Glorot & Bengio (2010),
He et al. (2015), it is natural to assume that W is drawn from Gaussian orthogonal ensemble. Under
this condition, one may show a stabilization effect, as demonstrated next.
Proposition 3. Suppose W ∈qRN ×N is a matrix from a Gaussian orthogonal ensemble. If k
                                        k
neurons are dead E ∥W⊥ ∥2 =          1− N E ∥W ∥2 holds for large N .
Proof: Appendix F.

We gather the main results of this section in the proposition that follows.
Proposition 4. For energy function (2) the following is true:

      1. Flat directions of dead neurons characterised by V form nullspace of Hessian Λ.
   5
     Note, however, that for the face given in Figure 2b it is possible to construct a positively invariant set
based on energy levels. After that LaSalle’s invariance principle (Haddad & Chellaboina, 2008, Theorem 3.3)
guarantees that isolated steady states are asymptotically stable. This material is standard and covered in many
books, e.g., (Haddad & Chellaboina, 2008, Section 3.3.).
   6
     We assume for simplicity that V has orthonormal columns.


                                                      7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


      2. Steady state is stable if energy function predicts local stability in the range of Hessian, i.e.
         if matrix ΛW Λ − Λ restricted on the range of Hessian is positive definite.
      3. If one performed direct optimization of the energy function and found that ye corresponds to
         the minimum, it is possible to recover the steady state of dynamical system (1) as follows:
         (i) compute the projector Pd on the nullspace of Λ; (ii) steady state of dynamical system
         reads y = ye + Pd (W g(e  y ) + b).
      4. When steady state (ya⋆ , yd⋆ ) is stable, the whole non-compact flat region (ya⋆ , yd⋆ + V c) is
         basin of attraction.

4   A SSOCIATIVE MEMORIES WITHOUT DEAD NEURONS
We have seen that dead neurons present certain problems for energy function (2): (i) flat regions
make optimization and analysis of energy cumbersome; (ii) one needs to distinguish between harm-
less flat direction of Hessian and other flat direction of energy that can compromise stability; (iii)
energy do not contain full information and one need to build a projector on the nullspace of Hessian
to restore the whole state. The last point implies that one needs Hessian even when stability analysis
is not performed and one merely wants to compute a local minimum of energy which can often be
done successfully with first-order methods.
To avoid these difficulties we will slightly modify the dynamics of associative memory (1) to
minimally alter steady states and get a better energy function.     In a simplified terms, our
idea is to modify right-hand side of (1) such that it becomes conservative vector field. If this
is the case, flat energy directions disappear. For example, the simplest model of this kind is
u̇(t) = W ⊤ g(W u(t) + b) − u(t) = − ∂E(u)    ∂u  with energy E(u) = 12 u⊤ u − L(W u + b).
A more general dynamical system along the same lines reads:
                         u̇(t) = R(u) (g(W u(t) + b) − u(t)) , u(0) = u0 ,                           (5)
where R(u) is a matrix-valued function to be specified later.
If one assumes that it is possible to select R(u) that has empty nullspace for all u, i.e., that informa-
tion is not lost after multiplication by R(u), the condition that we will verify later, steady states of
the newly introduced system (5) follows from the old one with affine transformation y = W u + b.
This means all architectures possible with the old model (1) are also possible with the new one (5).
More precisely, the structure of steady state is the same for memory (1) and memory (5), but the
structure of basins of attraction is different owing to the matrix R(u) absent in model (1).
Dynamical systems (5) and (1) have equivalent steady states, but (5) allows to construct of a large
set of Lyapunov functions with good properties in a systematic manner.
Proposition 5. For a parametric energy function
 E(u; α, β, γ, S) = αE1 (u) + βE2 (u) + γE3 (u; S), α, β, γ ∈ R,
                                              1              ⊤
 E1 (u) = u⊤ W g (W u + b) − L (W u + b) − g (W u + b) W g (W u + b) ,
                                              2
          1                                      1               ⊤
 E2 (u) = u⊤ W u − L (W u + b) , E3 (u; S) = (u − g(W u + b)) S (u − g(W u + b))
          2                                      2
                                                                              (6)
the following is true:

      1. E(u; α, β, γ, S) is a Lyapunov function for dynamical system (5) if one can find Q ≥ 0,
         R(u), S = S ⊤ such that for all u
                               ⊤
           R⊤ F (u) + F (u) R ≥ Q, F (u) = W Λ (W u + b) (αW − γS) + βW + γS. (7)

      2. For arbitrary parameters α, β, γ, S one can always find orthogonal matrix R(u) such that
         E(u; α, β, γ, S) is a Lyapunov function for dynamical system (5).
      3. E2 (u) and E3 (u; S) does not have flat directions corresponding to dead neurons.


                                                   8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


      4. Sufficient condition for stability of steady-state u⋆ : u⋆ = g (W u⋆ + b) is
                                                                                           ⊤
                 F (u⋆ ) (I − Λ (W u⋆ + b) W ) + (I − W Λ (W u⋆ + b)) (F (u⋆ )) > 0                   (8)

Proof: Appendix E.

Proposition 5 allows one to make several useful conclusions.
First, the construction of the Lyapunov function boils down to the analysis of matrix inequality (7).
In general, this inequality is nonlinear, but in particular cases, it reduces to a Sylvester equation
which can be systematically analyzed Simoncini (2016). Below we will provide several explicit
choices of R that result in a valid Lyapunov function.
The second point of Proposition 5 shows that suitable R always exist. Moreover, this R does not
alter the steady state, since it is an orthogonal matrix. Whether this choice of R is practical depends
on the parametrization of weights and other details of the model.
The third point shows that unless β = γ = 0, the energy function does not have a flat direction, and
the fourth point gives a sufficient condition for the stability of a particular state. This part is harder
to analyze in general, so we will discuss this condition for selected examples below.
Finally, Proposition 5 does not require Hessian to be positive definite which allows one to use a
richer set of activation functions.
Example 5 (α = γ = 0, β = 1). In this case E = E2 condition (7) becomes R⊤ W + W R ≥ 0.
There are many strategies to select R and W :

      1. The simplest choice is to take R = W since in this case condition (7) reduces to W 2 ≥ 0
         which is true for arbitrary symmetric matrix.
      2. Unfortunately, if matrix W has low rank and one takes R = W , dynamical system (5)
         can lead to false memories whenever f (u(t)) reaches a nullspace of W . To exclude this
         possibility one can parametrize W = OP in terms of its polar decomposition and select
         R = O. With that choice condition (7) becomes P ≥ 0 which automatically follows from
         polar decomposition.
      3. We can restrict W to be positive definite by taking W = KK ⊤ for some full-rank K.
         In this case, a large set of positive definite matrices R exists such that RW + W R ≥ 0.
         More specifically, one needs to restrict the condition number of R as explained in Nicholson
         (1979).
      4. If W is positive definite the other option is to select arbitrary Q > 0 and consider Lya-
         punov equation RW + W R = Q which is known to have unique solution for arbitrary
         Q > 0. One can Rexplicitly provide it in many forms Lancaster (1970), Simoncini (2016),
                            ∞
         for example R = 0 dτ exp(−τ W )Q exp(−τ W ).

Condition for the stability of state (8) in this case reduces to W − W Λ (W u⋆ + b) W > 0.
Note that nullspace of Λ does not compromise stability since it does not transfer to nullspace of
W − W ΛW .

Interestingly, one can also construct associative memory with non-symmetric weights as explained
in the next two examples.
Example 6 (α = β = 0, γ = 1 and W ̸= W ⊤ ). E3 is the only energy function that is de-
fined for W ̸=  W ⊤ . If we account for that in Proposition 5, existence condition (7) becomes
R⊤ I − W ⊤ Λ S + S (I − ΛW ) R ≥ 0. Two examples of suitable R, S, W are given below:

      1. The simplest choice is to take S = I and R = I − W ⊤ Λ. One also may ensure that R is
                                        −1
         invertible with ∥W ∥2 < ∥Λ∥2 .

      2. Another possible choice is to take R = Λ,  and ensure Λ − 21 Λ W + W ⊤ Λ ≥ 0, which


         can be simplified to ω(W )  ≤ λmin (Λ) λmax (Λ2 ) where ω(W ) is numerical abscissa
         ω(W ) = λmax (W + W ⊤ ) 2. For example, if Λ ≥ 0 any W with non-positive real part
         of the spectrum suffices.


                                                    9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Example 7 (associative memory with smooth Leaky ReLU). Here we build a concrete example
of hierarchical associative memory Krotov (2021) with smooth Leaky ReLU Biswas et al. (2021) to
avoid dealing with
                   ODE
                        having a non-smooth right-hand
                                                ′
                                                         side.  The activation function       g(u)
                                                                                        reads   √
                                                                                                   =
u 5 + 3erf 3u 8        8 and its derivative is g (u) = g(u) u + 9u exp −9u2 64 (32 π),
where all operations are pointwise and erf is error function. Weights and state vector are selected
                                                        ⊤
as in Example 1 but without requirement Wi,i+1 = Wi+1,i     . After that we select R = I − W ⊤ Λ
and obtain the following dynamical system
                                 ′

          u̇(t) = I − W ⊤ ⊙ g (W u(t) + b) (g(W u(t) + b) − u(t)) , u(0) = u0 .
                                       1                                   ⊤
                                       2 (g(W u(t) + b) − u(t))   (g(W u(t) + b) − u(t)) is
For this system Lyapunov function E2 =
                                                            ′
non-increasing on trajectories. Matrix I − W ⊤ ⊙ g (W u(t) + b) can in principle have non-
trivial nullspace. To avoid this one observes that ∥W ∥2 ≤ max
                                                              i ∥Wi,i+1 ∥2 + maxi ∥Wi,i−1 ∥2

(the bound is tight) and take Wi,i+1 = Wfi,i±1 2 W   fi,i±1  , for some W
                                                                        f with the same block
                                                                   2
structure. Note, that in this construction Λ is not positive definite, and W is not symmetric.
All theoretical statements that we derived are valid only for modified dynamical system 5. However,
it is easy to see that energy function E3 from Proposition 5 can be adopted for the original temporal
dynamics (1). The resulting energy function and dynamical system reads
                ẏ(t) = R(y(t)) (W g(y(t)) − y(t) + b) , y(0) = y0 ,                           (9)
                           1                          ⊤
                E3 (y) = (W g(y(t)) − y(t) + b) S (W g(y(t)) − y(t) + b) .                    (10)
                           2
We used temporal dynamics (9) with R = I − W Λ(y) and energy function (10) with S = I to
generate results given in Figure 1. One can also prove results similar to Proposition 5 for energy
function (10) but since the extension is straightforward we do not pursue this further.

5    C ONCLUSIONS
We describe the effect of dead neurons on the energy landscape of associative memory, analyze the
consequences for stability, and provide several remedies, including new dynamical systems with
good energy functions. We think it is appropriate to discuss the overall significance of the Lyapunov
function for associative memory. Is it necessary to have this function at all? How is this function
used in practice?
One may observe that, currently, the Lyapunov function is underutilized. As a rule, one uses several
steps or even a single step of temporal dynamics of ODE during training and inference Hoover et al.
(2024), Hoover et al. (2022), Millidge et al. (2022a), Ramsauer et al. (2020), Krotov & Hopfield
(2016). The role of Lyapunov’s function is merely to provide comfort that some steady states may
exist somewhere. As we show in this article, it is often a false comfort.
It is important to note, that the Lyapunov function in itself does not ensure stability: (i) it may be
the case that no steady state exists, (ii) limit cycles may still be present, (iii) all steady states may be
unstable. Besides that, for any steady state, the Lyapunov function can be constructed (by solving
the Lyapunov equation) even when the “global” Lyapunov function is unavailable.
The Lyapunov function, as it is currently considered, is not of huge help. We can suggest several
appropriate use cases: (i) model parameters may be adjusted on the training stage to make the Lya-
punov function unstable for particular states – something that can not be easily done by integrating
the dynamical system alone. This may help to learn from negative and adversarial examples Wang
et al. (2024), Goodfellow et al. (2014); (ii) Lyapunov function may help in theoretical understanding
of memory capacity, e.g., in the present article we have already shown that a whole flat direction cor-
responds to the basin of attraction, and can not support more than a single memory; (iii) Lyapunov
function may be directly used to compute and manipulate basins of attraction, potentially speeding
up learning and making memory more robust to adversarial attacks.
All in all, we think that the Lyapunov function is a powerful tool that can lead to novel theoretical
results and practical learning techniques in the field of associative memory. We hope that our results
will inspire further research in this direction.


                                                    10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


R EFERENCES
Koushik Biswas, Sandeep Kumar, Shilpak Banerjee, and Ashish Kumar Pandey. Smu: smooth
  activation function for deep networks using smoothing maximum technique. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2111.04682, 2021.
Ricky TQ Chen, Yulia Rubanova, Jesse Bettencourt, and David K Duvenaud. Neural ordinary
  differential equations. Advances in neural information processing systems, 31, 2018.
Marco Chiani. Distribution of the largest eigenvalue for real wishart and gaussian random matrices
 and a simple approximation for the tracy–widom distribution. Journal of Multivariate Analysis,
 129:69–81, 2014.
Chenhao Cui and Tom Fearn. Modern practical convolutional neural networks for multivariate
  regression: Applications to nir calibration. Chemometrics and Intelligent Laboratory Systems,
  182:9–20, 2018.
Xavier Glorot and Yoshua Bengio. Understanding the difficulty of training deep feedforward neural
  networks. In Proceedings of the thirteenth international conference on artificial intelligence and
  statistics, pp. 249–256. JMLR Workshop and Conference Proceedings, 2010.
Ian J Goodfellow, Jonathon Shlens, and Christian Szegedy. Explaining and harnessing adversarial
  examples. arXiv preprint arXiv:1412.6572, 2014.
Wassim M Haddad and VijaySekhar Chellaboina. Nonlinear dynamical systems and control: a
 Lyapunov-based approach. Princeton university press, 2008.
Kaiming He, Xiangyu Zhang, Shaoqing Ren, and Jian Sun. Delving deep into rectifiers: Surpassing
  human-level performance on imagenet classification. In Proceedings of the IEEE international
  conference on computer vision, pp. 1026–1034, 2015.
Benjamin Hoover, Duen Horng Chau, Hendrik Strobelt, and Dmitry Krotov. A universal abstraction
  for hierarchical hopfield networks. In The Symbiosis of Deep Learning and Differential Equations
  II, 2022.
Benjamin Hoover, Hendrik Strobelt, Dmitry Krotov, Judy Hoffman, Zsolt Kira, and Duen Horng
  Chau. Memory in plain sight: A survey of the uncanny resemblances between diffusion models
  and associative memories. arXiv preprint arXiv:2309.16750, 2023.
Benjamin Hoover, Yuchen Liang, Bao Pham, Rameswar Panda, Hendrik Strobelt, Duen Horng
  Chau, Mohammed Zaki, and Dmitry Krotov. Energy transformer. Advances in Neural Infor-
  mation Processing Systems, 36, 2024.
John J Hopfield. Neural networks and physical systems with emergent collective computational
  abilities. Proceedings of the national academy of sciences, 79(8):2554–2558, 1982.
John J Hopfield. Neurons with graded response have collective computational properties like those
  of two-state neurons. Proceedings of the national academy of sciences, 81(10):3088–3092, 1984.
Roger A Horn and Charles R Johnson. Matrix analysis. Cambridge university press, 2012.
Dmitry Krotov. Hierarchical associative memory. arXiv preprint arXiv:2107.06446, 2021.
Dmitry Krotov. A new frontier for hopfield networks. Nature Reviews Physics, 5(7):366–367, 2023.
Dmitry Krotov and John Hopfield. Large associative memory problem in neurobiology and machine
 learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2008.06996, 2020.
Dmitry Krotov and John J Hopfield. Dense associative memory for pattern recognition. Advances
 in neural information processing systems, 29, 2016.
Peter Lancaster. Explicit solutions of linear matrix equations. SIAM review, 12(4):544–566, 1970.
Yann LeCun, Sumit Chopra, Raia Hadsell, M Ranzato, Fujie Huang, et al. A tutorial on energy-
  based learning. Predicting structured data, 1(0), 2006.


                                                11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Lu Lu, Yeonjong Shin, Yanhui Su, and George Em Karniadakis. Dying relu and initialization:
  Theory and numerical examples. arXiv preprint arXiv:1903.06733, 2019.
Aleksandr Mikhailovich Lyapunov. The general problem of the stability of motion. International
  journal of control, 55(3):531–534, 1992.
Andrew L Maas, Awni Y Hannun, Andrew Y Ng, et al. Rectifier nonlinearities improve neural
  network acoustic models. In Proc. icml, volume 30, pp. 3. Atlanta, GA, 2013.
Beren Millidge, Tommaso Salvatori, Yuhang Song, Thomas Lukasiewicz, and Rafal Bogacz. Uni-
  versal hopfield networks: A general framework for single-shot associative memory models. In
  International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 15561–15583. PMLR, 2022a.
Beren Millidge, Yuhang Song, Tommaso Salvatori, Thomas Lukasiewicz, and Rafal Bogacz. Back-
  propagation at the infinitesimal inference limit of energy-based models: Unifying predictive cod-
  ing, equilibrium propagation, and contrastive hebbian learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2206.02629,
  2022b.
D.W. Nicholson. Eigenvalue bounds for ab+ba, with a,b positive definite matrices. Linear
  Algebra and its Applications, 24:173–184, 1979. ISSN 0024-3795. doi: https://doi.org/
  10.1016/0024-3795(79)90157-5. URL https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/
  article/pii/0024379579901575.
Richard S Palais. A simple proof of the banach contraction principle. Journal of Fixed Point Theory
  and Applications, 2:221–223, 2007.
Hubert Ramsauer, Bernhard Schäfl, Johannes Lehner, Philipp Seidl, Michael Widrich, Thomas
  Adler, Lukas Gruber, Markus Holzleitner, Milena Pavlović, Geir Kjetil Sandve, et al. Hopfield
  networks is all you need. arXiv preprint arXiv:2008.02217, 2020.
Valeria Simoncini. Computational methods for linear matrix equations. siam REVIEW, 58(3):377–
  441, 2016.
Steven H Strogatz. Nonlinear dynamics and chaos: with applications to physics, biology, chemistry,
  and engineering. CRC press, 2018.
Fei Tang and Michael Kopp. A remark on a paper of krotov and hopfield [arxiv: 2008.06996]. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2105.15034, 2021.
Ilya O Tolstikhin, Neil Houlsby, Alexander Kolesnikov, Lucas Beyer, Xiaohua Zhai, Thomas Un-
   terthiner, Jessica Yung, Andreas Steiner, Daniel Keysers, Jakob Uszkoreit, et al. Mlp-mixer: An
   all-mlp architecture for vision. Advances in neural information processing systems, 34:24261–
   24272, 2021.
Renxi Wang, Haonan Li, Xudong Han, Yixuan Zhang, and Timothy Baldwin. Learning from failure:
  Integrating negative examples when fine-tuning large language models as agents. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2402.11651, 2024.
Xiaohui Xie and H Sebastian Seung. Equivalence of backpropagation and contrastive hebbian learn-
  ing in a layered network. Neural computation, 15(2):441–454, 2003.


A    R ELATIONS BETWEEN MEMORY MODELS
Our model is most directly related to Dense Associative Memory described in (Krotov, 2021, Equa-
tion (2)). This equation reads
                                              N
                                       dxI   X
                                    τI     =     WIJ gJ − xI ,
                                        dt
                                               J=1
                                                                             I })
where xI , I = 1, . . . , N are activities of individual neurons, gJ = dL({X
                                                                         dxJ      is activation function
which is a gradient of Lagrange function L that depends on all activities, and τI control relaxation


                                                  12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


time of individual neurons. Energy function used in this work is available in equation (Krotov, 2021,
Equation (3)) and is given below:
                                     N                      N
                                     X                   1 X
                                E=         xI gI − L −       gI WIJ gJ .
                                                         2
                                     I=1                  I,J=1

It is easy to see that there is a direct relation between dynamical system (1) and the model (2) we
use in the article and the ones from Krotov (2021): WIJ are the elements of matrix W , activities xI
are components of y. Two differences between the model from that article and Dense Associative
Memory are: bias term that we use b is absent from Dense Associative Memory Krotov (2021), time
scales τI are absent from our model. The bias term can be simply removed by taking b = 0 and
since it is not used in the stability analysis, this does not affect our results. Observe, that if b = 0
the energy that we use (2) is precisely the same as in Krotov (2021). Similarly, time scale τI are
absent from the definition of energy function in Krotov (2021) so they do not influence flat energy
regions. However, they mildly influence stability analysis since after linearisation Jacobian will by
multiplied by D −1 where D is a diagonal matrix containing time scales on the diagonal.
Next we discuss the relation to model (Krotov & Hopfield, 2020, Equation (1)). This model seems
to be quite different from our formulation, but it is a specific case of Dense Associative Memory
(Krotov, 2021, Equation (2)) with bias term. To see this we describe model given in (?, Equation (1))
In the article Krotov & Hopfield (2020) authors split neurons on two parts: activations of memory
neurons are hµ , µ = 1, . . . , Nh and activations of feature neurons are vi , i = 1, . . . , Nf . These
neurons has distinct activations function fµ = f (hµ ) and gi = g(hi ) which are defined as derivatives
                                                ∂Lh ({hµ })               ({vi })
of corresponding Lagrange functions fµ =           ∂hµ      and gi = ∂Lv∂v  i
                                                                                  (Krotov & Hopfield,
2020, Equation (3)). Dynamical equations for these activations (Krotov & Hopfield, 2020, Equation
(1)) is reproduced below
                                              Nh
                                        dvi   X
                                     τf     =     ξiµ fµ − vi + Ii ,
                                        dt    µ=1
                                              Nf
                                        dhµ   X
                                     τh     =     ξµi gi − hµ ,
                                         dt   i=1

where ξµi = ξiµ are symmetric weights describing “weights of synapses” and Ii is “the input current
into feature neurons.” Lyapunov function given in (Krotov & Hopfield, 2020, Equation (2)) reads
                                           "
                        Nf                        Nh
                                                                #
                        X                         X                 X
                 E =  (vi − Ii )gi − Lv  +         hµ fµ − Lh −       fµ ξµi gi .
                          i=1                        µ=1                   µ,i

To see that this model is related to (Krotov, 2021, Equation (2)) , consider a special weight matrix
WIJ , xI , τI that have the following block structure

                                      0 ξ             v         τf ev
                              W = ⊤           ,x=        ,τ =           ,
                                     ξ    0           h         τh eh
where ev and eh are identity vector of sizes Nf , Nh . With this split and Lagrangian L({xI }) =
Lv ({vi }) + Lh ({hµ }) we have

                    X                       ∂L       0 ξ       g(v)        v
                        WIJ gJ − xI ⇒ W        = ⊤                     −
                                            ∂x      ξ    0     f (h)       h
                      J

so we see that we reproduce (Krotov & Hopfield, 2020, Equation (1)) without bias term Ii . The
same way we reproduce the energy function but without Ii .
Given that, both models (Krotov & Hopfield, 2020, Equation (1)), (Krotov, 2021, Equation (2)) are
directly related to (1). The only difference is these models contain τ variable that speed up or slow
down temporal dynamics for selected neurons. Importantly, energy functions from models Krotov
& Hopfield (2020), Krotov (2021) are equivalent to (2).
Note that other modifications of memory models are available. The main problematic part that lead
to flat energy is a Lagrange function introduced in Krotov & Hopfield (2020). So, whenever this


                                                   13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


function is used, the energy will have non-compact flat regions corresponding to dead neurons. To
give an example, in Millidge et al. (2022a) authors build a modified model but used a non-trivial
Lagrange function Lh in Equation (3). If f (h) = sep(h) can produce dead neurons, the energy from
Millidge et al. (2022a) will have a non-compact flat region. One such situation occurs when the
softmax function is used as sep(h) in (Millidge et al., 2022a, Equation (5)).

B    P ROOF OF P ROPOSITION 1: DEAD NEURONS LEAD TO NON - COMPACT FLAT
     ENERGY REGIONS

We assume that we are at point y in the region where neurons are dead, so there is V such that
g(y + V c) = g(y) for arbitrary c with positive components. We substitute y + V c into the
definition of energy to obtain
                                ⊤                             1               ⊤
 E(y + V c) = (y + V c − b) g (y + V c) − L (y + V c) −          (g (y + V c)) W g (y + V c) .
                                                              2
First, we use g(y + V c) = g(y) to remove shift from activation functions
                                          ⊤                     1        ⊤
           E(y + V c) = (y + V c − b) g (y) − L (y + V c) −       (g (y)) W g (y) .
                                                                2
Next, we use Taylor series with mean-value reminder to expand Lagrange function
                                                            !⊤
                                           ∂L(z)
                 L (y + V c) = L (y) +                         V c, τ ∈ (0, 1).
                                             ∂z z=y+τ V c

Since by definition g(y) = ∂L(y)
                            ∂y , the expression above can be presented as follows
                                                              ⊤
                     L (y + V c) = L (y) + (g (y + τ V c)) V c, τ ∈ (0, 1).
Now, since τ > 0 we use g(y + τ V c) = g(y) to remove shift and obtain
                                                                  ⊤
                                L (y + V c) = L (y) + (g (y)) V c
We substitute this to the last expression for energy which gives
                                     ⊤                             ⊤       1        ⊤
      E(y + V c) = (y + V c − b) g (y) − L (y) − (g (y)) V c −               (g (y)) W g (y) .
                                                                           2
                                               ⊤                       ⊤
Two remaining terms containing c are (V c) g (y) and − (g (y)) V c cancel each other, so we
obtain
                                  ⊤                1        ⊤
              E(y + V c) = (y − b) g (y) − L (y) − (g (y)) W g (y) = E(y),
                                                   2
as claimed in the proposition.

C    E XAMPLE OF MEMORY CAPACITY DEGRADATION FOR ENERGY FUNCTION
     BOUNDED FROM BELOW

Figure 2a shows an energy function that is unbounded from below but supports two stable states. In
this section we argue that the unbounded energy is not problematic. Moreover, if one is too strict
about this property, memory can severely degrade in capacity.
It is easy to find papers on associative memory that claim that it is necessary to have energy function
bounded from below to ensure stable memory recovery, e.g., see discussion after equation (4) (in
both cases) in Krotov (2021) and Krotov & Hopfield (2020). In Xie & Seung (2003) authors even
incorrectly claim “Furthermore, with appropriately chosen fk , such as sigmoid functions, E(x) is
also bounded below, in which case E(x) is a Lyapunov function”. Clearly, the Lyapunov function
is not required to be bounded.
We certainly agree that if the energy function is bounded and informative (not flat), the memory
vector will be recovered eventually from arbitrary initial conditions. However, we have several
arguments again the overall importance of this condition:


                                                   14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


      1. Unbounded at infinity only. Activation functions used for associative memory are at least
         continuous, meaning energy can be unbounded only when the activities of neurons reach
         infinity. This kind of run-away behavior is very easy to detect and prevent when one uses
         actual implementation of associative memory.
      2. Finite number of updates in practice. In practice ODE is not integrated for a very long
         time. As we discuss in Section 5 one usually performs a small number of steps for discre-
         tised dynamics, e.g., 10 or even 1 step. Under these conditions it is not possible to diverge
         using ODEs considered in this article.
      3. Stability is a local condition. For associative memory one cares more about local stability
         in the basins of attraction, and the fact that energy is bounded from below is a global
         information, which is seldom important for local stability (with the important exception
         discussed below). In practice one can always rescale input vectors (initial conditions) to
         localize it on a sufficiently small sphere with radius R. Memory trained and used this way
         has little chance to diverge.
      4. Extra constraints can compromise capacity. If we require energy to be bounded from be-
         low we will put extra constraints on parameters of associative memory. These constraints,
         as we will show below, can decrease capacity dramatically.

The last point, the decrease in capacity, is especially interesting. We will illustrate it with ReLU
memory model
                         dy(t)
                                = W ReLU (y(t)) − y(t) + b, y(0) = y0 ,
                          dt
that has energy
                                          N
                          ⊤
                                          X 1                 2    1          ⊤
        E(y) = (y − b) ReLU(y) −                  (ReLU(yi )) −      (ReLU(y)) W ReLU(y).
                                          i=1
                                              2                    2
                                                                                   ⊤
To analyze this energy function we observe that y ⊤ ReLU(y) = (ReLU(y)) ReLU(y). This fact
allows us to simplify energy to
                              1            ⊤
                    E(y) =      (ReLU(y)) (I − W ) ReLU(y) − b⊤ ReLU(y).
                              2
It is possible to bound this energy function from below using spectral radius ρ of W
                               1 − ρ(W )              ⊤
                     E(y) ≥               (ReLU(y)) ReLU(y) − b⊤ ReLU(y),
                                   2
note that this bound is tight unless we restrict allowed weights, since it is saturated for W = αI for
scalar α. From this lower bound we can observe that memory is bounded from below if ρ(W ) ≤ 1.
Moreover, in light of our previous comment, it is a necessary and sufficient condition.
Suppose now we restrict W such that ρ(W ) = 1 − ϵ with arbitrary small but nonzero ϵ. In this case
ReLU memory has a single memory vector.
We start by showing that a steady state of temporal dynamics exists. For that we consider a discrete
iteration
                                 y (n+1) = W ReLU y (n) + b.
Observe that right-hand side is a Lipschitz function with Lipschitz constant 1 − ϵ:
        ∥W ReLU (c1 ) + b − (W ReLU (c2 ) + b)∥2 = ∥W (ReLU (c1 ) − ReLU (c2 ))∥2
        ≤ ∥W ∥2 ∥(ReLU (c1 ) − ReLU (c2 )∥2 ≤ ∥W ∥2 ∥c1 − c2 ∥2 = (1 − ϵ) ∥c1 − c2 ∥2
Given that, by Banach fixed point theorem Palais (2007) these iterations has unique fixed point. This
fixed point is a steady state since
                      y ⋆ = W ReLU (y ⋆ ) + b ⇒ W ReLU (y ⋆ ) − y ⋆ + b = 0
so the right-hand side of the dynamical system is zero.
Now, we will show that this steady state is unique. For that we consider two trajectories starting
from (arbitrary) distinct initial conditions y1 (t), y2 (t): y1 (0) = y01 , y2 (0) = y02 . We will show that


                                                    15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


the distance between y1 (t) and y2 (t) decreases with time. To do that we consider derivative of this
distance:

        1 d                   2                     ⊤   dy1 (t) dy2 (t)
             ∥y1 (t) − y2 (t)∥2 = (y1 (t) − y2 (t))            −
        2 dt                                              dt       dt
                            ⊤
        = (y1 (t) − y2 (t)) (W ReLU (y1 (t)) − y1 (t) − W ReLU (y2 (t)) + y2 (t))
                                2                       ⊤
        = − ∥y1 (t) − y2 (t)∥2 + (y1 (t) − y2 (t)) (W ReLU (y1 (t)) − W ReLU (y2 (t))) .
To bound second term we use that a ≤ |a| and Cauchy-Schwarz inequality
1 d                   2                      2                    ⊤
     ∥y1 (t) − y2 (t)∥2 ≤ − ∥y1 (t) − y2 (t)∥2 + (y1 (t) − y2 (t)) (W ReLU (y1 (t)) − W ReLU (y2 (t)))
2 dt
                       2
≤ − ∥y1 (t) − y2 (t)∥2 + ∥y1 (t) − y2 (t)∥2 ∥W ReLU (y1 (t)) − W ReLU (y2 (t))∥2 .
Finally, we use result that W ReLU(·) is Lipschitz with Lipschitz constant 1 − ϵ to obtain
1 d                   2                      2                    2                               2
     ∥y1 (t) − y2 (t)∥2 ≤ − ∥y1 (t) − y2 (t)∥2 + ∥y1 (t) − y2 (t)∥2 (1 − ϵ) = −ϵ ∥y1 (t) − y2 (t)∥2 .
2 dt
Using Grönwal inequality we obtain
                       1 d                   2         1 d                   2
                            ∥y1 (t) − y2 (t)∥2 ≤ e−2ϵt      ∥y1 (0) − y2 (0)∥2 .
                       2 dt                            2 dt
In other words, separated trajectories converge exponentially fast. Since there is a fixed point one
of the trajectories might as well start from y ⋆ which means this fixed point is the only one, and it is
exponentially stable.
The result that we demonstrate here means one should be careful restricting parameters of associative
memory, since it may lead to degradation of capacity to a single memory. The proof above is not
working for ρ(W ) = 1, but since ϵ can be arbitrary slow one can recover the same result in a limit
ϵ → 0.

D    M EMORY MODEL FROM H OPFIELD (1984)

In this section we align our notation with the one from Hopfield (1984). The model of interest is
given in (Hopfield, 1984, Equation (5)). We replicated this model below
                                    dui   X
                                Ci      =     Tij Vj − ui /Ri + Ii ,
                                     dt     j

                                    ui = gi−1 (Vi ) ,
where ui is an instantaneous input to neuron i, Vi is the output or “short term average of the firing rate
of the cell i”, gi is an activation function or “the input-output characteristic of a nonlinear amplifier
with negligible response time”, Tij are weights and Tij−1 “finite impedance between the output Vj
and the cell body of cell i”, Ri is “transmembrane resistance” and Ci is “input capacitance”, Ii is
bias or “any other (fixed) input current to neuron i”.
If we put aside the biological content of Hopfield (1984), this equation is already very similar to
all models we discussed in Appendix A. To make the resemblance even more evident observe that
Ri can be removed without the loss of generality, since we can multiply on them and redefine
Ci → Ri Ci , Tij → Ri Tij , Ii → RI Ii . After that we also substitute Vi = g(ui ) and obtain the
following equation
                                   dui    X
                                Ci     =     Tij gj (uj ) − ui + Ii ,
                                    dt     j

which is precisely the Dense Associative Memory (Krotov, 2021, Equation (2)) with weights Tij ,
time variables Ci extra bias term Ii . Since we already discussed the relation of Dense Associative
Memory to our model in Appendix A, we can be sure that model from Hopfield (1984) is in the
same class of memory models.


                                                        16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Dynamical system (Hopfield, 1984, Equation (5)) comes with the energy function (Hopfield, 1984,
Equation (7)):
                        1X                X 1 Z Vi                  X
                 E=−          Tij Vi Vj +            dV gi−1 (V ) +    Ii Vi ,
                        2 ij              i
                                             Ri 0                    i
Using Vi = gi (ui ) we obtain
                                                         Z Vi
                 1X                          X 1                                 X
             E=−      Tij gi (ui )gi (ui ) +                    dV gi−1 (V ) +       Ii gi (ui ).
                 2 ij                        i
                                               Ri         0                      i

In addition to that we can drop Ri for the reason explained above
                        1X                          X Z Vi                X
                E=−          Tij gi (ui )gi (ui ) +        dV gi−1 (V ) +   Ii gi (ui ).
                        2 ij                        i  0                  i

The first and last sums are easily mapped on our notation and the second sum is explained in Sec-
tion 3.1).
All in all, one can say that our model is similar to the one from Hopfield (1984) but with Ci = Ri =
1. As we argued, Ri is irrelevant and Ci does not appear in the energy function.

E    P ROOF OF P ROPOSITION 3: STABILISATION OF DYNAMICS FOR RANDOM
     MATRICES

Matrix W⊥ can be written as D ⊤ O ⊤ W OD where O is orthogonal full rank matrix and D is
first N − k columns of I. Since GOE is invariant under orthogonal transformations O ⊤ W O is
also a matrix from GOE. The effect of D is to select a principal submatrix with N − k rows and
columns. Given that W⊥ is also from GOE but with N − k rows and columns. For GOE with
large N , the distribution of leading eigenvalue quickly converges to Tracy–Widom distribution (see
Chiani (2014) equation (50) and numerical results), so, on the average, spectral radiusqof a matrix
                                    p                                                         k
with N − k rows and columns is 2(N − k) (see below) and E ∥W⊥ ∥2 E ∥W ∥2 = 1 − N                .
To obtain an average spectral radius for the GOE matrix M we will use the theory described in
Section 4 of Chiani (2014). Let λ1 be a spectral radius of matrix M ∈ RN ×N . We define a
Gaussian orthogonal ensemble as a set of random symmetric matrices with independently
                                                                                           identically
normally distributed entries (for upper diagonal part) with variances 1 and 1 2 for entries on and off
the diagonal respectively. For sufficiently large N it is known that
                                                ′               ′
                                        λ1 = µN + µTW1 σN ,                                         (11)
where λ1 is a mean value of spectral radius, µTW1 ≃ −1.2 is a mean value of Tracy–Widom distri-
bution and
                v
                u                              − 13 !
                                                         √

           ′
                u            1    1         1                       ′      1     1
         µN = 2 N − −
                t                     N−              → 2N − 1; σN = √ N − 6 → 0.         (12)
                             2 10           2                               2
                                                                           √
So we see that for large N the average spectral radius of the GOE matrix is 2N .

F    P ROOF OF P ROPOSITION 5: ASSOCIATIVE MEMORY WITHOUT DEAD
     NEURONS

Observe that ∂L(W
                ∂u
                  u+b)
                       = W g (W u + b) and ∂g(W
                                              ∂u
                                                u+b)
                                                     = Λ (W u + b) W .

      1. Using the identities above we find
              ∂E1                                    ∂E2
                  = W Λ (W u + b) W (u − g(W u+b)) ,       = W (u − g(W u+b)) ,
              ∂u                                      ∂u
              ∂E3
                  = (I − W Λ (W u + b)) S (u − g(W u+b)) .
              ∂u

                                                    17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


        Multiplying gradients on α, β, γ and adding them gives ∂E(u)
                                                                ∂u = F (u)f (u). Since u̇ =
        −R(u)f (u(t)) where f (u(t)) = u − g(W u+b) from Ė = u̇⊤ ∂E ∂u we obtain

                                                               ⊤
                            Ė = −f (u)⊤ R⊤ F (u) + (F (u)) R f (u).
                                                                                          ⊤
        If one can find positive semidefinite matrix Q such that R⊤ F (u) + (F (u)) R ≥ Q,
        energy is non-increasing on trajectories since in this case Ė ≤ −f ⊤ Qf ≤ 0
     2. Consider polar decomposition of matrix F (u) = O(u)P (u) and take R(u) = O(u).
                                                   ⊤
        Since P (u) ≥ 0 we have R⊤ F (u) + (F (u)) R = 2P (u) ≥ 0 and Ė ≤ 0.
     3. From the proof of Proposition 1 we know that if W u + b → W u + b + V c, Lagrange
        function shifts on g (W u + b) V c. The first term in the energy function (6) is quadratic
        and does not contain g so in general energy E2 does not have flat directions. Similarly,
        E3 has a form f (u)⊤ Sf (u) where f is not invariant under transformation W u + b →
        W u + b + V c meaning E3 is not invariant as well.
     4. Since ∂E                      ⋆
              ∂u = F (u)f (u) and f (u ) = 0 we find for sufficiently small δ

                                                                 ∂f (u)
                            E(u⋆ + δ) − E(u⋆ ) = δ ⊤ F (u⋆ )              δ.
                                                                  ∂u u=u⋆
        For stability one needs this quadratic form to be positive definite, which gives (8).


                                                18
