Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


X-N E M O : E XPRESSIVE N EURAL M OTION R EENACT-
MENT VIA D ISENTANGLED L ATENT ATTENTION

 Xiaochen Zhao1,2∗, Hongyi Xu2 , Guoxian Song2 , You Xie2 , Chenxu Zhang2 , Xiu Li2 ,
 Linjie Luo2 , Jinli Suo1 , Yebin Liu1†
 1
   Tsinghua University, 2 ByteDance Inc.


                      Implicit 1D
                     Latent Motion
                      Descriptor



                     diffusion
                                     cross-attn
                                      self-attn


                     T steps


Figure 1: We present X-NeMo, a diffusion-based portrait animation framework that integrates
expressive 1D latent motion descriptors with identity-disentangled motion control through cross-
attention mechanisms (left). Our method enables meticulous transfer of expressive head poses and
detailed facial expressions while maintaining identity consistency, even across subjects with distinct
appearances, styles and facial structures (right).

                                                  A BSTRACT

            We propose X-NeMo, a novel zero-shot diffusion-based portrait animation
            pipeline that animates a static portrait using facial movements from a driving video
            of a different individual. Our work first identifies the root causes of the key issues
            in prior approaches, such as identity leakage and difficulty in capturing subtle and
            extreme expressions. To address these challenges, we introduce a self-supervised
            training framework that distills a 1D identity-agnostic latent motion descriptor
            from driving image, effectively controlling motion through cross-attention dur-
            ing image generation. Our implicit motion descriptor captures expressive facial
            motion in fine detail, learned from a diverse video dataset without reliance on
            pretrained motion detectors. We further enhance expressiveness and disentangle
            motion latents from identity cues by supervising their learning with a dual GAN
            decoder, alongside spatial and color augmentations. By embedding the driving
            motion into a 1D latent vector and controlling motion via cross-attention rather
            than additive spatial guidance, our design eliminates the transmission of spatial-
            aligned structural clues from the driving condition to the diffusion backbone, sub-
            stantially mitigating identity leakage. Extensive experiments demonstrate that X-
            NeMo surpasses state-of-the-art baselines, producing highly expressive anima-
            tions with superior identity resemblance. Our code and models will be available
            for research at our project page.
   * Work done during the internship at ByteDance.
   †
       Corresponding author.


                                                      1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


1   I NTRODUCTION
We investigate the task of portrait animation, where a static portrait is animated using head move-
ments and facial expressions derived from a driving video of a different subject. This task has
garnered growing interest owing to its versatile applications in video conferencing, visual effects
and digital agents. Building on prior research, we aim to advent the field of zero-shot portrait reen-
actment by synthesizing highly expressive animations while maintaining identity resemblance to the
reference portraits with minimal loss.
Commencing with the pioneering works Siarohin et al. (2019b;a), portrait animation has primarily
involved extracting motion features from a driving video followed with a generative process, such as
GANs Goodfellow et al. (2014); Karras et al. (2019; 2020) or diffusion models Ho et al. (2020); Song
et al. (2020a;b); Rombach et al. (2022), conditioned on the reference appearance and derived motion
features. Recent advancements in diffusion models have achieved unprecedented diversity and qual-
ity in image generation, prompting us to utilize their generative capabilities Saharia et al. (2022);
AI (2022) for portrait animation. Recent approaches have tackled portrait animation as a controlled
image-to-video diffusion task, where the reference appearance is cross-queried through mutual self-
attention Cao et al. (2023) whereas the driving motion signal is integrated into the denoising pro-
cess using frameworks like ControlNet Zhang et al. (2023b) or lighter-weight PoseGuider Hu et al.
(2023). The driving motion is represented either through explicit semantic signals such as facial
landmarks Ma et al. (2024); Wei et al. (2024); Chang et al. (2024), dense pose Xu et al. (2024d)
and facial template renderings Chen et al. (2024a), or through implicit motion features learnt from
synthetic cross-identity image pairs with aligned expression but different identities Xie et al. (2024);
Yang et al. (2024a). Despite significant progress in realism and dynamics, these diffusion-based
methods still struggle to capture extreme or subtle expressions and often suffer from identity drift-
ing, particularly when the reference and driving identities differ substantially.
We identify two main factors contributing to the challenges in expressiveness and identity resem-
blance in prior network designs. First, explicit motion descriptors like facial landmarks or blend-
shapes, are often too coarse to capture extreme or subtle facial motions and rely heavily on the ro-
bustness and accuracy of external motion detectors. Although these descriptors do not contain RGB
appearance, they encode the facial structure of the driving identity, leading to undesirable identity
leakage in cross-identity animations. Recent approaches Xie et al. (2024); Yang et al. (2024a) have
attempted to derive implicit motion signals directly from synthetic cross-identity training image pairs
generated using an off-the-shelf portrait animator (e.g., Wang et al. (2021)). Despite substantial im-
provements in expressiveness and stability, these methods remain constrained by the capacity of pre-
trained portrait animators which struggle with complex expressions (e.g., tongue protrusion, cheek
puffing). Additionally, sharing aligned facial structures in training pairs inadvertently pass identity
information onto the learnt implicit motion features. Second, prior diffusion-based approaches often
guide motion control using spatially-aligned 2D conditions via ControlNet or PoseGuider. While ef-
fective for self-driven motion, this approach encourages the diffusion backbone to take a shortcut to
mimic the 2D layout rather than fully leveraging semantic mappings between reference and driving
images, leading to identity leakage during expression transfer across different subjects.
In this work, we propose X-NeMo, a novel portrait animation framework that enables self-supervised
learning of a compact 1D latent motion descriptor, facilitating effective motion control in diffusion
models via cross attentions. Specifically, we introduce a motion encoder to extract a 1-D identity-
agnostic motion latent from the original driving image, and modulate this controlling motion de-
scriptor into the diffusion backbone via cross-attentions. By training jointly with the image gener-
ator, our encoder fully leverages the motion diversity and richness embedded in our training video
collections, without reliance on off-the-shelf motion detectors. We restrict the dimensionality of the
latent embedding, functioning as a low-pass filter Burkov et al. (2020), and format it as a 1D global
motion descriptor that excludes 2D structural cues from the driving image. Furthermore, by using
cross motion attentions rather than spatial additive guidance, we ensure that the backbone remains
agnostic to the identity structural signals from the motion control branch. This structure-agnostic
motion control enables various augmentations like color jittering and spatial transformations, pro-
moting the self-supervised disentanglement of identity and motion. In addition to the diffusion
loss, we incorporate a dual GAN-based decoder head and refine the learning of our motion latent
space with image-level losses that capture subtle and detailed expressions. Our design effectively
mitigates the aforementioned shortcut learning, and compels the network to interpret fine-grained
motion semantics during both motion encoding and image generation stages.


                                                   2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Trained on a collective of public video datasets Zhang et al. (2021); Xie et al. (2022); Kirschstein
et al. (2023), our method excels at faithfully capturing both extreme and nuanced facial motions and
transferring them across subjects even with distinct identity attributes. We extensively evaluate our
model across our challenging benchmarks and X-NeMo outperforms state-of-the-art portrait anima-
tion baselines both quantitatively and qualitatively. Additionally, our expressive latent motion de-
scriptor serves as a unified identity-agnostic embedding, facilitating motion interpolation and video
outpainting applications beyond portrait animation. We summarize our contributions as follows,
• A novel diffusion-based portrait animation pipeline, coupled with latent motion representation,
  achieving state-of-the-art performance in terms of motion accuracy and identity disentanglement.
• A structure-agnostic motion control scheme that learns a 1-D identity-disentangled latent motion
  descriptor and modulates control into image generation via cross-attentions, effectively addressing
  the long-standing issues of identity entanglement and motion expressiveness loss.
• A set of carefully designed strategies during both training (e.g., dual head latent supervision,
  augmentations and reference feature masking) and inference that substantially enhance the model
  performance, as supported by extensive ablation studies.
• Demonstration of captivating zero-shot portrait animations and generations.


2   R ELATED W ORKS

GAN-based Portrait Animation. Video-driven face reenactment seeks to accurately transfer fa-
cial expressions and head movements from a driving video to a target image. Common approaches
have primarily leveraged Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) Goodfellow et al. (2014); Kar-
ras et al. (2019; 2020) to model and capture the intricate motion dynamics between source and
target identities. Broadly, these methods can be categorized into two classes: The first class is based
on explicit motion representations Siarohin et al. (2019a;b); Ren et al. (2021); Wang et al. (2021);
Mallya et al. (2022); Yin et al. (2022); Gao et al. (2023); Doukas et al. (2021); Guo et al. (2024a);
Zhao & Zhang (2022), such as 3D face model parameters, landmarks, or latent keypoints, which use
structured information to disentangle appearance and motion, but struggle with large pose changes
or dynamic expressions. The second category involves latent motion representations Burkov et al.
(2020); Liang et al. (2022); Zhou et al. (2021); Pang et al. (2023); Wang et al. (2022; 2023); Droby-
shev et al. (2022; 2024); Xu et al. (2024c), embedding motion information in a latent space, offering
improved expressiveness but relying on complex loss functions and hyperparameters to achieve
identity-motion disentanglement. While more effective at transferring subtle expressions, such
methods are still limited by the capability of GAN-based generators in handling extreme expres-
sions and out-of-domain portrait styles. Our work follows this disentangled representation learning
approach, but instead we use a Diffusion Model as the generator, which offers significantly improved
generation capabilities with diverse and complex portrait styles.
Diffusion-based Portrait Animation. Diffusion models Ho et al. (2020); Song et al. (2020a;b)
have demonstrated strong generative capabilities, with Latent Diffusion Models (LDMs) Rombach
et al. (2022) further advancing its efficiency by operating in a lower-dimensional latent space. Re-
cent works Liu et al. (2024); Xu et al. (2024a); Han et al. (2023); Varanka et al. (2024); Paskaleva
et al. (2024) have explored adapting pre-trained LDMs AI (2022) for conditional portrait generation,
by mapping reference images and driving signals into the text embeddings (e.g., using CLIP Khan-
delwal et al. (2022)) and injecting them into cross-attention layers. While effective for coarse-
level facial expression editing, these methods still struggle with appearance and motion consis-
tency in portrait video animation. Hu et al. (2023); Xu et al. (2024d); Chang et al. (2024) designed
for human body animation have shown that the combination of a dual U-Net with mutual self-
attention Cao et al. (2023) and temporal module Guo et al. (2024b) is able to maintain motion
smoothness with consistent appearance. This framework has been extended to portrait animation in
several works Tian et al. (2024); Xie et al. (2024); Wei et al. (2024); Xu et al. (2024b); Yang et al.
(2024a); Wang et al. (2024); Ma et al. (2024); Chen et al. (2024b), often using ControlNet Zhang
et al. (2023b) or PoseGuider Hu et al. (2023) for motion control. During training, they rely on
explicit representations like facial keypoints Ma et al. (2024); Wei et al. (2024), facial mesh render-
ings Chen et al. (2024a), or synthetic cross-identity portraits Xie et al. (2024); Yang et al. (2024a).
In contrast, our method learns a latent motion representation jointly with our diffusion backbone,
and incorporates motion control with cross-attentions, effectively preventing identity leakage.


                                                  3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


    Training                                                                                      Inference       Driving Video {𝐼"! }


                                                   Augmentations
                                                                                                                                    …
                                                                                       App        𝐼!
                    𝐼!                 𝐼"                                            Encoder


                                                                    Motion Encoder
                                        𝑓!"#
                                                                                           𝑓$%%                    Motion Encoder
                                                                                                                               {𝑓&'"! }
                                       z#               𝐸!"#
                                                                                                                               …
                                                            𝑓&'"
                                                                                       C
              …


                                                                                                              ℛ            𝒟
                                   …



                                                                                      GAN
                                                                                     Decoder                      X-NeMo
                                                                                     𝑳%&'
             …


                                   …


    ℛ                     𝒟                                                                                                  …
                                                            𝑳𝒍𝒅𝒎
        Spatial Module   Motion Cross-Attention   Temporal Module


Figure 2: Overview of X-NeMo. We leverage a pretrained diffusion model D as the rendering
backbone and incorporate a reference network module R for appearance conditioning, along with
temporal modules for cross-frame consistency. For motion control, we train a latent motion em-
bedding fmot encoded from the driving image ID after applying spatial and color augmentations.
Alongside the relative translation and scaling frts of the face bounding box from reference IR and
driving image ID , we integrate the latent motion conditions into the diffusion backbone using newly
inserted cross-attention layers. Besides the original diffusion loss Lldm , we supervise the learning
of our latent motion embedding with a jointly trained GAN decoder head (coupled with an appear-
ance latent embedding fapp ) using image-level losses Lgan . During inference, we derive the latent
motion codes directly from each driving frame, allowing us to synthesize expressive and precise
animations while strictly maintain identity resemblance to the reference image.

3        M ETHOD

Given a single portrait as the reference image IR , our objective is to generate a head animation
sequence {IR−>Di } of length l, conditioned on a driving video IDi , where i = 1, . . . , l denotes the
frame index. The generated frames {IR−>Di } aim to preserve the identity features and background
content depicted in IR while accurately replicating the head pose and facial expressions featured in
each corresponding driving frame IDi . While portrait animation algorithms are generally trained as
a frame reconstruction task over video datasets, the IR and ID may feature distinct identities during
inference, enabling cross-identity motion transfer.
For our task, we harness the generative capabilities of pre-trained Latent Diffusion Models AI (2022)
for image generation. Although our method shares some network modules with prior diffusion-
based approaches (Section 3.1), it innovates on motion control by addressing the root causes behind
the loss of expressiveness and identity resemblance. We introduce our learning framework that
achieves fine-grained, identity-agnostic motion control through cross-attention to a co-learned im-
plicit motion descriptor (Section 3.2). To assist the self-supervised learning of motion and identity
disentanglement, we present a set of carefully designed training strategies (Section 3.3). Figure 2
provides an overview of our training and inference pipeline.

3.1        P RELIMINARIES
Latent Diffusion Model. Facilitated by a pretrained auto-encoder, latent diffusion models Rom-
bach et al. (2022) are a class of diffusion models Ho et al. (2020); Song et al. (2020a;b) that synthe-
size desired samples in the image latent space, starting from Gaussian noise zT ∼ N (0, 1) and re-
fining through T denoising steps. During training, latent representations of images are progressively


                                                                                       4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


corrupted by Gaussian noise ϵ, following the Denoising Diffusion Probabilistic Model (DDPM)
framework Ho et al. (2020). A UNet-based denoising backbone network D containing intervened
layers of convolutions and self-/cross-attentions, is trained to learn the reverse denoising process.
Portrait Animation. Recently a line of work Tian et al. (2024); Xie et al. (2024); Wei et al. (2024);
Xu et al. (2024b); Yang et al. (2024a); Wang et al. (2024); Ma et al. (2024); Chen et al. (2024b)
have explored leveraging the generative power of pretrained LDM, such as Stable Diffusion AI
(2022), for portrait animation. While exhibiting slight algorithmic variations, these methods gener-
ally employ similar components to transfer driving motions onto the reference image. Specifically,
a reference network R Cao et al. (2023), sharing the same architecture with the UNet D, extracts
reference features of identity appearance and background which are then cross-queried by the UNet
self-attention blocks. Motion control is achieved through an additional module, often formatted in
ControlNet Zhang et al. (2023b) or lighter-weight PoseGuider Hu et al. (2023), translating driving
conditions into 2D spatially-aligned offsets additive to the UNet features. To maintain consistency
across animated frames, temporal modules Guo et al. (2023), which incorporates cross-frame atten-
tions, are intervened with the spatial transformer blocks.
While effective to some extent, prior methods often fall short in expressiveness and suffer from
identity leakage in the generated animations. First, expressiveness is limited by the coarse granu-
larity of the driving motion conditions, such as facial landmarks or synthetic training images Xie
et al. (2024), which fail to capture complex and subtle expressions like frowning or puckering. Sec-
ond, while prior approaches mostly address appearance leakage, they overlook the leakage of 2D
facial structure and spatial layout embedded in the driving conditions, whether through landmarks or
synthesized images. ControlNet-like mechanisms transform these motion conditions into spatially-
aligned offsets within the UNet’s intermediate features. This reliance on spatial alignment causes the
UNet to bypass the need to interpret semantic correspondences between the reference and driving
faces, resulting in undesirable identity drift during cross-identity animation at inference.

3.2   P IPELINE WITH I DENTITY-D ISENTANGLED I MPLICIT M OTION C ONTROL

As shown in Figure 2, we follow the existing UNet-based latent diffusion framework AI (2022),
integrating both the reference network and temporal modules. However, our key innovation lies in
a novel motion control module, designed to tackle challenges in motion expressiveness and identity
consistency, particularly during cross-identity reenactments. A core design principle of our approach
is to distill motion directly from the original driving images, while ensuring the image generation
backbone operates independently of any appearance or structural clues from the motion control path.
Latent Motion Descriptor. For motion extraction, we employ an image encoder Emot , to learn an
implicit latent representation, fmot , that captures facial motions across varying levels of granularity.
Similar to the approaches in Wang et al. (2022; 2023), we formulate the motion latent representation
fmot as a low-dimensional 1-D global descriptor. The motion encoder Emot consists of intervened
layers of convolution-based feature extraction and self-attention, followed by MLP layers, which
encode the motion into a 1D latent vector, thereby eliminating spatial positional information (i.e.,
image structure) along the encoding process. Following the information bottleneck principle Tishby
et al. (2000), we employ a larger network capacity (i.e., the reference net R) and higher feature
dimensions (i.e., multi-scale feature maps) for appearance modeling, while using a smaller network
capacity (Emot ) and lower feature dimension ( fmot ) for motion encoding. This design, function-
ing as a low-pass bottleneck filter, encourages the emergence of disentangled representations that
effectively capture key semantics of facial motion without entangling with appearance information.
Furthermore, unlike previous methods that rely on pretrained motion extractor as the driving condi-
tions (e.g., facial landmarks), our latent motion representation is optimized jointly with the diffusion
generator during training. As a result, this allows our model to progressively learn and refine the
motion distribution as the diffusion model is trained on more diverse and expressive video data like
NerSemble Kirschstein et al. (2023). With that, our approach enhances the expressiveness of the
generated animations, as the model adapts to more complex and nuanced facial motions.
Cross-Attention Control. To exert motion control on UNet using our latent motion descriptor, one
possible approach would be to use a ControlNet-like module to guide the denoising process after
transforming the 1D latent code fmot into a 2D spatially-aligned control map via a StyleGAN-like
decoder. However, this would contradict our design goal for identity disentanglement.(Figure 3(a))
Since fmot is intentionally free of 2D structural information, transforming it into a spatial control


                                                   5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


      Reference   Driving         w/o cross-attn   Ours       Reference   Driving     w/o augmentation   Ours


                            (a)                                                     (b)

Figure 3: Qualitative ablation study on factors affecting identity consistency. (a) Replacing our mo-
tion cross-attentions with a control module using spatially additive guidance leads to severe leakage
of the driving identity’s facial structure. (b) Training without our color and spatial augmentations
results in noticeable appearance leakage and identity drift.

map demands additional input regarding the reference identity’s structure, thereby violating our
principle that the motion control path should remain agnostic to identity-specific features. Instead
the UNet should resort to the reference net for relevant identity-related information.
Instead, we adopt a cross-attention conditioning mechanism, which has proven effective across var-
ious control modalities Rombach et al. (2022); Tian et al. (2024); Ruiz et al. (2023). This allows
direct injection of the latent motion embedding into the UNet without adding spatial bias. Specifi-
cally, we insert motion-attention layers performing cross attention with the latent motion code fmot
after each spatial transformer blocks in the backbone. This cross-attention scheme integrates the 1D
motion embedding globally into the generation process, encouraging the UNet to interpret the mo-
tion condition and establish semantic correspondences between the reference and driving identity.

3.3      T RAINING S TRATEGIES

For training, we randomly sample two distinct frames from a video as the reference IR and driving
ID image, respectively. The model is then trained to denoise the latent map of the target image ID
at timestep t, with the diffusion loss defined as follows,
                         Lldm = Ezt ,ϵ∼N (0,1),t ∥ϵ − ϵθ (zt , cref , fmot )∥22 ,

                                                                                                (1)
where ϵθ denotes the trainable parameters in the backbone D, and fmot , cref represent the driving
motion and reference features, respectively, extracted by Emot and R. The training process is
structured into three stages. The first stage is the image pretraining stage, where the backbone UNet
and reference net are taken into training. The second stage additionally incorporates the motion
encoder Emot and the newly integrated motion-attention layers into the optimization, forming an
end-to-end encoder-generator structure. Lastly, we train the temporal modules to ensure cross-
frame coherence. After the three-stage training process (intended as warm-up), we finetune the
entire pipeline end-to-end, with all trainable modules optimized simultaneously.
However, straightforward self-supervised training of the entire framework does not inherently dis-
entangle identity from facial motion. The UNet may inadvertently reconstruct the target image by
borrowing appearance features from the driving image or encoding identity information into the la-
tent motion descriptor fmot . Additionally, when IR and ID share similar expressions, the model
may distill motion signals from the reference image , hindering independent control over facial mo-
tion and identity, particularly in cross-identity reenactments. To address these issues, we propose
several training strategies to fully leverage the potential of our network design in Section 3.2.
Color/Spatial Augmentation. To suppress identity information leakage from the motion control
branch, we reduce the appearance and structural consistency between the driving and target images
using both color and spatial augmentations. Specifically, we apply color jittering, random scaling
within 30%, and piecewise affine transformations, to the driving image ID , altering the facial ap-
pearance and shape while preserving motion semantics. We also perform face-centered cropping
to enhance spatial disparity between the driving and target, promoting the motion encoder Emot to
focus on the facial movements and capture nuanced expressions. As shown in Figure 3(b), these
augmentations effectively guide the motion encoder Emot towards learning identity-agnostic mo-


                                                          6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


   Reference    Driving     w/o GAN head   Ours       Reference    Driving         w/o RFM   Ours


                          (a)                                                (b)


Figure 4: Qualitative ablation study on factors influencing motion expressiveness.(a) Without the
dual GAN head, training solely with the diffusion loss hinders the motion encoder’s ability to learn
detailed and local motion patterns. (b) Our reference feature masking (RFM) strategy facilitates the
transfer of fine-level facial expressions, such as the wrinkles at the nasal region.

tion representation. To account for the disrupted head translation due to face-centered cropping, we
construct a triplet frts = (∆x/sr , ∆y/sr , sd /sr ), where (∆x, ∆y) denotes the 2D relative distance
between the face centers in the IR and ID , and sd /sr reflects the change in bounding box scale. This
triplet is processed through fully connected layers and fused with latent motion embedding fmot .
Owing to our design of motion control via latent motion embedding and cross-attentions, we sub-
stantially improves facial motion disentanglement from identity structure through spatial augmen-
tations. In contrast, applying these augmentations with a ControlNet-like mechanism, which relies
heavily on aligned spatial control signals, would degrade both robustness and accuracy.
Dual-Head Latent Supervision. In our early experiments, we observe that our motion control
training, while effective in capturing coarse facial motions, converges slowly and struggles to depict
subtle and fine-grained motions like frowning and puckering (see Figure 4(a)). The latent motion
embedding, acting as a low-pass filter, tends to model low-frequency movements first. Additionally,
the diffusion loss used during training assigns equal weight to every “pixel” in the latent noise,
leading the model to prioritize a smooth motion space over capturing local, detailed expressions.
To address this, we introduce a dual GAN-based head to guide the learning of the latent motion
embedding, enhancing the model’s attention to fine-grained facial expressions.
Following Burkov et al. (2020); Wang et al. (2022; 2023), we employ a convolutional feature extrac-
tor network to encode the reference image into an appearance latent embedding fapp . Together with
our motion latent code fmot , these embeddings modulate a StyleGAN generator Karras et al. (2020)
(i.e., the GAN-head decoder) to generate an RGB image, co-trained with our diffusion-based motion
control. Its training losses, collectively denoted as Lgan , are formulated in image space, including
a weighted L1 reconstruction loss, adversarial loss, feature matching loss Burkov et al. (2020), and
VGG perceptual losses Simonyan & Zisserman (2014); Cao et al. (2018). Focused on structural
variations more than pixel-wise differences, these image-level losses guide the latent space learning
with detailed and local motion modes. Furthermore, since the GAN head contains much fewer train-
able parameters than the diffusion backbone, it converges faster, boostrapping the motion encoder
and aiding the learning of motion attention layers under a well-distributed motion latent embedding.
Reference Feature Masking. In line with our strategies for identity disentanglement in the motion
control branch, we also aim to mitigate motion leakage from the appearance reference network.
When IR and ID exhibit similar expressions, even just partially, the backbone network is likely to
utilize the high-dimensional multi-scale appearance features as a “shortcut” for motion reference,
bypassing the intended reliance on our compact 1D latent motion descriptor. While such motion
leakage does not impede training data fitting during self-driven training, it hampers the learning of
effective and expressive motion control (Figure 4(b)).
Inspired by Masked Image Modeling He et al. (2022), we introduce reference feature masking to
mitigate motion leakage in appearance features. Specifically, we apply 30% uniform random mask-
ing to the appearance feature maps from the reference net R. The masked feature maps are flattened
and used as reference keys and values for the self-attention layers within the UNet backbone. This
balances the strength between appearance and motion signals, ensuring that subtle driving expres-
sions are effectively transferred without being overshadowed by the reference expressions.


                                                  7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


      Reference    Driving    PD-FGC     LivePortrait       FYE   AniPortrait   X-Portrait   Ours


Figure 5: Qualitative comparisons. Among all the methods, X-NeMo achieves the most accurate
transfer of intricate expressions and emotional subtleties while demonstrating the highest identity
resemblance, regardless of the characteristic differences between the reference and driving identities.

4     E XPERIMENT

4.1   I MPLEMENTATION D ETAILS

We train our model on a combination of talking head datasets (HDTF Zhang et al. (2021), VFHQ Xie
et al. (2022)) and facial expression dataset (NerSemble Kirschstein et al. (2023)), uniformly pro-
cessed at 25 fps and cropped to a 512 × 512 resolution. The training is conducted on 8 Nvidia
A100 GPUs using the AdamW optimizer Yao et al. (2021) with a learning rate of 1e − 5. We use
a batch size of 64 for appearance and motion control training, and a batch size of 16 for the tempo-
ral module using 24-frame video sequences. During inference, we implement the prompt traveling
technique Tseng et al. (2022) to enhance temporal smoothness in long video generation.
For evaluation, we compile a benchmark of 100 in-the-wild reference portraits DeviantArt (2024);
Midjourney (2024); Pexels (2024), representing a broad spectrum of facial structures, appearances
and styles. Additionally we collect 100 test videos from DFEW Jiang et al. (2020) featuring emo-
tionally expressive clips, alongside 200 licensed videos showcasing a diverse range of emotions,
head poses, and facial expressions. Please also refer to our supplementary video for more results.

4.2   E VALUATIONS AND C OMPARISONS

In our evaluation, we compare our method against state-of-the-art video-driven portrait animation
baselines, including X-Portrait Xie et al. (2024), AniPortrait Wei et al. (2024), Follow-your-Emoji
(FYE) Ma et al. (2024), and Echomimic Chen et al. (2024b). We also assess recent non-diffusion-
based methods, including PD-FGC Wang et al. (2023) that employs latent motion representation, and
LivePortrait Guo et al. (2024a) which uses implicit neural landmarks. EmoPortraits Drobyshev et al.
(2024), a GAN-based expressive portrait animation method, is excluded from our comparisons due
to the lack of inference code. For fair comparisons, we finetune AniPortrait, X-Portrait, and PD-FGC
using our dataset, while utilizing the released pretrained models for the remaining methods, given
the unavailability of their training code. We assess performance in both self and cross reenactments,
with all metrics computed at a resolution of 256×256 (the resolution at which PD-FGC was trained).
Self Reenactment. For each test video, we utilize the first frame as the reference image, generating
the entire sequence with subsequent frames acting as both the driving image and the ground truth
target. We evaluate the performance by computing the L1, structural (SSIM), and perceptual (LPIPS)
image losses to assess both image quality and motion accuracy. Our method, X-NeMo, consistently
outperforms all baseline methods, as shown in our numerical comparisons (Table 1).


                                                        8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Table 1: Quantitative comparison. Our method achieves superior numerical results than all the
baselines in both self-driven and cross-driven reenactments.
                       Self-Reenactment                        Cross-Reenactment
  Method
                   L1↓     SSIM↑ LPIPS↓ ID-SIM↑ AED/APD↓ EMO-SIM↑ FVD ↓
  PD-FGC          0.085 0.728         0.291       0.604      0.045/3.95      0.49  441.8
  LivePortrait 0.074 0.770            0.236       0.702      0.055/6.61      0.48  279.2
  X-Portrait      0.063 0.793         0.209       0.695      0.041/4.07      0.52  237.3
  FYE             0.075 0.741         0.249       0.725      0.062/4.49      0.41  360.9
  AniPortrait 0.057 0.812             0.198       0.713      0.043/4.14      0.46  290.5
  Ours            0.055 0.826         0.168       0.787      0.039/3.42      0.65  152.8

Cross Reenactment. Our method empowers the creation of captivating and expressive anima-
tions across diverse portraits even driven by in-the-wild videos with distinct identity features (Fig-
ure 1, 3, 4, 5). Our qualitative comparisons (Figure 5) demonstrate that X-NeMo surpasses all the
baselines by a significant margin in identity similarity, expression accuracy and perceptual quality.
GAN-based baselines suffer from blurriness and distortions under large head motions and when ap-
plied to out-of-domain portraits. For both exaggerated (e.g., cheek puffing, sticking out the tongue)
and subtle facial expressions (e.g., biting the lip), all other methods struggle to faithfully capture and
transfer these facial motion details. Additionally, our method excels in preserving identity resem-
blance, regardless of the structural difference between the reference and driving faces, while severe
identity drift occurs in other diffusion-based baselines relying on spatially aligned control signals.
For quantitative assessment, video-level evaluation uses FVD Unterthiner et al. (2018) metrics. To
evaluate the image-level quality, we employ three metrics to evaluate identity similarity, expres-
sion/head pose accuracy, and emotion consistency respectively. Specifically, we utilize the ArcFace
score Deng et al. (2019) to measure the cosine similarity of identity features (ID-SIM). Motion
accuracy is calculated as the average L1 difference between extracted facial blendshapes (AED)
and head poses (APD) of the driving and generated images using MediaPipe Lugaresi et al. (2019).
However, since blendshapes provide only a coarse motion estimation, we further employ a pretrained
emotion encoder, EmoNet Toisoul et al. (2021), to assess emotion accuracy. Specifically, we calcu-
late the mean value of concordance correlation coefficients and Pearson correlation coefficients for
both valence and arousal to measure the emotion similarity (EMO-SIM). The emotion score reflect
model’s performance in fine-grained expression control, as emotion recognition is highly sensitive to
micro-expressions. Our method numerically surpasses all competitors, demonstrating the superior
capabilities afforded by our novel motion control design (Table 1).
Applications. Our latent motion descriptor acts as a unified representation for both motion
comprehension and generation, supporting tasks beyond portrait animation, including (emotion-
conditioned) portrait video outpainting and latent motion interpolation. With our expressive,
identity-agnostic motion embedding, we are able to generate long-range expressive videos while
consistently preserving the identity across diverse portraits. For more details and visual results,
please refer to our supplemental paper (Section. E) and accompanying video.

4.3   A BLATION S TUDIES

We ablate individual design
                                                       Table 2: Quantitative ablation.
choices by removing them
                                       Method               ID-SIM↑ AED/APD↓ EMO-SIM↑
from our full training pipeline.
                                       w/o GAN head           0.789       0.045/4.64        0.43
We validate the function of
                                       w/o joint training     0.782       0.040/3.49        0.52
dual-head supervision in motion
                                       w/o RFM                0.791       0.039/3.41        0.62
expressiveness by removing the
                                       w/o augmentation       0.724       0.042/3.63        0.50
GAN decoder from co-training
                                       w/o cross-attn         0.697       0.040/3.55        0.48
(“w/o GAN head”). Even with
extended training, the motion          Ours                   0.787       0.039/3.42        0.65
encoder Emot struggles with detailed motions in the absence of image-level loss guidance ( Fig-
ure 4(a)), as reflected by a substantial reduction in both expression and emotion metrics (Table 2).
We further validate the importance of joint training by pretraining Emot with GAN losses and then
freezing it while training the rest of the model sorely with the diffusion loss (“w/o joint training”).
Both Table 2 and the supplemental video demonstrate that joint training elicits stronger motion


                                                    9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


representation from the encoder, leveraging the diffusion model’s superior generative capacity over
the standalone GAN decoder. Additionally, we assess the role of reference feature masking (“w/o
RFM”) in enhancing motion accuracy. Without it, the network shows a stronger bias to the reference
expressions at certain local regions(Figure 4(b)), yielding a lower emotion score (Table 2).
We assess the efficacy of augmentation and cross-attention control in motion-identity disentangle-
ment. When training without augmentations (“w/o augmentation”), the generations often exhibit
noticeable identity leakage from the driving subject in both appearance and face structure (Fig-
ure 3(b)), as confirmed by the drop in identity similarity score (Table 2). We also compare our
method to a baseline where the motion latent is transformed into a 2D control map via an upsam-
pling decoder and applied to the UNet using a ControlNet (“w/o cross-attn”). While effective for
coarse motion control, its reliance on spatially-aligned additive controls lead to reduced identity re-
semblance (Figure 4(a)), underscoring the necessity of our structure-agnostic motion control design.
We leverage classifier-free guidance               Reference    Driving    Original CFG  Ours

(CFG) Ho & Salimans (2022) to steer
the inference towards more expressive
motion transfer. While straightforward
for the conditional generation, we find the
optimal practice by using fully masked
appearance features and the motion latent
fref mot extracted from reference image
IR as the negative prompts. As illustrated
in Figure 6, this CFG configuration
enables the network to better distinguish      Figure 6: Ablation on different CFG configurations.
between conditional appearance and
motion features, facilitating more accurate and semantic motion transfer. Our CFG is formulated as
              ϵ̃θ (zt , cref , fmot ) = (1 + w)ϵθ (zt , cref , fmot ) − wϵθ (zt , ∅, fref mot ),   (2)
where w = 3.5 is the CFG scale and ϵ̃θ is the final composed noise estimate.


5   D ISCUSSION AND C ONCLUSION
We present X-NeMo, a novel diffusion-based portrait animation framework that effectively disen-
tangles motion and identity, achieving substantial improvements in generating expressive, identity-
preserved animations from diverse portraits. At its core, we introduce self-supervised learning
framework that integrates latent motion representations with structure-agnostic motion control
through cross-attentions, enhanced by carefully-designed training and inference strategies. We
demonstrate high-quality animation results on a wide range of portraits and expressive driving
videos, validating the efficacy of our approach. We believe our method offers valuable insights
into the field and opens avenues for numerous downstream tasks.
Limitations and Future Work. Our                   Driving     X-NeMo         Driving   X-NeMo

method is trained solely on real human
talking and expression videos.        Con-
sequently, out-of-domain portraits with
non-human appearances, such as 3D car-
toon characters, may exhibit artifacts like
                                                             Figure 7: Failure cases.
blurred eyes. Additionally, it might strug-
gle with exaggerated expressions absent from the training data (see Figure 7). However, our scalable
framework, free from reliance on pre-trained motion detectors, enables generalization to various
styles and motions with more training data. Our motion control represents a general scheme, with
which we aim to integrate into video diffusion backbones Yang et al. (2024b); Zheng et al. (2024)
in the future, for smoother and more dynamic results.
Ethics Statement. Our work aims to improve portrait animation from a technical perspective and
is not intended for malicious use. However, we recognize the potential for misuse like generating
fake videos. Therefore, synthesized images and videos should clearly indicate their artificial nature.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS                 This paper is supported by the NSFC project No.62125107.


                                                     10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


R EFERENCES
Stability AI. Stable diffusion v1.5 model card. https://huggingface.co/runwayml/stable-diffusion-
  v1-5, 2022.
Andreas Blattmann, Tim Dockhorn, Sumith Kulal, Daniel Mendelevitch, Maciej Kilian, Dominik
  Lorenz, Yam Levi, Zion English, Vikram Voleti, Adam Letts, et al. Stable video diffusion: Scaling
  latent video diffusion models to large datasets. arXiv preprint arXiv:2311.15127, 2023.
Adrian Bulat and Georgios Tzimiropoulos. How far are we from solving the 2d & 3d face alignment
  problem?(and a dataset of 230,000 3d facial landmarks). In Proceedings of the IEEE international
  conference on computer vision, pp. 1021–1030, 2017.
Egor Burkov, Igor Pasechnik, Artur Grigorev, and Victor Lempitsky. Neural head reenactment with
  latent pose descriptors. In CVPR, 2020.
Mingdeng Cao, Xintao Wang, Zhongang Qi, Ying Shan, Xiaohu Qie, and Yinqiang Zheng. Mas-
 actrl: Tuning-free mutual self-attention control for consistent image synthesis and editing. arXiv
 preprint arXiv:2304.08465, 2023.
Qiong Cao, Li Shen, Weidi Xie, Omkar M. Parkhi, and Andrew Zisserman. VGGFace2: A dataset
  for recognising faces across pose and age. In International Conference on Automatic Face and
  Gesture Recognition, 2018.
Di Chang, Yichun Shi, Quankai Gao, Hongyi Xu, Jessica Fu, Guoxian Song, Qing Yan, Yizhe Zhu,
  Xiao Yang, and Mohammad Soleymani. Magicpose: Realistic human poses and facial expressions
  retargeting with identity-aware diffusion. In ICML, 2024.
Ken Chen, Sachith Seneviratne, Wei Wang, Dongting Hu, Sanjay Saha, Md Tarek Hasan, Sanka
  Rasnayaka, Tamasha Malepathirana, Mingming Gong, and Saman Halgamuge. Anifacediff:
  High-fidelity face reenactment via facial parametric conditioned diffusion models. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2406.13272, 2024a.
Zhiyuan Chen, Jiajiong Cao, Zhiquan Chen, Yuming Li, and Chenguang Ma. Echomimic: Life-
  like audio-driven portrait animations through editable landmark conditions. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2407.08136, 2024b.
Jiankang Deng, Jia Guo, Niannan Xue, and Stefanos Zafeiriou. Arcface: Additive angular margin
   loss for deep face recognition. In CVPR, pp. 4690–4699, 2019.
DeviantArt. deviantart. https://www.deviantart.com, 2024.
Michail Christos Doukas, Stefanos Zafeiriou, and Viktoriia Sharmanska. Headgan: One-shot neural
 head synthesis and editing. In ICCV, 2021.
Nikita Drobyshev, Jenya Chelishev, Taras Khakhulin, Aleksei Ivakhnenko, Victor Lempitsky, and
  Egor Zakharov. Megaportraits: One-shot megapixel neural head avatars. In ACM MM, 2022.
Nikita Drobyshev, Antoni Bigata Casademunt, Konstantinos Vougioukas, Zoe Landgraf, Stavros
  Petridis, and Maja Pantic. Emoportraits: Emotion-enhanced multimodal one-shot head avatars.
  In CVPR, 2024.
Patrick Esser, Robin Rombach, and Bjorn Ommer. Taming transformers for high-resolution image
  synthesis. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recogni-
  tion, pp. 12873–12883, 2021.
Yue Gao, Yuan Zhou, Jinglu Wang, Xiao Li, Xiang Ming, and Yan Lu. High-fidelity and freely
  controllable talking head video generation. In CVPR, 2023.
Ian Goodfellow, Jean Pouget-Abadie, Mehdi Mirza, Bing Xu, David Warde-Farley, Sherjil Ozair,
  Aaron Courville, and Yoshua Bengio. Generative adversarial nets. In NeurIPS, 2014.
Jianzhu Guo, Dingyun Zhang, Xiaoqiang Liu, Zhizhou Zhong, Yuan Zhang, Pengfei Wan, and
   Di Zhang. Liveportrait: Efficient portrait animation with stitching and retargeting control. arXiv
   preprint arXiv:2407.03168, 2024a.


                                                 11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Yuwei Guo, Ceyuan Yang, Anyi Rao, Yaohui Wang, Yu Qiao, Dahua Lin, and Bo Dai. Animatediff:
  Animate your personalized text-to-image diffusion models without specific tuning. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2307.04725, 2023.
Yuwei Guo, Ceyuan Yang, Anyi Rao, Zhengyang Liang, Yaohui Wang, Yu Qiao, Maneesh
  Agrawala, Dahua Lin, and Bo Dai. Animatediff: Animate your personalized text-to-image diffu-
  sion models without specific tuning. In ICLR, 2024b.
Yue Han, Jiangning Zhang, Junwei Zhu, Xiangtai Li, Yanhao Ge, Wei Li, Chengjie Wang, Yong
  Liu, Xiaoming Liu, and Ying Tai. A generalist facex via learning unified facial representation.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2401.00551, 2023.
Kaiming He, Xinlei Chen, Saining Xie, Yanghao Li, Piotr Dollár, and Ross Girshick. Masked
  autoencoders are scalable vision learners. In CVPR, pp. 16000–16009, 2022.
Jonathan Ho and Tim Salimans.             Classifier-free diffusion guidance.      arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2207.12598, 2022.
Jonathan Ho, Ajay Jain, and Pieter Abbeel. Denoising diffusion probabilistic models. NeurIPS, 33:
  6840–6851, 2020.
Li Hu, Xin Gao, Peng Zhang, Ke Sun, Bang Zhang, and Liefeng Bo. Animate anyone:
  Consistent and controllable image-to-video synthesis for character animation. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2311.17117, 2023.
Xingxun Jiang, Yuan Zong, Wenming Zheng, Chuangao Tang, Wanchuang Xia, Cheng Lu, and
  Jiateng Liu. Dfew: A large-scale database for recognizing dynamic facial expressions in the wild.
  In Proceedings of the 28th ACM international conference on multimedia, pp. 2881–2889, 2020.
Tero Karras, Samuli Laine, and Timo Aila. A style-based generator architecture for generative
  adversarial networks. In CVPR, 2019.
Tero Karras, Samuli Laine, Miika Aittala, Janne Hellsten, Jaakko Lehtinen, and Timo Aila. Analyz-
  ing and improving the image quality of StyleGAN. In CVPR, 2020.
Apoorv Khandelwal, Luca Weihs, Roozbeh Mottaghi, and Aniruddha Kembhavi. Simple but effec-
  tive: Clip embeddings for embodied ai. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer
  Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 14829–14838, 2022.
Tobias Kirschstein, Shenhan Qian, Simon Giebenhain, Tim Walter, and Matthias Nießner. Nersem-
  ble: Multi-view radiance field reconstruction of human heads. ACM Transactions on Graphics,
  2023.
Borong Liang, Yan Pan, Zhizhi Guo, Hang Zhou, Zhibin Hong, Xiaoguang Han, Junyu Han, Jingtuo
  Liu, Errui Ding, and Jingdong Wang. Expressive talking head generation with granular audio-
  visual control. In CVPR, 2022.
Renshuai Liu, Bowen Ma, Wei Zhang, Zhipeng Hu, Changjie Fan, Tangjie Lv, Yu Ding, and Xuan
  Cheng. Towards a simultaneous and granular identity-expression control in personalized face
  generation. In CVPR, 2024.
Camillo Lugaresi, Jiuqiang Tang, Hadon Nash, Chris McClanahan, Esha Uboweja, Michael Hays,
  Fan Zhang, Chuo-Ling Chang, Ming Guang Yong, Juhyun Lee, et al. Mediapipe: A framework
  for building perception pipelines. arXiv preprint arXiv:1906.08172, 2019.
Yue Ma, Hongyu Liu, Hongfa Wang, Heng Pan, Yingqing He, Junkun Yuan, Ailing Zeng, Chengfei
  Cai, Heung-Yeung Shum, Wei Liu, et al. Follow-your-emoji: Fine-controllable and expressive
  freestyle portrait animation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.01900, 2024.
Arun Mallya, Ting-Chun Wang, and Ming-Yu Liu. Implicit warping for animation with image sets.
  NeurIPS, 2022.
Midjourney. midjourney. https://www.midjourney.com, 2024.


                                                12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Youxin Pang, Yong Zhang, Weize Quan, Yanbo Fan, Xiaodong Cun, Ying Shan, and Dong-ming
  Yan. Dpe: Disentanglement of pose and expression for general video portrait editing. In CVPR,
  2023.
Reni Paskaleva, Mykyta Holubakha, Andela Ilic, Saman Motamed, Luc Van Gool, and Danda
  Paudel. A unified and interpretable emotion representation and expression generation. In CVPR,
  2024.
Pexels. pexels. https://www.pexels.com/, 2024.
Yurui Ren, Ge Li, Yuanqi Chen, Thomas H Li, and Shan Liu. Pirenderer: Controllable portrait
  image generation via semantic neural rendering. In ICCV, 2021.
Robin Rombach, Andreas Blattmann, Dominik Lorenz, Patrick Esser, and Björn Ommer. High-
  resolution image synthesis with latent diffusion models. In CVPR, pp. 10684–10695, 2022.
Nataniel Ruiz, Yuanzhen Li, Varun Jampani, Yael Pritch, Michael Rubinstein, and Kfir Aberman.
  Dreambooth: Fine tuning text-to-image diffusion models for subject-driven generation. In Pro-
  ceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, pp. 22500–
  22510, 2023.
Chitwan Saharia, William Chan, Saurabh Saxena, Lala Li, Jay Whang, Emily L Denton, Kamyar
  Ghasemipour, Raphael Gontijo Lopes, Burcu Karagol Ayan, Tim Salimans, et al. Photorealistic
  text-to-image diffusion models with deep language understanding. NeurIPS, 35:36479–36494,
  2022.
Aliaksandr Siarohin, Stéphane Lathuilière, Sergey Tulyakov, Elisa Ricci, and Nicu Sebe. Animating
  arbitrary objects via deep motion transfer. In CVPR, 2019a.
Aliaksandr Siarohin, Stéphane Lathuilière, Sergey Tulyakov, Elisa Ricci, and Nicu Sebe. First order
  motion model for image animation. NeurIPS, 2019b.
Karen Simonyan and Andrew Zisserman. Very deep convolutional networks for large-scale image
  recognition. arXiv preprint arXiv:1409.1556, 2014.
Jiaming Song, Chenlin Meng, and Stefano Ermon. Denoising diffusion implicit models. arXiv
   preprint arXiv:2010.02502, 2020a.
Yang Song, Jascha Sohl-Dickstein, Diederik P Kingma, Abhishek Kumar, Stefano Ermon, and Ben
  Poole. Score-based generative modeling through stochastic differential equations. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2011.13456, 2020b.
Linrui Tian, Qi Wang, Bang Zhang, and Liefeng Bo. Emo: Emote portrait alive-generating expres-
  sive portrait videos with audio2video diffusion model under weak conditions. In ECCV, 2024.
Naftali Tishby, Fernando C Pereira, and William Bialek. The information bottleneck method. arXiv
  preprint physics/0004057, 2000.
Antoine Toisoul, Jean Kossaifi, Adrian Bulat, Georgios Tzimiropoulos, and Maja Pantic. Es-
  timation of continuous valence and arousal levels from faces in naturalistic conditions.
  Nature Machine Intelligence, 2021.     URL https://www.nature.com/articles/
  s42256-020-00280-0.
Jonathan Tseng, Rodrigo Castellon, and C. Karen Liu. Edge: Editable dance generation from music,
  2022.
Thomas Unterthiner, Sjoerd Van Steenkiste, Karol Kurach, Raphael Marinier, Marcin Michalski,
  and Sylvain Gelly. Towards accurate generative models of video: A new metric & challenges.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:1812.01717, 2018.
Tuomas Varanka, Huai-Qian Khor, Yante Li, Mengting Wei, Hanwei Kung, Nicu Sebe, and Guoying
  Zhao. Towards localized fine-grained control for facial expression generation. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2407.20175, 2024.


                                                 13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Cong Wang, Kuan Tian, Jun Zhang, Yonghang Guan, Feng Luo, Fei Shen, Zhiwei Jiang, Qing Gu,
  Xiao Han, and Wei Yang. V-express: Conditional dropout for progressive training of portrait
  video generation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.02511, 2024.
Duomin Wang, Yu Deng, Zixin Yin, Heung-Yeung Shum, and Baoyuan Wang. Progressive dis-
  entangled representation learning for fine-grained controllable talking head synthesis. In CVPR,
  2023.
Kaisiyuan Wang, Qianyi Wu, Linsen Song, Zhuoqian Yang, Wayne Wu, Chen Qian, Ran He,
  Yu Qiao, and Chen Change Loy. Mead: A large-scale audio-visual dataset for emotional talking-
  face generation. In European Conference on Computer Vision, pp. 700–717. Springer, 2020.
Ting-Chun Wang, Arun Mallya, and Ming-Yu Liu. One-shot free-view neural talking-head synthesis
  for video conferencing. In CVPR, 2021.
Yaohui Wang, Di Yang, Francois Bremond, and Antitza Dantcheva. Latent image animator: Learn-
  ing to animate images via latent space navigation. ICLR, 2022.
Huawei Wei, Zejun Yang, and Zhisheng Wang. Aniportrait: Audio-driven synthesis of photorealistic
  portrait animation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.17694, 2024.
Liangbin Xie, Xintao Wang, Honglun Zhang, Chao Dong, and Ying Shan. Vfhq: A high-quality
  dataset and benchmark for video face super-resolution. In The IEEE Conference on Computer
  Vision and Pattern Recognition Workshops (CVPRW), 2022.
You Xie, Hongyi Xu, Guoxian Song, Chao Wang, Yichun Shi, and Linjie Luo. X-portrait: Expres-
  sive portrait animation with hierarchical motion attention. In SIGGRAPH, 2024.
Chao Xu, Yang Liu, Jiazheng Xing, Weida Wang, Mingze Sun, Jun Dan, Tianxin Huang, Siyuan Li,
  Zhi-Qi Cheng, Ying Tai, et al. Facechain-imagineid: Freely crafting high-fidelity diverse talking
  faces from disentangled audio. In CVPR, 2024a.
Mingwang Xu, Hui Li, Qingkun Su, Hanlin Shang, Liwei Zhang, Ce Liu, Jingdong Wang, Luc
 Van Gool, Yao Yao, and Siyu Zhu. Hallo: Hierarchical audio-driven visual synthesis for portrait
 image animation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.08801, 2024b.
Sicheng Xu, Guojun Chen, Yu-Xiao Guo, Jiaolong Yang, Chong Li, Zhenyu Zang, Yizhong Zhang,
  Xin Tong, and Baining Guo. Vasa-1: Lifelike audio-driven talking faces generated in real time.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2404.10667, 2024c.
Zhongcong Xu, Jianfeng Zhang, Jun Hao Liew, Hanshu Yan, Jia-Wei Liu, Chenxu Zhang, Jiashi
  Feng, and Mike Zheng Shou. Magicanimate: Temporally consistent human image animation
  using diffusion model. In CVPR, 2024d.
Shurong Yang, Huadong Li, Juhao Wu, Minhao Jing, Linze Li, Renhe Ji, Jiajun Liang, and Haoqiang
  Fan. Megactor: Harness the power of raw video for vivid portrait animation. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2405.20851, 2024a.
Zhuoyi Yang, Jiayan Teng, Wendi Zheng, Ming Ding, Shiyu Huang, Jiazheng Xu, Yuanming Yang,
  Wenyi Hong, Xiaohan Zhang, Guanyu Feng, et al. Cogvideox: Text-to-video diffusion models
  with an expert transformer. arXiv preprint arXiv:2408.06072, 2024b.
Zhewei Yao, Amir Gholami, Sheng Shen, Mustafa Mustafa, Kurt Keutzer, and Michael Mahoney.
  Adahessian: An adaptive second order optimizer for machine learning. In proceedings of the
  AAAI conference on artificial intelligence, volume 35, pp. 10665–10673, 2021.
Fei Yin, Yong Zhang, Xiaodong Cun, Mingdeng Cao, Yanbo Fan, Xuan Wang, Qingyan Bai,
  Baoyuan Wu, Jue Wang, and Yujiu Yang. Styleheat: One-shot high-resolution editable talking
  face generation via pre-trained stylegan. In ECCV, 2022.
Jianrong Zhang, Yangsong Zhang, Xiaodong Cun, Shaoli Huang, Yong Zhang, Hongwei Zhao,
   Hongtao Lu, and Xi Shen. T2m-gpt: Generating human motion from textual descriptions with
   discrete representations. In CVPR, 2023a.


                                                14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Lvmin Zhang, Anyi Rao, and Maneesh Agrawala. Adding conditional control to text-to-image
  diffusion models. In ICCV, pp. 3836–3847, 2023b.

Zhimeng Zhang, Lincheng Li, Yu Ding, and Changjie Fan. Flow-guided one-shot talking face
  generation with a high-resolution audio-visual dataset. In CVPR, pp. 3661–3670, 2021.

Jian Zhao and Hui Zhang. Thin-plate spline motion model for image animation. In CVPR, 2022.

Zangwei Zheng, Xiangyu Peng, Tianji Yang, Chenhui Shen, Shenggui Li, Hongxin Liu, Yukun
  Zhou, Tianyi Li, and Yang You. Open-sora: Democratizing efficient video production for all,
  March 2024. URL https://github.com/hpcaitech/Open-Sora.

Hang Zhou, Yasheng Sun, Wayne Wu, Chen Change Loy, Xiaogang Wang, and Ziwei Liu. Pose-
  controllable talking face generation by implicitly modularized audio-visual representation. In
  CVPR, 2021.


A    T RAINING AND I NFERENCE D ETAILS
GAN Head Training Losses. Following Burkov et al. (2020), we train our dual GAN decoder
in a self-supervised manner to reconstruct ID using a combination of losses. Specifically, a L1
reconstruction loss is employed to minimize pixel-wise L1 distance:

                                      Lrecon = ∥ID − IR→D ∥1                                      (3)

Additionally, two perceptual losses, LV GG and LV GGF ace , are applied based on L1 matching of
ConvNet activations from a VGG-19 model Simonyan & Zisserman (2014) pretrained for ImageNet
classification and a VGGFace model Cao et al. (2018) trained for face recognition:
                                    N
                                    X
                           Lvgg =         ∥VGGi (ID ) − VGGi (IR→D )∥1 ,                          (4)
                                    i=1
                                N
                                X
                      Lvggf =         ∥VGGface i (ID ) − VGGface i (IR→D )∥1 ,                    (5)
                                I=1

where N denotes the number of feature layers in each respective pre-trained VGG model. An adver-
sarial generative loss Ladv is applied using a co-trained discriminator D, while a feature matching
loss Lf m is calculated as the L1 distance between discriminator feature maps at different layers:
                                          N
                                          X
                               Lf m =           ∥Di (ID ) − Di (IR→D )∥1                          (6)
                                          i=1

The overall learning objective for the GAN head is then formulated as:

                 Lgan = Ladv + λr Lrecon + λvgg Lvgg + λvggf Lvggf + λf m Lf m                    (7)

where λr =1.0, λvgg =3e-2, λvggf =6e-3 and λf m =10.0.

Inference Performance. During inference, we use 25 DDIM steps Song et al. (2020a) with a
classifier-free guidance (CFG) scale of 3.5. For generating a 1-second video at 25 frames per second,
the process takes approximately 20 seconds and requires 24 GB of memory.

Encoder Architecture. Emot takes the classical feature alignment network Bulat & Tzimiropou-
los (2017) as the backbone, with an additional attention layer added at both its input and output to
enhance feature extraction capabilities. Finally, it outputs a 1D vector through two MLP layers. The
appearance encoder for extracting fapp is implemented as a ResNet50.


                                                     15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


B    V IDEO -L EVEL P ERFORMANCE A NALYSIS

As demonstrated in our comprehensive quantitative (Table 1) and qualitative evaluations(Figure 5
and video demos), X-NeMo consistently outperforms all baseline methods in motion expressive-
ness and temporal coherence. This strong video-level performance stems primarily from our robust
single-frame reenactment capability. Specifically, our motion encoder captures fine-scale facial mo-
tion within individual frames, while the temporal motion module focuses on cross-frame consis-
tency, supported by the SVD-VAE decoder Blattmann et al. (2023) and prompt traveling Cao et al.
(2023) during inference.
Unlike prior methods, which rely on pre-trained motion control signals such as explicit landmarks
(AniPortrait Wei et al. (2024)) or implicit landmarks (X-Portrait Xie et al. (2024)), our approach
utilizes a learnable motion representation that is optimized jointly with the diffusion generator. Pre-
trained motion signals are often unstable and prone to jitter across frames, and they fail to fully
capture the complex facial expressions present in diverse datasets. By jointly optimizing motion
representation with the generator, X-NeMo inherently achieves better expressiveness and more ef-
fective disentanglement of motion and identity.
However, straightforward self-supervised training does not naturally disentangle identity from facial
motion. As shown in Table 2, critical components like Dual Head Supervision, Cross-Attention, and
Augmentations are essential for achieving effective disentanglement. Furthermore, Joint Training
and RFM enhance motion extraction, capturing subtle micro-expressions (not captured by AKD but
reflected in the EMO-SIM metric) and enabling vivid and expressive reeactment results.

C    M ORE A BLATIONS

We provide additional visual ablations on some network and training hyperparameters.

          Reference          Driving       latent size = 128   latent size = 512   latent size = 1024


Figure 8: We ablate the effect of different sizes of latent motion embedding in capturing fine-grained
intricate expressions.


Motion Latent Embedding Size. We evaluate the dimensionality of our motion latent embedding
by comparing 128, 512, and 1024-dimensional latent codes for fmot . In typical driving scenarios,
all three configurations perform similarly in replicating facial expressions with minimal differences.
However, as shown in Figure 8, reducing the embedding size to 128 diminishes the ability to capture
subtle, intricate expressions, while increasing it to 1024 provides negligible improvements. Thus,
we select the 512-dimensional embedding as it balances compactness with motion expressiveness.

Reference Feature Masking Ratio. We assess the effectiveness of our reference feature masking
strategy across different masking ratios, ranging from 0%, 30%, 75%, to 95%. As shown in Figure 9,
this strategy enhances the transfer of detailed facial expressions; however, excessively high masking
ratios impede the model’s ability to capture fine motion details and maintain identity consistency.


                                                  16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


        Reference       Driving        w/o RFM         30% RFM        75% RFM         95% RFM


Figure 9: Qualitative comparison of different ratios of reference feature masking indicates that 30%
achieves the most accurate capture of driving facial motions.


                               Table 3: More quantitative ablations.
           Method                      ID-SIM↑ AED/APD↓ EMO-SIM↑                    FVD↓
           Ours                          0.787     0.039/3.42        0.6531         152.8
           Temporal motion encoder       0.786     0.039/3.42        0.6526         151.5
           Simultaneous training         0.774     0.039/3.45        0.6398         155.2


This is likely because when the reference image’s appearance is too heavily obscured during training,
the motion encoder compensates by encoding appearance information, reducing the capacity of the
motion embedding for expressing dynamic movements. In practice, we found that masking ratios
between 20% and 50% achieve optimal results, with 30% used in our implementation.


Single-Frame Motion Extraction We conducted an experiment where latent motion sequences
were extracted using multiple driving frames instead of a single image. Specifically, we imple-
mented a pipeline with a temporal motion encoder trained end-to-end using 16-frame video clips.
As shown in Tab. 3, the differences across all metrics are minimal. However, training with video
clips significantly reduces training efficiency, as the batch size for multi-frame training is reduced
by a factor of 16 compared to single-frame training. Consequently, we opted for the more efficient
single-frame pipeline.
Regarding why temporal encoding yields negligible gains for portrait animation, we believe this is
due to the structured nature of facial video data and the capability of our motion encoder, which
learns directly and implicitly from smooth RGB image signals. Facial videos exhibit strong struc-
tural consistency and clear motion patterns, enabling fine-grained motion extraction on a frame-by-
frame basis. This ensures temporal continuity without requiring multi-frame inputs. Additionally,
in our self-driven training setup, the diffusion generation network accurately reconstructs the target
image using a single driving frame, often disregarding motion cues from neighboring frames.


Simultaneous Training As mentioned in Sec. 3.3, before the end-to-end fine-tuning, our method
conducts a three-stage training process. To ablate this, we implemented a baseline that directly trains
the whole network simultaneously. As shown in Tab. 3, the differences across all metrics are not
remarkable. Nonetheless, due to the high GPU cost of simultaneous training and small batch size,
it’s much slower for this baseline to converge. Hence in practice, we adopt the stepwise training
strategy for training efficiency.


D    M ORE R ESULTS

Please refer to our supplemental video for more expressive demo cases.


                                                  17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


E    A PPLICATIONS
Our latent motion embedding, trained jointly with the diffusion backbone, offers a compact, identity-
agnostic, yet expressive representation for a diverse range of facial motions. Beyond the primary
portrait animation task, we showcase its broader applications as a unified motion representation,
enabling seamless motion interpolation, video outpainting and conditioned generation.

                                   Latent Motion                     Latent Motion
             Driving
                                   Interpolation                     Interpolation


     Reference


Figure 10: Latent motion interpolation. We derive latent motion codes from a few driving keyframes
(top) and apply onto diverse portraits with linearly interpolated motion embeddings (bottom).


Latent Motion Interpolation. Owing to our smooth and identity-agnostic latent motion space, we
are able to extract keyframe expressions from different videos, linearly interpolate the latent embed-
dings and apply them across diverse portraits, as showcased in Figure. 10. This interpolation yields
smooth and natural expression transitions, maintaining motion coherence across different portraits
and appearance consistency with the reference images. These results underscore the robustness and
identity disentanglement of our motion latent embedding.

Portrait Video Outpainting and Generation. By leveraging our motion latent embedding as a
unified representation for motion comprehension and generation, we showcase its application in
video outpainting. Specifically, we adopt the approach from T2M-GPT Zhang et al. (2023a) to to-
kenize temporal latent motions by training a Vector-Quantized VAE model Esser et al. (2021) with
a learnable codebook (4096 entries of 8-dimension code) that downsamples the temporal dimen-
sion by a factor of 4. This allows us to represent T frames of motion with T /4 discrete motion
tokens, where T is the training sequence length (we use T = 128), facilitating the use of GPT-like
frameworks for long-sequence motion generation. In Figure. 12, we train a GPT2-small network
that extends preceding motions derived from a driving video with extrapolated motions. The results
show natural and expressive generated sequences, thanks to the strong representation power of our
latent motion embedding. Moreover, as more facial video datasets containing multimodal annota-
tions (e.g., text and audio) become available, our method can seamlessly extend to multimodal facial
video generation within a unified framework. As an example, we illustrate emotion-conditioned por-
trait video generation in Figure 11, trained with MEAD dataset Wang et al. (2020).


                                                   18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                           28th frame 42th frame 91th frame


      Reference              Emotion Condition: “Angry”                             Emotion Condition: “Happy”


                                              …                  …                                    …          …


                                              …                  …                                    …          …


                                  Figure 11: Emotion-conditioned portrait video generation.
                   Driving


                                                                               Motion Outpainting
       Reference
                   Driving


                                                                               Motion Outpainting
       Reference


Figure 12: Portrait video outpainting. Starting from a sequence of driving motion, our model is
capable of extrapolating into a long video sequence with consistent identity attributes.


                                                                          19
