Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


C ORRELATED P ROXIES : A N EW D EFINITION AND
I MPROVED M ITIGATION FOR R EWARD H ACKING
 Cassidy Laidlaw∗ Shivam Singhal∗ Anca Dragan
 Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science
 University of California, Berkeley
 Berkeley, CA 94709, USA
 {cassidy_laidlaw,shivamsinghal,anca}@berkeley.edu



                                                 A BSTRACT

             Because it is difficult to precisely specify complex objectives, reinforcement learn-
             ing policies are often optimized using proxy reward functions that only approximate
             the true goal. However, optimizing proxy rewards frequently leads to reward hack-
             ing: the optimized reward function ceases to be a good proxy and the resulting
             policy performs poorly with respect to the unspecified true reward. Principled
             solutions to reward hacking have been impeded by the lack of a good definition for
             the problem. To address this gap, we introduce a definition of reward hacking based
             on the correlation between proxy and true rewards for states and actions seen by a
             “reference policy” that breaks down under optimization. We show that this defini-
             tion captures reward hacking behavior across several realistic settings, including in
             reinforcement learning from human feedback (RLHF). Using our formulation, we
             show theoretically that regularization to the reference policy can effectively prevent
             reward hacking. While the current practice in RLHF applies a KL penalty between
             action distributions for this purpose, our theory suggests regularizing the χ2 diver-
             gence between the policies’ occupancy measures can be more effective. We intu-
             itively show the benefits of this type of regularization and demonstrate that it better
             mitigates reward hacking in practice across four realistic settings, including RLHF.
             Our code is available at https://github.com/cassidylaidlaw/orpo.


1       I NTRODUCTION
A major challenge for the designers of goal-oriented AI systems is specifying a reward function that
robustly captures their goals and values. Manually designing reward functions is difficult due to the
ambiguities and complexity underlying real-world scenarios (Ibarz et al., 2018). An alternative is to
learn reward functions from human data (Sadigh et al., 2017; Jeon et al., 2020), but these often fail to
generalize outside the distribution of behavior seen during training (McKinney et al., 2023; Tien et al.,
2023). Thus, a learned or hand-specified reward function is often just a proxy for the true reward
underlying the system designer’s intent. Misalignment between the two objectives can lead to reward
hacking: a learned policy performs well according to the proxy reward function but not according
to the true reward function (Russell et al., 2010; Amodei et al., 2016; Pan et al., 2022; Skalse et al.,
2022). A reward hacking policy’s behavior is often undesirable and can be especially catastrophic
when deployed in safety-critical scenarios, such as autonomous driving (Krakovna et al., 2019; Turner
et al., 2019; Knox et al., 2022). Unfortunately, reward hacking is a common phenomenon (Krakovna,
2018) and has harmful effects in the real world (Lum & Isaac, 2016; Corbett-Davies et al., 2017;
Obermeyer et al., 2019; Milli et al., 2021; Franchi et al., 2023; Kleinberg et al., 2023).
The ideal solution to prevent reward hacking would be to perfectly align the specified proxy and
unknown true reward; however, in many domains, this is impossible to achieve. For example, imagine
trying to design a reward function for a self-driving car. It would need to capture multiple factors: the
arrival time, passenger comfort, compliance with traffic laws, and various other considerations—many
of which are difficult to robustly measure and would need to be carefully weighted against each other
(Knox et al., 2022). In practice, reward hacking can occur even with significant reward engineering
    ∗
        Equal contribution.


                                                       1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 1: We present a new characterization of
reward hacking and a method for preventing it.
                                                                               (s, a) sampled


                                                     True reward R(s, a)
We define a proxy reward function as one that cor-                                                      (s, a) from optimizing
                                                                               from πref
relates with an unknown true reward function for                                                        R̃ with regularization
state-action pairs sampled from some reference                                                          to πref
policy. However, optimizing the proxy alone can
lead to a breakdown in the correlation and worse
true reward than the reference policy. We show                                                             (s, a) from
theoretically and empirically that optimizing the                                                          optimizing R̃
proxy with χ2 occupancy measure regularization                                                             alone
to the reference policy can allow outperforming
the reference policy under the unknown true re-                                 Proxy reward R̃(s, a)
ward.


efforts. This is evident in the case of recommender systems, where hand-designed reward functions
have led to adverse outcomes in terms of user experience (Stray et al., 2022).
Since proxy reward functions for complex tasks are nearly always misspecified in practice, what
can be done to avoid reward hacking? There is a lack of principled solutions for preventing reward
hacking, stemming from a more fundamental problem: defining reward hacking in a formal sense that
captures realistic cases. In particular, it is difficult to characterize what makes a proxy reward function
“good”. We argue that proxies are chosen because they seem to capture the true objective under some
reference distribution of behavior. To formalize this, we define a proxy reward as one that correlates
with the true reward function under the distribution of states and actions visited by a reference policy.
Then, we define reward hacking in this setting as when optimizing a correlated proxy reward leads
to a policy obtaining lower true reward than the reference policy (Figure 1). This captures several
intuitive cases of reward hacking across realistic environments: traffic control, pandemic mitigation,
blood glucose regulation, and reinforcement learning from human feedback (RLHF) (Figure 2).
Furthermore, our definition motivates a method for avoiding reward hacking during policy opti-
mization by regularizing the optimized policy to be similar to the reference policy. Specifically, we
find that optimizing the proxy reward minus a regularization term provides a provable lower bound
on improvement in true reward. The amount of regularization needed increases as the correlation
between the proxy and true rewards becomes weaker. In practice, RLHF already uses this form of
regularization through a KL divergence penalty to the reference policy (Stiennon et al., 2020; Bai
et al., 2022), and Theorem 5.1 provides theoretical justification for why this works. However, our
results suggest an important modification: rather than penalizing the KL divergence between the
policies’ action distributions as currently done in RLHF, we should instead penalize the chi-squared
(χ2 ) divergence between the policies’ occupancy measures. We compare both OM to AD regulariza-
tion and χ2 to KL divergence, presenting intuitive reasons why χ2 OM divergence may be a better
regularization target in Figures 3 and 4.
Based on our theoretical results, we empirically investigate the benefits of using χ2 occupancy
measure regularization to prevent reward hacking. Following previous work (Ho & Ermon, 2016), we
implement OM regularization using a discriminator network that approximates the OM divergence
between policies. We evaluate our approach in multiple reward hacking benchmark environments
(Pan et al., 2022). Our results demonstrate that training with occupancy measure regularization leads
to better performance under the unseen true reward function in all of the environments, validating
our theoretical results. In contrast, we find that it is difficult to tune AD regularization in some
environments to both prevent reward hacking and allow meaningful improvement over the reference
policy. Furthermore, regularization with χ2 divergence tends to be more robust to the choice of
regularization coefficient and often achieves higher true reward than regularizing with KL divergence.
Our main contributions can be summarized as follows:
      1. We provide a new formal definition of reward hacking that captures realistic case studies.
      2. Using our definition, we establish that optimizing a correlated proxy reward with χ2 occu-
         pancy measure (OM) regularization leads to a provable improvement in the unknown true
         reward function.
      3. We show how to practically implement χ2 OM regularization and demonstrate that it
         outperforms the current standard for preventing reward hacking via action distribution (AD)
         regularization.


                                                                           2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


2    R ELATED W ORK

Reward hacking. Some prior works establish theoretical models of reward hacking as a special
case of Goodhart’s Law (Goodhart, 1984; Leike et al., 2018; Manheim & Garrabrant, 2019; Krakovna,
2019; Skalse et al., 2022; Ngo et al., 2023; Fluri et al., 2024; Kwa et al., 2024). Krakovna (2018)
catalog many examples of reward hacking. Pan et al. (2022) categorize different types of reward
misspecification and relate optimization power to reward hacking. See the end of Section 4 for a
comparison of our definition of reward hacking with previous ones.
Safe reinforcement learning. In the context of reward hacking, regularizing policies to be similar
to an offline policy based on their action distribution KL divergence was proposed by Stiennon et al.
(2020) and has since been widely employed in the context of optimizing LLMs using RLHF (Ouyang
et al., 2022; Bai et al., 2022; Glaese et al., 2022). KL regularization for RLHF has been further studied
by Vieillard et al. (2021), Gao et al. (2022), and Korbak et al. (2022). Nika et al. (2024) propose a
type of occupancy measure regularization in RLHF but it is limited to deterministic MDPs, while
we study general stochastic MDPs. Some alternative approaches to avoid reward hacking include
quantilizers (Taylor, 2016), “mild” optimization (Taylor et al., 2020), and impact regularization
(Turner et al., 2020). While constrained RL can prevent the misbehavior of agents that optimize
flawed reward functions (Dalal et al., 2018; Chow et al., 2019; Zhang et al., 2020; Roy et al., 2022),
it simply shifts the difficulty of designing a reward function to specifying a set of constraints and
weights. Robust RL usually considers a misspecified transition model, but some work has explored
misspecified reward functions (Derman et al., 2021; Gadot et al., 2024). Other proposals to address
the reward specification problem attempt to infer the true reward function based on the given proxy
reward function, environment context, and/or feedback from humans (Hadfield-Menell et al., 2017;
Reddy et al., 2020; Lee et al., 2021). Gleave et al. (2021) and Skalse et al. (2024) have previously
studied quantifying the similarity of reward functions.
Other divergences for regularization in RLHF. Some work has explored using divergences other
than KL divergence for regularization in RLHF. Go et al. (2023) investigate using other f -divergences
for aligning language models. Wang et al. (2023a) explore generalizing direct preference optimization
(DPO) (Rafailov et al., 2024), a type of RLHF that leverages offline RL, to other f -divergences.
The most relevant work to ours in this area is Huang et al. (2024), which also proposes using χ2
divergence as a more theoretically grounded alternative to KL divergence for regularization in RLHF.
Our work differs from theirs in several key aspects: we address reward hacking in general rather than
focussing specifically on learning from preference data; we use online RL instead of their DPO-like
algorithm; and, we validate our approach through experiments in realistic environments while their
work is primarily theoretical.
Applications of occupancy measure regularization.            Occupancy measure regularization and
optimization have been used for a variety of purposes, including imitation learning (Ho & Ermon,
2016) and efficient exploration Kang et al. (2018); Hazan et al. (2019); Lee et al. (2020); Nedergaard
& Cook (2023). Various types of distributional regularization are used in model-based RL since
learned models may not generalize out-of-distribution (Yang et al., 2022).
Offline reinforcement learning. Our work bears a superficial resemblance to prior work in offline
RL, where algorithms commonly use occupancy measure or action distribution-based regularization
to constrain the learned policy within the training data distribution (Fujimoto et al., 2019; Lee et al.,
2022; Mandal et al., 2023; He, 2023; Cheng et al., 2022; Rashidinejad et al., 2023; Xie et al., 2023).
However, the settings are fundamentally different: while offline RL is limited by a lack of coverage
in the training data, the difficulty in our setting is that the reward function is misspecified. While it
might be possible to avoid reward hacking by using offline RL algorithms, we leave this to future
work and focus on regularization-based approaches in the online RL setting.

3    P RELIMINARIES

To study reward hacking, we consider the setting of an infinite-horizon Markov decision process
(MDP). An agent takes actions a ∈ A to transition between states s ∈ S over a series of timesteps
t = 0, 1, 2, . . .. We assume that S and A are finite for simplicity, but our results can easily generalize
to infinite state or action spaces. The first state s0 is sampled from an initial distribution µ0 (s), and
when an agent takes action at in st at time t, the next state st+1 is reached at timestep t + 1 with


                                                    3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                                                                                                                           User: What is
                                                                                        Susceptible    Exposed
                                                                                                                                                           the capital of
                                                                                                                                                               France?

                                                                                                                                                       Assistant: The
                                                                                         Recovered    Infectious                                          capital of
                                                                                                                                                       France is Paris.


                                                               Traffic                     Pandemic                           Glucose                            RLHF                         AI safety
                                                              control                      mitigation                        monitoring                                                       gridworld
                                                              (r=0.10)                      (r=0.75)                          (r=0.70)                          (r=0.40)                       (r=0.40)
                                                     0                             0                                   0                              30                            0.1
 Reference


                                                     -5                                                              -50
  policy


                                                                                 -0.1          (-0.06, -0.06)                     (-0.04, -28)        20
                                                    -10                                                             -100                                                           0.05       (0.07, 0.06)
                                                              (4.5, -7.6)         -1                                                                            (-0.0, 16.4)
                                                                                                                                                      10
                                                   -100
                                                                                 -10                               -1000                               0                             0
                             True reward R(s, a)


                                                          0    4    8       12      -0.5         -0.1 -0.05 0            -0.2        -0.1         0        -3        0         3          0      0.2   0.4
            hacking policy


                                                     0                             0                                   0                              30                            0.1
               Reward


                                                     -5                          -0.1                                -50
                                                                                                                                                      20
                                                    -10                                        (-0.01, -0.14)       -100                                         (1.4, 10.0)       0.05
                                                                                  -1                                                                                                           (0.45, 0.02)
                                                              (9.1, -197.2)                                                       (-0.00, -106)       10
                                                   -100
                                                                                 -10                               -1000                               0                             0
                                                          0    4    8       12      -0.5         -0.1 -0.05 0            -0.2   -0.1      0                -3        0         3          0      0.2   0.4
Regularized


                                                     0                             0                                   0                              30                            0.1
                                                     -5                                                              -50      (-0.01, -8)                                                     (0.09, 0.09)
  policy


                                                              (4.9, -4.2)        -0.1          (-0.05, -0.05)                                         20
                                                    -10                                                             -100                                                           0.05
                                                                                  -1                                                                  10        (0.3, 17.0)
                                                   -100
                                                                                 -10                               -1000                               0                             0
                                                          0    4    8       12          -0.5     -0.1 -0.05 0              -0.2      -0.1         0        -3        0         3          0      0.2   0.4
                                                                                                                                                                                      Mean reward
                                                                                                                    Proxy reward R̃(s, a)

Figure 2: Our definition of reward hacking successfully describes reward hacking behavior in four realistic
environments and an illustrative gridworld. The top row shows the distribution of proxy and true reward
values for state-action pairs sampled from a domain-appropriate reference policy for each environment; in all
environments, the proxy and true rewards are correlated. However, as shown in the middle row, this correlation
breaks down if the proxy is optimized via RL, and the true reward achieved is lower than that of the reference
policy, which we characterize as reward hacking. In line with our theoretical results, the bottom row shows that
RL with occupancy measure regularization to the reference policy can prevent reward hacking while enabling an
increase in true reward.


transition probability p(st+1 | st , at ). The agent aims to optimize a reward function R : S × A → R,
and rewards are accumulated over time with discount factor γ ∈ [0, 1). A policy π maps each state
s to a distribution over actions to take at that state π(a | s). We define the (normalized) return of a
policy π under a reward function R as
                                                        P∞
                              J(π, R) = (1 − γ) Eπ [ t=0 γ t R(st , at )]                           (1)
where Eπ refers to the expectation under the distribution of states and actions induced by running the
policy π in the environment.
We define the state-action occupancy measure µπ of a policy π as the expected discounted number of
times the agent will be in a particular state and take a specific action:
                       µπ (s, a) = (1 − γ) Eπ [ t=0 γ t 1{st = s ∧ at = a}] .
                                                 P∞
                                                                                                  (2)
The standard approach to solving an MDP is to find a policy π that maximizes its return J(π, R).
However, as we discussed in the introduction, an AI system designer might optimize π using a learned
or hand-specified proxy reward function R̃ that imperfectly captures the true reward function R. A
precise definition of reward hacking would help us to better understand and mitigate the problem.
Intuitively, reward hacking occurs when when optimizing the proxy reward J(π, R̃) of a policy
π ultimately leads to low true reward J(π, R). However, formalizing this intuition is surprisingly
challenging.
Desiderata for a definition of reward hacking. To understand why defining reward hacking is
difficult, consider the case study of RLHF. In RLHF, optimizing a learned reward function over LLM
outputs eventually leads to the LLM producing nonsensical responses Stiennon et al. (2020). This
clearly satisfies our informal definition of “optimizing the proxy makes the true reward decrease.”


                                                                                                                       4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


However, what if we were to optimize R̃(s, a) = −R(s, a)? In this case, optimizing R̃ also makes
the true reward go down, but arguably this is not reward hacking because R̃ was not a good “proxy”
in the first place. Thus, a good definition of reward hacking should distinguish between “reasonable”
proxies and reward functions that are clearly unrelated to the true reward function.
In the example of RLHF, when optimization leads to nonsensical outputs, we can clearly identify
that the proxy has been “hacked.” However, what if optimizing the proxy produced mediocre but
not obviously bad outputs? Even if optimizing the proxy does not lead to near-optimal true reward,
we wouldn’t necessarily classify this behavior as reward hacking. Thus, a good definition of reward
hacking should specify a threshold for the true reward: if the true reward falls below the threshold,
reward hacking has occurred, and above it, it has not.
To summarize, we argue that a good definition of reward hacking should satisfy two desiderata:
      1. Characterizing what makes a proxy reward “reasonable” to optimize in the first place.
      2. Defining a threshold for true reward below which a policy is reward hacking.
After presenting our definition in the next section, we compare to other definitions using these criteria.

4    D EFINING R EWARD H ACKING
Despite the difficulties in formalizing reward hacking, we argue that both of our desiderata for a
definition can be met by defining reward hacking with respect to a reference policy. This approach
enables both a precise definition of proxy rewards and a natural true reward threshold for determining
when reward hacking is occurring.
Characterizing proxy rewards. To find a realistic definition of a good proxy reward, consider the
process by which system designers create proxies. If they are hand-specified, we argue that designers
usually imagine a distribution of behavior and design a reward that captures the objective under that
distribution. For example, we study a traffic control simulator (Lopez et al., 2018; Vinitsky et al.,
2018; Wu et al., 2022; Pan et al., 2022) where a small number of autonomous cars help to regulate
traffic among a larger population of human drivers. In this case, a designer might choose average
vehicle speed as a proxy for traffic flow; this is a reasonable proxy because under the distribution of
typical human driving behavior, higher speeds are associated with better traffic conditions. We can
formalize this intuition by requiring that the proxy and true rewards be correlated over states and
actions sampled from a reference policy:
Definition 4.1 (Correlated proxy reward). An r-correlated proxy reward R̃ with respect to a reference
policy πref is one that has a correlation of r > 0 with the true reward for state-action pairs sampled
from the reference policy:
                       h                                            i
                          R̃(s,a)−J(πref ,R̃)    R(s,a)−J(πref ,R)
                Eµπref           σR̃                    σR            = r,
                         h                            2 i                      h                      2 i
             2                                                       2
  where σR̃     = Eµπref R̃(s, a) − J(πref , R̃)           and σR      = Eµπref R(s, a) − J(πref , R)
are the variances of proxy and true rewards under the reference policy.

To consider an application of our definition, let’s return to the example of our traffic environment,
where we define the true reward function as the negative total commute time for all vehicles. Using
an autonomous vehicle policy based on a common model of human driving behavior as πref , we plot
the distribution of true and proxy rewards in the top-left corner of Figure 2. The clear correlation
that we observe between the two reward functions—higher average speed corresponding to lower
commute times and vice versa—confirms that average speed is a correlated proxy reward according
to Definition 4.1.
Definition 4.1 offers key advantages over past formalisms. First, it avoids too strongly constraining
proxy rewards by allowing the proxy and true reward functions to diverge arbitrarily at some state-
action pairs when those pairs have low or zero occupancy measure under the reference policy. Second,
it encompasses both learned proxy rewards and hand-specified ones; see Lemma A.8 for a discussion
of how learned rewards are generally correlated proxies.
Choosing a threshold for reward hacking. As discussed in Section 3, defining reward hacking
requires specifying a threshold of true reward below which policy behavior is considered poor enough


                                                    5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


to be classified as reward hacking. Given that we already characterize proxy rewards with respect to a
reference policy, this same reference policy provides a natural baseline for evaluating a policy that
optimizes the proxy: if optimizing the proxy leads to worse true reward than the reference policy
achieves, then the system designer may be better off simply using the reference policy.
Definition 4.2 (Reward hacking). Suppose R̃ is an r-correlated proxy with respect to πref (Defini-
tion 4.1). Then we say reward hacking occurs when a policy π optimized for R̃ has lower true reward
than the reference policy πref , i.e., when J(π, R) < J(πref , R).
If an optimal policy for R̃ exhibits reward hacking, then we say that R̃ is a hackable correlated proxy:
                   J(π, R) < J(πref , R)       for some      π ∈ arg max J(π, R̃).
                                                                         π

For example, in the traffic control environment, optimizing average speed as a proxy leads to
autonomous vehicles blocking highway on-ramps, a strategy that increases overall average speed by
allowing highway traffic to move freely. However, the true reward becomes extremely low because
commute times for the cars on the on-ramp are arbitrarily long. This policy is thus reward hacking
under Definition 4.2 since the true reward is lower than that of typical human driving.
Verifying our definition experimentally.           To test whether Definition 4.2 accurately captures
intuitive cases of reward hacking in practice, we consider four realistic environments and an illustrative
gridworld. In addition to the aforementioned traffic simulator, we consider pandemic mitigation
and glucose monitoring environments, all of which were originally studied by Pan et al. (2022) as
examples of reward hacking. PandemicSimulator (Kompella et al., 2020) uses a specialized SEIR
(susceptible, exposed, infected, recovered) infection model to simulate the COVID-19 pandemic
among a population; the policy controls the level of lockdown restrictions placed on the population
by observing the results of testing. The proxy reward omits the political cost of certain decisions.
SimGlucose (Man et al., 2014) is based on an FDA-approved simulator of Type 1 Diabetes patients
in which a policy monitors glucose levels and administers insulin. The true reward captures patient
health while the proxy reward prioritizes reducing the monetary cost of insulin.
We also study RLHF, in which LLMs are optimized based on a reward function learned from human
preferences. Following Gao et al. (2022) and Coste et al. (2024), we use a large (more robust)
reward model as the true reward function and a smaller (less robust) one as the proxy. Finally, as
an interpretable and illustrative example, we include the tomato-watering AI safety gridworld from
Leike et al. (2017). Besides the gridworld, all of our environments reflect complex, realistic tasks
with large or infinite state state spaces. We construct a natural reference policy for each of the five
environments; see Appendix C for more details about the environments and reference policies.
The top row of Figure 2 shows the distribution of true and proxy reward values for state-action pairs
sampled from these reference policies in each environment. We find that in all cases, the proxy
rewards correlate with the true reward, satisfying our definition of a correlated proxy. Furthermore,
when optimizing the proxies, we see that the true reward drops significantly compared to the reference
policy. Thus, these intuitive cases of reward hacking are captured by Definition 4.2.
Comparison to other definitions of reward hacking. Skalse et al. (2022) define reward hacking
as an increase in proxy reward accompanied by a drop in true reward. This definition does not satisfy
our first desideratum of requiring the proxy to be a reasonable optimization target. Also, the threshold
of any decrease in the true reward being considered reward hacking seems overly restrictive; in
many cases, optimizing a proxy reward will not lead to a perfect optimization of the true reward.
Kwa et al. (2024) define the phenomenon of “catastrophic Goodhart” as when optimizing a proxy
with low expected error under some base policy leads to “arbitrarily high [proxy] reward despite
achieving no more [true reward]” than the base policy. This definition is quite similar to ours but
does not capture that the true reward decreases when reward hacking occurs; furthermore, it is often
impossible to obtain arbitrarily high proxy reward in practice. Finally, Fluri et al. (2024) define
error-regret mismatch as when a proxy reward has low error on a training distribution compared to
the true reward, but optimizing the proxy produces a suboptimal policy. This definition is also similar
to ours but leaves the threshold for reward hacking ambiguous.
Furthermore, none of these works develop a general method for preventing reward hacking. In
contrast, we will show that our definition leads to a natural regularization method for optimizing a
proxy reward without allowing reward hacking. Also, unlike most of these works, we validate our
definition and method through extensive experiments in realistic environments.


                                                    6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 3: Unlike RLHF, which attempts to prevent re-
ward hacking by regularizing action distribution (AD)            χ2 (π∥πref ) = 1.4 χ2 (µπ ∥µπref ) = 919.6
divergence from the reference policy, our results suggest         π(a | s)                           µπ (s)
regularizing using occupancy measure (OM) divergence
is more effective. These plots of the glucose monitoring                                         µπref (s)
environment show the typical ADs and OMs of two poli-
cies. π is close to πref in AD; it gives slightly less insulin.      π ref (a | s)
However, π’s optimization of the proxy also leads to a
vastly different OM with typical glucose levels far outside 0.00         0.05      0.10       200          400
the healthy range (dotted lines). Thus, regularizing ADs
                                                                a (insulin delivered) s (blood glucose level)
to be close to πref is not enough to prevent reward hacking.
Instead, divergence between the OMs better captures the
reward hacking behavior.

5    M ITIGATING R EWARD H ACKING WITH O CCUPANCY M EASURE
     R EGULARIZATION

We now discuss how our new definition of reward hacking motivates better methods for preventing
it. Ideally, we would like to be able to optimize a proxy reward function and have it translate into
an improvement in true reward over the reference policy. To understand how this might be possible,
consider again the traffic environment. The reward hacking policy exhibits behavior which is very
unlikely under the reference policy: human drivers hardly ever stop indefinitely on on-ramps. That is,
optimizing the proxy reward leads to out-of-distribution states and actions where the correlation that
made the proxy good in the first place breaks down. Visually, this can be seen in the second row of
Figure 2: the reward hacking policy usually finds state-action pairs with high proxy reward and low
true reward that were very unlikely to be reached by the reference policy.
Thus, one solution to prevent reward hacking could be to optimize the proxy reward while avoiding
states that are unlikely under the reference policy. The following theorem formalizes this idea.
Theorem 5.1. Suppose that R̃ is an r-correlated-proxy for the true reward function R, and let
σR̃ and σR be defined as in Definition 4.1. Then for any policy π such that µπ ≪ µπref (i.e.,
µπref (s, a) = 0 ⇒ µπ (s, a) = 0), we have
                                                                                            !
           J(π, R) − J(πref , R)   1 J(π, R̃) − J(πref , R̃)
                                                                  q
                                 ≥                                        2  2
                                                               − (1 − r )χ µπ ∥µπref          , (3)
                   σR              r               σR̃
                               h             i
where χ2 µπ ∥µπref = Eµπ µµππ (s,a)

                                   (s,a) − 1   is the χ2 divergence between µπ and µπref .
                                    ref


See Appendix A for the proof. Equation (10) gives a lower bound on how much the policy π improves
over the reference policy πref in terms of the true reward, normalized by the standard deviation of the
true reward under the reference policy. Although this is exactly what we would like to maximize,
we must instead optimize the right-hand side (RHS) of (10) since we cannot access the true reward
directly. The RHS consists of two terms: one measuring the normalized improvement of the policy
π’s proxy reward over the reference policy and the other penalizing the divergence of π’s occupancy
measure from that of πref . Optimizing the first term alone often leads to reward hacking, but by both
incentivizing π to achieve high proxy reward and stay close to the reference policy, π can achieve
high true reward.
By scaling the RHS of (10) and removing terms that are constant with respect to π, we arrive at the
following regularized policy optimization objective to avoid reward hacking:
                                     p                                       p
            maximize J(π, R̃) − λ χ2 (µπ ∥µπref )         where      λ = σR̃ 1 − r2 .           (4)
The amount of regularization needed to improve on the reference policy depends     √ on the strength of
correlation r. The higher the correlation, the lower the regularization strength 1 − r2 . Given the
prefactor of 1r on the RHS of (10), it may appear that a lower correlation leads to a larger gain in true
reward. However, Lemma A.2 shows that in fact, the lower bound decreases as a function of r.
While Theorem 5.1 does not guarantee that the true reward can be increased by optimizing (4), it does
at least allow us to provably avoid reward hacking. In Theorem A.3 in the appendix, we show that it
is difficult to guarantee an improvement in true reward in general. However, if the lower bound on


                                                        7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                       Prompt: Explain why whales migrate.
     Whales migrate for various            Whales migrate for a variety    Whales migrate to and from
     reasons, including the                of reasons. They migrate to     the ocean because it is the
     ability to avoid potential            access food, as well as for     most efficient and pleasant
     conflicts in their                    security and mating             way to travel...
     populations, to forage...             opportunities...
20
                                                    χ2 divergence
                                                    KL divergence
 0
  −20             0               20              40             60         80          100            120
                                             log (µπ (s, a)/µπref (s, a))

Figure 4: Our theory also suggests reward hacking can more effectively be prevented by regularizing
with χ2 divergence instead of KL divergence. This plot illustrates how χ2 regularization is more effective
at preventing reward hacking    in RLHF. Both divergences can be written as the expectation of a function
g log µπ (s, a)/µπref (s, a) which increases the penalty on state-action pairs based on how far the log-ratio
is from zero. The g(·) associated with KL divergence only increases slowly for large log-ratios, so policies
trained with KL divergence may produce nonsensical text. In contrast, the g(·) for χ2 divergence increases
exponentially, better constraining the LLM to produce text similar to the SFT policy.

the RHS of (10) can be increased above zero—which can be tested empirically—then we know that
the true reward has also increased. In our experiments in Section 6, we show that in many realistic
environments it is possible to increase the true reward by optimizing (4).
Comparison to KL regularization in RLHF. Currently, RLHF calls for the application of a KL
penalty between the distributions of responses generated by the optimized policy and the SFT policy
(Stiennon et al., 2020; Bai et al., 2022). In our setting, we can write this as
                                                    P∞ t
            maximize J(π, R̃) − λ(1 − γ)Eπ             t=0 γ DKL π(· | st ) ∥ µπref (· | st ) .  (5)
That is, in RLHF, the expected KL divergence between the action distributions of π and πref is
penalized. Action distribution divergence is easy to calculate and optimize, and training LLMs
with (5) seems to work well in practice. However, unlike our objective in (4), (5) lacks theoretical
guarantees, and it is unclear if it works in other environments.
Our regularized objective in (4) differs from the regularization applied in RLHF in two key ways: our
approach uses occupancy measure (OM) divergence instead of action distribution (AD) divergence,
and it employs χ2 divergence instead of KL divergence. In this section, we provide intuition for
why choosing OM over AD divergence and χ2 over KL divergence are more effective for preventing
reward hacking. Then, in Section 6, we empirically explore applying different types of regularization
to prevent reward hacking in the five environments we study.
Occupancy measure vs. action distribution regularization. While AD regularization works
well for RLHF, this may be because RLHF is essentially a contextual bandit problem, meaning
that γ = 0; in this case, OM and AD divergence are equivalent (see Appendix A.3). However, in
other cases, AD divergence may not suffice to prevent reward hacking behavior. This is because,
in longer-horizon environments, a small change in action distribution at a single state can lead to
a much higher probability of reaching undesirable states. Figure 3 shows an example of this in
the glucose monitoring environment: policies that are close in action distribution regularization
produce vastly different patient glucose levels. Occupancy measure regularization avoids this issue
by directly preventing the distribution of glucose levels from differing too much from the reference
policy. In Theorem A.5 in the appendix, we show that in general it is impossible to lower bound the
improvement in true reward using almost any form of AD regularization, in contrast to our results on
OM regularization.
χ2 vs. KL divergence. Compared to KL divergence, χ2 divergence may be more effective for
preventing reward hacking because it more strongly penalizes out-of-distribution state-action pairs.
To illustrate this, we can write both divergences as expectations over functions of the log-ratio of the
occupancy measures, which we denote d(s, a):
    DKL (µπ ∥ µπref ) = Eµπ d(s, a) + e−d(s,a)          χ2 (µπ ∥ µπref ) = Eµπ ed(s,a) + e−d(s,a)


                            where       d(s, a) = log µπ (s, a)/µπref (s, a) .                       (6)


                                                         8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                                  Environment
                                     Traffic       Pandemic          Glucose               RLHF        AI safety
 Method                              control       mitigation       monitoring                         gridworld
                                     (×103 )                          (×103 )

 Action dist. χ2                   -1.29 ± 0.10   -12.29 ± 0.05    -74.8 ± 11.8         16.94 ± 0.07   6.24 ± 0.09
 State occupancy χ2                -2.18 ± 0.38   -10.68 ± 0.15     -54.7 ± 1.0                   —    9.07 ± 0.06
 State-action occupancy χ2         -1.15 ± 0.05   -11.17 ± 0.17     -47.6 ± 0.6                   —    9.17 ± 0.11
 Action dist. KL                   -1.33 ± 0.05   -12.20 ± 0.06     -73.4 ± 8.3         16.81 ± 0.27   6.33 ± 0.11
 State occupancy KL                -1.34 ± 22.6   -10.24 ± 0.54     -58.4 ± 3.4                   —    7.07 ± 0.11
 State-action occupancy KL         -1.25 ± 0.06   -11.73 ± 0.19     -48.9 ± 0.5                   —    6.86 ± 0.17
 πref                           -2.28 ± 0.00      -12.26 ± 0.00     -72.6 ± 0.0         16.37 ± 0.00   5.86 ± 0.00
 No regularization             -57.38 ± 3.53      -29.57 ± 6.86    -599.0 ± 1.6          9.16 ± 0.80   2.35 ± 0.14
 Training with true reward      -0.93 ± 0.11       -2.65 ± 0.83     -43.4 ± 0.8                   —    8.54 ± 0.12

Table 1: We compare using various types of regularization to prevent reward hacking in the five environments
form Figure 2. The median true reward and standard deviation across 5 random seeds is shown for the best
regularization coefficient for each type of regularization. The bottom rows show results for the baselines: the
reference policy πref , a policy trained on the proxy reward without regularization (exhibiting reward hacking),
and a policy trained on the true reward function (impossible in practice, but included as an upper bound on
performance). We find that occupancy measure regularization consistently improves on action distribution
regularization, and that χ2 divergence often outperforms KL divergence.

As d(s, a) increases, the optimized policy is visiting state-action pairs that are less likely under the
reference policy. However, KL divergence only penalizes d(s, a) linearly, while χ2 penalizes it
exponentially, resulting in stronger regularization even with a low coefficient. Figure 4 plots the
functions in (6) and shows how in practice χ2 divergence better prevents reward hacking in RLHF.

6    E XPERIMENTS
We now show that our theoretical results—which suggest χ2 occupancy measure regularization can
prevent reward hacking—translate to empirical success in realistic environments.
Occupancy measure regularization in practice.           Occupancy measure regularization is more
difficult to implement in practice compared to action distribution regularization. While AD regular-
ization can be added as a loss term to deep RL algorithms like proximal policy optimization (PPO)
(Schulman et al., 2017), OM divergences cannot be calculated in closed form. Instead, we follow
several previous works (e.g., Ho & Ermon 2016; Kang et al. 2018) and use a discriminator network
to approximate OM divergences. Specifically, in Appendix B, we show the objective in (4) can be
optimized via policy gradient with an adjusted reward function that depends on a discriminator dˆϕ :
                                                                         h                i
                                        ˆ                      c2 = Eµ edˆϕ (st ,at ) − 1
             R′ (s, a) = R̃(s, a) − √λ edϕ (s,a)
                                         c2
                                                   where       χ                    π
                                         χ
                                          h                       i             h           i
                                              −dˆϕ′ (s,a)                      dˆϕ′ (s,a)
          and      ϕ = arg min
                            ′
                               Eµ π log(1 + e             ) + Eµπref log(1 + e            )  .                  (7)
                               ϕ

That is, optimizing a discriminator network dˆϕ to minimize the given loss can be used to estimate
and optimize χ2 OM divergence. We alternately train dˆϕ via gradient descent on (7) and the policy
π via PPO based on the adjusted reward. We call this algorithm Occupancy-Regularized Policy
Optimization (ORPO). See Appendix B for a full derivation of these approximations and Algorithm 1
for a formal description; we also describe how to regularize based on OM KL divergence.
Experimental setup.       In each of the five environments shown in Figure 2, we train policies
with four types of regularization towards the reference policy: AD KL, AD χ2 , OM KL, and OM
χ2 . In Appendix A.5, we show that Theorem 5.1 also holds for state-only occupancy measures
if the environment’s reward function does not depend on the action; thus, we experiment with
regularizing based on both state-action and state-only OM divergence. For each environment and
type of regularization,
                √       we test a number of regularization coefficients λ. Theorem 5.1 suggests
setting λ = σR̃ 1 − r2 for an r-correlated proxy, so for χ2 regularization we test a range of values
λ = c σR̃ from c = 1 to 10−2 (10−4 for RLHF). Since it is less clear theoretically how to set the
coefficient λ for KL regularization, we experiment with a wider range of values.


                                                       9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                           Traffic control                  Pandemic           Glucose monitoring                                              AI safety
                                                           ×10
                                                                    3                       mitigation             ×10
                                                                                                                            4                           RLHF                   gridworld
KL divergence χ2 divergence
                                                    −1.0                         −10                                                                                 10
                                                                                                              −5
                                                                                                                                              17
                                                    −1.5
                              True reward J(π, R)                                −12                      −10                                                        5
                                                    −2.0
                                                                                                                                              16
                                                    −2.5                         −14                      −15                                                        0
                                                             0               −2         0                −2         0                −2             0    −2     −4             0           −2
                                                           10              10          10           10             10               10             10   10     10         10          10
                                                    −1.0                         −10                                                                                 10
                                                                                                              −5
                                                                                                                                              17
                                                    −1.5
                                                                                 −12                      −10                                                        5
                                                    −2.0
                                                                                                                                              16
                                                    −2.5                         −14                      −15                                                        0
                                                                1               −1          0            −2             0                −2         0    −2     −4         1               −1
                                                           10               10         10           10             10               10             10   10     10         10           10
                                                                                                                            λ/σR̃
                                                                        State-action OM                       State OM                        AD                Reference policy

Figure 5: The true reward achieved by policies regularized with varying amounts of action distribution or
occupancy measure regularization using χ2 and KL divergence. The x-axis is the regularization coefficient λ
normalized by the standard deviation of proxy rewards under the reference policy. Dots indicate the median
reward and the shaded area is the range over random seeds. For RLHF, AD and OM regularization are equivalent,
which is why OM regularization results are not shown for that column.

We train each combination of {χ2 divergence, KL divergence} × {AD, state OM, state-action OM}
× {λ1 , λ2 , . . . } with five random seeds and measure the resulting policies’ expected returns under
the true reward. As a baseline, we train a policy without any regularization, which leads to reward
hacking in all environments. We also train a policy directly on the true reward function as an upper
limit for performance. In RLHF, we only consider AD regularization since it is equivalent to OM
regularization for LLM chatbots (see Appendix A.3). We do not train a policy on the true reward for
RLHF as we found it could be hacked with enough optimization pressure. See Appendix D for all
hyperparameter and experiment details.
Results.      The results of our experiments are shown in Table 1 and Figure 5. Table 1 shows
the median true reward with the best coefficient for each type of regularization. We find that OM
regularization consistently outperforms AD regularization across the four non-RLHF environments. In
two environments (glucose monitoring and pandemic mitigation), AD regularization fails to improve
on the reference policy’s true reward at all. Furthermore, χ2 regularization tends to perform similarly
to or better than KL regularization across all environments. In RLHF in particular, χ2 regularization
leads to a larger improvement over the reference policy compared to the industry-standard KL penalty,
and is more stable across seeds as well.
In Figure 5, we show the true reward achieved when training with each type of regularization
across a range of λ values. In addition to performing best with an optimal coefficient, χ2 and
OM regularization seem to also perform well over a larger range of coefficients compared to AD
regularization. In Appendix E, we present the full results of our experiments and ablations of ORPO.


7                                 C ONCLUSION

We have introduced a new definition for reward hacking based on the correlation between a proxy
reward function and the unknown true reward that breaks down when optimizing the proxy. Further-
more, we leveraged this definition to show theoretically and empirically that χ2 occupancy measure
regularization can more effectively prevent reward hacking than current approaches. Our results
have implications for settings, like RLHF, where RL is used to optimize complex, hard-to-specify
objectives. We suggest that the heuristic KL penalty used currently should be replaced by a more
principled form of regularization. While OM and AD regularization are equivalent for today’s formu-
lation of RLHF as a contextual bandit, they will likely diverge in the near future when LLM-based
agents are optimized over multi-turn conversations or with tool use (Wang et al., 2023b; Abdulhai
et al., 2023; Shani et al., 2024). Thus, our results provide a principled path to continuing to ensure
the safety of increasingly powerful AI systems.


                                                                                                                    10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We would like to thank Cam Allen, Micah Carroll, Dibya Ghosh, Katie Kang, and Sam Toyer for
helpful discussions and feedback on drafts.
This work was supported by the Semiconductor Research Corporation (SRC)’s Center for the Co-
Design of Cognitive Systems (COCOSYS) as well as the NSF’s Human Centered Computing (HCC)
program. Cassidy Laidlaw is supported by an Open Philanthropy AI Fellowship and a National
Defense Science and Engineering Graduate (NDSEG) Fellowship.

R EFERENCES
Marwa Abdulhai, Isadora White, Charlie Snell, Charles Sun, Joey Hong, Yuexiang Zhai, Kelvin
 Xu, and Sergey Levine. LMRL Gym: Benchmarks for Multi-Turn Reinforcement Learning
 with Language Models, November 2023. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/2311.18232.
 arXiv:2311.18232 [cs].
Dario Amodei, Chris Olah, Jacob Steinhardt, Paul Christiano, John Schulman, and Dan Mané.
  Concrete Problems in AI Safety, July 2016. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/1606.06565.
  arXiv:1606.06565 [cs].
Yuntao Bai, Andy Jones, Kamal Ndousse, Amanda Askell, Anna Chen, Nova DasSarma, Dawn
  Drain, Stanislav Fort, Deep Ganguli, Tom Henighan, Nicholas Joseph, Saurav Kadavath, Jackson
  Kernion, Tom Conerly, Sheer El-Showk, Nelson Elhage, Zac Hatfield-Dodds, Danny Hernandez,
  Tristan Hume, Scott Johnston, Shauna Kravec, Liane Lovitt, Neel Nanda, Catherine Olsson, Dario
  Amodei, Tom Brown, Jack Clark, Sam McCandlish, Chris Olah, Ben Mann, and Jared Kaplan.
  Training a Helpful and Harmless Assistant with Reinforcement Learning from Human Feedback,
  April 2022. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/2204.05862. arXiv:2204.05862 [cs].
Stella Biderman, Hailey Schoelkopf, Quentin Gregory Anthony, Herbie Bradley, Kyle O’Brien,
  Eric Hallahan, Mohammad Aflah Khan, Shivanshu Purohit, Usvsn Sai Prashanth, Edward
  Raff, Aviya Skowron, Lintang Sutawika, and Oskar Van Der Wal. Pythia: A Suite for An-
  alyzing Large Language Models Across Training and Scaling. In Proceedings of the 40th
  International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 2397–2430. PMLR, July 2023. URL
  https://proceedings.mlr.press/v202/biderman23a.html. ISSN: 2640-3498.
Ching-An Cheng, Tengyang Xie, Nan Jiang, and Alekh Agarwal. Adversarially Trained Actor
  Critic for Offline Reinforcement Learning, July 2022. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/2202.
  02446. arXiv:2202.02446 [cs].
Yinlam Chow, Ofir Nachum, Aleksandra Faust, Edgar Duenez-Guzman, and Mohammad
  Ghavamzadeh. Lyapunov-based Safe Policy Optimization for Continuous Control, February
  2019. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/1901.10031. arXiv:1901.10031 [cs, stat].
Sam Corbett-Davies, Emma Pierson, Avi Feller, Sharad Goel, and Aziz Huq. Algorithmic decision
  making and the cost of fairness, June 2017. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/1701.08230.
  arXiv:1701.08230 [cs, stat].
Thomas Coste, Usman Anwar, Robert Kirk, and David Krueger. Reward Model Ensembles Help
  Mitigate Overoptimization, March 2024. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/2310.02743.
  arXiv:2310.02743 [cs].
Gal Dalal, Krishnamurthy Dvijotham, Matej Vecerik, Todd Hester, Cosmin Paduraru, and Yuval
  Tassa. Safe Exploration in Continuous Action Spaces, January 2018. URL http://arxiv.
  org/abs/1801.08757. arXiv:1801.08757 [cs].
Esther Derman, Matthieu Geist, and Shie Mannor. Twice regularized MDPs and the equivalence
  between robustness and regularization, October 2021. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/2110.
  06267. arXiv:2110.06267 [cs, math].
Yann Dubois, Chen Xuechen Li, Rohan Taori, Tianyi Zhang, Ishaan Gulrajani, Jimmy
  Ba, Carlos Guestrin, Percy S. Liang, and Tatsunori B. Hashimoto. AlpacaFarm: A


                                               11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


  Simulation Framework for Methods that Learn from Human Feedback.       Advances
  in Neural Information Processing Systems, 36:30039–30069, December 2023.   URL
  https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/
  5fc47800ee5b30b8777fdd30abcaaf3b-Abstract-Conference.html.
Lukas Fluri, Leon Lang, Alessandro Abate, Patrick Forré, David Krueger, and Joar Skalse. The Perils
  of Optimizing Learned Reward Functions: Low Training Error Does Not Guarantee Low Regret,
  June 2024. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/2406.15753. arXiv:2406.15753 [cs].
Ian Fox, Joyce Lee, Rodica Pop-Busui, and Jenna Wiens. Deep Reinforcement Learning for
  Closed-Loop Blood Glucose Control, September 2020. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/
  2009.09051. arXiv:2009.09051 [cs, stat].
Matt Franchi, J. D. Zamfirescu-Pereira, Wendy Ju, and Emma Pierson. Detecting disparities in
 police deployments using dashcam data. In 2023 ACM Conference on Fairness, Accountability,
 and Transparency, pp. 534–544, June 2023. doi: 10.1145/3593013.3594020. URL http:
 //arxiv.org/abs/2305.15210. arXiv:2305.15210 [cs].
Scott Fujimoto, David Meger, and Doina Precup. Off-Policy Deep Reinforcement Learning with-
  out Exploration. In Proceedings of the 36th International Conference on Machine Learning,
  pp. 2052–2062. PMLR, May 2019. URL https://proceedings.mlr.press/v97/
  fujimoto19a.html. ISSN: 2640-3498.
Uri Gadot, Esther Derman, Navdeep Kumar, Maxence Mohamed Elfatihi, Kfir Levy, and Shie Mannor.
  Solving Non-Rectangular Reward-Robust MDPs via Frequency Regularization, February 2024.
  URL http://arxiv.org/abs/2309.01107. arXiv:2309.01107 [cs].
Leo Gao, John Schulman, and Jacob Hilton. Scaling Laws for Reward Model Overoptimization,
  October 2022. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/2210.10760. arXiv:2210.10760 [cs, stat].
Amelia Glaese, Nat McAleese, Maja Trebacz, John Aslanides, Vlad Firoiu, Timo Ewalds, Maribeth
 Rauh, Laura Weidinger, Martin Chadwick, Phoebe Thacker, Lucy Campbell-Gillingham, Jonathan
 Uesato, Po-Sen Huang, Ramona Comanescu, Fan Yang, Abigail See, Sumanth Dathathri, Rory
 Greig, Charlie Chen, Doug Fritz, Jaume Sanchez Elias, Richard Green, Sona Mokra, Nicholas
 Fernando, Boxi Wu, Rachel Foley, Susannah Young, Iason Gabriel, William Isaac, John Mellor,
 Demis Hassabis, Koray Kavukcuoglu, Lisa Anne Hendricks, and Geoffrey Irving. Improving
 alignment of dialogue agents via targeted human judgements, September 2022. URL http:
 //arxiv.org/abs/2209.14375. arXiv:2209.14375 [cs].
Adam Gleave, Michael Dennis, Shane Legg, Stuart Russell, and Jan Leike. Quantifying Differences
  in Reward Functions. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2021. URL
  https://openreview.net/forum?id=LwEQnp6CYev.
Dongyoung Go, Tomasz Korbak, Germán Kruszewski, Jos Rozen, Nahyeon Ryu, and Marc Dymet-
  man. Aligning Language Models with Preferences through f-divergence Minimization, June 2023.
  URL http://arxiv.org/abs/2302.08215. arXiv:2302.08215 [cs].
C. A. E. Goodhart. Problems of Monetary Management: The UK Experience. In C. A. E. Goodhart
  (ed.), Monetary Theory and Practice: The UK Experience, pp. 91–121. Macmillan Education
  UK, London, 1984. ISBN 978-1-349-17295-5. doi: 10.1007/978-1-349-17295-5_4. URL
  https://doi.org/10.1007/978-1-349-17295-5_4.
Dylan Hadfield-Menell, Smitha Milli, Pieter Abbeel, Stuart Russell, and Anca Dragan. Inverse
  Reward Design, 2017. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/1711.02827. arXiv:1711.02827
  [cs].
Alexander Havrilla, Maksym Zhuravinskyi, Duy Phung, Aman Tiwari, Jonathan Tow, Stella Biderman,
  Quentin Anthony, and Louis Castricato. trlX: A Framework for Large Scale Reinforcement Learn-
  ing from Human Feedback. In Houda Bouamor, Juan Pino, and Kalika Bali (eds.), Proceedings
  of the 2023 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, pp. 8578–8595,
  Singapore, December 2023. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2023.
  emnlp-main.530. URL https://aclanthology.org/2023.emnlp-main.530.


                                                12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Elad Hazan, Sham M. Kakade, Karan Singh, and Abby Van Soest. Provably Efficient Maxi-
  mum Entropy Exploration, January 2019. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/1812.02690.
  arXiv:1812.02690 [cs, stat].
Haoyang He. A Survey on Offline Model-Based Reinforcement Learning, May 2023. URL http:
 //arxiv.org/abs/2305.03360. arXiv:2305.03360 [cs, eess].
Jonathan Ho and Stefano Ermon.      Generative Adversarial Imitation Learning. In
  Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 29. Curran Associates,
  Inc., 2016. URL https://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2016/hash/
  cc7e2b878868cbae992d1fb743995d8f-Abstract.html.
Audrey Huang, Wenhao Zhan, Tengyang Xie, Jason D. Lee, Wen Sun, Akshay Krishnamurthy,
  and Dylan J. Foster. Correcting the Mythos of KL-Regularization: Direct Alignment without
  Overoptimization via Chi-Squared Preference Optimization, July 2024. URL http://arxiv.
  org/abs/2407.13399. arXiv:2407.13399 [cs].
Borja Ibarz, Jan Leike, Tobias Pohlen, Geoffrey Irving, Shane Legg, and Dario Amodei. Reward
  learning from human preferences and demonstrations in Atari. 2018. doi: 10.48550/ARXIV.1811.
  06521. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/1811.06521. Publisher: arXiv Version Number:
 1.
Hamish Ivison, Yizhong Wang, Jiacheng Liu, Zeqiu Wu, Valentina Pyatkin, Nathan Lambert, Noah A.
  Smith, Yejin Choi, and Hannaneh Hajishirzi. Unpacking DPO and PPO: Disentangling Best
  Practices for Learning from Preference Feedback. 2024. doi: 10.48550/ARXIV.2406.09279. URL
  https://arxiv.org/abs/2406.09279. Publisher: arXiv Version Number: 1.
Hong Jun Jeon, Smitha Milli, and Anca D. Dragan. Reward-rational (implicit) choice: A unifying
  formalism for reward learning, December 2020. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/2002.
  04833. arXiv:2002.04833 [cs].
Bingyi Kang, Zequn Jie, and Jiashi Feng. Policy Optimization with Demonstrations. In Proceedings
  of the 35th International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 2469–2478. PMLR, July 2018.
  URL https://proceedings.mlr.press/v80/kang18a.html. ISSN: 2640-3498.
Jon Kleinberg, Sendhil Mullainathan, and Manish Raghavan. The Challenge of Understanding
  What Users Want: Inconsistent Preferences and Engagement Optimization, October 2023. URL
  http://arxiv.org/abs/2202.11776. arXiv:2202.11776 [cs].
W. Bradley Knox, Alessandro Allievi, Holger Banzhaf, Felix Schmitt, and Peter Stone. Reward
 (Mis)design for Autonomous Driving, March 2022. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/2104.
 13906. arXiv:2104.13906 [cs].
Vladimir Koltchinskii. Local Rademacher Complexities and Oracle Inequalities in Risk Minimization.
  The Annals of Statistics, 34(6):2593–2656, 2006. ISSN 0090-5364. URL https://www.jstor.
  org/stable/25463523. Publisher: Institute of Mathematical Statistics.
Varun Kompella, Roberto Capobianco, Stacy Jong, Jonathan Browne, Spencer Fox, Lauren Meyers,
  Peter Wurman, and Peter Stone. Reinforcement Learning for Optimization of COVID-19 Mitigation
  policies, October 2020. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/2010.10560. arXiv:2010.10560
  [cs].
Tomasz Korbak, Ethan Perez, and Christopher L. Buckley. RL with KL penalties is better
  viewed as Bayesian inference, October 2022. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/2205.11275.
  arXiv:2205.11275 [cs, stat].
Victoria Krakovna. Specification gaming examples in AI, April 2018. URL https://vkrakovna.
  wordpress.com/2018/04/02/specification-gaming-examples-in-ai/.
Victoria Krakovna. Classifying specification problems as variants of Goodhart’s Law,
  August 2019.       URL https://vkrakovna.wordpress.com/2019/08/19/
  classifying-specification-problems-as-variants-of-goodharts-law/.


                                               13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Victoria Krakovna, Laurent Orseau, Ramana Kumar, Miljan Martic, and Shane Legg. Penalizing
  side effects using stepwise relative reachability, March 2019. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/
  1806.01186. arXiv:1806.01186 [cs, stat].
Thomas Kwa, Drake Thomas, and Adrià Garriga-Alonso. Catastrophic Goodhart: regularizing RLHF
  with KL divergence does not mitigate heavy-tailed reward misspecification, November 2024. URL
  http://arxiv.org/abs/2407.14503. arXiv:2407.14503 [cs].
Cassidy Laidlaw, Stuart Russell, and Anca Dragan. Bridging RL Theory and Practice with the Effec-
  tive Horizon, April 2023. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/2304.09853. arXiv:2304.09853
  [cs, stat].
Jongmin Lee, Cosmin Paduraru, Daniel J. Mankowitz, Nicolas Heess, Doina Precup, Kee-Eung Kim,
  and Arthur Guez. COptiDICE: Offline Constrained Reinforcement Learning via Stationary Dis-
  tribution Correction Estimation, April 2022. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/2204.08957.
  arXiv:2204.08957 [cs].
Kimin Lee, Laura Smith, and Pieter Abbeel. PEBBLE: Feedback-Efficient Interactive Reinforcement
  Learning via Relabeling Experience and Unsupervised Pre-training, June 2021. URL http:
  //arxiv.org/abs/2106.05091. arXiv:2106.05091 [cs].
Lisa Lee, Benjamin Eysenbach, Emilio Parisotto, Eric Xing, Sergey Levine, and Ruslan Salakhutdinov.
  Efficient Exploration via State Marginal Matching, February 2020. URL http://arxiv.org/
  abs/1906.05274. arXiv:1906.05274 [cs, stat].
Jan Leike, Miljan Martic, Victoria Krakovna, Pedro A. Ortega, Tom Everitt, Andrew Lefrancq,
  Laurent Orseau, and Shane Legg. AI Safety Gridworlds, November 2017. URL http://arxiv.
  org/abs/1711.09883. arXiv:1711.09883 [cs].
Jan Leike, David Krueger, Tom Everitt, Miljan Martic, Vishal Maini, and Shane Legg. Scalable agent
  alignment via reward modeling: a research direction, November 2018. URL http://arxiv.
  org/abs/1811.07871. arXiv:1811.07871 [cs, stat].
Eric Liang, Richard Liaw, Philipp Moritz, Robert Nishihara, Roy Fox, Ken Goldberg, Joseph E.
  Gonzalez, Michael I. Jordan, and Ion Stoica. RLlib: Abstractions for Distributed Reinforcement
  Learning, June 2018. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/1712.09381. arXiv:1712.09381
  [cs].
Pablo Alvarez Lopez, Michael Behrisch, Laura Bieker-Walz, Jakob Erdmann, Yun-Pang Flötteröd,
  Robert Hilbrich, Leonhard Lücken, Johannes Rummel, Peter Wagner, and Evamarie Wiessner.
  Microscopic Traffic Simulation using SUMO. In 2018 21st International Conference on Intelligent
  Transportation Systems (ITSC), pp. 2575–2582, November 2018. doi: 10.1109/ITSC.2018.8569938.
  URL https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/8569938. ISSN: 2153-0017.
Kristian Lum and William Isaac. To Predict and Serve? Significance, 13(5):14–19, October
  2016. ISSN 1740-9705. doi: 10.1111/j.1740-9713.2016.00960.x. URL https://doi.org/
  10.1111/j.1740-9713.2016.00960.x. _eprint: https://academic.oup.com/jrssig/article-
  pdf/13/5/14/49106469/sign_13_5_14.pdf.
Chiara Dalla Man, Francesco Micheletto, Dayu Lv, Marc Breton, Boris Kovatchev, and Claudio
  Cobelli. The UVA/PADOVA Type 1 Diabetes Simulator. Journal of Diabetes Science and
  Technology, 8(1):26–34, January 2014. ISSN 1932-2968. doi: 10.1177/1932296813514502. URL
  https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4454102/.
Debmalya Mandal, Stelios Triantafyllou, and Goran Radanovic. Performative Reinforcement Learn-
  ing, February 2023. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/2207.00046. arXiv:2207.00046 [cs].
David Manheim and Scott Garrabrant. Categorizing Variants of Goodhart’s Law, February 2019.
  URL http://arxiv.org/abs/1803.04585. arXiv:1803.04585 [cs, q-fin, stat].
Lev McKinney, Yawen Duan, David Krueger, and Adam Gleave. On The Fragility of Learned Reward
  Functions, January 2023. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/2301.03652. arXiv:2301.03652
  [cs].


                                               14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Smitha Milli, Luca Belli, and Moritz Hardt. From Optimizing Engagement to Measuring Value.
  In Proceedings of the 2021 ACM Conference on Fairness, Accountability, and Transparency, pp.
  714–722, March 2021. doi: 10.1145/3442188.3445933. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/
  2008.12623. arXiv:2008.12623 [cs, stat].
Alexander Nedergaard and Matthew Cook. k-Means Maximum Entropy Exploration, November
  2023. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/2205.15623. arXiv:2205.15623 [cs].
Richard Ngo, Lawrence Chan, and Sören Mindermann. The alignment problem from a deep
  learning perspective, September 2023. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/2209.00626.
  arXiv:2209.00626 [cs].
Andi Nika, Debmalya Mandal, Parameswaran Kamalaruban, Georgios Tzannetos, Goran Radanovic,
  and Adish Singla. Reward Model Learning vs. Direct Policy Optimization: A Comparative Analysis
  of Learning from Human Preferences. In Proceedings of the 41st International Conference on
 Machine Learning, pp. 38145–38186. PMLR, July 2024. URL https://proceedings.mlr.
  press/v235/nika24a.html. ISSN: 2640-3498.
Ziad Obermeyer, Brian Powers, Christine Vogeli, and Sendhil Mullainathan. Dissecting racial
  bias in an algorithm used to manage the health of populations. Science, 366(6464):447–453,
  October 2019. ISSN 0036-8075, 1095-9203. doi: 10.1126/science.aax2342. URL https:
  //www.science.org/doi/10.1126/science.aax2342.
Long Ouyang, Jeff Wu, Xu Jiang, Diogo Almeida, Carroll L. Wainwright, Pamela Mishkin, Chong
  Zhang, Sandhini Agarwal, Katarina Slama, Alex Ray, John Schulman, Jacob Hilton, Fraser Kelton,
  Luke Miller, Maddie Simens, Amanda Askell, Peter Welinder, Paul Christiano, Jan Leike, and
  Ryan Lowe. Training language models to follow instructions with human feedback. 2022. doi:
  10.48550/ARXIV.2203.02155. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2203.02155.
Alexander Pan, Kush Bhatia, and Jacob Steinhardt. The Effects of Reward Misspecification: Mapping
  and Mitigating Misaligned Models, February 2022. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/2201.
  03544. arXiv:2201.03544 [cs, stat].
Adam Paszke, Sam Gross, Francisco Massa, Adam Lerer, James Bradbury, Gregory Chanan, Trevor
  Killeen, Zeming Lin, Natalia Gimelshein, Luca Antiga, Alban Desmaison, Andreas Köpf, Edward
 Yang, Zach DeVito, Martin Raison, Alykhan Tejani, Sasank Chilamkurthy, Benoit Steiner, Lu Fang,
  Junjie Bai, and Soumith Chintala. PyTorch: An Imperative Style, High-Performance Deep Learning
  Library, December 2019. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/1912.01703. arXiv:1912.01703
  [cs, stat].
Meghan E. Pauley, Kalie L. Tommerdahl, Janet K. Snell-Bergeon, and Gregory P. Forlenza. Con-
 tinuous Glucose Monitor, Insulin Pump, and Automated Insulin Delivery Therapies for Type 1
 Diabetes: An Update on Potential for Cardiovascular Benefits. Current Cardiology Reports, 24
 (12):2043–2056, December 2022. ISSN 1534-3170. doi: 10.1007/s11886-022-01799-x. URL
 https://doi.org/10.1007/s11886-022-01799-x.
Rafael Rafailov, Archit Sharma, Eric Mitchell, Stefano Ermon, Christopher D. Manning, and Chelsea
  Finn. Direct Preference Optimization: Your Language Model is Secretly a Reward Model, July
  2024. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/2305.18290. arXiv:2305.18290 [cs].
Paria Rashidinejad, Banghua Zhu, Cong Ma, Jiantao Jiao, and Stuart Russell. Bridging Offline
  Reinforcement Learning and Imitation Learning: A Tale of Pessimism, July 2023. URL http:
  //arxiv.org/abs/2103.12021. arXiv:2103.12021 [cs, math, stat].
Siddharth Reddy, Anca Dragan, Sergey Levine, Shane Legg, and Jan Leike. Learning Hu-
  man Objectives by Evaluating Hypothetical Behavior. In Proceedings of the 37th Interna-
  tional Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 8020–8029. PMLR, November 2020. URL
  https://proceedings.mlr.press/v119/reddy20a.html. ISSN: 2640-3498.
Julien Roy, Roger Girgis, Joshua Romoff, Pierre-Luc Bacon, and Christopher Pal. Direct Behavior
  Specification via Constrained Reinforcement Learning, June 2022. URL http://arxiv.org/
  abs/2112.12228. arXiv:2112.12228 [cs].


                                               15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Stuart J. Russell, Peter Norvig, and Ernest Davis. Artificial intelligence: a modern approach. Prentice
  Hall series in artificial intelligence. Prentice Hall, Upper Saddle River, 3rd ed edition, 2010. ISBN
  978-0-13-604259-4.
Dorsa Sadigh, Anca Dragan, Shankar Sastry, and Sanjit Seshia. Active Preference-Based Learning
  of Reward Functions. In Robotics: Science and Systems XIII. Robotics: Science and Systems
  Foundation, July 2017. ISBN 978-0-9923747-3-0. doi: 10.15607/RSS.2017.XIII.053. URL
  http://www.roboticsproceedings.org/rss13/p53.pdf.
John Schulman. Approximating KL Divergence, March 2020. URL http://joschu.net/
  blog/kl-approx.html.
John Schulman, Filip Wolski, Prafulla Dhariwal, Alec Radford, and Oleg Klimov. Proximal Pol-
  icy Optimization Algorithms, August 2017. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/1707.06347.
  arXiv:1707.06347 [cs].
Lior Shani, Aviv Rosenberg, Asaf Cassel, Oran Lang, Daniele Calandriello, Avital Zipori, Hila Noga,
  Orgad Keller, Bilal Piot, and Idan Szpektor. Multi-turn Reinforcement Learning from Preference
  Human Feedback. arXiv preprint arXiv:2405.14655, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/
  2405.14655.
Joar Skalse, Nikolaus H. R. Howe, Dmitrii Krasheninnikov, and David Krueger. Defining and
  Characterizing Reward Hacking, September 2022. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/2209.
  13085. arXiv:2209.13085 [cs, stat].
Joar Skalse, Lucy Farnik, Sumeet Ramesh Motwani, Erik Jenner, Adam Gleave, and Alessandro
  Abate. STARC: A General Framework For Quantifying Differences Between Reward Functions,
  December 2024. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/2309.15257. arXiv:2309.15257 [cs].
Garry M. Steil. Algorithms for a Closed-Loop Artificial Pancreas: The Case for Proportional-Integral-
  Derivative Control. Journal of Diabetes Science and Technology, 7(6):1621–1631, November
  2013. ISSN 1932-2968. URL https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/
  PMC3876341/.
Nisan Stiennon, Long Ouyang, Jeff Wu, Daniel M. Ziegler, Ryan Lowe, Chelsea Voss, Alec Radford,
  Dario Amodei, and Paul Christiano. Learning to summarize from human feedback, September
  2020. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/2009.01325. arXiv:2009.01325 [cs].
Jonathan Stray, Alon Halevy, Parisa Assar, Dylan Hadfield-Menell, Craig Boutilier, Amar Ashar,
  Lex Beattie, Michael Ekstrand, Claire Leibowicz, Connie Moon Sehat, Sara Johansen, Lianne
  Kerlin, David Vickrey, Spandana Singh, Sanne Vrijenhoek, Amy Zhang, McKane Andrus, Natali
  Helberger, Polina Proutskova, Tanushree Mitra, and Nina Vasan. Building Human Values into
  Recommender Systems: An Interdisciplinary Synthesis, July 2022. URL http://arxiv.org/
  abs/2207.10192. arXiv:2207.10192 [cs].
Jessica Taylor.    Quantilizers: A Safer Alternative to Maximizers for Limited Opti-
  mization.     March 2016.     URL https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/
  Quantilizers%3A-A-Safer-Alternative-to-Maximizers-for-Taylor/
  4e8ff3b4069a12a00196d62925bab8add7389742.
Jessica Taylor, Eliezer Yudkowsky, Patrick LaVictoire, and Andrew Critch. Alignment for Advanced
  Machine Learning Systems. In Ethics of Artificial Intelligence. Oxford University Press, August
  2020. ISBN 978-0-19-090505-7. Google-Books-ID: 1yT3DwAAQBAJ.
Jeremy Tien, Jerry Zhi-Yang He, Zackory Erickson, Anca D. Dragan, and Daniel S. Brown. Causal
  Confusion and Reward Misidentification in Preference-Based Reward Learning, March 2023. URL
  http://arxiv.org/abs/2204.06601. arXiv:2204.06601 [cs].
Martin Treiber, Ansgar Hennecke, and Dirk Helbing. Congested Traffic States in Empirical Observa-
 tions and Microscopic Simulations. Physical Review E, 62(2):1805–1824, August 2000. ISSN
 1063-651X, 1095-3787. doi: 10.1103/PhysRevE.62.1805. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/
 cond-mat/0002177. arXiv:cond-mat/0002177.


                                                  16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A. M. Turner, Logan Smith, Rohin Shah, Andrew Critch, and Prasad Tadepalli. Optimal Policies
  Tend To Seek Power. December 2019. URL https://www.semanticscholar.
  org/paper/Optimal-Policies-Tend-To-Seek-Power-Turner-Smith/
  46d4452eb041e33f1e58eab64ec8cf5af534b6ff.
Alexander Matt Turner, Neale Ratzlaff, and Prasad Tadepalli. Avoiding Side Effects in Complex Envi-
  ronments, October 2020. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/2006.06547. arXiv:2006.06547
  [cs].
Ikechukwu Uchendu, Ted Xiao, Yao Lu, Banghua Zhu, Mengyuan Yan, Joséphine Simon, Matthew
  Bennice, Chuyuan Fu, Cong Ma, Jiantao Jiao, Sergey Levine, and Karol Hausman. Jump-
  Start Reinforcement Learning, July 2023. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/2204.02372.
  arXiv:2204.02372 [cs].
Nino Vieillard, Tadashi Kozuno, Bruno Scherrer, Olivier Pietquin, Rémi Munos, and Matthieu
  Geist. Leverage the Average: an Analysis of KL Regularization in RL, January 2021. URL
  http://arxiv.org/abs/2003.14089. arXiv:2003.14089 [cs, stat].
Eugene Vinitsky, Aboudy Kreidieh, Luc Le Flem, Nishant Kheterpal, Kathy Jang, Cathy Wu, Fangyu
  Wu, Richard Liaw, Eric Liang, and Alexandre M. Bayen. Benchmarks for reinforcement learning
  in mixed-autonomy traffic. In Proceedings of The 2nd Conference on Robot Learning, pp. 399–409.
  PMLR, October 2018. URL https://proceedings.mlr.press/v87/vinitsky18a.
  html. ISSN: 2640-3498.
Chaoqi Wang, Yibo Jiang, Chenghao Yang, Han Liu, and Yuxin Chen. Beyond Reverse KL:
  Generalizing Direct Preference Optimization with Diverse Divergence Constraints, September
  2023a. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/2309.16240. arXiv:2309.16240 [cs].
Xingyao Wang, Zihan Wang, Jiateng Liu, Yangyi Chen, Lifan Yuan, Hao Peng, and Heng Ji.
  Mint: Evaluating llms in multi-turn interaction with tools and language feedback. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2309.10691, 2023b. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2309.10691.
Cathy Wu, Aboudy Kreidieh, Kanaad Parvate, Eugene Vinitsky, and Alexandre M. Bayen. Flow: A
  Modular Learning Framework for Mixed Autonomy Traffic. IEEE Transactions on Robotics, 38
  (2):1270–1286, April 2022. ISSN 1552-3098, 1941-0468. doi: 10.1109/TRO.2021.3087314. URL
  http://arxiv.org/abs/1710.05465. arXiv:1710.05465 [cs].
Tengyang Xie, Ching-An Cheng, Nan Jiang, Paul Mineiro, and Alekh Agarwal. Bellman-consistent
  Pessimism for Offline Reinforcement Learning, October 2023. URL http://arxiv.org/
  abs/2106.06926. arXiv:2106.06926 [cs, stat].
Shentao Yang, Yihao Feng, Shujian Zhang, and Mingyuan Zhou. Regularizing a Model-based
  Policy Stationary Distribution to Stabilize Offline Reinforcement Learning, June 2022. URL
  http://arxiv.org/abs/2206.07166. arXiv:2206.07166 [cs].
Yiming Zhang, Quan Vuong, and Keith W. Ross. First Order Constrained Optimization in Policy
  Space, October 2020. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/2002.06506. arXiv:2002.06506 [cs,
  stat].


                                               17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Appendix
A      P ROOFS AND A DDITIONAL T HEORETICAL R ESULTS

A.1       P ROOF OF T HEOREM 5.1

Theorem 5.1. Suppose that R̃ is an r-correlated-proxy for the true reward function R, and let
σR̃ and σR be defined as in Definition 4.1. Then for any policy π such that µπ ≪ µπref (i.e.,
µπref (s, a) = 0 ⇒ µπ (s, a) = 0), we have
                                                                                     !
           J(π, R) − J(πref , R)   1 J(π, R̃) − J(πref , R̃)
                                                              q
                                 ≥                                   2  2
                                                             − (1 − r )χ µπ ∥µπref     ,  (3)
                   σR              r          σR̃
                        h                i
where χ2 µπ ∥µπref = Eµπ µµππ (s,a)

                               (s,a) − 1   is the χ2 divergence between µπ and µπref .
                                         ref


Proof. For simplicity of exposition, define

                               R(s, a) − J(πref , R)                                  R̃(s, a) − J(πref , R̃)
               Z(s, a) =                                       and       Z̃(s, a) =                           .
                                       σR                                                      σR̃
Combining (1) and (2), we can see that the return of a policy can be re-written as the expected reward
for states and actions sampled from the occupancy measure:
                                  P
                       J(π, R) = s,a∈S×A µπ (s, a)R(s, a) = Eµπ [R(s, a)].                         (8)

Using (8), we can rewrite (10) as
                           h                 i p
                     Eµπ Z̃(s, a) − r Z(s, a) ≤ (1 − r2 )χ2 (µπ ∥µπref ).

Then, the left hand side can be rewritten as
       h                    i
  Eµπ Z̃(s, a) − r Z(s, a)
             h                    i          h               i        h                     i
     = Eµπ Z̃(s, a) − r Z(s, a) − Eµπref Z̃(s, a) − r Z(s, a) + Eµπref Z̃(s, a) − r Z(s, a)
             h                    i          h               i
     = Eµπ Z̃(s, a) − r Z(s, a) − Eµπref Z̃(s, a) − r Z(s, a) ,

since by definition Eµπref [Z̃(s, a)] = Eµπref [Z(s, a)] = 0. Applying the Cauchy-Schwartz inequality
to this difference gives
       h                     i          h                     i
 Eµπ Z̃(s, a) − r Z(s, a) − Eµπref Z̃(s, a) − r Z(s, a)
            X h                           ih                      i
     =              Z̃(s, a) − r Z(s, a) µπ (s, a) − µπref (s, a)
          (s,a)∈S×A
                                                         "                         #
                  hp                                   i µ (s, a) − µ (s, a)
                                                           π            πref
              X
      =             µπref (s, a) Z̃(s, a) − r Z(s, a)        p
        (s,a)∈S×A
                                                                µπref (s, a)
        v                                                                                              
        u
        u                         h                    i2                (µ    (s, a) −   µ     (s, a)) 2
        u X                                                                 π             πref
                                                               X
      ≤t             µπref (s, a) Z̃(s, a) − r Z(s, a)                                                  
                                                                                   µπref (s, a)
                (s,a)∈S×A                                                    (s,a)∈S×A
          s                                         2
      =       Eµπref        Z̃(s, a) − r Z(s, a)          χ2 (µπ ∥µπref ).                                        (9)



                                                                18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


The expectation can be calculated as
                                      2
        Eµπref Z̃(s, a) − r Z(s, a)

            = Varµπref Z̃(s, a) − r Z(s, a)

            = Varµπref Z̃(s, a) + r2 Varµπref (Z(s, a)) − 2r Covµπref Z̃(s, a), Z(s, a)
             = 1 − r2 ,
using the fact that both reward functions have unit variance under the reference policy and that their
correlation is r. Plugging this into (9) gives the desired result.



A.1.1    N EAR -O PTIMAL REFERENCE POLICIES

While Theorem 5.1 shows that optimizing the proxy reward with regularization can improve on the
reference policy’s reward, it does not guarantee that the learned policy will be near-optimal. However,
a simple corollary shows that if the reference policy is near-optimal, then the learned policy will also
be near-optimal.
Corollary A.1. Suppose that R̃ is an r-correlated-proxy for the true reward function R, and let
σR̃ and σR be defined as in Definition 4.1. Furthermore, suppose that the reference policy πref is
near-optimal:
                                 J(πref , R) ≥ max
                                                ∗
                                                   J(π ∗ , R) − ϵσR ,
                                                π

for some ϵ > 0.
Then for any policy π such that µπ ≪ µπref , we have
                                                                                                        !
 maxπ∗ J(π ∗ , R) − J(π, R)     1          J(π, R̃) − J(πref , R̃)
                                                                       q
                            ≤ϵ−                                    −        (1 − r2 )χ2 µπ ∥µπref           . (10)
            σR                  r                   σR̃

This result bounds the suboptimality gap—how close the learned policy is to optimal—in terms of
the suboptimality gap of the reference policy and the increase in the regularized proxy reward. The
proof is straightforward and follows from Theorem 5.1.


A.1.2    U NDERSTANDING THE L OWER B OUND IN T HEOREM 5.1

Denote by
                                                                                 !
                         1      J(π, R̃) − J(πref , R̃) p
                  L(π) =                               − (1 − r2 )χ2 (µπ ∥µπref )                            (11)
                         r               σR̃
the lower bound on increase in the true reward which is the RHS of (10). One surprising observation
is that this lower bound seems to be increasing as the proxy becomes less correlated with the true
reward. This would suggest that a less correlated proxy leads to better optimization of the true reward.
However, as the following lemma shows, L(π) is actually decreasing in r.
Lemma A.2. Under the same conditions as Theorem 5.1, the lower bound L(π) satisfies
                                      √
                                  1 − 1 − r2
                                              q
                         L(π) ≤                 χ2 µπ ∥µπref .                                               (12)
                                        r
                                                                 √
                                                                        2
This shows that the lower bound can be at most a factor of 1− r1−r times the divergence between
the learned and reference policies’ occupancy measures. This factor is increasing in r and asymptotes
to r/2 as r → 0.


                                                    19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Proof. Using the same notation as the proof of Theorem 5.1, we can rewrite the lower bound as
                             1  h            i p
                    L(π) =       Eπ Z̃(s, a) − (1 − r2 )χ2 (µπ ∥µπref ) .
                             r
Following a similar argument to that in the proof of Theorem 5.1, we can write
      h        i        h      i           h        i
   Eπ Z̃(s, a) = Eπ Z̃(s, a) − Eπref Z̃(s, a)
                                                        "                          #
                        X hp                           i µ (s, a) − µ (s, a)
                                                           π            πref
                 =                µπref (s, a)Z̃(s, a)       p
                    (s,a)∈S×A
                                                                µπref (s, a)
                    v                                                                                   
                    u
                    u
                                                                          (µ   (s, a) −   µ      (s, a)) 2
                    u X                                                     π             π
                                                                X
                 ≤t                µπref (s, a)Z̃(s, a)2                                   ref           
                                                                                   µπref (s, a)
                             (s,a)∈S×A                               (s,a)∈S×A
                       r         h            i
                   =       Eµπref Z̃(s, a)2 χ2 (µπ ∥µπref )
                       p
                   =       χ2 (µπ ∥µπref ).
Combining this with the definition of L(π) gives
                             1  p 2                 p
                    L(π) ≤          χ (µπ ∥µπref ) − (1 − r2 )χ2 (µπ ∥µπref )
                             r √
                             1 − 1 − r2 p 2
                          =                  χ (µπ ∥µπref ),
                                    r
which completes the proof.


A.1.3    I S THE L OWER B OUND O PTIMIZABLE ?

While Theorem 5.1 shows that the increase in true reward over the reference policy can be lower-
bounded by the the proxy reward minus a regularization term, it is not clear if it is actually possible
to increase the lower bound L(π) as defined in (11). For example, if the reference policy is already
optimal with respect to the proxy reward, then clearly L(π) ≤ 0. As another example, suppose
it possible to improve πref with respect to both the true and proxy rewards, but only by visiting a
state-action pair never visited by πref . In this case, it is also impossible to improve the lower bound in
Theorem 5.1 while obeying the requirement that µπ ≪ µπref .
We prove two results relating to whether L(π) can be increased above zero. Lemma A.3 shows
that in general it is difficult to show when the lower bound can be optimized—there are general
counterexamples where it cannot be positive. However, Lemma A.4 shows that there are MDPs with
r-correlated proxies for any r where the lower bound can be positive.
Furthermore, as we show in our experiments, in many realistic environments it does appear that the
lower bound is optimizable. Furthermore, Theorem 5.1 still allows for safe optimization of the proxy
reward: even if the it not possible to increase the lower bound above zero, optimizing L(π) will at
least prevent reward hacking.

Lemma A.3. Fix any r ∈ (0, 1). Then there is an MDP with a true reward function R, a proxy
reward R̃, and a reference policy πref such that R̃ is an r-correlated proxy that can be improved upon
in both true and proxy reward by a policy π ∗ :
                                              J(π ∗ , R) > J(πref , R)
                                              J(π ∗ , R̃) > J(πref , R̃)
                                                    µπ∗ ≪ µπref .


                                                         20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


However, for any policy π such that µπ ≪ µπref ,
                                                                                            !
                      1       J(π, R̃) − J(πref , R̃)
                                                          q
               L(π) =                                 −       (1 − r2 )χ2   µπ ∥µπref           ≤ 0.
                      r                σR̃

That is, Lemma A.3 shows that there is an MDP where there exists a policy π ∗ that improves on the
reference policy in both true reward and proxy reward, but it is still not possible to increase the lower
bound L(π) above zero. This suggests that it is difficult to specify general conditions under which
L(π) can exceed zero. Thus, we rely on the empirical evidence from our experiments to show that
the lower bound is often optimizable.

Proof. We consider MDPs with discount γ = 0, such that the transition probabilities are not relevant;
only the initial state distribution µ0 and the reward functions specify the MDP. We split the analysis
into two cases depending on whether r ≤ 1/2 or r ≥ 1/2.

Case 1: r ≤ 1/2. We define an MDP with two states s1 , s2 and two actions a1 , a2 , with initial state
distribution and rewards as follows:
                                                 r                                r
                   1                                 r                                 r
       µ0 (s1 ) =                 R(s1 , a1 ) =                   R̃(s1 , a1 ) =
                  1+r                              1−r                               1−r
                                                   r
                                                     1−r
                                  R(s1 , a2 ) = −                 R̃(s1 , a2 ) = 0
                                                       r
                                                                                    r
                    r                                                                  1−r
       µ0 (s2 ) =                    R(s2 , ·) = 0                  R̃(s2 , ·) = −
                  1+r                                                                     r


Furthermore, we define πref (a1 | s1 ) = 1 − r and πref (a2 | s1 ) = r, and πref (a1 | s2 ) = 1. Based on
this, simple algebra shows the following facts:
                                              1−r                                    r
                         µπref (s1 , a1 ) =                           µπref (s1 , a2 ) =
                                              1+r                                   1+r
                                                                                    r
                                                                                       1
            J(πref , R) = J(πref , R̃) = 0                               σR = σR̃ =
                                                                                      1+r
                   h                 i     r
            Eµπref R(s, a)R̃(s, a) =         .
                                         1+r
Based on this, it is clear that R̃ is an r-correlated proxy. Furthermore, letting π ∗ (a1 | s1 ) = 1 and
π ∗ (a1 | s2 ) = 1, we have
                                                 r
                                             1        r
                             J(π ∗ , R) =                 > 0 = J(πref , R)
                                           1+r 1−r
                                                 r
                                             r        r
                             J(π ∗ , R̃) =                > 0 = J(πref , R̃)
                                           1+r 1−r
                                   µπ∗ ≪ µπref ,
satisfying the conditions in the lemma.
Now, consider any policy π such that µπ ≪ µπref . We can calculate the lower bound L(π) (ignoring
the prefactor of 1r ) as
                                   √       p
                          J(π, R̃) 1 + r − (1 − r2 )χ2 (µπ ∥µπref ).                         (13)
Since µπ ≪ µπref , π(a1 | s2 ) = 1, so it can only differ from πref in state s1 . Let δ = π(a1 |
s1 ) − πref (a1 | s1 ). Then, we can write the first term of (13) as
                                 √                       r √
                                                    r                 r
                                               1                          r
                         J(π, R̃) 1 + r = δ                    1+r =δ          .
                                             1+r 1−r                    1 − r2

                                                    21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Note that the χ2 divergence between distributions µ and ν can be alternatively written as
                                                   X (µ(s, a) − ν(s, a))2
                                  χ2 (µ∥ν) =                                      .
                                                   s,a
                                                                ν(s, a)

Therefore, the χ2 divergence between µπ and µπref can be lower bounded as
                                                                                 2
                                                                   1−r+δ    1−r
                           (µπ (s1 , a1 ) − µπref (s1 , a1 ))
                                                             2
                                                                    1+r  −  1+r        δ2
         χ2 (µπ ∥µπref ) ≥                                     =        1−r        =        .
                                     µπref (s1 , a1 )                   1+r
                                                                                     1 − r2

This leads to the bound on (13):
                             r                  r                             r
                                     r                            δ2      r
                   rL(π) ≤ δ              −         (1 − r2 )          =δ      − |δ|.
                                   1 − r2                       1 − r21 − r2
                                                                                  p
Clearly if δ ≤ 0 this is non-positive, and if δ > 0 it is also non-positive since r/(1 − r2 ) < 1 as
long as r ≤ 1/2. Thus, the lower bound cannot be increased above zero in this case.


Case 2: r ≥ 1/2. In this case, we define an MDP with three states s1 , s2 , s3 and two actions a1 , a2 ,
with initial state distribution and rewards as follows:
                                                        r                               r
                2r2 − 2r + 1                              1−r                             1−r
    µ0 (s1 ) = 2                          R(s1 , a1 ) =                 R̃(s1 , a1 ) =
                  r −r+1                                    r                               r
                                                          r
                                                              r
                                          R(s1 , a2 ) = −               R̃(s1 , a2 ) = 0
                                                            1−r
                 (1 − r)2
                                                                                          r
                                                                                              r
    µ0 (s2 ) = 2                            R(s2 , ·) = 0                  R̃(s2 , ·) = −
                r −r+1                                                                      1−r
                                                          r                               r
                (1 − r)(2r − 1)                               r                               r
    µ0 (s3 ) =      2
                                            R(s3 , ·) = −                  R̃(s3 , ·) = −
                   r −r+1                                   1−r                             1−r


We define the reference policy πref as follows:
                                     r2                                                  (1 − r)2
            πref (a1 | s1 ) =                                       πref (a2 | s1 ) =
                                2r2 − 2r + 1                                          2r2 − 2r + 1
            πref (a1 | s2 ) = 1                                     πref (a1 | s3 ) = 1.
As above, we can show the following facts:
                                              r2                                         (1 − r)2
                     µπref (s1 , a1 ) =                                   µπref (s1 , a2 ) =
                                          r2 − r + 1                                    r2 − r + 1
                                                                                        r
                                                                                               r
         J(πref , R) = J(πref , R̃) = 0                                      σR = σR̃ =     2
                                                                                          r −r+1
               h               i              r2
         Eµπref R(s, a)R̃(s, a) =                    .
                                          r2 − r + 1
Again, this shows that R̃ is an r-correlated proxy. Letting π ∗ (a1 | s1 ) = π ∗ (a1 | s2 ) = π ∗ (a1 |
s3 ) = 1, we have
                                                r
                             ∗          1−r        1−r
                        J(π , R) = 2                     > 0 = J(πref , R)
                                     r −r+1          r
                                                r
                                      (1 − r)2     1−r
                        J(π ∗ , R̃) = 2                  > 0 = J(πref , R̃)
                                     r −r+1          r
                               µπ∗ ≪ µπref ,


                                                         22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


satisfying the conditions in the lemma.
Now, consider any policy π such that µπ ≪ µπref . We can calculate the lower bound L(π) (again
ignoring the prefactor of 1r ) as
                                  r
                                    r2 − r + 1 p
                         J(π, R̃)             − (1 − r2 )χ2 (µπ ∥µπref ).                 (14)
                                        r
As in the previous case, let δ = π(a1 | s1 ) − πref (a1 | s1 ). Then, we can write the first term of (14) as
          r                                  r         r                                  r
             r2 − r + 1        2r2 − 2r + 1 1 − r r2 − r + 1               2r2 − 2r + 1           1−r
 J(π, R̃)                 =δ 2                                         =δ                       2
                                                                                                          .
                  r             r −r+1            r             r                r            r −r+1
The χ2 divergence between µπ and µπref can be lower bounded as
                                                      2           2
                                                     2r −2r+1
                                                        2 −r+1 δ
                                                2                          2           2
 2               (µ (s ,
                   π 1 1 a ) −   µ     (s ,
                                   πref 1 1 a ))      r                2  2r − 2r + 1       1
χ (µπ ∥µπref ) ≥                                  =         r 2     =δ                    2
                                                                                                .
                         µπref (s1 , a1 )               r 2 −r+1
                                                                              r          r −r+1

This leads to the bound on (14):
                                  r        s                          2
                 2r2 − 2r + 1
                                                          2
                                  1−r              2  2
                                                         2r − 2r + 1        1
       rL(π) ≤ δ                          − (1 − r )δ
                      r        r2 − r + 1                    r          r2 − r + 1
                2r2 − 2r + 1   √           p
              = √             δ 1 − r − |δ| 1 − r2 .
               r r2 − r + 1

                                                  √ if δ ≤√0 then the bound in non-positive. If
The prefactor is positive, and as in the previous case,
δ > 0, then the bound is also non-positive since 1 − r < 1 − r2 for any r ∈ (0, 1). Thus, the
lower bound cannot be increased above zero in this case either, completing the proof.

Lemma A.4. Fix any r ∈ (0, 1). Then there is an MDP with a true reward function R, a proxy
reward R̃, and a reference policy πref such that R̃ is an r-correlated proxy and:

      1. There is a policy π ∗ such that L(π ∗ ) > 0.

      2. Any optimal policy with respect to L(·) is also an optimal policy with respect to the true
         reward function:
                                       arg max L(π) ⊆ arg max J(π, R).
                                             π                   π

Lemma A.4 shows that no matter how low the correlation coefficient r is between the true and proxy
rewards, there is at least some MDP where the lower bound L(π) can be positive. Furthermore, in this
MDP, maximizing L(π) actually leads to an optimal policy with respect to the true reward function.


Proof. As in the proof of Lemma A.3, we construct an MDP with discount factor γ = 0 that has
three states and two actions. The initial state distribution and reward functions are given by
                                1−r                              3+r                        3+r
                     µ0 (s1 ) =                     µ0 (s2 ) =                 µ0 (s3 ) =
                                r4                               r8                          8
                                                                                             r
                                   1+r                              1−r                       1−r
    R(s1 , a1 ) = R̃(s1 , a1 ) = 2                  R(s2 , ·) = 2             R(s3 , ·) = − 2
                                   1−r                              3+r                       3+r
                                 r                                r                       r
                                    1−r                              1−r                     1−r
    R(s1 , a2 ) = R(s1 , a2 ) = − 2                 R̃(s2 , ·) = − 2          R̃(s3 , ·) = 2     .
                                    1+r                              3+r                     3+r
We define the reference policy πref as follows:
          πref (a1 | s1 ) = πref (a2 | s1 ) = 1/2      πref (a1 | s2 ) = 1    πref (a1 | s3 ) = 1.


                                                      23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


We can show the following facts:

          J(πref , R) = J(πref , R̃)
                       r               r               r          r
                 1−r       1+r 1−r         1+r 3+r        1−r 3+r      1−r
             =           2         −     2     +        2     −      2
                    8      1−r       8     1−r     8      3+r   8      3+r
             =0
           2       2    1−r 1+r 1−r 1+r 3+r 1−r 3+r 1−r
          σR = σR̃    =      2       +     2     +      2     +   2      =1
                          8      1−r   8     1−r     8    3+r   8   3+r
                h                 i
          Eµπref R(s, a)R̃(s, a)
                 1−r 1+r 1−r 1+r 3+r 1−r 3+r 1−r
             =      2     +   2     −   2     −   2     = r.
                  8   1−r   8   1−r   8   3+r   8   3+r
Thus, R̃ is an r-correlated proxy.
Since the rewards for both actions are identical at s2 and s3 , a policy can only differ meaningfully
from πref at s1 . Define
                                       1
                     π∆ (a1 | s1 ) =     +∆       π∆ (a1 | s2 ) = π∆ (a1 | s3 ) = 1.
                                       2
as any such policy where ∆ ∈ [−1/2, 1/2]. Then, we can calculate the lower bound L(π∆ ) as
                          1               p
                L(π∆ ) =     J(π∆ , R̃) − (1 − r2 )χ2 (µπ∆ ∥µπref )
                          r                                                   !
                                          r             r
                          1         1−r         1+r                1
                       =     2∆               2      − (1 − r2 ) (1 − r)∆2
                          r           8         1−r                2
                                r                       r                  !
                          1        (1 + r)(1 − r)         (1 − r)2 (1 + r)
                       =     ∆                    − |∆|
                          r              2                       2
                            r
                          1 (1 + r)(1 − r)         √
                       =                       ∆ − 1 − r|∆| .
                          r          2
      √
Since 1 − r < 1, clearly this is maximized at ∆ = 1/2, where
                                   r
                                 1 (1 + r)(1 − r) 1 √

                                                                 1
                      L(π∆ ) =                          − 1−r         > 0.
                                 r         2         2           2
Furthermore, π1/2 is an optimal policy with respect to the true reward function, since R(s1 , a1 ) >
R(s1 , a2 ) and π1/2 (a1 | s1 ) = 1. Thus, letting π ∗ = π1/2 completes the proof.



A.2    FAILURE OF ACTION D ISTRIBUTION R EGULARIZATION

As discussed in the main text, the OM regularization method we propose differs from the AD-based
regularization found in previous work on RLHF. The following theorem shows that almost any form
of policy optimization with action distribution regularization cannot guarantee an improvement in
true reward over the reference policy.

Theorem A.5. Fix r ∈ (0, 1). Consider a policy optimization objective regularized by any f -
divergence between the action distributions of the learned policy and the reference policy:
                                                               "∞                                        #!
                                                                 X
maximize      L′ (π) = J(π, R̃) − J(πref , R̃) − g (1 − γ)Eπ        γ t Df π(· | st ) ∥ πref (· | st )      ,
                                                                    t=0

where f : [0, ∞) → R is a convex, continuous function with f (1) = 0, g : [0, ∞) → [0, ∞) is a


                                                   24
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


strictly increasing function with g(0) = 0, and Df is the f -divergence:

                                                           P (x)
                                 Df (P ∥ Q) = Ex∼Q f                 .
                                                           Q(x)

Then there is an MDP, reward functions R, R̃, and reference policy πref such that R̃ is an r-correlated
proxy for R, but there is a policy π
                                   e such that
                            L′ (e
                                π) > 0      but      J(e
                                                       π , R) < J(πref , R).

Theorem A.5 concerns a general form of policy optimization with action distribution regularization;
it considers any f -divergence between action distributions and any way of scaling the f -divergence
using the function g. For instnce, g could incorporate linear scaling of the divergence as in the
KL regularization used in previous work, square-root scaling as we use with χ2 divergence in
Theorem 5.1, or any other scaling. The theorem shows that no matter how the regularization is
formulated, it cannot guarantee improvement in true reward over the reference policy; there is a
policy that increases the regularized objective but decreases the true reward.


Proof. Define the inverse g −1 : [0, ∞) → [0, ∞] as

                              g −1 (x) = sup {y ∈ [0, ∞) | g(y) ≤ x} .
Since f is continuous and f (1) = 0, there must be a radius ρ > 0 such that
                                                             2g −1 1−r

                                                                    8
                         |u − 1| ≤ ρ       ⇒        f (u) <              .
                                                                1−r

We construct an MDP with discount factor
                                         −1 1−r
                               n                       o
                         max 1 − 2g ( 8 ) , 1 , 1                   f (2) > 0
                                       (1−r)f (2) 1+ρ 2
                    γ=          n        o
                         max 1 , 1                                  otherwise.
                                  1+ρ 2

There are four states and two actions. The initial state distribution and transition probabilities are
                   1+r
        µ0 (s1 ) =                            p(s1 | s1 , a1 ) = 1             p(s1 | s1 , a2 ) = 1
                     4
                   1+r
        µ0 (s2 ) =                            p(s2 | s2 , a1 ) = 1             p(s2 | s2 , a2 ) = 1
                     4
                   (1 − r)(1 + γ)
        µ0 (s3 ) =                            p(s3 | s3 , a1 ) = 1             p(s4 | s3 , a2 ) = 1
                         4
                   (1 − r)(1 − γ)
        µ0 (s4 ) =                            p(s4 | s4 , a1 ) = 1             p(s4 | s4 , a2 ) = 1.
                         4
The reward functions only depend on the state and are given by

                       R(s1 , ·) = 1                             R̃(s1 , ·) = 1
                       R(s2 , ·) = −1                            R̃(s2 , ·) = −1
                       R(s3 , ·) = 1                             R̃(s3 , ·) = −1
                       R(s4 , ·) = −1                            R̃(s4 , ·) = 1.
In graphical form, the MDP is as follows:


                                                   25
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                         µ0 = 1+r                                            µ0 = 1+r
                                                                                   4
                               4

                                      s1                             s2
                                    R=1                           R = −1
                     a1 , a2                                                         a1 , a2
                                    R̃ = 1                        R̃ = −1


                 µ0 = (1−r)(1+γ)
                          4                                                   µ0 = (1−r)(1−γ)
                                                                                       4

                                                      a2
                                       s3                             s4
                        a1           R=1                           R = −1
                                    R̃ = −1                         R̃ = 1            a1 , a2


We consider the reference policy defined by
                     πref (a1 | s1 ) = 1                          πref (a2 | s1 ) = 0
                     πref (a1 | s2 ) = 1                          πref (a2 | s2 ) = 0
                     πref (a1 | s3 ) = γ                          πref (a2 | s3 ) = 1 − γ
                     πref (a1 | s4 ) = 1                          πref (a2 | s4 ) = 0.
To compute the occupancy measure of the reference policy, we first can see that clearly,
                                                                         1+r
                                 µπref (s1 , a1 ) = µπref (s2 , a1 ) =       .
                                                                          4
For s3 , the agent stays in the state until it takes action a2 , so we have
                            µπref (s3 ) = (1 − γ)µ0 (s3 ) 1 + γ 2 + γ 4 + · · ·


                                                   (1 − r)(1 + γ) 1
                                      = (1 − γ)
                                                         4       1 − γ2
                                           1−r
                                      =        .
                                            4
This also implies that µπref (s4 ) = 1−r
                                      4 since the occupancy measure sums to one. Thus, we can
compute

                                J(πref , R) = 0                              J(πref , R̃) = 0
                                         σR = 1                                       σR̃ = 1
                   Eµπref [R(s, a)R̃(s, a)] = r.

This confirms that R̃ is an r-correlated proxy for R.
Now, we define π
               e as
                  πref (a1 | s1 ) = 1                             πref (a2 | s1 ) = 0
                  πref (a1 | s2 ) = 1                             πref (a2 | s2 ) = 0
                  πref (a1 | s3 ) = 2γ − 1                        πref (a2 | s3 ) = 2(1 − γ)
                  πref (a1 | s4 ) = 1                             πref (a2 | s4 ) = 0.
Note that since γ ≥ 1/2 by definition, the policy is well-defined. As for πref , the occupancy measure


                                                      26
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


   e at s1 and s2 is 1+r
of π                  4 . For s3 , we have

                   µπe (s3 ) = (1 − γ)µ0 (s3 ) 1 + γ(2γ − 1) + γ 2 (2γ − 1)2 + · · ·


                                     (1 − r)(1 + γ)       1
                            = (1 − γ)
                                           4        1 − γ(2γ − 1)
                              (1 − r)(1 + γ)
                            =                .
                                4(1 + 2γ)
For s4 ,
                                µπe (s4 ) = 1 − µπe (s1 ) − µπe (s2 ) − µπe (s3 )
                                            1 − r (1 − r)(1 + γ)
                                          =        −
                                              2           4(1 + 2γ)
                                            (1 − r)(1 + 3γ)
                                          =                    .
                                               4(1 + 2γ)
Based on this, we can compute the true reward of π
                                                 e:
                  J(e
                    π , R) = Eµπe [R(s, a)]
                             1 + r 1 + r (1 − r)(1 + γ) (1 − r)(1 + 3γ)
                           =        −         +           −
                               4          4     4(1 + 2γ)   4(1 + 2γ)
                                γ(1 − r)
                           =−
                               2(1 + 2γ)
                           ≤ 0 = J(πref , R).
This verifies the claim that J(e
                               π , R) < J(πref , R).
To show the second claim, we can compute the regularized objective L′ (e
                                                                       π ). Starting with the proxy
reward term, we have
                              1 + r 1 + r (1 − r)(1 + γ) (1 − r)(1 + 3γ)
                  J(e
                    π , R̃) =       −     −             +
                                4       4   4(1 + 2γ)       4(1 + 2γ)
                               γ(1 − r)
                            =
                              2(1 + 2γ)
                              1−r
                            ≥      .                                                                      (15)
                                8
Next, we compute the regularization term, which can be written as
                                     "∞                                       #!
                                      X
                                           t
                     g (1 − γ)Eπe         γ Df π e(· | st ) ∥ πref (· | st )
                                            t=0

                             = g µ(s3 )Df πe(· | s3 ) ∥ πref (· | s3 )

since πref and π
               e only differ in state s3 . We can rewrite the above as

            (1 − r)(1 + γ)                        e(a1 | s3 )
                                                  π                                      e(a2 | s3 )
                                                                                         π
    =g                        πref (a1 | s3 )f                     + πref (a2 | s3 )f
              4(1 + 2γ)                          πref (a1 | s3 )                        πref (a2 | s3 )

            (1 − r)(1 + γ)                1
    =g                        γf 2 −           + (1 − γ)f (2) .                                            (16)
              4(1 + 2γ)                   γ


                                                       27
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                     1
Note that since γ ≥ 1+ρ , we have

                                           1
                                             ≤1+ρ
                                           γ
                                           1
                                       2− ≥1−ρ
                                           γ
                                               2g −1 1−r

                                         1            8
                                    f 2−     <             .
                                         γ        1−r
                                                                            2g −1 ( 1−r )
Plugging this back into (16) along with the fact that (1 − γ)f (2) ≤ (1−r)8 , we get
                                             "                                #!
                                                 2g −1 1−r       2g −1 ( 1−r

                             (1 − r)(1 + γ)              8                8 )
                      <g                      γ               +
                               4(1 + 2γ)            1−r             1−r
                                                    !
                             1 − r 4g −1 1−r

                                               8
                      ≤g           ×
                               4         1−r
                          1−r
                      ≤       .
                           8
Combining this with (15), we have
                                                        "∞                                                #!
                                                         X
        ′                                                        t
      L (π) = J(π, R̃) − J(πref , R̃) − g (1 − γ)Eπ             γ Df       π(· | st ) ∥ πref (· | st )
                                                          t=0
                 1−r     1−r
             >       −0−     = 0,
                  8       8
which completes the proof.


A.3   ACTION D ISTRIBUTION AND O CCUPANCY M EASURE D IVERGENCES IN LLM S


As noted in the main text, in the current paradigm of using RLHF to train LLMs, we can show that
action distribution divergence between two policies is equivalent to occupancy measure divergence.
In particular, RLHF for LLMs is usually modeled as a contextual bandit.
In our setting, a contextual bandit can be defined as an MDP with γ = 0; then, the return of the policy
π under a reward function R is given by
                               J(π, R) = Es∼µ0 (·),a∼π(·|s) [R(s, a)].
That is, a single state is sampled from the initial state distribution µ0 , and then a single action is
sampled from the policy π conditioned on that state. RLHF for LLMs follows this setting as a prompt
is sampled from a dataset, the LLM generates a response, and the reward is calculated based on the
prompt and response.
In this setting, it is simple to show that the action distribution and occupancy measure divergences
are equivalent.


Lemma A.6. Let Df (P ∥ Q) = Ex∼Q f P (x)/Q(x) be the f -divergence between two distribu-
tions P and Q. Then, for any two policies π, π ′ in a contextual bandit, we have
                                                  h                         i
                     Df (µπ ∥ µπ′ ) = Es∼µ0 (·) Df π(· | s) ∥ π ′ (· | s) .

Lemma A.6 applies to any f -divergence, including the KL and χ2 divergences we study in this paper.


                                                  28
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Proof. We have

                                                               µπ (s, a)
                   Df (µπ ∥ µπ′ ) = Es∼µ0 (·),a∼π′ (·|s) f
                                                              µπ′ (a | s)

                                                                 µ0 (s)π(a | s)
                                  = Es∼µ0 (·) Ea∼π′ (·|s) f
                                                                 µ0 (s)π ′ (a | s)
                                                         ′
                                  = Es∼µ0 (·) [Df (π ∥ π )] ,
which completes the proof.

A.3.1    AUTOREGRESSIVE E NVIRONMENTS
While most RLHF implementations use the contextual bandit formulation above for the purposes of
KL regularization, one can also model training an LLM as a sequential problem where each token
generated is a separate action. This formulation is no longer a contextual bandit, but we can show
that the action distribution and occupancy measure KL divergences are still equivalent!
Lemma A.7. Suppose that an environment satisfies the following conditions:

        • It is deterministic: µ0 (s0 ) = 1 for exactly one state s0 , and for all st , at ∈ S × A,
          p(st+1 | st , at ) = 1 for exactly one state st+1 .
        • Exactly one sequence of actions leads to each state: if following a0 , . . . , at−1 leads to s,
          then no other sequence of actions (of any length) can also lead to s.

Then, for any policies π, π ′ , the action distribution and occupancy measure KL divergences between
them are equal (removing the (1 − γ) prefactor on the action distribution divergence):
                                               "∞                                    #
                                                 X
                                                      t                   ′
                     DKL (µπ ∥ µπ′ ) = Eπ            γ DKL (π(· | st ) ∥ π (· | st )) .
                                              t=0


Lemma A.7 applies to LLMs since one can treat the “state” of the environment after t timesteps as
all the tokens generated so far w0 w1 . . . wt−1 , and the actions as the next token wt , which is then
appended to the state:
at ∼ π(at | st ) = π(wt | w0 w1 . . . wt−1 ).
p(st+1 | st , at ) = 1{st+1 = w0 w1 . . . wt−1 wt }         where st = w0 w1 . . . wt−1   and   at = wt .
Thus, regardless of the formalism used to train an LLM via RLHF, the action distribution and
occupancy measure KL are equivalent. However, the conditions of Lemma A.7 are unlikely to be
met by many other MDPs. Many MDPs are stochastic, violating the first assumption. Even among
deterministic MDPs, it is very uncommon that only a single action sequence can lead to each state.

Proof. Given the assumptions about the environment, we can rewrite the log-occupancy measure of
a state-action pair in terms of the sum of log action probabilties over the unique sequence of actions
leading to that state. Suppose a0 , . . . , at−1 is the unique action sequence leading to s and that this
action sequence visits states s0 , . . . , st−1 , s. Then
                                                          "∞                       #!
                                                             γ t 1{st = s ∧ at = a}
                                                           X
                   log µπ (s, a) = log (1 − γ)Eπ
                                                           t=0
                                                  t

                                = log (1 − γ)γ Pπ (st = s ∧ at = a)
                                                 t
                                                               !
                                                 Y
                                               t
                                = log (1 − γ)γ      π(ai | si )
                                                      i=0
                                                                 t
                                                                 X
                                = log(1 − γ) + t log γ +               log π(ai | si ).
                                                                 i=0



                                                      29
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Using this, we can rewrite the occupancy measure KL divergence as

                      X                       µπ (s, a)
DKL (µπ ∥ µπ′ ) =             µπ (s, a) log
                                              µπ′ (s, a)
                     (s,a)∈S×A
                               ∞
                               X                    X                                       t
                                                                                            X
                  = (1 − γ)              γt                       Pπ (a0 ∧ · · · ∧ at )           log π(ai | si ) − log π ′ (ai | si )
                                   t=0         a0 ,...,at ∈At+1                             i=0
                                                                                     
                               ∞
                               X                    X                   t
                                                                        Y                   t
                                                                                            X
                  = (1 − γ)              γt                                 π(ai | si )         log π(ai | si ) − log π ′ (ai | si ) ,
                                   t=0         a0 ,...,at ∈At+1        j=0                  i=0
                                                                                                                           (17)
where si is the state reached by taking a0 , . . . , ai−1 .
We will now show inductively that
                                            
                 X           Y t               t
                                               X
                                 π(aj | sj )     log π(ai | si ) − log π ′ (ai | si )
                a0 ,...,at ∈At+1         j=0                      i=0
                          t X
                          X
                      =                  Pπ (si )DKL (π(· | si ) ∥ π ′ (· | si )).                                         (18)
                          i=0 si ∈S

Consider first if t = 0. Then
                          X
                                     π(a0 | s0 ) log π(a0 | s0 ) − log π ′ (a0 | s0 )
                            a0 ∈A

                             = DKL (π(· | s0 ) ∥ π ′ (· | s0 ))
                             = Pπ (s0 )DKL (π(· | s0 ) ∥ π ′ (· | s0 )).


                                                                  30
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Now suppose (18) holds for t − 1. Then for t we have
                              
     X          Y t               Xt
                   π(aj | sj )       log π(ai | si ) − log π ′ (ai | si )
 a0 ,...,at ∈At+1            j=0                      i=0
                                                                             "
                X                t−1
                                 Y                          X
 =                                    π(aj | sj )               π(at | st ) log π(at | st ) − log π ′ (at | st )
        a0 ,...,at−1 ∈At         j=0                      at ∈A
                                                                                       t−1
                                                                                                                                       #
                                                                                       X
                                                                                   +           log π(ai | si ) − log π ′ (ai | si )
                                                                                       i=0
                                                     "
                X                t−1
                                 Y
 =                                    π(aj | sj ) DKL (π(· | st ) ∥ π ′ (· | st ))
        a0 ,...,at−1   ∈At       j=0
                                                                                        t−1
                                                                                                                                       #
                                                                   X                    X
                                                                                                                         ′
                                                             +            π(at | st )           log π(ai | si ) − log π (ai | si )
                                                                  at ∈A                 i=0
                                                     "
                X                t−1
                                 Y
 =                                    π(aj | sj ) DKL (π(· | st ) ∥ π ′ (· | st ))
        a0 ,...,at−1   ∈At       j=0
                                                                  t−1
                                                                                                                     #
                                                                  X
                                                                                                       ′
                                                             +             log π(ai | si ) − log π (ai | si )
                                                                  i=0
        X
                                                  ′
 =              Pπ (st )DKL (π(· | st ) ∥ π (· | st ))
        st ∈S
                                                           
                       X                t−1
                                        Y                       t−1
                                                                X
          +                                  π(aj | sj )                log π(ai | si ) − log π ′ (ai | si )
                a0 ,...,at−1 ∈At       j=0                        i=0
                                                                     t−1 X
  (i)   X                                                            X
 =              Pπ (st )DKL (π(· | st ) ∥ π ′ (· | st )) +                         Pπ (si )DKL (π(· | si ) ∥ π ′ (· | si ))
        st ∈S                                                        i=0 si ∈S
        t X
        X
 =                   Pπ (si )DKL (π(· | si ) ∥ π ′ (· | si )),
        i=0 si ∈S

where (i) is from the inductive hypothesis.


                                                                          31
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Now, plugging (18) into (17) gives
                    DKL (µπ ∥ µπ′ )
                                   ∞
                                   X           t X
                                               X
                     = (1 − γ)           γt                      Pπ (si )DKL (π(· | si ) ∥ π ′ (· | si ))
                                   t=0   i=0 si ∈S
                                    ∞
                                   XX X∞
                     = (1 − γ)             t
                                                   γ             Pπ (si )DKL (π(· | si ) ∥ π ′ (· | si ))
                                   i=0 t=i               si ∈S
                                   ∞ X
                                   X                                                                 ∞
                                                                                                     X
                                                                                      ′
                     = (1 − γ)                         Pπ (si )DKL (π(· | si ) ∥ π (· | si ))              γt
                                   i=0 si ∈S                                                         t=i
                                         "∞                                               ∞
                                                                                                     #
                                          X                                               X
                     = (1 − γ)Eπ                   DKL (π(· | si ) ∥ π ′ (· | si ))             γt
                                             i=0                                          t=i
                                                         ∞
                                         "                                                           #
                                                   i
                                               γ         X
                     = (1 − γ)Eπ                       DKL (π(· | si ) ∥ π ′ (· | si ))
                                             1 − γ i=0
                                   ∞
                           "                                           #
                                   X
                     = Eπ γ    i
                                         DKL (π(· | si ) ∥ π ′ (· | si )) ,
                                   i=0

which is the desired result.

A.4    L EARNED R EWARD F UNCTIONS ARE r-C ORRELATED

Proxy reward functions are often learned from data like ratings or preference comparisons, including
in the case of RLHF. Here, we show that a learned reward function with low mean-squared error—a
common objective in supervised learning—is r-correlated with the true reward function.
Lemma h A.8. Let R be the true
                             i reward function and R̃ be a learned reward function. Suppose that
                           2      2
Eµπref (R(s, a) − R̃(s, a)) ≤ ϵσR   . Then, the learned reward function is an r-correlated proxy
with r ≥ 1 − ϵ.

The assumption in Lemma A.8 is that the mean-squared error over the occupancy measure of the
reference policy is small. This can be achieved, for example, by learning R̃ via least-squares
regression over a training dataset of state-action pairs sampled from the reference policy. Many
results in learning theory show that this results in a small mean-squared error over the distribution the
training data was sampled from, i.e., exactly the assumption in Lemma A.8 (Koltchinskii, 2006).

Proof. Throughout the proof, all expectations, variances, and covariances are with respect to µπref .
We can rewrite the assumption using the bias-variance decomposition as
   h                     i
 E (R(s, a) − R̃(s, a))2
          h                  i                     h        i 2
    = Var R(s, a) − R̃(s, a) + E [R(s, a)] − E R̃(s, a)
                           h       i          h                i                     h       i 2
    = Var [R(s, a)] + Var R̃(s, a) − 2 Cov R(s, a), R̃(s, a) + E [R(s, a)] − E R̃(s, a)
                         h                i                     h      i 2
        2     2
    = σR  + σR̃ − 2 Cov R(s, a), R̃(s, a) + E [R(s, a)] − E R̃(s, a)
         2
    ≤ ϵσR  .
                         h         i 2
Note that E [R(s, a)] − E R̃(s, a)     > 0, so we can rewrite the inequality as
                    h                 i
                                                 2    2             2    2

                2Cov R(s, a), R̃(s, a) ≥ (1 − ϵ)σR + σR̃ ≥ (1 − ϵ) σR + σR̃   .


                                                                   32
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Dividing both sides by 2σR σR̃ gives
                                 h              i
                           Cov R(s, a), R̃(s, a)                         2     2
                                                                  1 − ϵ σR + σR̃
                                                             ≥                   .
                                         σR σR̃                     2    σR σR̃
                                2   2
                               σR +σR̃
By the AM-GM inequality,          2    ≥ σR σR̃ , so
                                         h                 i
                                      Cov R(s, a), R̃(s, a)
                                                                    ≥ 1 − ϵ,
                                              σR σR̃
which is the desired result.

A.5    S TATE -O NLY O CCUPANCY M EASURES

We can also consider state-only occupancy measures, defined as
                                                "∞              #
                                                     γ 1{st = s} .
                                                 X
                                                      t
                             µπ (s) = (1 − γ)Eπ
                                                            t=0

In many environments, the reward functions only depend on the state, i.e., R(s, a) = R(s) and
R̃(s, a) = R̃(s). In this case, Theorem 5.1 holds for state-only occupancy measures as well. The
proof is identical to the proof of Theorem 5.1, but replacing expectations and sums over state-action
pairs with expectations over states.


B     D ERIVATION OF O CCUPANCY-R EGULARIZED P OLICY O PTIMIZATION

In this appendix section, we show how to derive the approximations used for Occupancy-Regularized
Policy Optimization (ORPO). As a reminder, we would like to optimize
                                                p
                                  J(πθ , R̃) − λ χ2 (µπθ ∥µπref ).
We can rewrite its gradient as
                           p
       ∇θ J(πθ , R̃) − λ χ2 (µπθ ∥µπref )
                                λ∇θ χ2 (µπθ ∥µπref )
           = ∇θ J(πθ , R̃) −     p
                                2 χ2 (µπθ ∥µπref )
                                         !                                                       !
                    X                                λ                   X µπ (s, a)2
                                                                                 θ
           = ∇θ        µπθ (s, a)R̃(s, a) − p                    ∇θ                         −1
                   s,a
                                                 2
                                              2 χ (µπθ ∥µπref )          s,a
                                                                              µ πref (s, a)
                 "                                                                        #
                                                                     µπθ (s, a)2

             X                                   λ
           =       ∇θ µπθ (s, a)R̃(s, a) − p                  ∇θ                    −1
             s,a                           2 χ2 (µπθ ∥µπref )        µπref (s, a)
                 "                                                                          #
             X                                   λ            2µπθ (s, a)
           =       ∇θ µπθ (s, a)R̃(s, a) − p                                ∇θ µπθ (s, a)
             s,a                           2 χ2 (µπθ ∥µπref ) µπref (s, a)
                                                                              !
             X                                       λ           µπθ (s, a)
           =       ∇θ µπθ (s, a)    R̃(s, a) − p                                .
             s,a                                χ2 (µπθ ∥µπref ) µπref (s, a)

As described in the main text, policy gradient algorithms can approximate this type of gradient by
using an augmented reward function
                                                            λ           µπθ (s, a)
                         R′ (s, a) = R̃(s, a) − p                                    .               (19)
                                                       χ2 (µπθ ∥µπref ) µπref (s, a)

                                                       33
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


However, two terms in (19) cannot be computed directly: the current χ2 divergence between occu-
pancy measures, and the ratio of the occupancy measures µπθ (s, a)/µπref (s, a). We first show how to
approximate the latter using a discriminator network dˆϕ (s, a), trained to optimize
                                  h                    i           h                  i
                                               ˆ                                ˆ
             ϕ = arg min Eµπθ log(1 + e−dϕ (s,a) ) + Eµπref log(1 + edϕ (s,a) ) .                (20)
                         ϕ

It is well-known that exactly optimizing the loss function in (20) gives
                                                       µπ (s, a)
                                       dˆϕ (s, a) = log θ           .                           (21)
                                                       µπref (s, a)
Furthermore, the OM χ2 divergence is given by

               2                      µπθ (s, a)             h
                                                               ˆ
                                                                           i
             χ (µπθ ∥µπref ) = Eµπθ                − 1 = Eµπθ edϕ (s,a) − 1 =: χ
                                                                               c2 .             (22)
                                      µπref (s, a)
Combining (21) and (22) shows that the augmented reward in (19) can be rewritten as
                                                                  ˆ
                                  R′ (s, a) = R̃(s, a) − √λc2 edϕ (s,a) .
                                                             χ


Putting all the steps together, the following algorithm formalizes ORPO:


Algorithm 1 Occupancy-Regularized Policy Optimization (ORPO).
 1: for iteration i = 1, . . . , I do
 2:     Collect a set of n trajectories Dπ from πθ .
 3:     Collect a set of n trajectories Dπref from πref .
 4:     Optimize ϕ via SGD to minimize
                            h                    i        h                    i
                                       ˆ                            ˆ
                         EDπ log(1 + e−dϕ (s,a) ) + EDπref log(1 + edϕ (s,a) )
                           h            i
 5:               c2 = ED edˆϕ (s,a) − 1 .
        Calculate χ      π

                                                                                      ˆ
 6:     Transform Dπ to Dπ′ by replacing the rewards with R′ (s, a) = R̃(s, a)− √λc2 edϕ (s,a) − 1 .
                                                                                   χ

 7:    Optimize θ via SGD to minimize the proximal policy optimization (PPO) loss LPPO (Dπ′ ).
 8: end for


A similar approach can also be used to optimize the proxy reward regularized by KL divergence

                                    J(πθ , R̃) − λ DKL (µπθ ∥µπref ) ,
by changing the augmented reward in Line 6 of Algorithm 1 to

                                    R′ (s, a) = R̃(s, a) − λ dˆϕ (s, a).

How accurate is the discriminator-based approximation?. To determine whether using the
discriminator results in an accurate approximation of χ2 and KL OM divergences, we plot the output
of the discriminator in the glucose environment versus the theoretically correct value in Figure 6.
The results suggest that the discriminator accurately approximates the log ratio of the occupancy
measures, which in turn allows for accurate approximations of the OM divergences.


                                                    34
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                             µπ (s)

                                                                            µπref (s)

                                     100           200                300           400
                            1

                            0

                          −1                          ˆ
                                                      d(s)
                                                             µπ (s)
                          −2                          log
                                                            µπref (s)
                          −3
                                      100          200          300               400
                                             s (blood glucose level)

Figure 6: The top plot shows the state occupancy measures of the reference policy πref and a policy π optimized
with ORPO in the glucose environment. The bottom plot shows the exact log ratio of the occupancy measures
log µπ (s)/µπref (s) versus the discriminator output dˆϕ (s), which attempts to approximate it. We find the
discriminator output to be a good approximation of the log ratio.


C     E NVIRONMENT D ETAILS
Here, we discuss the details of the five reward-hacking environments we study.

C.1    T RAFFIC C ONTROL

The traffic control environment, based on the Flow simulator (Wu et al., 2022), simulates a group
of human-controlled and RL-controlled vehicles on an on-ramp attempting to merge into traffic on
a highway. The true reward prioritizes a small mean commute time, while the proxy reward is the
average velocity of all cars. When reward hacking, the RL controlled vehicle on the on-ramp stops
indefinitely and lets cars continue forward at high speeds on the highway, which maximizes the proxy
reward but increases the commute times of cars on the on-ramp infinitely. As the reference policy for
the traffic environment we used the Intelligent Driver Model (IDM), a standard approximation of
human driving behavior (Treiber et al., 2000). In practice, reference policies are often learned via
imitation learning, so to simulate this we generate data from the IDM controller and train a behavioral
cloning (BC) policy using the generated data.
Here, the green cars are controlled by the human driver model IDM controller, and the blue cars are
controlled by RL:


This particular frame showcases reward hacking behavior. The blue RL-controlled vehicle has
stopped completely on the on-ramp, blocking cars behind it. This increases the average velocity of
all vehicles in the simulation, as the cars on the straightway are able to continue speeding along the
road without having to wait for merging cars. However, the true reward (negative average commute


                                                      35
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


time) decreases endlessly as the cars on the on-ramp wait.

C.2   G LUCOSE M ONITORING

The SimGlucose blood glucose monitoring environment is an extension of the FDA-approved glucose
monitoring simulator proposed by Man et al. (2014) for Type 1 Diabetes patients (Fox et al., 2020):


The RL agent (bottom) controls the insulin administered to a simulated patient in order to maintain
healthy glucose levels. The true reward is a standard measure of health risk for the patient, but the
proxy reward prioritizes the monetary cost of insulin. As the safe baseline policy, we train a BC
policy using data generated by a PID controller with parameters tuned by the original designers of
the simulator (Steil, 2013).
In Figure 2, we adapt a diagram from Pauley et al. (2022) to represent this environment.

C.3   PANDEMIC M ITIGATION

PandemicSimulator (Kompella et al., 2020) models a population’s infection dynamics using a modified
SEIR model that they designed to represent the COVID-19 pandemic:


The RL agent chooses the level of lockdown restrictions placed on the population by observing the
results of testing. The proxy reward function omits the political cost associated with certain decisions.
Our reference policy is trained via BC on a combination of hand-specified and real-world strategies
employed by governments during the pandemic, which were also used by Kompella et al. (2020) as
baselines.

C.4   RLHF

We base our RLHF environment on the work of Coste et al. (2024), who study overoptimization
of LLM-based reward models. The proxy reward model we use is fine-tuned from Pythia-70M
(Biderman et al., 2023) on the AlpacaFarm (Dubois et al., 2023) preference dataset. As a true reward


                                                  36
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


model, we use the Llama 3 Tulu V2 8B RM from AI2 (Ivison et al., 2024). As a reference policy, we
use Coste et al.’s SFT policy, which was fine-tuned from Pythia-1.4B on the AlpacaFarm SFT data.
We evaluate policies’ true and proxy rewards on responses sampled for a held out set of prompts.

C.5   T OMATO -WATERING G RIDWORLD

The tomato environment contains a sprinkler state where the agent perceives all tomatoes as being
watered and thus receives high proxy reward but no true reward. We train a reference policy using the
true reward function, and then add a 10% chance of taking a random action to ensure there is room to
improve upon it.
The gray squares in the environment represent walls, and the white squares represent open spaces
where the agent can travel:


The sprinkler state is down a narrow hallway, and on the other end a tomato is down another narrow
hallway.


D     E XPERIMENT D ETAILS

D.1   N ON -LLM E XPERIMENTS

We implement ORPO using RLLib (Liang et al., 2018) and PyTorch (Paszke et al., 2019).

Network architectures For the pandemic, traffic, and tomato-watering environments, we use policy
networks based on fully-connected networks with 2 layers of 128 units, 4 layers of 512 units, and
4 units of 512 units, respectively. The policy model for the glucose environment is a basic LSTM
network with 3 layers of 64 units each. We made this choice since the observation of the environment
contains continuous historical information about the patient’s blood glucose levels and previously
administered insulin.
The discriminator model for all four non-LLM environments is a fully connected network with 2
layers of 256 units each. We found that the discriminator architecture did not need to be tuned to
each environment.

Policy initialization Initializing using an imitation learning policy has been shown to effectively
speed up the learning process (Laidlaw et al., 2023; Uchendu et al., 2023) and is used in practice
for RLHF (Stiennon et al., 2020), so we initialize our policies using the specified πref for the more
realistic traffic, glucose, and pandemic environments.


                                                 37
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Hyperparameters Some hyperparameters for the traffic environment were tuned by Pan et al.
(2022). We primarily tuned the hyperparameters listed below in order to ensure that the proxy reward
would be properly optimized and reward hacking would occur without regularization. This enables to
see if the various regularization methods actually succeed at preventing reward hacking.

           Hyperparameter                     Tomato      Traffic   Glucose     Pandemic
           Training iterations                     500        250        500           260
           Batch size                            3000     40000      100000          3860
           SGD minibatch size                      128     16384        1024            64
           SGD epochs per iteration                   8         5           4             5
           Optimizer                            Adam       Adam        Adam         Adam
           Learning rate                         1e-3        5e-5       1e-4       0.0003
           Gradient clipping                        0.1     None           10            10
           Discount rate (γ)                      0.99       0.99        0.99         0.99
           GAE coefficient (λ)                    0.98       0.97        0.98        0.95
           Entropy coefficient (start)            0.01       0.01        0.01           0.1
           Entropy coefficient (end)              0.01       0.01        0.01         0.01
           Entropy schedule horizon                   0         0           0      500000
           KL target                            0.001        0.02       1e-3          0.01
           Value function loss clipping              10   10,000         100            20
           Value function loss coefficient         0.1        0.5     0.0001            0.5
           Share value function layers                F         T           T             T

                                 Table 2: PPO/ORPO hyperparameters.



           Hyperparameter                     Tomato      Traffic   Glucose     Pandemic
           Discriminator reward clipping        1000          10       1e10            0.1
           Regularization coefficient (λ)      Varied     Varied      Varied        Varied
           σR̃                                   0.05     0.0002        0.05          0.08

                               Table 3: ORPO-specific hyperparameters.


ORPO details We found that a couple of tricks were useful to ensure that ORPO remained stable.
First, we clip the discriminator term added to the reward functions to a range [−δ, δ], since sometimes
it can blow up and cause numerical issues. Second, when estimating χ       c2 , we use a trimmed mean
(trimmed by 1% in each tail) to reduce the effect that outliers have on the estimate. These are both
particularly important for χ2 divergence, where the output of the discriminator is exponentiated for
both the reward discriminator term and for estimating χ  c2 .

D.2   RLHF E XPERIMENTS

We train LLMs via the RLHF implementation used by Coste et al. (2024), which is based on
OpenAssistant and trlX (Havrilla et al., 2023). To implement χ2 or KL regularization, we directly
add a loss term to the PPO loss:

                                             πθ (a | s)        πref (a | s)
                      χ2 divergence:     λ                 +                 −2
                                             πref (a | s)      πθ (a | s)

                                                   πθ (a | s)       πref (a | s)
                     KL divergence:      λ log                  +                −1
                                                  πref (a | s)       πθ (a | s)


where s is the prompt and a is the sampled response. Intuitively, both loss terms have a unique
minimum when πθ (a | s) = πref (a | s) and in expectation are equivalent to the correct divergence.
Schulman (2020) suggests that these are particularly low-variance estimates, and we find that they


                                                  38
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


work well in practice.

E     A DDITIONAL E XPERIMENTS AND R ESULTS
In this appendix, we the full results from our main experiments as well as ablations of ORPO.

E.1   W IN R ATES FOR RLHF

Besides calculating the true reward for RLHF models with the Llama 3 Tulu V2 8B RM, we also
calculate the win rates for the best coefficient of KL and χ2 regularization. We use AlpacaEval
(Dubois et al., 2023) with GPT4o-mini to compute the win rate between the RLHF policy and the SFT
policy. We find that the median win rate for χ2 divergence is higher, and it is also more consistent
across random seeds. In contrast, using KL divergence leads to reward hacking for one seed and a
lower median win rate.

                 Divergence      Coefficient      Median win rate         Win rate range
                   2
                 χ                    0.0008                    52.83           51.98 – 53.98
                 KL                    0.025                    51.50           11.93 – 53.75

Table 4: Win rates for RLHF-trained models using KL divergence vs. χ2 divergence. The median win rate and
range of win rates are reported across five seeds.


E.2   R ESULTS FOR A LL R EGULARIZATION C OEFFICIENTS

Here, we present the results of training with AD and OM regularization using χ2 and KL divergence
across all regularization coefficients. Each table shows the median and the standard deviation of the
true rewards achieved by the learned policy across 5 random seeds.

                                             χ2 divergence
                Coefficient                 AD        State OM           State-action OM
                0.000002        -60.79 ± 8.40       -61.04 ± 2.20               -59.11 ± 4.53
                0.000004        -62.01 ± 8.58       -61.85 ± 2.22               -58.21 ± 5.52
                0.00001         -60.43 ± 6.61       -59.82 ± 2.85               -54.35 ± 2.81
                0.00002         -62.01 ± 4.54      -56.53 ± 10.66               -1.35 ± 30.28
                0.00004         -50.84 ± 6.28      -42.24 ± 22.01                -1.15 ± 0.06
                0.0001           -1.29 ± 0.12        -2.18 ± 0.42                -1.38 ± 0.29
                0.0002           -1.70 ± 0.12        -2.46 ± 0.65                -1.85 ± 0.29

                                            KL divergence
                 Coefficient                AD      State OM            State-action OM
                 0.000001       -56.20 ± 4.02       -61.59 ± 2.72           -61.18 ± 2.87
                 0.0000025      -59.58 ± 4.84       -54.59 ± 3.16           -59.59 ± 2.36
                 0.000005       -57.24 ± 2.62       -59.03 ± 5.41           -61.24 ± 2.01
                 0.00001        -54.84 ± 3.15       -57.62 ± 3.13           -58.85 ± 2.73
                 0.000025       -55.10 ± 2.64       -59.32 ± 1.37           -56.86 ± 5.48
                 0.00005        -49.99 ± 4.04       -59.96 ± 1.65          -53.39 ± 23.77
                 0.0001         -45.72 ± 9.02       -1.34 ± 25.30            -1.25 ± 0.07
                 0.00025         -1.33 ± 0.05        -1.47 ± 0.20            -1.51 ± 0.10
                 0.0005          -1.52 ± 0.04        -1.76 ± 0.22            -1.99 ± 0.35
                 0.001           -1.73 ± 0.07        -1.76 ± 0.26            -2.30 ± 1.14
                 0.0025          -1.98 ± 0.07        -1.76 ± 0.51            -1.94 ± 0.30
                 0.005           -2.15 ± 0.05        -1.90 ± 0.83            -2.08 ± 0.61
                 0.01            -2.11 ± 0.05        -2.12 ± 1.00            -2.14 ± 0.56

                                Table 5: All traffic control results (×103 ).


                                                     39
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                         χ2 divergence
              Coefficient               AD         State OM         State-action OM
              0.0008         -17.60 ± 1.78      -12.59 ± 1.63            -27.16 ± 12.83
              0.0016         -36.16 ± 3.25     -11.25 ± 10.08             -11.17 ± 0.19
              0.004         -34.16 ± 12.90      -10.88 ± 0.91             -11.65 ± 2.12
              0.008          -12.45 ± 0.25      -10.99 ± 3.13             -12.02 ± 0.18
              0.016          -12.31 ± 0.08      -10.68 ± 0.17             -12.18 ± 0.46
              0.04           -12.29 ± 0.05      -10.78 ± 0.12             -12.34 ± 0.10
              0.08           -12.39 ± 0.04      -10.73 ± 0.84             -12.20 ± 0.11

                                        KL divergence
              Coefficient               AD       State OM           State-action OM
              0.00006        -21.23 ± 9.74      -33.59 ± 9.89            -30.96 ± 22.42
              0.00012       -30.39 ± 22.16     -41.96 ± 12.70             -19.67 ± 6.43
              0.0003         -23.10 ± 5.63     -35.29 ± 10.32             -27.56 ± 7.50
              0.0006        -21.85 ± 19.03     -34.56 ± 11.97             -22.40 ± 9.84
              0.0012        -25.17 ± 10.24      -31.28 ± 7.83             -31.77 ± 6.01
              0.003          -23.51 ± 6.91     -35.76 ± 10.53            -23.90 ± 12.81
              0.006         -12.26 ± 11.82     -58.08 ± 46.98            -29.42 ± 25.37
              0.012          -12.30 ± 9.27      -10.60 ± 0.87             -11.88 ± 0.81
              0.03           -12.28 ± 0.14      -11.03 ± 6.86             -11.73 ± 0.21
              0.06           -12.20 ± 0.07      -10.71 ± 0.18            -12.23 ± 14.25
              0.12           -12.33 ± 0.04      -10.24 ± 0.61             -12.09 ± 0.38
              0.3            -12.35 ± 0.04      -11.02 ± 0.57             -12.11 ± 0.25
              0.6            -12.40 ± 0.04      -10.61 ± 0.36             -12.11 ± 0.28
              1.2            -12.33 ± 0.03      -10.50 ± 0.26             -12.02 ± 0.28

                             Table 6: All pandemic mitigation results.


                                                40
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                            χ2 divergence
               Coefficient                 AD        State OM          State-action OM
               0.0005           -580.7 ± 73.8      -484.2 ± 56.6           -164.0 ± 3.5
               0.001             -94.2 ± 14.0      -263.9 ± 19.2           -127.0 ± 5.9
               0.0025             -97.1 ± 8.2      -146.4 ± 18.1            -93.3 ± 9.3
               0.005             -76.6 ± 10.5      -109.7 ± 10.3            -55.2 ± 0.7
               0.01               -84.7 ± 8.5        -72.8 ± 8.8            -47.5 ± 0.6
               0.025              -85.6 ± 7.9        -54.3 ± 1.3            -50.9 ± 2.3
               0.05              -74.8 ± 13.1        -57.1 ± 3.5          -113.3 ± 32.8

                                           KL divergence
              Coefficient                  AD       State OM            State-action OM
              0.00003          -598.4 ± 39.7        -604.1 ± 10.7          -583.8 ± 61.2
              0.00006          -600.6 ± 12.4       -589.0 ± 260.9           -594.7 ± 3.3
              0.00015          -592.3 ± 51.3        -607.9 ± 11.1          -577.1 ± 11.2
              0.0003            -593.6 ± 6.0        -592.0 ± 29.3          -497.9 ± 11.2
              0.0006            -590.0 ± 7.5         -593.1 ± 5.4           -364.3 ± 5.8
              0.0015          -459.9 ± 114.1        -511.1 ± 21.1           -181.6 ± 7.5
              0.003            -270.0 ± 39.7        -332.3 ± 41.0           -101.2 ± 5.0
              0.006             -154.5 ± 5.5        -158.7 ± 28.8            -61.9 ± 5.2
              0.015              -84.1 ± 6.8          -82.9 ± 5.6            -48.9 ± 0.5
              0.03               -98.3 ± 8.4          -58.4 ± 3.8            -49.6 ± 1.2
              0.06              -88.6 ± 12.8          -59.0 ± 7.2           -78.3 ± 10.2
              0.15              -82.1 ± 11.6          -75.9 ± 4.6          -106.6 ± 19.6
              0.3                -73.4 ± 9.2         -98.1 ± 16.1          -127.3 ± 24.7
              0.6                -88.6 ± 5.6        -112.5 ± 16.6          -118.5 ± 10.7

                             Table 7: All glucose monitoring results (×103 ).


                            Coefficient            AD χ2               AD KL
                            0.00008          9.20 ± 0.68       8.80 ± 2.24
                            0.00025         14.05 ± 3.27       9.48 ± 1.02
                            0.0008          16.94 ± 0.07       8.84 ± 0.42
                            0.0025          16.84 ± 0.08      14.22 ± 2.81
                            0.008           16.71 ± 0.11      12.73 ± 2.75
                            0.025           16.59 ± 0.11      16.81 ± 0.27
                            0.08            16.43 ± 0.07      16.52 ± 0.08
                            0.25            16.22 ± 0.10      16.33 ± 0.04
                            0.8             16.13 ± 0.10      16.25 ± 0.13

                                      Table 8: All results for RLHF.


                                                   41
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                            χ2 divergence
                   Coefficient             AD      State OM        State-action OM
                   0.0005         2.65 ± 0.67     0.64 ± 0.19            0.53 ± 0.29
                   0.001          3.87 ± 0.25     0.65 ± 4.63            0.60 ± 0.16
                   0.0025         6.24 ± 0.10     9.06 ± 0.17            9.04 ± 4.71
                   0.005          6.17 ± 0.03     9.06 ± 0.11            9.16 ± 0.09
                   0.01           6.16 ± 0.04     9.07 ± 0.07            9.17 ± 0.12
                   0.025          6.19 ± 0.04     8.64 ± 0.12            8.61 ± 0.18
                   0.05           6.14 ± 0.00     7.95 ± 0.05            7.99 ± 0.22

                                           KL divergence
                   Coefficient             AD    State OM          State-action OM
                   0.0008         2.52 ± 0.18     2.32 ± 0.86            2.31 ± 0.08
                   0.0016         2.98 ± 0.33     2.31 ± 0.07            1.11 ± 0.89
                   0.004          4.59 ± 0.19     2.23 ± 0.06            2.01 ± 0.23
                   0.008          6.10 ± 0.15     1.30 ± 0.19            1.25 ± 0.32
                   0.016          6.33 ± 0.13     0.82 ± 0.22            0.84 ± 0.21
                   0.04           6.26 ± 0.05     1.17 ± 2.92            1.81 ± 0.31
                   0.08           6.26 ± 0.04     7.62 ± 0.06            7.32 ± 0.28
                   0.16           6.21 ± 0.05     7.20 ± 0.12            7.12 ± 0.11
                   0.4            6.16 ± 0.03     6.89 ± 0.14            6.84 ± 0.19
                   0.8            6.19 ± 0.03     7.07 ± 0.12            6.86 ± 0.19
                   1.6            6.14 ± 0.04     6.90 ± 0.13            6.61 ± 0.31
                   4              6.13 ± 0.03     6.80 ± 0.16            6.79 ± 0.12
                   8              6.13 ± 0.01     6.81 ± 0.28            6.80 ± 0.06
                   16             6.13 ± 0.00     6.94 ± 0.10            6.83 ± 0.25

                         Table 9: All results for the tomato-watering gridworld.


E.3   A BLATIONS


Here, we present the results of two ablations of ORPO. For each of the non-RLHF environments, we
fix the optimal coefficient for state-action OM χ2 regularization and modify other hyperparameters.
We do not ablate the RLHF experiments because RLHF is a contextual bandit (Appendix A.3) and so
it isn’t actually necessary to run ORPO for RLHF. The results are shown in Table 10 below.
Order of training policy and discriminator networks. First, we experiment with modifying
ORPO to train the discriminator after the policy. In Algorithm 1, the discriminator dˆϕ is optimized,
then the rewards are updated with the discriminator outputs, and then the policy is trained with
the updated rewards. An alternative is to wait to train the discriminator until after the policy
has been updated, i.e., put Line 4 after Line 7. We experimented with this and found that in in
most environments there is not too much difference between the two orders, although training the
discriminator first gives slightly better results. However, in the pandemic mitigation environment, we
found that it training the discriminator second gave results with much higher variance. This suggests
that it is best to train the discriminator before augmenting the rewards to train the policy.
Discriminator reward clipping. Second, we experiment with modifying the discriminator reward
clipping parameter δ of ORPO. We found that removing the clipping parameter entirely led to NaN
errors and training could not complete, so we do not report those results. However, to test sensitivity
to this parameter, we tried training with a clipping parameter 10× larger and 10× smaller in each
environment. We found that the results did not vary by much across different clipping parameters.
This suggests that ORPO is relatively robust to the hyperparameter, so it does not need to be tuned
precisely.


                                                   42
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                                       Environment
                                                 Traffic          Pandemic      Glucose              AI safety
 Method                                          control          mitigation   monitoring            gridworld
                                                  (×103 )                              (×103 )

 Default parameters                           -1.15 ± 0.06     -10.68 ± 0.15.       -47.5 ± 0.6     9.17 ± 0.12
 Train policy before discriminator            -1.24 ± 0.07      -11.51 ± 0.40       -48.2 ± 0.7     8.97 ± 0.13
 Discriminator reward clipping ×0.1           -1.18 ± 0.14      -10.77 ± 0.16       -47.7 ± 0.8     9.21 ± 0.18
 Discriminator reward clipping ×10            -1.24 ± 0.03      -10.73 ± 0.37       -47.9 ± 0.7     9.20 ± 0.14

Table 10: Results of our ablations of ORPO. We report the median and standard deviation of the true reward across
five random seeds for the four non-RLHF environments. The top row shows results using each environment’s
most effective form of occupancy measure regularization: state-action OM for traffic, glucose, and tomato and
state OM for pandemic, with the optimal χ2 divergence coefficients. The other rows show ablations with the
same coefficient. We find that ORPO is mostly robust to different hyperparameters but that it is probably best to
train the discriminator network before the policy network.


                                                       43
