Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


FASTER D IFFUSION S AMPLING WITH R ANDOMIZED
M IDPOINTS : S EQUENTIAL AND PARALLEL
 Shivam Gupta1 , Linda Cai2 , Sitan Chen3
 1
   UT Austin 2 UC Berkeley 3 Harvard SEAS
 shivamgupta@utexas.edu, tcai@berkeley.edu, sitan@seas.harvard.edu



                                            A BSTRACT
         Sampling algorithms play an important role in controlling the quality and runtime
         of diffusion model inference. In recent years, a number of works (Chen et al.,
         2023c;b; Benton et al., 2023; Lee et al., 2022) have analyzed algorithms for dif-
         fusion sampling with provable guarantees; these works show that for essentially
         any data distribution, one can approximately sample in polynomial time given a
         sufficiently accurate estimate of its score functions at different noise levels.
         In this work, we propose a new scheme inspired by Shen and LeeвҖҷs randomized
         midpoint method for log-concave sampling (Shen & Lee, 2019). We prove that
         this approach achieves the best known dimension dependence for sampling from
         arbitrary smooth distributions in total variation distance (O(de 5/12 ) compared to
            вҲҡ
         O(
          e d) from prior work). We also show that our algorithm can be parallelized to
                             2
         run in only O(log
                       e       d) parallel rounds, constituting the first provable guarantees
         for parallel sampling with diffusion models.
         As a byproduct of our methods, for the well-studied problem of log-concave sam-
         pling in total variation distance, we give an algorithmвҲҡ and simple analysis achiev-
                                           5/12
         ing dimension dependence O(d  e        ) compared to O( d) from prior work.
                                                               e


1   I NTRODUCTION
Diffusion models (Sohl-Dickstein et al., 2015; Song & Ermon, 2019; Ho et al., 2020; Dhariwal &
Nichol, 2021; Song et al., 2021a;b; Vahdat et al., 2021) have emerged as the de facto approach
to generative modeling across a range of data modalities like images (Betker et al., 2023; Esser
et al., 2024), audio (Kong et al., 2020), video (Brooks et al., 2024), and molecules (Wu et al.,
2024). In recent years a slew of theoretical works have established surprisingly general convergence
guarantees for this method (Chen et al., 2023c; Lee et al., 2023; Chen et al., 2023a;b;d; Benton et al.,
2024; Gupta et al., 2023b; Li et al., 2023; 2024). They show that for essentially any data distribution,
assuming one has a sufficiently accurate estimate for its score function, one can approximately
sample from it in polynomial time.
While these results offer some theoretical justification for the empirical successes of diffusion mod-
els, the upper bounds they furnish for the number of iterations needed to generate a single sample
                                                                                                вҲҡ are
quite loose relative to what is done in practice. The best known provable bounds scale as O( d/Пө),
where d is the dimension of the space in which the diffusion is taking place (e.g. d = 16384 for
Stable Diffusion) (Chen et al., 2023b), and Пө is the target error. Even ignoring the dependence on Пө
and the hidden constant factor, this is at least 2 вҲ’ 3Г— larger than the default value of 50 inference
steps in Stable Diffusion.
In this work we consider a new approach for driving down the amount of compute that is provably
needed to sample with diffusion models. Our approach is rooted in the randomized midpoint method,
originally introduced by Shen and Lee (Shen & Lee, 2019) in the context of Langevin Monte Carlo
for log-concave sampling. At a high level, this is a method for numerically solving differential
equations where within every discrete window of time, one forms an unbiased estimate for the drift
by evaluating it at a random вҖңmidpointвҖқ (see Section 2.2 for a formal treatment). For sampling from
log-concave densities, the number of iterations needed by their method scales with d1/3 , and this
remains the best known bound in the вҖңlow-accuracyвҖқ regime.


                                                   1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


While this method is well-studied in the log-concave setting (He et al., 2020; Yu et al., 2023; Yu &
Dalalyana, 2024; Shen & Lee, 2019), its applicability to diffusion models has been unexplored both
theoretically and empirically. Our first result uses вҲҡ
                                                     the randomized midpoint method to obtain an im-
provement over the prior best known bound of O( d/Пө) for sampling arbitrary smooth distributions
with diffusion models:
Theorem 1.1 (Informal, see Theorem B.10). Suppose that the data distribution q has bounded
second moment, its score functions вҲҮ ln qt along the forward process are L-Lipschitz, and we are
                                                          ПөвҲҡ
given score estimates which are L-Lipschitz and O( e
                                                      d1/12 L
                                                              )1 -close to вҲҮ ln qt for all t. Then there
is a diffusion-based sampler using these score estimates (see Algorithm 1) which outputs a sample
                                                            e 5/3 d5/12 /Пө) iterations.
whose law is Пө-close in total variation distance to q using O(L

Our algorithm is based on the ODE-based predictor-corrector algorithm introduced in (Chen et al.,
2023b), but in place of the standard exponential integrator discretization in the predictor step, we
employ randomized midpoint discretization. We note that in the domain of log-concave sampling,
the result of Shen and Lee only achieves recovery in Wasserstein distance. Prior to our work, it
was actually open whether one can achieve the same dimensionвҲҡ          dependence in total variation or
KL divergence, for which the best known bound was O(      e d) (Ma et al., 2021; Zhang et al., 2023;
Altschuler & Chewi, 2023). In contrast, our result circumvents this barrier by carefully trading off
time spent in the corrector phase of the algorithm for time spent in the predictor phase. We defer the
details of this, as well as other important technical hurdles, to Section 3.1.
Next, we turn to a different computational model: instead of quantifying the cost of an algorithm
in terms of the total number of iterations, we consider the parallel setting where one has access to
multiple processors and wishes to minimize the total number of parallel rounds needed to generate a
single sample. This perspective has been explored in a recent empirical work (Shih et al., 2024), but
to our knowledge, no provable guarantees were known for parallel sampling with diffusion models
(see Section 1.1 for discussion of concurrent and independent work). Our second result provides the
first such guarantee:
Theorem 1.2 (Informal, see Theorem C.13). Under the same assumptions on q as in Theorem 1.1,
and assuming that we are given score estimates which are O(   e вҲҡПө )-close to вҲҮ ln qt for all t, there
                                                                  L
is a diffusion-based sampler using these score estimates (see Algorithm 9) which outputs a sample
                                                            e В· polylog(Ld/Пө)) parallel rounds.
whose law is Пө-close in total variation distance to q using O(L

This result follows in the wake of several recent theoretical works on parallel sampling of log-
concave densities using Langevin Monte Carlo (Anari et al., 2023; 2024; Shen & Lee, 2019). A
common thread among these works is the observation that differential equations can be numerically
solved via fixed point iteration (see Section 2.3 for details), and we adopt a similar perspective in
the context of diffusions. To our knowledge this is the first provable guarantee for parallel sampling
beyond the log-concave setting.
Finally, we show that, as a byproduct of our methods, we can actually obtain a similar dimension de-
             e 5/12 ) as in Theorem 1.1 for log-concave sampling in TV, superseding the previously
pendence of O(d          вҲҡ
best known bound of O( e d) mentioned above.
Theorem 1.3 (Informal, see Theorem D.3). Suppose distribution q is m-strongly-log-concave, and
its score function вҲҮ ln q is L-Lipschitz. Then, there is a underdamped-Langevin-based sampler that
uses
     this score
             (Algorithm      11) and outputs a sample whose law is Пө-close in total variation to q using
 e d5/12 2/3   L4/3      1
O            Пө  m4/3
                     +   Пө    iterations.


1.1     R ELATED WORK

Our discretization scheme is based on the randomized midpoint method of (Shen & Lee, 2019),
which has been studied at length in the domain of log-concave sampling (He et al., 2020; Yu et al.,
2023; Yu & Dalalyana, 2024).

   1e
      O(В·) hides polylogarithmic factors in d, L, Пө and ExвҲјq [вҲҘxвҲҘ2 ]


                                                        2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


The proof of our parallel sampling result builds on the ideas of (Shen & Lee, 2019; Anari et al.,
2023; 2024) on parallelizing the collocation method. These prior results were focused on Langevin
Monte Carlo, rather than diffusion-based sampling. We review these ideas in Section 2.3.
In (Chen et al., 2023b), the authors proposed the predictor-corrector framework that we also use for
analysing convergence вҲҡ    guarantee of the probability flow ODE and which achieved iteration com-
plexity scaling with O(e d). In addition to this, there have been many works in recent years giving
general convergence guarantees for diffusion models (De Bortoli et al., 2021; Block et al., 2022;
De Bortoli, 2022; Lee et al., 2022; Liu et al., 2022; Pidstrigach, 2022; Wibisono & Yang, 2022; Chen
et al., 2023c;d; Lee et al., 2023; Li et al., 2023; Benton et al., 2023; Chen et al., 2023b; Benton et al.,
2024; Chen et al., 2023a; Gupta et al., 2023b). Of these, one line of work (Chen et al., 2023c; Lee
et al., 2023; Chen et al., 2023a; Benton et al., 2024) analyzed DDPM, the stochastic analogue of the
probability flow ODE, and showed OМғ(d) iteration complexity bounds. Another set of works (Chen
et al., 2023b;d; Li et al., 2023; 2024) studied the probability flow ODE, for which our work provides
a new discretization scheme for the probability flow ODE, that achieves a state-of-the-art O(d  e 5/12 )
dimension dependence for sampling from a diffusion model.

Concurrent work. Here we discuss the independent works of (Chen et al., 2024) and (Kandasamy
& Nagaraj, 2024). (Chen et al., 2024) gave an analysis for parallel sampling with diffusion models
that also achieves a polylog(d) number of parallel rounds like in the present work. (Kandasamy &
Nagaraj, 2024) showed an improved dimension dependence of O(d       e 5/12 ) for log-concave sampling in
total variation, similar to our analogous result, but via a different proof technique. In addition to this,
they show a similar result when the distribution only satisfies a log-Sobolev inequality. They also
show empirical results for diffusion models, showing that an algorithm inspired by the randomized
midpoint method outperforms ODE based methods with similar compute. While their work builds
on the randomized midpoint method, they do not theoretically analyze the diffusion setting and do
not study parallel sampling.

2     P RELIMINARIES
2.1   P ROBABILITY FLOW ODE

In this section we review basics about deterministic diffusion-based samplers; we refer the reader
to (Chen et al., 2023b) for a more thorough exposition.
Let q вҲ— denote the data distribution over Rd . We consider the standard Ornstein-Uhlenbeck (OU)
forward process, i.e. the вҖңVP SDE,вҖқ given by
                                                вҲҡ
                             dxвҶ’        вҶ’
                                t = вҲ’xt dt +      2 dBt     xвҶ’0 вҲјq ,
                                                                    вҲ—
                                                                                             (1)
where (Bt )tвүҘ0 denotes a standard Brownian motion in Rd . This process converges exponentially
quickly to its stationary distribution, the Gaussian distribution N (0, Id).
Suppose the OU process is run until terminal time T > 0, and for any t вҲҲ [0, T ], let qtвҲ— вүң law(xвҶ’
                                                                                                 t ),
i.e. the law of the forward process at time t. We will consider the reverse process given by the
probability flow ODE
                                dxt = (xt + вҲҮ ln qT вҲ’t (xt )) dt .                                (2)
This is a time-reversal of the forward process, so that if x0 вҲј qT , then law(xt ) = qTвҲ— вҲ’t . In practice,
one initializes at x0 вҲј N (0, Id), and instead of using the exact score function вҲҮ ln qT вҲ’t , one
uses estimates sbT вҲ’t вүҲ вҲҮ ln qT вҲ’t which are learned from data. Additionally, the ODE is solved
numerically using any of a number of discretization schemes. The theoretical literature on diffusion
models has focused primarily on exponential integration, which we review next before turning to
the discretization scheme, the randomized midpoint method used in the present work.

2.2   D ISCRETIZATION SCHEMES

Suppose we wish to discretize the following semilinear ODE:
                                        dxt = (xt + ft (xt )) dt .                                     (3)


                                                    3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


For our application we will eventually take ft вүң sbT вҲ’t , but we use ft in this section to condense
notation.
Suppose we want to discretize Equation (3) over a time window [t0 , t0 + h]. The starting point is
the integral formulation for this ODE:
                                               Z t0 +h
                             xt0 +h = eh xt0 +         et0 +hвҲ’t ft (xt ) dt .                 (4)
                                                         t0

Under the standard exponential integrator discretization, one would approximate the integrand by
et0 +hвҲ’t ft0 (xt0 ) and obtain the approximation
                                       xt0 +h вүҲ eh xt0 + (eh вҲ’ 1)ft0 (xt0 ) .                               (5)
The drawback of this discretization is that it uses an inherently biased estimate for the integral
in Eq. equation 4. The key insight of (Shen & Lee, 2019) was to replace this with the following
unbiased estimate
                     Z t0 +h
                             et0 +hвҲ’t ft (xt ) dt вүҲ he(1вҲ’Оұ)h ft0 +Оұh (xt0 +Оұh ) ,              (6)
                             t0

where Оұ is a uniformly random sample from [0, 1]. While this alone does not suffice as the estimate
depends on xt0 +Оұh , naturally we could iterate the above procedure again to obtain an approxima-
tion to xt0 +Оұh . It turns out though that even if we simply approximate xt0 +Оұh using exponential
integrator discretization, we can obtain nontrivial improvements in discretization error (e.g. our
Theorem 1.1). In this case, the above sequence of approximations takes the following form:
                                  xt0 +Оұh вүҲ eОұh xt0 + (eОұh вҲ’ 1)ft0 (xt0 )                                   (7)
                                               h          (1вҲ’Оұ)h
                                   xt0 +h вүҲ e xt0 + he             ft0 +Оұh (xt0 +Оұh ) .                     (8)

Note that a similar idea can be used to discretize stochastic differential equations, but in this work
we only use it to discretize the probability flow ODE.

Predictor-Corrector. For important technical reasons, in our analysis we actually consider a
slightly different algorithm than simply running the probability flow ODE with approximate score,
Gaussian initialization, and randomized midpoint discretization. Specifically, we interleave the ODE
with corrector steps that periodically inject noise into the sampling trajectory. We refer to the phases
in which we are running the probability flow ODE as predictor steps.
The corrector step will be given by running underdamped Langevin dynamics. As our analysis of
this will borrow black-box from bounds proven in (Chen et al., 2023b), we refer to Section B.2 for
details.

2.3    PARALLEL SAMPLING

The scheme outlined in the previous section is a simple special case of the collocation method. In
the context of the semilinar ODE from Eq. equation 3, the idea behind the collocation method is to
solve the integral formulation of the ODE in Eq. equation 4 via fixed point iteration. For our parallel
sampling guarantees, instead of choosing a single randomized midpoint Оұ, we break up the window
[t0 , t0 + h] into R sub-windows, select randomized midpoints Оұ1 , . . . , ОұR for these sub-windows,
and approximate the trajectory of the ODE at any time t0 + iОҙ, where Оҙ вүң h/R, by
                                       i
                                       X
             xt0 +Оұi h вүҲ eОұi h xt0 +         eОұi hвҲ’(jвҲ’1)Оҙ вҲ’ max(eОұi hвҲ’jОҙ , 1) В· ft0 +Оұj h (xt0 +Оұj h ) .    (9)
                                       j=1

One can show that as R вҶ’ вҲһ, this approximation tends to an equality. For sufficiently large
R, Eq. equation 9 naturally suggests a fixed point iteration that can be used to approximate each
                                                           (k)
xt0 +Оұi h , i.e. we can maintain a sequence of estimates x
                                                         bt0 +Оұi h defined by the iteration
                                       i
       (k)                 (kвҲ’1)                                                            (kвҲ’1)
                                       X
      bt0 +Оұi h вҶҗ eОұi h x
      x                 bt0        +         eОұi hвҲ’(jвҲ’1)Оҙ вҲ’ max(eОұi hвҲ’jОҙ , 1) В· ft0 +Оұj h (b
                                                                                           xt0 +Оұj h ) ,   (10)
                                       j=1


                                                              4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


for k ranging from 1 up to some sufficiently large K. Finally, analogously to Eq. equation 8, we can
estimate xt0 +h via
                                                R
                                         (K)                                 (K)
                                                X
                         xt0 +h вүҲ eh x
                                     bt0 + Оҙ          e(1вҲ’Оұi )h ft0 +Оұi h (b
                                                                           xt0 +Оұi h ) .               (11)
                                                i=1

The key observation, made in (Shen & Lee, 2019) and also in related works of (Anari et al., 2024;
Shih et al., 2024; Anari et al., 2023), is that for any fixed round k, all of the iterations Eq. equation 10
for different choices of i = 1, . . . , R can be computed in parallel. With R parallel processors, one
can thus compute the estimate for xt0 +h in K parallel rounds, with O(KR) total work.

2.4   A SSUMPTIONS

Throughout the paper, for our diffusion results, we will make the following standard assumptions
on the data distribution and score estimates.
Assumption 2.1 (Bounded Second Moment).
                                         m22 := E      вҲҘxвҲҘ2 < вҲһ.

                                               xвҲјq0

Assumption 2.2 (Lipschitz Score). For all t, the score вҲҮ ln qt is L-Lipschitz.
Assumption 2.3 (Lipschitz Score estimates). For all t for which we need to estimate the score
function in our algorithms, the score estimate sbt is L-lipschitz.
Assumption 2.4 (Score Estimation Error). For all t for which we need to estimate the score function
in our algorithms,
                                    st (xt ) вҲ’ вҲҮ ln qt (xt )вҲҘ2 вүӨ Пө2sc .

                              E вҲҘb
                                xt вҲјqt


3     T ECHNICAL OVERVIEW

Here we provide an overview of our sequential and parallel algorithms, along with the analysis of
our iteration complexity bounds. We begin with a description of the sequential algorithm.

3.1   S EQUENTIAL ALGORITHM

Following the framework of (Chen et al., 2023b), our algorithm consists of вҖңpredictorвҖқ steps in-
terspersed with вҖңcorrectorвҖқ steps, with the time spent on each carefully tuned to obtain our final
 e 5/12 ) dimension dependence. We first describe our predictor step вҖ“ this is the piece of our
O(d
algorithm that makes use of the Shen and LeeвҖҷs randomized midpoint method (Shen & Lee, 2019).

Algorithm 1 P REDICTOR S TEP (S EQUENTIAL )

Input parameters:
       вҖў Starting sample x
                         b0 , Starting time t0 , Number of steps N , Step sizes hnвҲҲ[0,...,N вҲ’1] , Score
         estimates sbt
      1. For n = 0, . . . , N вҲ’ 1:
                               PnвҲ’1
          (a) Let tn = t0 вҲ’ i=0 hi
          (b) Randomly sample Оұ uniformly from [0, 1].

                  bn+ 12 = eОұhn x
          (c) Let x                bn + eОұhn вҲ’ 1 sbtn (b
                                                       xn )ds
                  bn+1 = ehn x
          (d) Let x          bn + hn В· e(1вҲ’Оұ)hn sbtn вҲ’Оұhn (b
                                                           xn+ 21 )
                       PN вҲ’1
      2. Let tN = t0 вҲ’ i=0 hi
      3. Return x
                bN , tN .


                                                      5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


The main difference between the above and the predictor step of (Chen et al., 2023b) are steps 1(b)
вҖ“ 1(d). 1(b) and 1(c) together compute a randomized midpoint, and 1(d) uses this midpoint to
obtain an approximate solution to the integral of the ODE. We describe these steps in more detail in
Section 3.3.
Next, we describe the вҖңcorrectorвҖқ step, introduced in (Chen et al., 2023b). First, recall the under-
damped Langevin ODE:
                              db
                               xt = vbt dt
                                                                p                                    (12)
                              db
                               vt = (b xвҢҠt/hвҢӢh ) вҲ’ Оіb
                                     s(b            vt ) dt +       2Оі dBt

Here sb is our L2 accurate score estimate for a fixed time (say t). Then, the corrector step is described
below.

Algorithm 2 C ORRECTOR S TEP (S EQUENTIAL )

Input parameters:
       вҖў Starting sample x
                         b0 , Total time Tcorr , Step size hcorr , Score estimate sb
      1. Run underdamped Langevin Monte Carlo in equation 12 for total time Tcorr using step size
         hcorr , and let the result be x
                                       bN .
      2. Return x
                bN .


Finally, Algorithm 3 below puts the predictor and corrector steps together to give our final sequential
algorithm.

Algorithm 3 S EQUENTIAL A LGORITHM

Input parameters:
                                                                         вҲҡ
       вҖў Start time T , End time Оҙ, Corrector steps time Tcorr вүІ 1/ L, Number of predictor-
         corrector steps N0 , Predictor step size hpred , Corrector step size hcorr , Score estimates
         sbt
              b0 вҲј N (0, Id ).
      1. Draw x
      2. For n = 0, . . . , N0 вҲ’ 1:
          (a) Starting from xbn , run Algorithm 1 with starting time T вҲ’ n/L using step sizes hpred
                                                                                                   bвҖІn+1 .
              for all N steps, with N = Lh1pred , so that the total time is 1/L. Let the result be x
          (b) Starting from xbвҖІn+1 , run Algorithm 1 for total time Tcorr with step size hcorr and score
              estimate sbT вҲ’(n+1)/L to obtain xbn+1 .
      3. Starting from x  bN0 , run Algorithm 4 with starting time T вҲ’ N0 /L using step sizes
                                                           bвҖІN0 +1 .
         hpred /2, hpred /4, hpred /8, . . . , Оҙ to obtain x
      4. Starting from x bвҖІN0 +1 , run Algorithm 2 for total time Tcorr with step size hcorr and score
         estimate sbОҙ to obtain x bN0 +1 .
      5. Return x
                bN0 +1 .


For the final setting of parameters in Algorithm 3, see Theorem B.10. Now, we describe the analysis
of the above algorithm in detail.

3.2   P REDICTOR - CORRECTOR FRAMEWORK

The general framework of our algorithm closely follows that of (Chen et al., 2023b), which proposed
to run the (discretized) reverse ODE but interspersed with вҖңcorrectorвҖқ steps given by running un-
derdamped Langevin dynamics. The idea is that the вҖңpredictorвҖқ steps where the discretized reverse


                                                    6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


ODE is being run keep the sampler close to the true reverse process in Wasserstein distance, but they
cannot be run for too long before potentially incurring exponential blowups. The main purpose of
the corrector steps is then to inject stochasticity into the trajectory of the sampler in order to convert
closeness in Wasserstein to closeness in KL divergence. This effectively allows one to вҖңrestart the
couplingвҖқ used to control the predictor steps. For technical reasons that are inherited from (Chen
et al., 2023b), for most of the reverse process the predictor steps (Step 2(a)) are run with a fixed step
size, but at the end of the reverse process (Step 3), they are run with exponentially decaying step
sizes.
We follow the same framework, and the core of our result lies in refining the algorithm and analysis
for the predictor steps by using the randomized midpoint method. Below, we highlight our key
technical steps.

3.3   P REDICTOR STEP вҖ“ IMPROVED DISCRETIZATION ERROR WITH RANDOMIZED MIDPOINTS

Here, we explain the main idea behind why randomized midpoint allows us to achieve improved
dimension dependence. We first focus on the analysis of the predictor (Algorithm 1) and restrict our
attention to running the reverse process for a small amount of time h вүӘ 1/L.
We begin by recalling the dimension dependence achieved by the standard exponential integrator
scheme. One can show (see e.g. Lemma 4 in (Chen et al., 2023b)) that if the true reverse process and
the discretized reverse process are both run for small time h starting from the same initialization,
the two processes drift by a distance of O(d1/2 h2 ). By iterating this coupling O(1/h) times, we
conclude that in an O(1) window of time, the processes drift by a вҲҡdistance of O(d1/2 h). To ensure
                  вҲҡ one would take the step size h to be O(1/ d), thus obtaining an iteration
this is not too large,
complexity of O( d) as in (Chen et al., 2023b).
The starting point in the analysis of randomized midpoint is to instead track the squared displace-
ment between the two processes instead. Given two neighboring time steps t вҲ’ h and t in the
algorithm, let xt denote the true reverse process at time t, and let x bt denote the algorithm at time t
(in the notation of Algorithm 2, this is x
                                         bn for some n, but we use t in the discussion here to make the
comparison to the true reverse process clearer). Note that x  bt depends on the choice of randomized
                                                                                         2
midpoint Оұ (see Step 1(b)). One can bound the squared displacement E вҲҘxt вҲ’ x         bt вҲҘ as follows. Let
yt be the result of running the reverse process for time h starting from xbtвҲ’h . Then by writing xt вҲ’ x  bt
as (xt вҲ’ yt ) вҲ’ (bxt вҲ’ yt ) and applying YoungвҖҷs inequality, we obtain
                              Lh                       2
    E вҲҘxt вҲ’ x   bt вҲҘ2 вүӨ 1 +          E вҲҘxt вҲ’ yt вҲҘ2 +       E вҲҘEx   bt вҲ’ yt вҲҘ2 + E E вҲҘb    xt вҲ’ yt вҲҘ2 . (13)
  x
  btвҲ’h ,Оұ                      2 xbtвҲ’h                Lh xbtвҲ’h Оұ                xbtвҲ’h Оұ

For the first term, because xt and yt are the result of running the same ODE on initializations xtвҲ’h
and xbtвҲ’h , the first term is close to E вҲҘxtвҲ’h вҲ’ xbtвҲ’h вҲҘ2 provided h вүӘ 1/L. The upshot is that the
squared displacement at time t is at most the squared displacement at time t вҲ’ h plus the remaining
two terms on the right of Equation (13).
The main part of the proof lies in bounding these two terms, which can be thought of as вҖңbiasвҖқ
and вҖңvarianceвҖқ terms respectively. The variance term can be shown to scale with the square of the
aforementioned O(d1/2 h2 ) displacement bound that arises in the exponential integrator analysis,
giving O(dh4 ):
Lemma 3.1 (Informal, see Lemma B.4 for formal statement). If h вүІ L1 and T вҲ’ t вүҘ (T вҲ’ t вҲ’ h)/2,
then

                     2     2   4            1
       E E вҲҘb
            xt вҲ’ yt вҲҘ вүІ L dh L вҲЁ                     + h2 Пө2sc + L2 h2 E вҲҘxtвҲ’h вҲ’ x btвҲ’h вҲҘ2 .
     btвҲ’h Оұ
     x                                 T вҲ’ (t вҲ’ h)                    x
                                                                      btвҲ’h


Note that in this bound, in addition to the O(dh4 ) term and a term for the score estimation error,
there is an additional term which depends on the squared displacement from the previous time step.
Because the prefactor L2 h2 is sufficiently small, this will ultimately be negligible.
The upshot of the above Lemma is that if the bias term is of lower order, then this means that
the squared displacement essentially increases by O(dh4 ) with every time step of length h. Over
O(1/h) such steps, the total squared displacement is O(dh3 ), so if we take the step size h to be
O(1/d1/3 ), this suggests an improved iteration complexity of O(d1/3 ).


                                                    7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                              2                         2
Arguing that the bias term Lh    ExbtвҲ’h вҲҘEОұ x
                                            bt вҲ’ yt вҲҘ is dominated by the variance term is where it
is crucial that we use randomized midpoint instead of exponential integrator. But recall that the
randomized midpoint method was engineered so that it would give an unbiased estimate for the
true solution to the reverse ODE if the estimate of the trajectory at the randomized midpoint were
exact. In reality we only have an approximation to the latter, but as we show, the error incurred by
this is indeed of lower order (see Lemma B.3). One technical complication that arises here is that
the relevant quantity to bound is the distance between the true process at the randomized midpoint
versus the algorithm, when both are initialized at an intermediate point in the algorithmвҖҷs trajectory.
Bounding such quantities in expectation over the randomness of the algorithmвҖҷs trajectory can be
difficult, but our proof identifies a way of вҖңoffloadingвҖқ some of this difficulty by absorbing some
excess terms into a term of the form вҲҘxtвҲ’h вҲ’ x     btвҲ’h вҲҘ2 , i.e. the squared displacement from the
previous time step. Concretely, we obtain the following bound on the bias term:
Lemma 3.2 (Informal, see Lemma B.2 for formal statement).

                     2    4  6            1
     E вҲҘEx  bt вҲ’ yt вҲҘ вүІ L dh L вҲЁ                  + h2 Пө2sc + L2 h2 ExbtвҲ’h вҲҘxtвҲ’h вҲ’ x
                                                                                   btвҲ’h вҲҘ2
   btвҲ’h Оұ
   x                                 T вҲ’t+h

3.4   S HORTENING THE CORRECTOR STEPS

While we have outlined how to improve the predictor step in the framewok of (Chen et al., 2023b),
it is quite unclear whether the same can be achieved for the corrector step. Whereas the the former
is geared towards closeness in Wasserstein distance, the latter is geared towards closeness in KL
divergence, and it is a well-known open question in the log-concave sampling literature to obtain
analogous discretization bounds in KL for the randomized midpoint method (Chewi, 2023).
We will sidestep this issue and argue that even using exponential integrator discretization of the
underdamped Langevin dynamics will suffice for our purposes, by simply shortening the amount of
time for which each corrector step is run.
First, let us briefly recall what was shown in (Chen et al., 2023b) for the corrector step. If one
runs underdamped Langevin dynamics with stationary distribution q for time T and exponential
integrator discretization with step size h starting from two distributions p and q, then the resulting
distributions pвҖІ and q satisfy
                                            W2 (p, q)
                             TV(pвҖІ , q) вүІ              + L3/4 T 1/2 d1/2 h ,                        (14)
                                            L1/4 T 3/2
where L is the Lipschitzness of вҲҮ ln q (see Theorem B.6). At first glance this appears insufficient
                                 1/2
                     вҲҡ of the d h term coming from the discretization error, we would need
for our purposes: because                                                                  вҲҡ to
take step size h = 1/ d, which would suggest that the number of iterations must scale with d.
To improve the dimension dependence for our overall predictor-corrector algorithm, we observe that
if we take T itself to be smaller, then we can take h to be larger while keeping the discretization error
in Equation (14) sufficiently small. Of course, this comes at a cost, as T also appears in the term
 W2 (p,q)
L1/4 T 3/2
           in Equation (14). But in our overall proof, the W2 (p, q) term is bounded by the predictor
analysis. There, we had quite a bit of slack: even with step size as large as 1/d1/3 , we could achieve
small Wasserstein error. By balancing appropriately, we get our improved dimension dependence.

3.5   PARALLEL ALGORITHM

Now, we summarize the main proof ideas for our parallel sampling result. In Section 2.3, we de-
scribed how to approximately solve the reverse ODE over time h by running K rounds of the iter-
ation in Equation
           вҲҡ      (10). In our final algorithm, we will take h to be dimension-independent, namely
h = Оҳ(1/ L), so that the main part of the proof is to bound the discretization error incurred over
each of these time windows of length h. As in the sequential analysis, we will interleave these
вҖңpredictorвҖқ steps with corrector steps given by (parallelized) underdamped Langevin dynamics.
We begin by describing the parallel predictor step. Suppose we have produced an estimate for
the reverse process at t0 and now wish to solve the ODE from time t0 to t0 + h. We initialize at
   (0)
{b
 xt0 +Оұi h }iвҲҲ[R] via exponential integrator steps starting from the beginning of the window вҖ“ see Line


                                                    8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


1(c) in Algorithm 9 (this can be thought of as the analogue of Equation (7) used in the sequential
algorithm). The key difference relative to the sequential algorithm is that here, because the length of
the window is dimension-free, the discretization error incurred by this initialization is too large and
must be refined using the fixed point iteration in Equation (10). The main step is then to show that
with each iteration of Equation (10), the distance to the true reverse process contracts:
Lemma 3.3 (Informal, see Lemma C.2 for formal statement). Suppose h вүІ 1/L. If yt denotes the
solution of the true ODE starting at x  bt0 and running until time t0 + Оұi h, then for all k вҲҲ {1, В· В· В· K}
and i вҲҲ {1, В· В· В· , R},
                                                      пЈ«                                         пЈ¶
                                     2                      R                                 2
                  (k)                              k     1 X              (0)
                bt0 +Оұi h вҲ’ yt0 +Оұi h вүІ 8h2 L2 В· пЈӯ

       E        x                                                 E     x        вҲ’ yt0 +Оұj h пЈё
                                                         R j=1 xМӮt0 ,Оұj t0 +Оұj h
                                                                        b
xМӮt0 ,Оұ1 ,В·В·В·ОұR


                                                     L2 dh2

                                           2   2                        1           2                     2
                                       + h Пөsc +            (L вҲЁ              ) + L В· E вҲҘb   xt0 вҲ’ xt0 вҲҘ      ,
                                                      R2           T вҲ’ t0 + h           xМӮt0
                                                                                                        (15)
where xbt0 is the iterate of the algorithm from the previous time window, and xt0 is the corresponding
iterate in the true ODE.
In particular, because h is at most a small multiple of 1/L, the prefactor (8h2 L2 )k is exponentially
                                                            (k)
decaying in k, so that the error incurred by the estimate xbt0 +Оұi h is contracting with each fixed point
iteration. Because the initialization is at distance poly(d) from the true process, O(log d) rounds of
contraction thus suffice, which translates to O(log d) parallel rounds for the sampler. The rest of the
analysis of the predictor step is quite similar to the analogous proofs for the sequential algorithm
(i.e. Lemma C.4 and Lemma C.5 give the corresponding bias and variance bounds).
One shortcoming of the predictor analysis is that the contraction achieved by fixed point iteration
ultimately bottoms out at error which scales with d/R2 (see the second term in Equation (15)). In
order for the discretization error to be sufficiently
                                          вҲҡ           small, we thus have to take R, and thus the total
work of the algorithm, to scale with O( d). So in this case we do not improve over the dimension
dependence of (Chen et al., 2023b), and instead the improvement is in obtaining a parallel algorithm.
For the corrector analysis, we mostly draw upon the recent work of (Anari et al., 2024) which
analyzed a parallel implementation of the underdamped Langevin dynamics. While their guarantee
focuses on sampling from log-concave distributions, implicit in their analysis is a bound for general
smooth distributions on how much the law of the algorithm and the law of the true process drift apart
in a bounded time window (see Lemma C.8). This bound suffices for our analysis of the corrector
step, and we can conclude the following:
                                                                                             вҖІ
Theorem 3.4 (Informal, see Theorem C.12). Let ОІ вүҘ 1 be an adjustable parameter. Let pвҲҡ         denote
the law of the output of running the parallel corrector (see Algorithm 8) for total time 1/ L and
step size h, using an Пөsc -approximate estimate for вҲҮ ln q and starting from a sample from another
distribution p.                   p               Пөsc    Пө      Пө
                     TV(pвҖІ , q) вүІ KL(pвҖІ , q) вүІ вҲҡ + + вҲҡ В· W2 (p, q) .
                                                    L    ОІ    ОІ d
                                          вҲҡ
Furthermore, this algorithm uses Оҳ(ОІ e      d/Пө) score evaluations over Оҳ(log(ОІ 2 d/Пө2 )) parallel
rounds.
Overall, parallel algorithm is somewhat different from the parallel sampler developed in the empiri-
cal work of (Shih et al., 2024), even apart from the fact that we use randomized midpoint discretiza-
tion and corrector steps. The reason is that our algorithm applies collocation to fixed windows of
time, whereas the algorithm of (Shih et al., 2024) utilizes a sliding window approach that proac-
tively shifts the window forward as soon as the iterates at the start of the previous window begin
to converge. We leave rigorously analyzing the benefits of this approach as an interesting future
direction.

3.6   L OG - CONCAVE SAMPLING IN TOTAL VARIATION

Finally, we briefly summarize the simple proof for our result on log-concave sampling in TV, which
achieves the best known dimension dependence of O(d  e 5/12 ). Our main observation is that Shen


                                                     9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


and LeeвҖҷs randomized midpoint method (Shen & Lee, 2019) applied to the underdamped Langevin
process gives a Wasserstein guarantee for log-concave sampling, while the corrector step of (Chen
et al., 2023b) can convert a Wasserstein guarantee to closeness in TV. Thus, we can simply run the
randomized midpoint method, followed by the corrector step to achieve closeness in TV. Carefully
tuning the amount of time spend and step sizes for each phase of this algorithm yields our improved
dimension dependence вҖ“ see Appendix D for the full proof.

4   D ISCUSSION AND F UTURE W ORK
In this work, we showed that it is possible to leverage Shen and LeeвҖҷs randomized midpoint
method (Shen & Lee, 2019) to achieve the best known dimension dependence for sampling from
arbitrary smooth distributions in TV using diffusion. We also showed how to parallelize our algo-
                               2
rithm, and showed that O(log
                         e       d) parallel rounds suffice for sampling. These constitute the first
provable guarantees for parallel sampling with diffusion models. Finally, we showed that our tech-
niques can be used to obtain an improved dimension dependence for log-concave sampling in TV.
We note that relative to (Chen et al., 2023b), our result requires a slightly stronger guarantee on the
score estimation error, by a d1/12 factor; we believe this is an artifact of our analysis, and it would
be interesting to remove this dependence inвҲҡ    future work. Importantly however, it was not known
how to achieve an improvement over the O( d) dependence shown in that paper even in case that
the scores are known exactly prior to the present work. Moreover, another line of work (Li et al.,
2023; 2024; Dou et al., 2024)
                              analyzing
                                           diffusion sampling makes the stronger assumption that the
                               Пө
score estimation error is O
                          e   вҲҡ
                                d
                                   , an assumption stronger than ours by a d5/12 factor; this does not
detract from the importance of these works, and we feel the same is true in our case.
We also note that our diffusion results require smoothness assumptions вҖ“ we assume that the true
score, as well as our score estimates are L-Lipschitz. Although this assumption is standard in the
literature, recent work (Chen et al., 2023a; Benton et al., 2024) has analyzed DDPM in the absence
of these assumptions, culminating in a O(d)
                                         e    dependence for sampling using a discretization of the
reverse SDE. However, unlike in the smooth case, it is not known whether even a sublinear in d
dependence is possible without smoothness assumptions via any algorithm. We leave this as an
interesting open question for future work.

R EFERENCES
Jason M Altschuler and Sinho Chewi. Faster high-accuracy log-concave sampling via algorithmic
  warm starts. In 2023 IEEE 64th Annual Symposium on Foundations of Computer Science (FOCS),
  pp. 2169вҖ“2176. IEEE, 2023.
Nima Anari, Yizhi Huang, Tianyu Liu, Thuy-Duong Vuong, Brian Xu, and Katherine Yu. Parallel
  discrete sampling via continuous walks. In Proceedings of the 55th Annual ACM Symposium on
  Theory of Computing, pp. 103вҖ“116, 2023.
Nima Anari, Sinho Chewi, and Thuy-Duong Vuong. Fast parallel sampling under isoperimetry.
  CoRR, abs/2401.09016, 2024. doi: 10.48550/ARXIV.2401.09016. URL https://doi.org/
  10.48550/arXiv.2401.09016.
Joe Benton, George Deligiannidis, and Arnaud Doucet. Error bounds for flow matching methods.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.16860, 2023.
Joe Benton, Valentin De Bortoli, Arnaud Doucet, and George Deligiannidis. Nearly d-linear con-
  vergence bounds for diffusion models via stochastic localization. In The Twelfth International
  Conference on Learning Representations, 2024.
James Betker, Gabriel Goh, Li Jing, Tim Brooks, Jianfeng Wang, Linjie Li, Long Ouyang, Juntang
  Zhuang, Joyce Lee, Yufei Guo, et al. Improving image generation with better captions. Computer
  Science. https://cdn. openai. com/papers/dall-e-3. pdf, 2(3):8, 2023.
Adam Block, Youssef Mroueh, and Alexander Rakhlin. Generative modeling with denoising auto-
  encoders and Langevin sampling. arXiv preprint 2002.00107, 2022.


                                                  10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Tim Brooks, Bill Peebles, Connor Holmes, Will DePue, Yufei Guo, Li Jing, David Schnurr, Joe
  Taylor, Troy Luhman, Eric Luhman, Clarence Ng, Ricky Wang, and Aditya Ramesh. Video
  generation models as world simulators. 2024. URL https://openai.com/research/
  video-generation-models-as-world-simulators.

Haoxuan Chen, Yinuo Ren, Lexing Ying, and Grant M. Rotskoff. Accelerating diffusion models
  with parallel sampling: Inference at sub-linear time complexity, 2024.

Hongrui Chen, Holden Lee, and Jianfeng Lu. Improved analysis of score-based generative modeling:
  User-friendly bounds under minimal smoothness assumptions. In International Conference on
  Machine Learning, pp. 4735вҖ“4763. PMLR, 2023a.

Sitan Chen, Sinho Chewi, Holden Lee, Yuanzhi Li, Jianfeng Lu, and Adil Salim. The probabil-
   ity flow ODE is provably fast. In Thirty-seventh Conference on Neural Information Processing
   Systems, 2023b. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=KD6MFeWSAd.

Sitan Chen, Sinho Chewi, Jerry Li, Yuanzhi Li, Adil Salim, and Anru R Zhang. Sampling is as easy
   as learning the score: theory for diffusion models with minimal data assumptions. In International
   Conference on Learning Representations, 2023c.

Sitan Chen, Giannis Daras, and Alex Dimakis. Restoration-degradation beyond linear diffusions:
   A non-asymptotic analysis for ddim-type samplers. In International Conference on Machine
   Learning, pp. 4462вҖ“4484. PMLR, 2023d.

Siinho Chewi. Log-concave sampling. Book draft available at https://chewisinho. github. io, 2023.

Valentin De Bortoli. Convergence of denoising diffusion models under the manifold hypothesis.
  Transactions on Machine Learning Research, 2022.

Valentin De Bortoli, James Thornton, Jeremy Heng, and Arnaud Doucet. Diffusion SchroМҲdinger
  bridge with applications to score-based generative modeling. In M. Ranzato, A. Beygelzimer,
  Y. Dauphin, P.S. Liang, and J. Wortman Vaughan (eds.), Advances in Neural Information Pro-
  cessing Systems, volume 34, pp. 17695вҖ“17709. Curran Associates, Inc., 2021.

Prafulla Dhariwal and Alexander Nichol. Diffusion models beat GANs on image synthesis. In
  M. Ranzato, A. Beygelzimer, Y. Dauphin, P.S. Liang, and J. Wortman Vaughan (eds.), Advances
  in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 34, pp. 8780вҖ“8794. Curran Associates, Inc.,
  2021.

Zehao Dou, Minshuo Chen, Mengdi Wang, and Zhuoran Yang. Theory of consistency diffusion
  models: Distribution estimation meets fast sampling. In Ruslan Salakhutdinov, Zico Kolter,
  Katherine Heller, Adrian Weller, Nuria Oliver, Jonathan Scarlett, and Felix Berkenkamp (eds.),
  Proceedings of the 41st International Conference on Machine Learning, volume 235 of Pro-
  ceedings of Machine Learning Research, pp. 11592вҖ“11612. PMLR, 21вҖ“27 Jul 2024. URL
  https://proceedings.mlr.press/v235/dou24a.html.

Patrick Esser, Sumith Kulal, Andreas Blattmann, Rahim Entezari, Jonas MuМҲller, Harry Saini, Yam
  Levi, Dominik Lorenz, Axel Sauer, Frederic Boesel, et al. Scaling rectified flow transformers for
  high-resolution image synthesis. arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.03206, 2024.

Shivam Gupta, Jasper C.H. Lee, and Eric Price. High-dimensional location estimation via norm
  concentration for subgamma vectors. In Proceedings of the 40th International Conference on
  Machine Learning, ICMLвҖҷ23. JMLR.org, 2023a.

Shivam Gupta, Aditya Parulekar, Eric Price, and Zhiyang Xun. Sample-efficient training for diffu-
  sion. arXiv preprint arXiv:2311.13745, 2023b.

Ye He, Krishnakumar Balasubramanian, and Murat A Erdogdu. On the ergodicity, bias and asymp-
  totic normality of randomized midpoint sampling method. Advances in Neural Information Pro-
  cessing Systems, 33:7366вҖ“7376, 2020.


                                                 11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Martin Heusel, Hubert Ramsauer, Thomas Unterthiner, Bernhard Nessler, and Sepp Hochreiter.
 Gans trained by a two time-scale update rule converge to a local nash equilibrium. In Advances in
 Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS), volume 30, 2017. URL https://arxiv.
 org/abs/1706.08500.
Jonathan Ho, Ajay Jain, and Pieter Abbeel. Denoising diffusion probabilistic models. Advances in
  Neural Information Processing Systems, 33:6840вҖ“6851, 2020.
Saravanan Kandasamy and Dheeraj Nagaraj. The poisson midpoint method for langevin dynamics:
  Provably efficient discretization for diffusion models, 2024.
Zhifeng Kong, Wei Ping, Jiaji Huang, Kexin Zhao, and Bryan Catanzaro. Diffwave: A versatile
  diffusion model for audio synthesis. arXiv preprint arXiv:2009.09761, 2020.
Holden Lee, Jianfeng Lu, and Yixin Tan. Convergence for score-based generative modeling with
  polynomial complexity. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 35:22870вҖ“22882,
  2022.
Holden Lee, Jianfeng Lu, and Yixin Tan. Convergence of score-based generative modeling for
  general data distributions. In International Conference on Algorithmic Learning Theory, pp.
  946вҖ“985. PMLR, 2023.
Gen Li, Yuting Wei, Yuxin Chen, and Yuejie Chi. Towards faster non-asymptotic convergence for
  diffusion-based generative models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.09251, 2023.
Gen Li, Yu Huang, Timofey Efimov, Yuting Wei, Yuejie Chi, and Yuxin Chen. Accelerating conver-
  gence of score-based diffusion models, provably. arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.03852, 2024.
Xingchao Liu, Lemeng Wu, Mao Ye, and Qiang Liu. Let us build bridges: Understanding and
  extending diffusion generative models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2208.14699, 2022.
Yi-An Ma, Niladri S Chatterji, Xiang Cheng, Nicolas Flammarion, Peter L Bartlett, and Michael I
  Jordan. Is there an analog of nesterov acceleration for gradient-based mcmc? 2021.
Jakiw Pidstrigach. Score-based generative models detect manifolds. In S. Koyejo, S. Mohamed,
  A. Agarwal, D. Belgrave, K. Cho, and A. Oh (eds.), Advances in Neural Information Processing
  Systems, volume 35, pp. 35852вҖ“35865. Curran Associates, Inc., 2022.
Ruoqi Shen and Yin Tat Lee.       The randomized midpoint method for log-concave
  sampling.     In Hanna M. Wallach, Hugo Larochelle, Alina Beygelzimer, Florence
  dвҖҷAlcheМҒ-Buc, Emily B. Fox, and Roman Garnett (eds.), Advances in Neural Infor-
  mation Processing Systems 32: Annual Conference on Neural Information Process-
  ing Systems 2019, NeurIPS 2019, December 8-14, 2019, Vancouver, BC, Canada, pp.
  2098вҖ“2109, 2019. URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper/2019/hash/
  eb86d510361fc23b59f18c1bc9802cc6-Abstract.html.
Andy Shih, Suneel Belkhale, Stefano Ermon, Dorsa Sadigh, and Nima Anari. Parallel sampling of
  diffusion models. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 36, 2024.
Jascha Sohl-Dickstein, Eric Weiss, Niru Maheswaranathan, and Surya Ganguli. Deep unsupervised
  learning using nonequilibrium thermodynamics. In Francis Bach and David Blei (eds.), Proceed-
  ings of the 32nd International Conference on Machine Learning, volume 37 of Proceedings of
  Machine Learning Research, pp. 2256вҖ“2265, Lille, France, 7 2015. PMLR.
Yang Song and Stefano Ermon. Generative modeling by estimating gradients of the data distribution.
  In H. Wallach, H. Larochelle, A. Beygelzimer, F. d'AlcheМҒ-Buc, E. Fox, and R. Garnett (eds.),
  Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 32. Curran Associates, Inc., 2019.
Yang Song, Conor Durkan, Iain Murray, and Stefano Ermon. Maximum likelihood training of score-
  based diffusion models. In M. Ranzato, A. Beygelzimer, Y. Dauphin, P.S. Liang, and J. Wortman
  Vaughan (eds.), Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 34, pp. 1415вҖ“1428.
  Curran Associates, Inc., 2021a.


                                               12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Yang Song, Jascha Sohl-Dickstein, Diederik P. Kingma, Abhishek Kumar, Stefano Ermon, and Ben
  Poole. Score-based generative modeling through stochastic differential equations. In Interna-
  tional Conference on Learning Representations, 2021b.

Arash Vahdat, Karsten Kreis, and Jan Kautz. Score-based generative modeling in latent space. In
  M. Ranzato, A. Beygelzimer, Y. Dauphin, P.S. Liang, and J. Wortman Vaughan (eds.), Advances
  in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 34, pp. 11287вҖ“11302. Curran Associates, Inc.,
  2021.

Andre Wibisono and Kaylee Y. Yang. Convergence in KL divergence of the inexact Langevin
  algorithm with application to score-based generative models. arXiv preprint 2211.01512, 2022.

Kevin E Wu, Kevin K Yang, Rianne van den Berg, Sarah Alamdari, James Y Zou, Alex X Lu, and
  Ava P Amini. Protein structure generation via folding diffusion. Nature Communications, 15(1):
  1059, 2024.

Lu Yu and Arnak Dalalyana. Parallelized midpoint randomization for langevin monte carlo. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2402.14434, 2024.

Lu Yu, Avetik Karagulyan, and Arnak Dalalyan. Langevin monte carlo for strongly log-concave
  distributions: Randomized midpoint revisited. arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.08494, 2023.

Shunshi Zhang, Sinho Chewi, Mufan Li, Krishna Balasubramanian, and Murat A Erdogdu. Im-
  proved discretization analysis for underdamped langevin monte carlo. In The Thirty Sixth Annual
  Conference on Learning Theory, pp. 36вҖ“71. PMLR, 2023.

Roadmap. In Section A, we provide empirical evaluation of the randomized midpoint algorithm.
In Section B, we give the proof of Theorem 1.1, our main result on sequential sampling with diffu-
sions. In Section C, we give the proof of Theorem 1.2, our main result on parallel sampling with
diffusions. In Section D, we give the proof of Theorem 1.3 on log-concave sampling.
As a notational remark, in the proofs to follow we will sometimes use the notation KL(x вҲҘ y),
W2 (x, y), and TV(x, y) for random variables x and y to denote the distance between their associated
probability distributions. Also, throughout the Appendix, we use t to denote time in the forward
process.

A    E XPERIMENTS

Experimental setup. For all of our experiments, we use one NVIDIA A100 GPU. We evalu-
ate our (sequential) randomized midpoint scheduler (predictor step only), a deterministic midpoint
scheduler (where the midpoint is the average of the start and end times of a step), the default DDIM
scheduler, and the default DDPM scheduler on the following datasets: CIFAR-10 (generated image
dimension: 32 Г— 32), and CelebAHQ (generated image dimension: 256 Г— 256). To obtain score
estimations for both of the schedulers, we use public pretrained DDPM models release by (Ho et al.,
2020) for the two datasets2 , and generate 50k sample images for each dataset.

Evaluation. The performance of our scheduler and the default DDIM scheduler is evaluated by
comparing the FreМҒchet Inception Distance (FID) scores (Heusel et al., 2017), which measure the
quality of generated samples relative to the target distribution. Specifically, we use pytorch-fid3 .
The most expensive part of a diffusion scheduling algorithm is the number of evaluations of the
score estimation function, as it involves calling the pre-trained neural network. To obtain a fair
comparison, we maintain the same number of function calls (NFE) between the schedulers. Since
randomized and deterministic midpoint takes two NFE per step, while DDIM and DDPM takes one
NFE per step, this means that randomized and deterministic midpoint schedulers takes twice the step
size of DDIM and DDPM in our experiments. Our results can be found in Figure 1.
   2
     These      pretrained      models     can  be     found     respectively   at    https://heibox.uni-
heidelberg.de/f/2e4f01e2d9ee49bab1d5/?dl=1; https://huggingface.co/google/ddpm-ema-celebahq-256.
   3
     https://pypi.org/project/pytorch-fid/


                                                   13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Discussion. In our experiments, randomized midpoint consistently outperforms DDIM and
DDPM on FID scores, which matches our theoretical analysis. The randomized midpoint appears
to perform better than the deterministic midpoint on the CIFAR-10 dataset, while showing compa-
rable performance on the CelebAHQ dataset. We suspect that this relative performance difference
is related to the empirical bias of the deterministic midpoint estimator.


Figure 1: Number of Function Calls vs. FID score for CIFAR-10 and CelebAHQ Datasets (both
axes are on a log scale).


B     S EQUENTIAL ALGORITHM
In this section, we describe our sequential randomized-midpoint-based algorithm in detail. Follow-
ing the framework of (Chen et al., 2023b), we begin by describing the predictor Step and show in
Lemma B.5 that in O(d e 1/3 ) steps (ignoring other dependencies), when run for time t at most O( 1 )
                                                                                                     L
starting from tn , it produces a sample that is close to the true distribution at time tn вҲ’ t. Then, we
show that the corrector step can be used to convert our W2 error to error in TV distance by running
the underdamped Langevin Monte Carlo algorithm, as described in (Chen et al., 2023b). We show
in B.8 that if we run our predictor and corrector steps in succession for a careful choice of times, we
obtain a sample that is close to the true distribution in TV using just O(de 5/12 ) steps, but covering
            1                                                              2

a time O L . Finally, in Theorem B.10, we iterate this bound O(log d) times to obtain our final
                                                                     e
                          e 5/12 ).
iteration complexity of O(d

B.1   P REDICTOR STEP
              e 1/3 ) dependence on dimension for the predictor step, we will, roughly speaking,
To show the O(d
show that its bias after one step is bounded by вүҲ OL dh6 in Lemma B.3, and that the variance
is bounded by OL dh4 in Lemma B.4.  Then, iterating these bounds вүҲ h1 times as shown in


Lemma B.5 will give error OL dh4 + dh3 in squared Wasserstein Distance.
Lemma B.1 (Naive ODE Coupling). Consider two variables x0 , xвҖІ0 starting at time t0 , and consider
the result of running the true ODE for time h, and let the results be x1 , xвҖІ1 . For L вүҘ 1, h вүӨ 1/L, we
have
                                вҲҘx1 вҲ’ xвҖІ1 вҲҘ2 вүӨ exp(O(Lh))вҲҘx0 вҲ’ xвҖІ0 вҲҘ2

Proof. Recall that the true ODE is given by
                                     dxt = (xt + вҲҮ ln qT вҲ’t (xt ))dt
So,
              вҲӮt вҲҘxt вҲ’ xвҖІt вҲҘ2 = 2вҹЁxt вҲ’ xвҖІt , вҲӮt xt вҲ’ вҲӮt xвҖІt вҹ©
                              = 2вҹЁxt вҲ’ xвҖІt , xt вҲ’ xвҖІt + вҲҮ ln qT вҲ’t (xt ) вҲ’ вҲҮ ln qT вҲ’t (xвҖІt )вҹ©
                              вүІ LвҲҘxt вҲ’ xвҖІt вҲҘ2


                                                     14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Algorithm 4 P REDICTOR S TEP (S EQUENTIAL )

Input parameters:
         вҖў Starting sample x
                           b0 , Starting time t0 , Number of steps N , Step sizes hnвҲҲ[0,...,N вҲ’1] , Score
           estimates sbt
        1. For n = 0, . . . , N вҲ’ 1:
                                 PnвҲ’1
            (a) Let tn = t0 вҲ’ i=0 hi
            (b) Randomly sample Оұ uniformly from [0, 1].

                    bn+ 12 = eОұhn x
            (c) Let x                bn + eОұhn вҲ’ 1 sbtn (b
                                                         xn )ds
                    bn+1 = ehn x
            (d) Let x          bn + hn В· e(1вҲ’Оұ)hn sbtn вҲ’Оұhn (b
                                                             xn+ 21 )
                         PN вҲ’1
        2. Let tN = t0 вҲ’ i=0 hi
        3. Return x
                  bN , tN .


So,
                                вҲҘx1 вҲ’ xвҖІ1 вҲҘ2 вүӨ exp (O(Lh)) вҲҘx0 вҲ’ xвҖІ0 вҲҘ2 .
Lemma B.2. Suppose L вүҘ 1. In Algorithm 4, for all n вҲҲ {0, . . . , N вҲ’ 1}, let xвҲ—n (t) be the solution
                            bn at time tn , running until time tn вҲ’ t. If hn вүІ L1 and tn вҲ’ hn вүҘ tn /2,
of the true ODE starting at x
we have
                             xn+ 12 ) вҲ’ hn e(1вҲ’Оұ)hn вҲҮ ln qtn вҲ’Оұhn (xвҲ—n (Оұhn ))вҲҘ2
   E вҲҘhn e(1вҲ’Оұ)hn sbtn вҲ’Оұhn (b

                                                2 2      4    6          1
                                             вүІ hn Пөsc + L dhn L вҲЁ            + L2 h2n E вҲҘb
                                                                                         xn вҲ’ xtn вҲҘ2 ,
                                                                        tn
                                                          b0 вҲј qt0 .
where E refers to the expectation over the initial choice x

Proof. For the proof, we will let h := hn . It suffices to show that

                                                                      1
 E вҲҘb        xn+ 21 )вҲ’вҲҮ ln qtn вҲ’Оұh (xвҲ—n (Оұh))вҲҘ2 вүІ Пө2sc +L4 dh4 L вҲЁ
    stn вҲ’Оұh (b                                                            +L2 E вҲҘb
                                                                                 xn вҲ’ xtn вҲҘ2 (16)
                                                                     tn

We can separate the above quantity into three parts: the expected difference in score estimation
function s(В·) evaluated at xМӮn+1/2 and xtn вҲ’Оұh ; the expected difference in the true score function q(В·)
evaluated at xвҲ—n (Оұh) and xtn вҲ’Оұh ; and the expected difference between s(В·) and q(В·) both evaluated at
xtn вҲ’Оұh . By our Lipschitz assumption on both the score and score estimation function (Theorem 2.2
and Theorem 2.3), the first two terms can be bounded by L2 times the difference in estimated and
true sample x. By Theorem 2.4, the last term can be bounded by Пө2sc . Formally, we have
      E вҲҘb        xn+ 12 ) вҲ’ вҲҮ ln qtn вҲ’Оұh (xвҲ—n (Оұh))вҲҘ2
         stn вҲ’Оұh (b
 вүІ E вҲҘb        xn+ 12 ) вҲ’ sbtn вҲ’Оұh (xtn вҲ’Оұh )вҲҘ + E вҲҘвҲҮ ln qtn вҲ’Оұh (xвҲ—n (Оұh)) вҲ’ вҲҮ ln qtn вҲ’Оұh (xtn вҲ’Оұh )вҲҘ2
      stn вҲ’Оұh (b
           stn вҲ’Оұh (xtn вҲ’Оұh ) вҲ’ вҲҮ ln qtn вҲ’Оұh (xtn вҲ’Оұh )вҲҘ2
      + E вҲҘb
        xn+ 21 вҲ’ xtn вҲ’Оұh вҲҘ2 + L2 E вҲҘxtn вҲ’Оұh вҲ’ xвҲ—n (Оұh)вҲҘ2 + Пө2sc
 вүІL2 E вҲҘb
        xn+ 12 вҲ’ xвҲ—n (Оұh)вҲҘ2 + L2 E вҲҘxвҲ—n (Оұh) вҲ’ xtn вҲ’Оұh вҲҘ2 + Пө2sc .
 вүІL2 E вҲҘb                                                                                              (17)
By Theorem B.1, for any s вҲҲ [0, h],
                    вҲҘxвҲ—n (s) вҲ’ xtn вҲ’s вҲҘ2 вүІ exp (O(Lh)) вҲҘb
                                                        xn вҲ’ xtn вҲҘ2 вүІ вҲҘb
                                                                       x n вҲ’ x tn вҲҘ 2 ,                (18)
thus the second term in Equation (17) is bounded by L       2
                                                                E вҲҘxвҲ—n (Оұh) вҲ’ xtn вҲ’Оұh вҲҘ2 вүІ L2 вҲҘb
                                                                                               xn вҲ’ xtn вҲҘ2 .
Now, we just need to bound E вҲҘbxn+ 21 вҲ’ xвҲ—n (Оұh)вҲҘ2 .
Note that xвҲ—n (Оұh) is the solution to the following ODE run for time Оұh, starting at x
                                                                                     bn at time tn :
                                       dxt = (xt + вҲҮ ln qt (xt )) dt


                                                     15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Similarly, x
           bn+ 12 is the solution to the following ODE run for time Оұh, starting at x
                                                                                    bn at time tn :
                                          db
                                           xt = (b
                                                 xt + sbtn (b
                                                            xn )) dt
So, we have
                         bt вҲҘ2 = 2вҹЁxt вҲ’ x
                вҲӮt вҲҘxt вҲ’ x              bt , вҲӮt xt вҲ’ вҲӮt x
                                                        bt вҹ©
                                           bt вҲҘ2 + вҹЁxt вҲ’ x

                              = 2 вҲҘxt вҲ’ x                 bt , вҲҮ ln qt (xt ) вҲ’ sbtn (b
                                                                                     xn )вҹ©

                                       1
                              вүӨ 2+          вҲҘxt вҲ’ xbt вҲҘ2 + hвҲҘвҲҮ ln qt (xt ) вҲ’ sbtn (b xn )вҲҘ2
                                       h
where the last line is by YoungвҖҷs inequality.
So, by GroМҲnwallвҖҷs inequality,
                                                Z h
                                     1
вҲҘxвҲ—n (Оұh) вҲ’ x
            bn+ 21 вҲҘ2 вүӨ exp     2+        В· Оұh        hвҲҘвҲҮ ln qtn вҲ’s (xвҲ—n (s)) вҲ’ sbtn (b
                                                                                      xn )вҲҘ2 ds
                                     h             0
                          Z h
                      вүІh       вҲҘвҲҮ ln qtn вҲ’s (xвҲ—n (s)) вҲ’ sbtn (b
                                                              xn )вҲҘ2 ds
                             0
                           Z h
                      вүІh          вҲҘвҲҮ ln qtn вҲ’s (xвҲ—n (s)) вҲ’ вҲҮ ln qtn (xtn ) вҲҘ2 + вҲҘвҲҮ ln qtn (xtn ) вҲ’ sbtn (xtn )вҲҘ2
                             0
                                 + вҲҘb    xn ) вҲ’ sbtn (xtn )вҲҘ2 ds.
                                    stn (b
Taking expectation of the above quantity (as always over the intial choice of xМӮ0 вҲј qt0 ), we can now
use a similar computation as the one in Equation (17):
                             Z h
E вҲҘxвҲ—n (Оұh) вҲ’ xbn+ 21 вҲҘ2 вүІ h     E вҲҘвҲҮ ln qtn вҲ’s (xвҲ—n (s)) вҲ’ вҲҮ ln qtn (xtn ) вҲҘ2 ds
                                 0
                         + h2 E вҲҘвҲҮ ln qtn (xtn ) вҲ’ sbtn (xtn )вҲҘ2 + h2 E вҲҘb     xn ) вҲ’ sbtn (xtn )вҲҘ2
                                                                          stn (b
                           Z h
                                                                                                              2
                        вүІh     E вҲҘвҲҮ ln qtn вҲ’s (xвҲ—n (s)) вҲ’ вҲҮ ln qtn (xtn ) вҲҘ2 ds + h2 Пө2sc + h2 L2 вҲҘbxn вҲ’ xtn вҲҘ .
                                 0
Now we just need to bound E вҲҘвҲҮ ln qtn вҲ’s (xвҲ—n (s)) вҲ’ вҲҮ ln qtn (xtn ) вҲҘ2 . By Corollary E.1,

                                                           2    2    2        1
                E вҲҘвҲҮ ln qtn вҲ’s (xtn вҲ’s ) вҲ’ вҲҮ ln qtn (xtn )вҲҘ вүІ L dh L вҲЁ            .
                                                                             tn
By Lipschitzness of вҲҮ ln qt and Lemma B.1, for s вүӨ hn вүӨ 1/L,
           вҲҘвҲҮ ln qtn вҲ’s (xвҲ—n (s)) вҲ’ вҲҮ ln qtn вҲ’s (xtn вҲ’s )вҲҘ2 вүӨ L2 вҲҘxвҲ—n (s) вҲ’ xtn вҲ’s вҲҘ2
                                                             вүІ L2 exp (O(Lhn )) вҲҘb
                                                                                 xn вҲ’ xtn вҲҘ2
                                                             вүІ L2 вҲҘb
                                                                   xn вҲ’ xtn вҲҘ2 .
Combining the above two equations together, we get

                                                                      1
        E вҲҘвҲҮ ln qtn вҲ’s (xвҲ—n (s)) вҲ’ вҲҮ ln qtn (xtn ) вҲҘ2 вүІ L2 dh2 L вҲЁ        + L2 вҲҘb
                                                                                xn вҲ’ xtn вҲҘ2 ,
                                                                     tn
and thus

               вҲ—                  2    2 2       2    4       1
           E вҲҘxn (Оұh) вҲ’ x bn+ 21 вҲҘ вүІ h Пөsc + L dh L вҲЁ             + L2 h2 E вҲҘb
                                                                             xn вҲ’ xtn вҲҘ2 .
                                                             tn
Plugging the above bound into Equation (17) yields the claim.
Lemma B.3 (Sequential Predictor Bias). Suppose L вүҘ 1. In Algorithm 4, for all n вҲҲ {0, . . . , N вҲ’
1}, let xвҲ—n (t) be the solution of the true ODE starting at x
                                                            bn at time tn and running until time tn вҲ’ t,
and let xt вҲј qt be the solution of the true ODE, starting at xb0 вҲј qt0 . If hn вүІ L1 , and tn вҲ’hn вүҘ tn /2,
we have

                                                                 1
             EвҲҘEx  bn+1 вҲ’ xвҲ—n (hn )вҲҘ2 вүІ h2n Пө2sc + L4 dh6n L вҲЁ        + L2 h2n E вҲҘbxn вҲ’ xtn вҲҘ2
                 Оұ                                              tn
where EОұ is the expectation with respect to the Оұ chosen in the nth step, and E is the expectation
                                          b0 вҲј qt0 .
with respect to the choice of the initial x


                                                      16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Proof. For the proof, we wil fix n, and let h := hn . By the integral formulation of the true ODE,
                                      Z tn
                    xвҲ—n (h) = eh x
                                 bn +         esвҲ’(tn вҲ’h) вҲҮ ln qs (xвҲ—n (tn вҲ’ s)) ds .
                                              tn вҲ’h

Thus, we have
                                                                  Z tn
вҲҘExbn+1 вҲ’ xвҲ—n (h)вҲҘ2 = вҲҘh E e(1вҲ’Оұ)h sbtn вҲ’Оұh (b
                                             xn+ 21 ) вҲ’                  esвҲ’(tn вҲ’h) вҲҮ ln qs (xвҲ—n (tn вҲ’ s)) dsвҲҘ2
 Оұ                       Оұ                                         tn вҲ’h

                      вүІ E вҲҘhe(1вҲ’Оұ)h sbtn вҲ’Оұh (b
                                              xn+ 21 ) вҲ’ he            вҲҮ ln qtn вҲ’Оұh (xвҲ—n (Оұh))вҲҘ2
                                                                    (1вҲ’Оұ)h
                            Оұ
                                                                           Z tn
                                + вҲҘh В· E e(1вҲ’Оұ)h вҲҮ ln qtn вҲ’Оұh (xвҲ—n (Оұh)) вҲ’        esвҲ’(tn вҲ’h) вҲҮ ln qs (xвҲ—n (tn вҲ’ s)) dsвҲҘ2 .
                                        Оұ                                            tn вҲ’h

The second term is 0 since
                                                  Z 1
          h E e(1вҲ’Оұ)h вҲҮ ln qtn вҲ’Оұh (xвҲ—n (Оұh)) = h     e(1вҲ’Оұ)h вҲҮ ln qtn вҲ’Оұh (xвҲ—n (Оұh)) dОұ
            Оұ                                      0
                                                Z tn
                                              =        esвҲ’(tn вҲ’h) вҲҮ ln qs (xвҲ—n (tn вҲ’ s)) ds .
                                                          tn вҲ’h

For the first term, we have, by Lemma B.2

                        xn+ 12 ) вҲ’ he(1вҲ’Оұ)h вҲҮ ln qtn вҲ’Оұh (xвҲ—n (Оұh))вҲҘ2
  E вҲҘhe(1вҲ’Оұ)h sbtn вҲ’Оұh (b

                                                                       1
                                           вүІ h2 Пө2sc + L4 dh6 L вҲЁ          + L2 h2 E вҲҘb
                                                                                      xn вҲ’ xtn вҲҘ2 .
                                                                      tn
The claimed bound follows.
Lemma B.4 (Sequential Predictor Variance). Suppose L вүҘ 1. In Algorithm 4, for all n вҲҲ
{0, . . . , N вҲ’ 1}, let xвҲ—n (t) be the solution of the true ODE starting at x
                                                                            bn at time tn and running
until time tn вҲ’ t, and let xt вҲј qt be the solution of the true ODE starting at x b0 вҲј qt0 . If hn вүІ L1
and tn вҲ’ hn вүҘ tn /2, we have

                             вҲ—       2    2 2       2   4      1
              E вҲҘb
                 xn+1 вҲ’ xn (hn )вҲҘ вүІ hn Пөsc + L dhn L вҲЁ             + L2 h2n E вҲҘxtn вҲ’ xbn вҲҘ2
                                                              tn
where E refers to the expectation wrt the random Оұ in the nth step, along with the initial choice
b0 вҲј qt0 .
x

Proof. Fix n and let h := hn . We have
   xn+1 вҲ’ xвҲ—n (h)вҲҘ2
E вҲҘb
                                                  Z tn
     = E вҲҘh В· e   (1вҲ’Оұ)h
                                     xn+ 21 ) вҲ’
                           sbtn вҲ’Оұh (b                   esвҲ’(tn вҲ’h) вҲҮ ln qs (xвҲ—n (tn вҲ’ s)) dsвҲҘ2
                                                   tn вҲ’h

     вүІ E вҲҘh В· e(1вҲ’Оұ)h sbtn вҲ’Оұh (b
                                xn+ 21 ) вҲ’ he       вҲҮ ln qtn вҲ’Оұh (xвҲ—n (Оұh))вҲҘ2
                                                    (1вҲ’Оұ)h

                                                           Z tn
                                                 вҲ—
                + E вҲҘh В· e (1вҲ’Оұ)h
                                  вҲҮ ln qtn вҲ’Оұh (xn (Оұh)) вҲ’         e(1вҲ’Оұ)h вҲҮ ln qs (xвҲ—n (tn вҲ’ s)) dsвҲҘ2
                                                                     tn вҲ’h
                       Z tn                                              Z tn
                + EвҲҘ               e(1вҲ’Оұ)h вҲҮ ln qs (xвҲ—n (tn вҲ’ s)) ds вҲ’               esвҲ’(tn вҲ’h) вҲҮ ln qs (xвҲ—n (tn вҲ’ s)) dsвҲҘ2
                           tn вҲ’h                                             tn вҲ’h

The first term was bounded in Lemma B.2:

  E вҲҘh В· e(1вҲ’Оұ)h sbtn вҲ’Оұh (b
                           xn+ 21 ) вҲ’ he(1вҲ’Оұ)h вҲҮ ln qtn вҲ’Оұh (xtn вҲ’Оұh )вҲҘ2

                                                2 2       4   6         1
                                            вүІ h Пөsc + L dh L вҲЁ              + L2 h2 E вҲҘb
                                                                                       xn вҲ’ xtn вҲҘ2 .
                                                                       tn


                                                         17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


For the second term,
                                                           Z tn
          E вҲҘh В· e   (1вҲ’Оұ)h
                              вҲҮ ln qtn вҲ’Оұh (xвҲ—n (Оұh)) вҲ’              e(1вҲ’Оұ)h вҲҮ ln qs (xвҲ—n (tn вҲ’ s)) dsвҲҘ2
                                                            tn вҲ’h
                          Z tn
                = EвҲҘ                e(1вҲ’Оұ)h В· (вҲҮ ln qtn вҲ’Оұh (xвҲ—n (Оұh)) вҲ’ вҲҮ ln qs (xвҲ—n (tn вҲ’ s))) dsвҲҘ2
                            tn вҲ’h
                      Z tn
                вүІh                E вҲҘвҲҮ ln qtn вҲ’Оұh (xвҲ—n (Оұh)) вҲ’ вҲҮ ln qs (xвҲ—n (tn вҲ’ s)вҲҘ2 ds .
                          tn вҲ’h
Now,
E вҲҘвҲҮ ln qtn вҲ’Оұh (xвҲ—n (Оұh)) вҲ’ вҲҮ ln qs (xвҲ—n (tn вҲ’ s))вҲҘ2 вүІ E вҲҘвҲҮ ln qtn вҲ’Оұh (xtn вҲ’Оұh ) вҲ’ вҲҮ ln qs (xs )вҲҘ2
                                                                      + E вҲҘвҲҮ ln qtn вҲ’Оұh (xtn вҲ’Оұh ) вҲ’ вҲҮ ln qtn вҲ’Оұh (xвҲ—n (Оұh))вҲҘ2
                                                                      + E вҲҘвҲҮ ln qs (xs ) вҲ’ вҲҮ ln qs (xвҲ—n (tn вҲ’ s))вҲҘ2
The first of these terms is bounded in Corollary E.1:

                                                                        2     12   2
                  E вҲҘвҲҮ ln qtn вҲ’Оұh (xtn вҲ’Оұh ) вҲ’ вҲҮ ln qs (xs )вҲҘ вүІ L dh L вҲЁ
                                                                             tn
For the remaining two terms, note that by the Lipschitzness of вҲҮ ln qt and Lemma B.1,
      E вҲҘвҲҮ ln qtn вҲ’Оұh (xtn вҲ’Оұh ) вҲ’ вҲҮ ln qtn вҲ’Оұh (xвҲ—n (Оұh))вҲҘ2 вүӨ L2 E вҲҘxtn вҲ’Оұh вҲ’ xвҲ—n (Оұh)вҲҘ2
                                                                        вүІ L2 exp(O(Lh)) E вҲҘxtn вҲ’ x
                                                                                                 bn вҲҘ2
                                                                        вүІ L2 E вҲҘxtn вҲ’ x
                                                                                      bn вҲҘ2
and similarly, for tn вҲ’ h вүӨ s вүӨ tn ,
                    E вҲҘвҲҮ ln qs (xs ) вҲ’ вҲҮ ln qs (xвҲ—n (tn вҲ’ s))вҲҘ2 вүІ L2 E вҲҘxtn вҲ’ x   bn вҲҘ2 .               (19)
Thus, we have shown that the second term in our bound on E вҲҘb            xn+1 вҲ’ xвҲ—n (h)вҲҘ2 is bounded as
follows:
                                              Z tn
   E вҲҘh В· e(1вҲ’Оұ)h вҲҮ ln qtn вҲ’Оұh (xвҲ—n (Оұh)) вҲ’           e(1вҲ’Оұ)h вҲҮ ln qs (xвҲ—n (tn вҲ’ s)) , dsвҲҘ2
                                                tn вҲ’h

                                                                           1
                                                        вүІ L2 dh4 L вҲЁ           + L2 h2 E вҲҘxtn вҲ’ x  bn вҲҘ2 .
                                                                          tn
For the third term,
         Z tn                                           Z tn
                                    вҲ—
     EвҲҘ          e (1вҲ’Оұ)h
                          вҲҮ ln qs (xn (tn вҲ’ s)) , ds вҲ’        esвҲ’(tn вҲ’h) вҲҮ ln qs (xвҲ—n (tn вҲ’ s)) , dsвҲҘ2
           tn вҲ’h                                                tn вҲ’h
                    Z tn
           = EвҲҘ                e(1вҲ’Оұ)h вҲ’ esвҲ’(tn вҲ’h) вҲҮ ln qs (xвҲ—n (tn вҲ’ s)) , dsвҲҘ2
                      tn вҲ’h
                Z tn                               2
           вүІh              E e(1вҲ’Оұ)h вҲ’ esвҲ’(tn вҲ’h)               E    вҲҘвҲҮ ln qs (xвҲ—n (tn вҲ’ s))вҲҘ2 ds .
                    tn вҲ’h Оұ                                b0 вҲјqt0
                                                           x

Now, we have
   E вҲҘвҲҮ ln qs (xвҲ—n (tn вҲ’ s))вҲҘ2 вүІ E вҲҘвҲҮ ln qs (xs )вҲҘ2 + E вҲҘвҲҮ ln qs (xвҲ—n (tn вҲ’ s)) вҲ’ вҲҮ ln qs (xs )вҲҘ2
                                     d
                                 вүІ + L2 E вҲҘxtn вҲ’ x     bn вҲҘ2 .
                                     s
where the last step follows by Lemma E.4 and equation 19. So,
          Z tn                                        Z tn
                                     вҲ—
     EвҲҘ           e (1вҲ’Оұ)h
                           вҲҮ ln qs (xn (tn вҲ’ s)) ds вҲ’        esвҲ’(tn вҲ’h) вҲҮ ln qs (xвҲ—n (tn вҲ’ s)) dsвҲҘ2
            tn вҲ’h                                               tn вҲ’h
                   Z tn                         2   d
            вүІh          E e(1вҲ’Оұ)h вҲ’ esвҲ’(tn вҲ’h) В·      + L2 E вҲҘxtn вҲ’ x
                                                                    bn вҲҘ2 ds
                 tn вҲ’h Оұ                            s

                      d
            вүІ h4 В·       + L2 E вҲҘxtn вҲ’ x
                                       bn вҲҘ2
                     tn
                                                             xn+1 вҲ’ xвҲ—n (hn )вҲҘ2 .
Thus, noting that h вүӨ L1 , we obtain the claimed bound on E вҲҘb


                                                           18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Finally, we put together the bias and variance bounds above to obtain a bound on the Wasserstein
error at the end of the Predictor Step.
Lemma B.5 (Sequential Predictor WassersteinP      Guarantee). Suppose that L вүҘ 1, and that for our
sequence of step sizes h0 , . . . , hN вҲ’1 , i hi вүӨ 1/L. Let hmax = maxi hi . Then, at the end of
Algorithm 4,
      1. If tN вүі 1/L,
                                                     Пө2sc
                                 W22 (b
                                      xN , xtN ) вүІ        + L3 dh4max + L2 dh3max
                                                     L2
      2. If tN вүІ 1/L and hn вүІ t2n for each n,
                                                 Пө2sc
                             W22 (b                   + L3 dh4max + L2 dh3max В· N

                                  xN , xtN ) вүІ      2
                                                 L
Here, xtN вҲј qtN is the solution of the true ODE beginning at xt0 = x
                                                                   b0 вҲј qt0 .

Proof. For all n вҲҲ [1, . . . , N ], let yn be the solution of the exact one step ODE starting from x
                                                                                                   bnвҲ’1 .
Let the operator EОұ be the expectation over the random choice of Оұ in the nth iteration. Note that
only x
     b depends on Оұ. We have
    N
           bN вҲҘ2 = E вҲҘ(xtN вҲ’ yN ) вҲ’ (b          xN вҲ’ yN )вҲҘ2

E вҲҘxtN вҲ’ x
Оұ                     Оұ
                   = вҲҘxtN вҲ’ yN вҲҘ2 вҲ’ 2вҹЁxtN вҲ’ yN , E x     bN вҲ’ yN вҹ© + E вҲҘb xN вҲ’ yN вҲҘ2
                                                       Оұ              Оұ

                             LhN вҲ’1                          2
                   вүӨ 1+                 вҲҘxtN вҲ’ yN вҲҘ2 +            вҲҘEx bN вҲ’ yN вҲҘ2 + E вҲҘb xN вҲ’ yN вҲҘ2
                                2                          LhN вҲ’1 Оұ                 Оұ
                                                                    2
                   вүӨ exp (O(LhN вҲ’1 )) вҲҘxtN вҲ’1 вҲ’ x    bN вҲ’1 вҲҘ2 +          вҲҘExbN вҲ’ yN вҲҘ2 + E вҲҘb xN вҲ’ yN вҲҘ2 ,
                                                                 LhN вҲ’1 Оұ                  Оұ
where the third line is by YoungвҖҷs inequality, and the fourth line is by Lemma B.1. Taking the
                b0 вҲј qt0 , by Lemmas B.3 and B.4,
expectation wrt x
               2
E вҲҘxtN вҲ’ xbN вҲҘ
                                                         2
     вүӨ exp (O(LhN вҲ’1 )) E вҲҘxtN вҲ’1 вҲ’ x    bN вҲ’1 вҲҘ2 +           EвҲҘEx  bN вҲ’ yN вҲҘ2 + E вҲҘbxN вҲ’ yN вҲҘ2
                                                     LhN вҲ’1       Оұ

     вүӨ exp (O(LhN вҲ’1 )) E вҲҘxtN вҲ’1 вҲ’ x    bN вҲ’1 вҲҘ2

                    1         2     2      4   6              1         2 2                         2
          +O                 hN вҲ’1 Пөsc + L dhN вҲ’1 L вҲЁ               + L hN вҲ’1 E вҲҘxtN вҲ’1 вҲ’ x bN вҲ’1 вҲҘ
                  LhN вҲ’1                                    tN вҲ’1

                                                   1
          + O h2N вҲ’1 Пө2sc + L2 dh4N вҲ’1 L вҲЁ               + L2 h2N вҲ’1 E вҲҘxtN вҲ’1 вҲ’ x
                                                                                 bN вҲ’1 вҲҘ2
                                                 tN вҲ’1
     вүӨ exp (O(LhN вҲ’1 )) E вҲҘxtN вҲ’1 вҲ’ x       bN вҲ’1 вҲҘ2
                 hN вҲ’1 Пө2sc

                                  2      2       3   5     2   4
                                                                             1
          +O                + hN вҲ’1 Пөsc + L dhN вҲ’1 + L dhN вҲ’1 L вҲЁ
                     L                                                     tN вҲ’1
By induction, noting that xt0 = x   b0 , we have
                    вҲ’1                                                                    вҲ’1
                  N                                                                     N
                                                                                                !!
                          hn Пө2sc

             2
                  X
                                        2 2        3   5 2   4
                                                                         1              X
E вҲҘxtN вҲ’b
        xN вҲҘ вүІ                    + hn Пөsc + L dhn + L dhn В· L вҲЁ              В·exp O L       hi    .
                  n=0
                            L                                           tn             i=n+1

By assumption, i hi вүӨ L1 . In the first case, L вҲЁ t1n вүІ L for all n, so
                P

                                               Пө2sc
                           W22 (b
                                xN , xtN ) вүІ        + L3 dh4max + L2 dh3max .
                                               L2
In the second case,
                                                                          вҲ’1
                                          Пө2sc                          NX   hn
                      W22 (b
                           xN , xtN ) вүІ        + L3
                                                    dh4
                                                      max + L2
                                                               dh 3
                                                                  max  В·
                                          L2                                 t
                                                                         n=0 n
                                          Пө2sc
                                               + L3 dh4max + L2 dh3max В· N .

                                     вүІ       2
                                          L

                                                     19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


B.2   C ORRECTOR STEP

For the sequential algorithm, we make use of the underdamped Langevin corrector step and analysis
from (Chen et al., 2023b). We reproduce the same here for convenience.
The underdamped Langevin Monte Carlo process with step size h is given by:
                              db
                               xt = vbt dt
                                                                    p                            (20)
                              db
                               vt = (b xвҢҠt/hвҢӢh ) вҲ’ Оіb
                                     s(b            vt ) dt +           2Оі dBt
where Bt is Brownian motion, and sb satisfies
                                                                2
                                       s(x) вҲ’ вҲҮ ln q(x)вҲҘ вүӨ Пө2sc .
                                    E вҲҘb                                                         (21)
                                    xвҲјq
                                                                     вҲҡ
for some target measure q. Here, we set the friction parameter Оі = Оҳ( L).
Then, our corrector step is as follows.

Algorithm 5 C ORRECTOR S TEP (S EQUENTIAL )

Input parameters:
       вҖў Starting sample x
                         b0 , Total time Tcorr , Step size hcorr , Score estimate sb
      1. Run underdamped Langevin Monte Carlo in equation 20 for total time Tcorr using step size
         hcorr , and let the result be x
                                       bN .
      2. Return x
                bN .


Theorem B.6 (Theorem 5 of (Chen et al., 2023b), restated).
                                                       вҲҡ       Suppose Eq. equation 21 holds. For
any distribution p over Rd , and total time Tcorr вүІ 1/ L, if we let pN be the distribution of x
                                                                                              bN
                                                  b0 вҲј p, then we have
resulting from running Algorithm 5 initialized at x
                                                          1/2
                                    W2 (p, q)  Пөsc Tcorr
                     TV(pN , q) вүІ            3/2
                                                 + 1/4
                                                         + L3/4 Tcorr
                                                                 1/2 1/2
                                                                      d hcorr .
                                  1/4
                                L Tcorr          L

Corollary B.7 (Underdamped Corrector). For Tcorr = Оҳ вҲҡLd11/18
                                               вҲҡ          Пөsc      вҲҡ
               TV(pN , q) вүІ W2 (p, q) В· d1/12 В· L + вҲҡ            + Ld17/36 hcorr .
                                                         Ld 1/36


B.3   E ND - TO - END ANALYSIS
                                                                                              e 5/12 )
Finally, we put together the analysis of the predictor and corrector step to obtain our final O(d
dependence on sampling time. We first show that carefully choosing the amount of time to run the
corrector results in small TV error after successive rounds of the predictor and corrector steps in
Lemma B.8. Finally, we iterate this bound to obtain our final guarantee, given by Theorem B.10.
Lemma B.8 (TV error after one round of predictor and corrector). Let xt вҲј qt be a sample     from the

true distribution at time t. Let tn = T вҲ’ n/L for n вҲҲ [0, . . . , N0 ]. If we set Tcorr = Оҳ вҲҡLd11/18 ,
we have,

      1. For n вҲҲ [0, . . . , N0 вҲ’ 1], if tn вүі 1/L,
                                                                                 вҲҡ 17/36        Пөsc d1/12

                                                   2 7/12 2       3/2 7/12 3/2
         TV(bxn+1 , xtn+1 ) вүӨ TV(b   xn , xtn )+O L d    hpred + L d      hpred + Ld     hcorr + вҲҡ
                                                                                                     L

      2. If tN0 вүІ 1/L,
            xN0 +1 , xОҙ ) вүӨ TV(b
         TV(b                  xN0 , xtN0 )
                                                                                                        !

                                     2 7/12 2        3/2 7/12 3/2
                                                                    r    hpred вҲҡ 17/36        Пөsc d1/12
                            +O     L d      hpred + L d      hpred В· log      + Ld     hcorr + вҲҡ
                                                                           Оҙ                       L

                                                     20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Algorithm 6 S EQUENTIAL A LGORITHM

Input parameters:
                                                                         вҲҡ
       вҖў Start time T , End time Оҙ, Corrector steps time Tcorr вүІ 1/ L, Number of predictor-
         corrector steps N0 , Predictor step size hpred , Corrector step size hcorr , Score estimates
         sbt
              b0 вҲј N (0, Id ).
      1. Draw x
      2. For n = 0, . . . , N0 вҲ’ 1:
          (a) Starting from xbn , run Algorithm 4 with starting time T вҲ’ n/L using step sizes hpred
                                                                                                   bвҖІn+1 .
              for all N steps, with N = Lh1pred , so that the total time is 1/L. Let the result be x
          (b) Starting from xbвҖІn+1 , run Algorithm 5 for total time Tcorr with step size hcorr and score
              estimate sbT вҲ’(n+1)/L to obtain xbn+1 .
      3. Starting from x  bN0 , run Algorithm 4 with starting time T вҲ’ N0 /L using step sizes
                                                           bвҖІN0 +1 .
         hpred /2, hpred /4, hpred /8, . . . , Оҙ to obtain x
      4. Starting from x bвҖІN0 +1 , run Algorithm 5 for total time Tcorr with step size hcorr and score
         estimate sbОҙ to obtain x bN0 +1 .
      5. Return x
                bN0 +1 .


Proof. For n вҲҲ [0, . . . , N0 ], let ybn+1 be the result of a single predictor-corrector sequence as de-
scribed in step 2 of Algorithm 6, but starting from xtn вҲј qtn instead of x   bn . Additionally, let ybN0 +1
                                                                                                        вҖІ
be the result of running steps 3 and 4 starting from xtN0 вҲј qtN0 instead of x    bN0 . Similarly, let ybn+1
                                                                                             вҖІ
be the result of only applying the predictor step starting from xtn вҲј qtn , analogous to x  bn+1 defined
in step 2a.
We have, by the triangle inequality and the data-processing inequality, for n вҲҲ [0, . . . , N0 вҲ’ 1],
                         xn+1 , xtn+1 ) вүӨ TV(b
                      TV(b                   xn+1 , ybn+1 ) + TV(b
                                                                 yn+1 , xtn+1 )
                                          вүӨ TV(b
                                               xn , xtn ) + TV(b
                                                               yn+1 , xtn+1 )
By Corollary B.7,
                                  вҖІ
                                                                 вҲҡ           Пөsc     вҲҡ
         TV(b
            yn+1 , xtn+1 ) вүІ W2 (b
                                 yn+1 , xtn+1 ) В· d1/12 В·            L+ вҲҡ           + Ld17/36 hcorr
                                                                            Ld 1/36

Now, for tn вүі 1/L, by Lemma B.5,
                            вҖІ                    Пөsc       вҲҡ           вҲҡ 3/2
                       W2 (b
                           yn+1 , xtn+1 ) вүІ          + L3/2 dh2pred + L dhpred .
                                                  L
Combining the above gives the first claim.
For the second claim, similar to above, we have
                          xN0 +1 , xОҙ ) вүӨ TV(b
                       TV(b                  xN0 +1 , ybN0 +1 ) + TV(byN0 +1 , xОҙ )
                                        вүӨ TV(b
                                             xN0 , xtN0 ) + TV(b  yN0 +1 , xОҙ )
By Corollary B.7,
                                   вҖІ
                                                               вҲҡ           Пөsc     вҲҡ
              yN0 +1 , xОҙ ) вүӨ W2 (b
           TV(b                   yN 0 +1
                                          , xОҙ ) В· d1/12 В·         L+ вҲҡ           + Ld17/36 hcorr
                                                                          Ld 1/36

For  tN0 вүІ  1/L, by Lemma B.5, noting that the number of predictor steps in this case is
        h
O log predОҙ ,

                     вҖІ               Пөsc
                                                 3/2
                                                       вҲҡ              вҲҡ     3/2
                                                                                     r    hpred
                W2 (b
                    yN 0 +1
                            , xОҙ ) вүІ     +       L         dh2pred + L    dhpred    В· log
                                      L                                                     Оҙ
The second claim follows by combining the above.


                                                       21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


We recall the following lemma on the convergence of the OU process from (Chen et al., 2023b)
Lemma B.9 (Lemma 13 of (Chen et al., 2023b)). Let qt denote the marginal law of the OU process
started at q0 = q. Then, for all T вүі 1,
                                                    вҲҡ
                             TV(qT , N (0, Id )) вүІ ( d + m2 ) exp(вҲ’T )

Finally, we prove our main theorem on the convergence of our sequential algorithm.
Theorem B.10 (Convergence bound for sequential algorithm).    Suppose      Assumptions 2.1-2.4        hold.
                                                                   dвҲЁm22

                                                                                                    1
If x
   b denotes the output of Algorithm 6, for T = Оҳ log                2       , Tcorr   =    Оҳ    вҲҡ
                                                           1/2 Пө 2/3
                                                                                                     1/18
                                                                                                Ld
                   Пө2                                         Пө          Пө               1
and Оҙ = Оҳ L2 (dвҲЁm2 ) , if we set hpred = Оҳ min d1/3 L3/2 , d5/12 L5/3 В· log(m2 ) , hcorr =
                                                 e
                        2
            Пө                                                                        Пө
Оҳ d17/36 L3/2 log (m2 ) , and if the score estimation satisfies Пөsc вүӨ O
e                                                                        e вҲҡ
                                                                               Ld 1/12 log m2
                                                                                                , we have
that
                                                TV(bx, x0 ) вүІ Пө
                                 5/3 5/12
with iteration complexity Оҳ
                          e      L   d
                                     Пө      В· log2 (m2 )

Proof. We will let tn = T вҲ’ n/L. First, note that by Lemma B.9
                                               вҲҡ
                             TV(bx0 , xt0 ) вүІ ( d + m2 ) exp(вҲ’T )
We divide our analysis into two steps. For the first N0 = O(LT ) steps, we iterate the first part of
Lemma B.8 to obtain
                                                                         вҲҡ                  Пөsc d1/12

                                                                   3/2
   xN0 , xtN0 ) вүӨ TV(b
TV(b                  x0 , xt0 ) + O L2 d7/12 h2pred + L3/2 d7/12 hpred + Ld17/36 hcorr + вҲҡ             В· N0
                                                                                                 L
                   вҲҡ                                                                                             вҲҡ
                                                                          3/2
                вүІ    d + m2 exp(вҲ’T ) + L3 d7/12 h2pred T + L5/2 d7/12 hpred T + L3/2 d17/36 hcorr T + Пөsc d1/12 T L

Applying the second part of Lemma B.8 for the second stage of the algorithm, we have
        TV(bxN0 +1 , xОҙ )
                                                                                                       !
            вҲҡ                                                                           r
                                                                                                 hpred
                                           3 7/12 2          5/2 7/12 3/2
        вүІ     d + m2 exp(вҲ’T ) + L d               hpred + L d           hpred     T + log
                                                                                                   Оҙ
                                             вҲҡ
        + L3/2 d17/36 hcorr T + Пөsc d1/12 T L
                           dвҲЁm22
                                                            1/2
                                                               Пө            Пө2/3        1
Setting T = Оҳ log             2     , h pred =    Оҳ
                                                  e  min              ,
                                                            d1/3 L3/2 d5/12 L5/3
                                                                                                , and hcorr =
                            Пө                                                        log(m2 )
e 17/36Пө 3/2 В· 1
Оҳ                          , if the  score estimation  error  satisfies  Пө sc вүӨ  O
                                                                                 e вҲҡ           Пө
                                                                                                          , with
     d     L     log(m2 )                                                               Ld1/12 log(m2 )
                            5/3 5/12 2
iteration complexity Оҳ e L d          log m2
                                               , we obtain TV(b  xN0 +1 , xОҙ ) вүӨ Пө.
                                    Пө


C     PARALLEL ALGORITHM
C.1    P REDICTOR STEP

In this section, we will apply a parallel version of randomized midpoint for the predictor step, where
             2 Ld
only Оҳ(log
      e       ( Пө )) iteration complexity will be required to attain our desired error bound for one
predictor step.
In each iteration n, we will first sample R randomized midpoints that are in expectation evenly
                      hn
spaced with Оҙn = R     n
                         time intervals between consecutive midpoints. Next, in our step (c), we
provide an initial estimate on the x value of midpoints using our estimate of position x  bn at time tn
provided by iteration n вҲ’ 1. This step is analogous to step (c) in Algorithm 4 for the sequential
predictor step. Then, in step (d) we refine our initial estimates by using a discrete version of Picard
iteration, where for round k, we compute a new estimate of xtn вҲ’Оұi hn based on the estimates of


                                                      22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


xtn вҲ’Оұj hn for j вүӨ i in round k вҲ’ 1. Note that a trajectory x(t) that starts from time t0 and follows
the true ODE is a fix point of operator П„ that maps continuous function to continuous function, where
                                                    Z t
                          П„ (x)(t) = etвҲ’t0 x(t0 ) +     esвҲ’t0 В· вҲҮqs (x(s))ds.
                                                             t0

By smoothness of the true ODE, the continuous Picard iteration converges exponentially to the true
trajectory, and we will show that discretization error for Picard iteration is controlled. After the
refinements have sufficiently reduced the estimation error for our randomized midpoints, we make a
final calculation, estimating the value of xtn +hn based on the estimated value at all the randomized
midpoints.

Algorithm 7 P REDICTOR S TEP (PARALLEL )

Input parameters:
                                                                                      вҲ’1
                         b0 , Starting time t0 , Number of steps N , Step size {hn }N
       вҖў Starting sample x                                                          n=0 , Number of
                                   N вҲ’1                                       вҲ’1
         midpoint estimates {Rn }n=0    , Number of parallel iteration {Kn }N
                                                                            n=0 , Score estimates s
                                                                                                  bt
                                                hn
       вҖў For all n = 0, В· В· В· , N вҲ’ 1: let Оҙn = R n

      1. For n = 0, . . . , N вҲ’ 1:
                                PnвҲ’1
          (a) Let tn = t0 вҲ’ w=0 hw
          (b) Randomly sample Оұi uniformly from [(i вҲ’ 1)/Rn , i/Rn ] for all i вҲҲ {1, В· В· В· , Rn }
                                                       (0)
                                                     bn,i = eОұi hn x
          (c) For i = 1, В· В· В· , Rn in parallel: Let x              bn + eОұi hn вҲ’ 1 В· sbtn (b
                                                                                            xn )
          (d) For k = 1, В· В· В· , Kn :
                For i = 1, В· В· В· , Rn in parallel:
                     (k)                               Pi        Оұi hn вҲ’(jвҲ’1)Оҙn
                                                                                вҲ’ max(eОұi hn вҲ’jОҙn , 1) В·

                   x
                   bn,i        :=     eОұi hn x
                                             bn +          j=1 e
                            (kвҲ’1)
               sbtn вҲ’Оұj hn (b
                            xn,j    )
                                           PR         hn вҲ’Оұi hn                (K )
              bn+1 = ehn x
          (e) x          bn + Оҙn В·            i=1 e                            xn,in )
                                                                  sbtn вҲ’Оұi hn (b
                      PN вҲ’1
      2. Let tN = t0 вҲ’ n=0 hn
      3. Return x
                bN , tN .


In our analysis, we follow the same notation as in Appendix B.1. We first establish a poly(L, d)
bound on the initial estimation error incurred in step (c) of each iteration in Algorithm 7.
Claim C.1. Suppose L вүҘ 1. Assume hn вүІ 1/L. For any n = 0, В· В· В· , N вҲ’ 1, suppose we draw x               bn
from an arbitrary distribution pn , then run step (a) - (e) in Algorithm 7. Then for any i = 1, В· В· В· , Rn ,
                                    2                                     1
               (0)                                                                                   2
            bn,i вҲ’ xвҲ—n (Оұi hn )
          E x                           вүІ h2n Пө2sc + L2 dh4n (L вҲЁ              ) + L2 h2n вҲҘb
                                                                                           xn вҲ’ xtn вҲҘ ,
                                                                       tn вҲ’ hn
where xвҲ—n (t) is solution of the true ODE starting at x
                                                      bn at time tn and running until time tn вҲ’ t.


Proof. Notice that in step (c) of Algorithm 7, the initial estimate of the randomized midpoint is
done with the exact same formula as in step (c) of Algorithm 6, except we calculate this initial
estimate for Rn different randomized midpoints. Notice also that the bound for discretization error
in Theorem B.2 is not dependent on specific value of Оұ, as long as the randomed value is at most 1.
Hence we can use identical calculation to yield the claim.


Next, we show how to drive the initialization error from Lemma C.1 down (exponentially) using the
Picard iterations in step (d) of Algorithm 7.
Lemma C.2. Suppose L вүҘ 1. Assume hn вүІ 1/L. For all iterations n вҲҲ {0, В· В· В· , N вҲ’ 1}, suppose
we draw x
        bn from an arbitrary distribution pn , then run step (a) - (e) in Algorithm 7. Then for all


                                                          23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


k вҲҲ {1, В· В· В· Kn } and i вҲҲ {1, В· В· В· , Rn },

                                                   пЈ«                               пЈ¶
                                  2                      R                       2
         (k)                                     k   1  X      (0)
      bn,i вҲ’ xвҲ—n (Оұi hn )             вүІ 8h2n L2 В· пЈӯ           b вҲ’ xвҲ—n (Оұj hn ) пЈё

    E x                                                       x
                                                     R j=1 n,j

                                                    L2 dh2n

                                                                     1                             2
                                       + h2n Пө2sc +         (L вҲЁ          ) + L2
                                                                                  В· E вҲҘb
                                                                                       x n вҲ’ x tn вҲҘ    ,                                 (22)
                                                     Rn2          tn вҲ’ hn


where xвҲ—n (t) is solution of the true ODE starting at x
                                                      bn at time tn and running until time tn вҲ’ t.


                                                                                                                                   (k)
Proof. Fixing iteration n, we will let h := hn , R := Rn and Оҙ := Оҙn . The formula of x    bn,i and
xвҲ—n (Оұi h) has the same coefficient for xМӮn , thus we can bound the difference as follows:

                              2
         (k)
      bn,i вҲ’ xвҲ—n (Оұi h)
    E x

        i Z tn вҲ’(jвҲ’1)Оҙ                                                                        Z tn                                                  ! 2
                                                                                 (kвҲ’1)
        X
 вүӨE                                       esвҲ’(tn вҲ’Оұi h) ds В· sbtn вҲ’Оұj h (b
                                                                         xn,j            )вҲ’                   esвҲ’(tn вҲ’Оұi h) вҲҮ ln qs (xвҲ—n (tn вҲ’ s)) ds
        j=1      tn вҲ’min(jОҙ,Оұi h)                                                                 tn вҲ’Оұi h

                                                                                                                                   2
        i Z tn вҲ’(jвҲ’1)Оҙ
                                                                                 (kвҲ’1)
        X
                                          sвҲ’(tn вҲ’Оұi h)
 вүІE                                   e                  ds В·                   xn,j ) вҲ’ вҲҮ ln qtn вҲ’Оұj h (xвҲ—n (Оұj h))
                                                                    sbtn вҲ’Оұj h (b                                                        (23)
        j=1    tn вҲ’min(jОҙ,Оұi h)

                                                                                                                                          2
               i Z tn вҲ’(jвҲ’1)Оҙ
               X
                                              esвҲ’(tn вҲ’Оұi h) вҲҮqtn вҲ’Оұj h (xвҲ—n (Оұj h)) вҲ’ вҲҮ ln qs (xвҲ—n (tn вҲ’ s)) ds

       +E                                                                                                                                     .
               j=1   tn вҲ’min(jОҙ,Оұi h)

                                                                                                                                         (24)


The first to second line is by definition and the second to third line is by YoungвҖҷs inequality. Now,
we will bound Equation (23) and Equation (24) separately. By Theorem 2.2 and Theorem 2.4,

                                                                       2
                 (kвҲ’1)
E sbtn вҲ’Оұj h (b
              xn,j       ) вҲ’ вҲҮ ln qtn вҲ’Оұj h (xвҲ—n (Оұj h))
                                                                       2                                                                            2
                      (kвҲ’1)
   вүІ E sbtn вҲ’Оұj h (b
                   xn,j       ) вҲ’ stn вҲ’Оұj h (xtn вҲ’Оұj h )                   + E вҲҮ ln qtn вҲ’Оұj h (xвҲ—n (Оұj h)) вҲ’ вҲҮ ln qtn вҲ’Оұj h (xtn вҲ’Оұj h ))
                                                                                   2
      + E stn вҲ’Оұj h (xtn вҲ’Оұj h ) вҲ’ вҲҮ ln qtn вҲ’Оұj h (xtn вҲ’Оұj h )
                                                     2                                                2
                         (kвҲ’1)
   вүІПө2sc + L2 В· E x
                  bn,j            вҲ’ xtn вҲ’Оұj h                   bвҲ—n (Оұj h) вҲ’ xtn вҲ’Оұj h
                                                         + L2 E x
                                                     2                                                    2
                         (kвҲ’1)
   вүІПө2sc + L2 В· E x
                  bn,j            вҲ’ xвҲ—n (Оұj h)           + L2 В· E xвҲ—n (Оұj h) вҲ’ xtn вҲ’Оұj h                      .



By Theorem B.1, for any s вҲҲ [0, h],

                                              2                                               2                         2
               E вҲҘxвҲ—n (s) вҲ’ xtn вҲ’s вҲҘ вүІ exp (O(Lh)) В· E вҲҘb
                                                        xn вҲ’ xtn вҲҘ вүІ E вҲҘb
                                                                        xn вҲ’ xtn вҲҘ ,                                                     (25)


                                                                      24
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


thus L2 В· E вҲҘxвҲ—n (Оұj h) вҲ’ xtn вҲ’Оұj h вҲҘ2 вүІ L2 E вҲҘb
                                               xn вҲ’ xtn вҲҘ2 . The term in Equation (23) can now be
bounded as follows

                                                                                                                                 2
     i Z tn вҲ’(jвҲ’1)Оҙ
                                                                                    (kвҲ’1)
     X
                                            sвҲ’(tn вҲ’Оұi h)
E                                       e                   ds В·                   xn,j ) вҲ’ вҲҮ ln qtn вҲ’Оұj h (xвҲ—n (Оұj h))
                                                                       sbtn вҲ’Оұj h (b
     j=1       tn вҲ’min(jОҙ,Оұi h)

               i         Z tn вҲ’(jвҲ’1)Оҙ                                                                                                       2
                                                                                                 (kвҲ’1)
               X
                                                       sвҲ’(tn вҲ’Оұi h)
    вүӨR В·             E                             e                     ds В·                   xn,j ) вҲ’ вҲҮ ln qtn вҲ’Оұj h (xвҲ—n (Оұj h))
                                                                                    sbtn вҲ’Оұj h (b
               j=1           tn вҲ’min(jОҙ,Оұi h)

                                 i                                                                         2
                                                            (kвҲ’1)
                                 X
    вүӨR В· Оҙ 2 В· e2Оұi h                  E sbtn вҲ’Оұj h (b
                                                     xn,j           ) вҲ’ вҲҮ ln qtn вҲ’Оұj h (xвҲ—n (Оұj h))
                                 j=1
                                  i                                 2

                                                     (kвҲ’1)
                                  X                                                   2
    вүӨ2R В· Оҙ 2 В· e2Оұi h                             bn,j вҲ’ xвҲ—n (Оұj h) +L2 E вҲҘb
                                     Пө2sc + L2 В· E x                        xn вҲ’ xtn вҲҘ
                                  j=1
                                      R                                2

                                   1 X 2                (kвҲ’1)                            2
    вүӨ2R2 В· Оҙ 2 В· e2Оұi h                               bn,j вҲ’ xвҲ—n (Оұj h) +L2 E вҲҘb
                                         Пөsc + L2 В· E x                        xn вҲ’ xtn вҲҘ
                                   R j=1
                                                                                    R                 2
                                                        2                   1 X        (kвҲ’1)
    вүӨ4h2 Пө2sc +4h2 L2 E вҲҘb
                         xn вҲ’ xtn вҲҘ + 4h2 L2 В·                                       bn,j вҲ’ xвҲ—n (Оұj h) .
                                                                                  В·E x
                                                                            R j=1

                                            Pn                   Pn
The first to second line is by inequality ( i=1 ai )2 вүӨ n i=1 a2i , the second to third line is by the
         R tn вҲ’(jвҲ’1)Оҙ
fact that tn вҲ’min(jОҙ,Оұi h) esвҲ’(tn вҲ’Оұi h) ds вүӨ Оҙ В· eОұi h , the fifth to sixth line is by RОҙ = h and that e2Оұi h
is at most 2 when h < 1/4.
Similarly, the term in Equation (24) can be bounded as follows

                                                                                                                                     2
    i Z tn вҲ’(jвҲ’1)Оҙ
    X
                                       esвҲ’(tn вҲ’Оұi h) вҲҮ ln qtn вҲ’Оұj h (xвҲ—n (Оұj h)) вҲ’ вҲҮ ln qs (xвҲ—n (tn вҲ’ s)) ds

E
    j=1        tn вҲ’min(jОҙ,Оұi h)

           i             Z tn вҲ’(jвҲ’1)Оҙ                                                                                                             2
           X
                                                   esвҲ’(tn вҲ’Оұi h) вҲҮ ln qtn вҲ’Оұj h (xвҲ—n (Оұj h)) вҲ’ вҲҮ ln qs (xвҲ—n (tn вҲ’ s)) ds

    вүӨR В·             E
           j=1               tn вҲ’min(jОҙ,Оұi h)

                                 i Z tn вҲ’(jвҲ’1)Оҙ
                                 X                                                                                                   2
    вүӨR В· Оҙ В· e       2Оұi h
                             В·                                E вҲҮ ln qtn вҲ’Оұj h (xвҲ—n (Оұj h)) вҲ’ вҲҮ ln qs (xвҲ—n (tn вҲ’ s))                     ds
                                 j=1    tn вҲ’min(jОҙ,Оұi h)



Since |xвҲ—n (Оұj h) вҲ’ s| вүӨ Оҙ,

                                                                                2
E вҲҮqtn вҲ’Оұj h (xвҲ—n (Оұj h)) вҲ’ вҲҮ ln qs (xвҲ—n (tn вҲ’ s))
                                                                                         2                                                    2
    вүӨ3 E вҲҮqtn вҲ’Оұj h (xвҲ—n (Оұj h)) вҲ’ вҲҮqtn вҲ’Оұj h (xtn вҲ’Оұj h )                                   + 3 E вҲҘвҲҮqs (xs ) вҲ’ вҲҮqs (xвҲ—n (tn вҲ’ s))вҲҘ
                                                                                2
           + 3 E вҲҮqtn вҲ’Оұj h (xtn вҲ’Оұj h ) вҲ’ вҲҮqs (xs )
                                                                                         2                                                    2
    =3 E вҲҮqtn вҲ’Оұj h (xвҲ—n (Оұj h)) вҲ’ вҲҮqtn вҲ’Оұj h (xtn вҲ’Оұj h )                                   + 3 E вҲҘвҲҮqs (xs ) вҲ’ вҲҮqs (xвҲ—n (tn вҲ’ s))вҲҘ
              Z tn вҲ’Оұj h                      2

        + 3E              вҲӮu вҲҮ ln qu (xu )du
                         s
                                                                                                                Z tn вҲ’Оұj h                            2
                                            2                              2
    вүӨ3L В· E2
                      xвҲ—n (Оұj h) вҲ’ xtn вҲ’Оұj h + 3L2 В· E вҲҘxвҲ—n (tn вҲ’ s) вҲ’ xs вҲҘ + 3 E                                            вҲӮu вҲҮ ln qu (xu )du           .
                                                                                                                 s



                                                                             25
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


The second to third line is by YoungвҖҷs inequality, and the fourth to fifth line is by Theorem 2.2. By
Lemma 3 in (Chen et al., 2023b),
       Z tn вҲ’Оұj h                             2          Z tn вҲ’Оұj h
                                                                                            2
   E                вҲӮu вҲҮ ln qu (xu )du            вүӨОҙВ·                    E вҲҘвҲӮu вҲҮ ln qu (xu )вҲҘ du
        s                                                    s
                                                         Z tn вҲ’Оұj h
                                                                                    1                      1
                                                  вүӨОҙВ·                    L2 d max(L, )du вүӨ L2 dОҙ 2 (L вҲЁ        ).
                                                             s                      u                   tn вҲ’ h
Now, by Theorem B.1 and the fact that h вүІ L1 ,
                                                                 2                                    2                          1
E вҲҮqtn вҲ’Оұj h (xвҲ—n (Оұj h)) вҲ’ вҲҮ ln qs (xвҲ—n (tn вҲ’ s))                    вүӨ 12L2 exp(Lh) E вҲҘb
                                                                                        xn вҲ’ xtn вҲҘ + 3L2 dОҙ 2 (L вҲЁ                   )
                                                                                                                              tn вҲ’ h
                                                                                                2                    1
                                                                      вүӨ 36L2 E вҲҘb
                                                                                xn вҲ’ xtn вҲҘ + 3L2 dОҙ 2 (L вҲЁ               ).
                                                                                                                  tn вҲ’ h
We conclude that the term in Equation (24) can be bounded by
                                i Z tn вҲ’(jвҲ’1)Оҙ
                    2Оұi h
                                X                                                2                     1
        RВ·ОҙВ·e               В·                            36L2 E вҲҘb
                                                                 xn вҲ’ xtn вҲҘ + 3L2 dОҙ 2 (L вҲЁ                ) ds
                                j=1   tn вҲ’min(jОҙ,Оұi h)                                              tn вҲ’ h

                    2 2               2                  21          2    2
            вүӨ2R Оҙ В· 36L E вҲҘb xn вҲ’ xtn вҲҘ + 3L dОҙ (L вҲЁ          )
                                                       tn вҲ’ h

                                    2  3            1
            =4h2 L2 18 E вҲҘb
                          xn вҲ’ xtn вҲҘ + dОҙ 2 (L вҲЁ        ) .
                                       2         tn вҲ’ h
Combining the bounds for Equation (23) and Equation (24), we get
                                пЈ«                                                                            пЈ¶
                     2                R                       2   2
      (k)                          1 X      (kвҲ’1)                Пө                  1                      2
  E xbn,i вҲ’ xn (Оұi h) вүІ h2 L2 В·пЈӯ          x       вҲ’ xвҲ—n (Оұj h) + sc2 + dОҙ 2 (L вҲЁ        ) + E вҲҘb
                                                                                               x n вҲ’ x tn вҲҘ пЈё .
                                  R j=1 n,j                                      tn вҲ’ h
                                          b
                                                                 L

Given sufficiently small constant h, eОұi h вүӨ 2. Moreover, by the definition of Оҙ, RОҙ = h. By
unrolling the recursion, we get
                                            пЈ«                              пЈ¶
                            2                     R                      2
            (k)                          k    1  X     (0)
           bn,i вҲ’ xtn вҲ’Оұi h вүІ 8h2 L2 В· пЈӯ              x вҲ’ xвҲ—n (Оұj h) пЈё

       E x
                                              R j=1 n,j

                                     8h2 L2
                                                2
                                                Пөsc     2          1                       2
                                +                   + dОҙ (L вҲЁ           ) + E вҲҘb
                                                                               x n вҲ’ x tn вҲҘ
                                  1 вҲ’ 8h2 L2 L2                tn вҲ’ h
                                            пЈ«                              пЈ¶
                                                  R                      2
                                        k     1 X (0)
                              вүІ 8h2 L2 В· пЈӯ            bn,j вҲ’ xвҲ—n (Оұj h) пЈё
                                                      x
                                              R j=1

                                   2    2     2   2        1          2                 2
                                + h Пөsc + L dОҙ (L вҲЁ             ) + L В· E вҲҘb xn вҲ’ xtn вҲҘ      .
                                                        tn вҲ’ h

As a consequence of Lemma C.2, if we take the number Kn of Picard iterations sufficiently large,
the error incurred in our estimate for xtn вҲ’Оұi hn is dominated by the terms in the second line of
Eq. equation 22.
Corollary C.3. Assume L вүҘ 1. For all n вҲҲ {0, В· В· В· , N вҲ’ 1}, suppose we draw x            bn from an
                                                                                                 1
arbitrary distribution pn , then run step (a) - (e) in Algorithm 7. In addition, suppose hn < 3L   and
Kn вүі log(Rn ). Then for any i вҲҲ {1, В· В· В· , Rn },
                                             L2 dh4n

                               2                                1
          (Kn )     вҲ—                2 2                                                       2
      E xbn,i вҲ’ xn (Оұi hn ) вүІ hn Пөsc +                  LвҲЁ             + L2 h2n В· E вҲҘb
                                                                                     xn вҲ’ xtn вҲҘ ,
                                                Rn2         tn вҲ’ hn
where xвҲ—n (t) is solution of the true ODE starting at x
                                                      bn at time tn and running until time tn вҲ’ t.


                                                                 26
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Proof. Fixing iteration n, we will let h := hn , R := Rn , Оҙ := Оҙn and K := Kn . Notice that when
                                K
K вүҘ log 2 1 В·log(R), 8h2 L2 is at most R12 . Now by plugging Theorem C.1 into Theorem C.2,
          2
        8h L2
we get

                                  2                                                1
          (K)                                         2 K                                                     2
        bn,i вҲ’ xвҲ—n (Оұi h)                         2
                                                            В· h В· Пө2sc + L2 dh2 (L вҲЁ
                                                              2
                                                                                        ) + L2 вҲҘb

   E    x                             вүІ 8h L                                                      x n вҲ’ x tn вҲҘ
                                                                               tn вҲ’ h

                                             2   2      2   2         1         2                   2
                                        + h Пөsc + L dОҙ (L вҲЁ               ) + L В· E вҲҘb  x n вҲ’ x tn вҲҘ
                                                                   tn вҲ’ h

                                                                                            2
                                      вүІ (8h2 L2 )K + 1 h2 В· Пө2sc + L2 В· E вҲҘb

                                                                               xn вҲ’ xtn вҲҘ

                                                               1                     1
                                          + ((8h2 L2 )K + 2 ) В· L2 dh4 L вҲЁ
                                                              R                   tn вҲ’ h
                                                                            L dh4
                                                                             2

                                                                        2                       1
                                      вүІ h2 Пө2sc + L2 h2 В· E вҲҘb
                                                             xn вҲ’ xtn вҲҘ +              L  вҲЁ
                                                                             R2             tn вҲ’ h

The first to second inequality by rearrangement of terms, while the second to third inequality is by
                                             K
the fact that the terms R12 dominates 8h2 L2 .



We can now prove the parallel analogue of Theorem B.3 and Theorem B.4. Note that the bounds
in Theorem C.4 and Theorem C.5 are identical to the bounds in Theorem B.3 and Theorem B.4,
except from an additional R12 factor for the middle term. This additional factor stems from using
                            n
Rn midpoints in each iteration n (compared to using one midpoint each iteration in Algorithm 6).
Lemma C.4 (Parallel Predictor Bias). Assume L вүҘ 1. For all n вҲҲ {0, В· В· В· , N вҲ’1}, suppose we draw
x
bn from an arbitrary distribution pn , then run step (a) - (e) in Algorithm 7. In addition, suppose
      1
hn < 3L  and Kn вүі log(Rn ). Then we have

                                                             L4 h6n d           1                                  2
       bn+1 вҲ’ xвҲ—n (hn )вҲҘ2 вүІ h2n В· Пө2sc +
    EвҲҘEx                                                              В· (L вҲЁ         ))) + L2 h2n В· E вҲҘb
                                                                                                       x n вҲ’ x tn вҲҘ ,
           Оұ                                                  Rn2            tn вҲ’ hn

where xвҲ—n (t) is solution of the true ODE starting at x
                                                      bn at time tn and running until time tn вҲ’ t.



Proof. Fixing iteration n, we will let h := hn , R := Rn , Оҙ := Оҙn and K := Kn . We have

EвҲҘExbn+1 вҲ’ xвҲ—n (h)вҲҘ2
  Оұ
        "    R
                                              # Z                                         2
                                                  tn
                                         (K)
            X
                   hвҲ’Оұi h                              sвҲ’(tn вҲ’h)           вҲ—
 вүӨE E Оҙ В·        e        В· sbtn вҲ’Оұi h (b
                                        xn,i ) вҲ’     e           вҲҮ ln qs (xn (tn вҲ’ s)) ds
           Оұ                                                        tn вҲ’h
                       i=1
                   " R                                                                               # 2

                                                           (K)
                    X
   вүӨ2 E E                Оҙe  hвҲ’Оұi h
                                      В·                   xn,i ) вҲ’ вҲҮ ln qtn вҲ’Оұi h (xвҲ—n (Оұi h))
                                              sbtn вҲ’Оұi h (b                                                                 (26)
               Оұ
                   i=1
                       R                                                    Z tn                                                 2
                       X
       + 2E E                 hвҲ’Оұi h
                             Оҙe           В· вҲҮ ln qtn вҲ’Оұi h (xвҲ—n (Оұi h)) вҲ’             sвҲ’(tn вҲ’h)
                                                                                      e              вҲҮ ln qs (xвҲ—n (tn вҲ’ s)) ds       .
                   Оұ                                                          tn вҲ’h
                       i=1
                                                                                                                            (27)

Since Оұi is drawn uniformly from [(i вҲ’ 1)Оҙ, iОҙ],
                                                                  Z tn вҲ’(iвҲ’1)Оҙ
       E ОҙehвҲ’Оұi h В· вҲҮ ln qtn вҲ’Оұi h (xвҲ—n (Оұi h)) =                                esвҲ’(tn вҲ’h) вҲҮ ln qs (xвҲ—n (tn вҲ’ s)) ds,

       Оұ                                                           tn вҲ’iОҙ



                                                                   27
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


and the term in Equation (27) is equal to 0. Now we need to bound Equation (26).
                                                                       2
                 (K)
              xn,i ) вҲ’ вҲҮ ln qtn вҲ’Оұi h (xвҲ—n (Оұi h))
E sbtn вҲ’Оұi h (b
                                                                      2
                         (K)                                                                                                             2
                   xn,i ) вҲ’ sbtn вҲ’Оұi h (xtn вҲ’Оұi h )
   вүІ E sbtn вҲ’Оұi h (b                                                       + E вҲҘвҲҮ ln qtn вҲ’Оұi h (xtn вҲ’Оұi h ) вҲ’ вҲҮ ln qtn вҲ’Оұi h (xвҲ—n (Оұi h))вҲҘ
                                                                                       2
       + E вҲҘb
            stn вҲ’Оұi h (xtn вҲ’Оұi h ) вҲ’ вҲҮ ln qtn вҲ’Оұi h (xtn вҲ’Оұi h )вҲҘ
                                               2
                  (K)                                                                             2
           bn,j вҲ’ xвҲ—n (Оұj h) + L2 В· E вҲҘxвҲ—n (Оұj h) вҲ’ xtn вҲ’Оұi h вҲҘ + Пө2sc
   вүІL2 В· E x
                   L2 dh4

                                   1                              2                     2
   вүІL2 В· h2 Пө2sc +          L вҲЁ          + L 2 2
                                              h  В· E вҲҘb
                                                      x n вҲ’ x tn вҲҘ    + L2 E вҲҘb
                                                                              xn вҲ’ xtn вҲҘ + Пө2sc .
                    R2          tn вҲ’ h
                                           Pn                 Pn
The first to second line by inequality ( i=1 ai )2 вүӨ n i=1 a2i , the second to third line is by
Theorem 2.4, Theorem 2.2 and Theorem 2.3, and the third to fourth line is by Theorem C.3 (K вүі
log(R), which satisfies the condition in Theorem C.3) and Theorem B.1. Hence
                                                                          2
       " R                                                               #

                                     (K)
         X
2E E         ОҙehвҲ’Оұi h В· sbtn вҲ’Оұi h (b
                                    xn,i ) вҲ’ вҲҮ ln qtn вҲ’Оұi h (xtn вҲ’Оұi h )
       Оұ
           i=1
                 R                                                                               2
                                                (K)
                 X
   вүӨ2R(2Оҙ)2                           xn,i ) вҲ’ вҲҮ ln qtn вҲ’Оұi h (xtn вҲ’Оұi h )
                        E sbtn вҲ’Оұi h (b
                        Оұ
                 i=1
                                       L2 dh4

                                                        1                                2                        2
    вүІ8Оҙ 2 R2 В· Пө2sc + L2 В· h2 Пө2sc +            L вҲЁ           + L  2 2
                                                                    h  В· E вҲҘb
                                                                            x n вҲ’  x tn вҲҘ    +L 2
                                                                                                  E вҲҘb
                                                                                                     x n вҲ’ x tn вҲҘ
                                         R2          tn вҲ’ h
                  L4 dh6          1                          2
    вүІh2 В· Пө2sc +         (L вҲЁ         ) + L2 h2 E вҲҘb
                                                   xn вҲ’ xtn вҲҘ
                   R2          tn вҲ’ h
                                           Pn             Pn
The first to second step is by inequality ( i=1 ai )2 вүӨ n i=1 a2i and YoungвҖҷs inequality, the second
to third line is by plugging in our previous calculation, and the third to forth line is by h = ОҙR and
that h вүІ 1/L.
Lemma C.5 (Parallel Predictor Variance). Assume L вүҘ 1. For all n вҲҲ {0, В· В· В· , N вҲ’ 1}, suppose
we draw xbn from an arbitrary distribution pn , then run step (a) - (e) in Algorithm 7. In addition,
               1
suppose hn < 3L  and Kn вүі log(Rn ). Then we have
                                           L2 dh4n

                                                            1                                 2
     E вҲҘbxn+1 вҲ’ xвҲ—n (hn )вҲҘ2 вүІ h2n В· Пө2sc +           L вҲЁ            + L2 h2n В· E вҲҘb
                                                                                  x n вҲ’ x tn вҲҘ ,
      Оұ                                     Rn2          tn вҲ’ hn
where xвҲ—n (t) is solution of the true ODE starting at x
                                                      bn at time tn and running until time tn вҲ’ t.

Proof. Fixing iteration n, we will let h := hn , R := Rn , Оҙ := Оҙn and K := Kn . We will separate
    xn+1 вҲ’ xвҲ—n (h)вҲҘ2 into several terms and bound each term separately.
EОұ вҲҘb
      xn+1 вҲ’ xвҲ—n (h)вҲҘ2
   E вҲҘb
   Оұ
                  R                                                   Z tn                                                   2
                                                    (K)
                  X
                                                                                    sвҲ’(tn вҲ’h)
       вүӨE Оҙ В·           e   hвҲ’Оұi h
                                     В· sbtn вҲ’Оұi h (b
                                                   xn,i ) вҲ’                     e               вҲҮ ln qs (xвҲ—n (tn вҲ’ s)) ds
           Оұ                                                           tn вҲ’h
                  i=1
                 R                                                                                        2
                                                          (K)
                 X
                         hвҲ’Оұi h
       вүӨ3 E            Оҙe            В·                   xn,i ) вҲ’ вҲҮ ln qtn вҲ’Оұi h (xtn вҲ’Оұi h )
                                             sbtn вҲ’Оұi h (b                                                                       (28)
           Оұ
                 i=1
                     R Z tn вҲ’(iвҲ’1)Оҙ                                                                                              2
                     X
           + 3E                                    e   hвҲ’Оұi h
                                                                В· (вҲҮ ln qtn вҲ’Оұi h (xtn вҲ’Оұi h ) вҲ’ вҲҮ ln qs (xвҲ—n (tn вҲ’ s))) ds
                     i=1     tn вҲ’iОҙ
                                                                                                                                 (29)
                     R Z tn вҲ’(iвҲ’1)Оҙ                                                                                  2
                     X
           + 3E                                        ehвҲ’Оұi h вҲ’ esвҲ’(tn вҲ’h) В· вҲҮ ln qs (xвҲ—n (tn вҲ’ s)) ds                  .       (30)
                     i=1     tn вҲ’iОҙ



                                                                           28
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Equation (28) is identical to Equation (26) in Theorem C.4, and can be bounded by

                                                                                        2       L4 dh6         1
           Equation (28) вүІ h2 В· Пө2sc + L2 h2 В· E вҲҘb
                                                  xn вҲ’ xtn вҲҘ +                                      2
                                                                                                       (L вҲЁ        ))).
                                                                                                 R          tn вҲ’ h

Next we will bound Equation (29). By Theorem E.1 and Theorem B.1,
                                                                       2                            1                           2
E вҲҮqtn вҲ’Оұj h (xвҲ—n (Оұj h)) вҲ’ вҲҮ ln qs (xвҲ—n (tn вҲ’ s))                         вүІ L2 dОҙ 2 (L вҲЁ               ) + L2 В· E вҲҘb
                                                                                                                    x n вҲ’ x tn вҲҘ ,
                                                                                                 tn вҲ’ h
hence Equation (29) can be bounded with similar calculations as for Equation (24) in Theorem C.2,
by the following term:
                                                             L2 dh4

    2 2     2  2          1          2                   2                  1                        2
12R Оҙ В· L dОҙ (L вҲЁ             ) + O(L ) В· E вҲҘb
                                             x n вҲ’ x tn вҲҘ вүІ       2
                                                                     (LвҲЁ        )+L2 h2 E вҲҘb
                                                                                           xn вҲ’ xtn вҲҘ .
                       tn вҲ’ h                                  R         tn вҲ’ h

Finally we will bound Equation (30) Since both Оұi and s belong to the range [(i вҲ’ 1)Оҙ, iОҙ],

                    ehвҲ’Оұi h вҲ’ esвҲ’(tn вҲ’h) вүӨ eh (eвҲ’(iвҲ’1)Оҙ вҲ’ eвҲ’iОҙ ) вүӨ eh В· Оҙ вүӨ 2Оҙ.
                                                           2
Moreover, by the fact that E вҲҘвҲҮ ln qs (xtn )вҲҘ вүӨ Ld (by integration by parts), Theorem E.1, Theo-
rem B.1 and the fact that LОҙ = o(1), we have
                                   2                                   2                                                      2
    E вҲҘвҲҮ ln qs (xвҲ—n (tn вҲ’ s))вҲҘ вүІ E вҲҘвҲҮ ln qs (xtn )вҲҘ + E вҲҘвҲҮ ln qs (xвҲ—n (tn вҲ’ s)) вҲ’ вҲҮ ln qs (xtn )вҲҘ
                                                                                            2                             2
                                       вүІ Ld + L2 exp(LОҙ) вҲҘb
                                                          xn вҲ’ xtn вҲҘ вүІ Ld + L2 вҲҘb
                                                                                xn вҲ’ xtn вҲҘ .
Hence Equation (30) can be bounded by
                   R Z tn вҲ’(iвҲ’1)Оҙ                                                                                   2
                   X
                                                                   sвҲ’(tn вҲ’h)
              3E                              e   hвҲ’Оұi h
                                                           вҲ’e                         В· вҲҮ ln qs (xвҲ—n (tn вҲ’ s)) ds
                   i=1   tn вҲ’iОҙ
                         R Z tn вҲ’(iвҲ’1)Оҙ
                         X                                                                       2
                 вүӨ3RОҙ                                E вҲҘ2ОҙвҲҮ ln qs (xвҲ—n (tn вҲ’ s))вҲҘ
                         i=1       tn вҲ’iОҙ
                                   R Z tn вҲ’(iвҲ’1)Оҙ
                                   X
                               2                                                                  2
                 вүІ3RОҙ В· 4Оҙ                                     Ld + L2 вҲҘb
                                                                        x n вҲ’ x tn вҲҘ
                                   i=1      tn вҲ’iОҙ

                                                               2
                                                                            Ldh4   L2 h4              2
                 вүІR2 Оҙ 4 Ld + L2 вҲҘb
                                  xn вҲ’ xtn вҲҘ                           =         +       вҲҘb
                                                                                          x n вҲ’ x tn вҲҘ .
                                                                             R2     R2

By adding together Equation (28), Equation (29) and Equation (30), and combining terms, we con-
clude that
                                                            L4 dh6            1
                                                                              2
   xn+1 вҲ’ xвҲ—n (h)вҲҘ2 вүІ h2 В· Пө2sc + L2 h2 В· E вҲҘb
E вҲҘb                                         x n вҲ’ x tn вҲҘ +         (L вҲЁ           )))
Оұ                                                              R2         tn вҲ’ h
                         L2 dh4            1                            2   Ldh4       L2 h4              2
                       +       2
                                  (L вҲЁ         ) + L2 h2 E вҲҘb
                                                            x n вҲ’ x tn вҲҘ +       2
                                                                                    +        вҲҘb
                                                                                              x n вҲ’ x tn вҲҘ
                            R           tn вҲ’ h                                R         R2
                                   L2 dh4          1                             2
                     вүІ h2 В· Пө2sc +     2
                                          (L вҲЁ         ) + L2 h2 E вҲҘbx n вҲ’ x tn вҲҘ .
                                    R           tn вҲ’ h

We can now prove our main guarantee вҲҡfor the parallel predictor step, which states that with logarith-
mically many parallel rounds and O(
                                  e d) score estimate queries over a short time interval (of length
O(1/L)) of the reverse process, the algorithm does not drift too far from the true ODE. Our proof
follows a similar flow as Theorem B.5.
Note that due to the existence of Rn midpoints in each step, we can set hn = Оҳ(1). We will set
hn to be Оҳ( L1 ), unless tn is close to the end time Оҙ (see Algorithm 9 for the global algorithm and
timeline). If tn is close to Оҙ, we will repeated half hn as n increases, until we reach the end time.


                                                                   29
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Theorem C.6. Assume L вүҘ 1. LetвҲҡ ОІ вүҘ 1 be an adjustableвҲҡparameter.         вҲҡWhen  we set hn =
      1                             ОІ d                      L d          ОІ d
min{ 4L , tn /2, tn вҲ’ Оҙ}, K вүі log( Пө ) and Rn = hn В· ОІ В· Пө = O              Пө    , the Wasserstein
distance between the true ODE process and the process in Algorithm 7, both starting from xМӮ0 вҲј qt0
and run for total time TN вүІ L1 is bounded by
                                                    Пөsc    Пө
                                   W2 (b
                                       xN , xTN ) вүІ     + вҲҡ .
                                                     L   ОІ L

Proof. To avoid confusion, we will reserve x    bn as the result of running Algorithm 7 for n steps,
            b0 вҲј q0 . We will use ybn to denote the result from running the true ODE process, starting
starting at x
at x
   bnвҲ’1 . Then by an identical calculation as in Theorem B.5,
                                                           2         2                 2
               2                                                                                           2
E вҲҘxtN вҲ’ x
         bN вҲҘ вүӨ exp (O(LhN вҲ’1 )) xtN вҲ’1 вҲ’ x
                                          bN вҲ’1                +             bN вҲ’ yN
                                                                            Ex             + E вҲҘb
                                                                                                xN вҲ’ yN вҲҘ .
Оұ                                                                  LhN вҲ’1   Оұ                Оұ

Now we do a similar calculation as in Theorem B.5, but utilizes the bias and variance of one step
in the parallel algorithm instead of sequential. Taking the expectation wrt xb0 вҲј qt0 , by Lem-
mas C.4 and C.5,
         bN вҲҘ2
E вҲҘxtN вҲ’ x
                                                         2
                                     bN вҲ’1 вҲҘ2 +
      вүӨ exp (O(LhN вҲ’1 )) E вҲҘxtN вҲ’1 вҲ’ x                        EвҲҘExbN вҲ’ yN вҲҘ2 + E вҲҘb
                                                                                  xN вҲ’ yN вҲҘ2
                                                       LhN вҲ’1   Оұ

      вүӨ exp (O(LhN вҲ’1 )) E вҲҘxtN вҲ’1 вҲ’ x   bN вҲ’1 вҲҘ2
                                          L4 dh6N вҲ’1

                  1                                          1
          +O               h2N вҲ’1 Пө2sc +               L вҲЁ         +  L 2 2
                                                                         hN вҲ’1 E вҲҘx tN вҲ’1 вҲ’ x N вҲ’1 вҲҘ 2
                                             Rn2
                                                                                            b
                LhN вҲ’1                                     tN вҲ’1
                             L2 dh4N вҲ’1

                                                   1
          + O h2N вҲ’1 Пө2sc +                 LвҲЁ           + L2 h2N вҲ’1 E вҲҘxtN вҲ’1 вҲ’ x
                                                                                 bN вҲ’1 вҲҘ2
                                Rn2              tN вҲ’1
      вүӨ exp (O(LhN вҲ’1 )) E вҲҘxtN вҲ’1 вҲ’ x bN вҲ’1 вҲҘ2
                hN вҲ’1 Пө2sc               L3 dh5N вҲ’1 + L2 dh4N вҲ’1

                              2     2                                   1
          +O               + hN вҲ’1 Пөsc +                           LвҲЁ
                   L                               Rn2                tN вҲ’1
Since hN вҲ’1 < L1 , the term L3 dh5N вҲ’1 is dominated by the term L2 dh4N вҲ’1 and the term h2N вҲ’1 Пө2sc os
               hN вҲ’1 Пө2sc
dominated by      L       . By induction, noting that xt0 = x
                                                            b0 , we have
                              вҲ’1                                            вҲ’1
                            N                                             N
                                                                                  !!
                                     L2 dh4n

                      2     hn 2
                            X                         1                   X
     E вҲҘxtN вҲ’ x
              bN вҲҘ вүІ          Пө +            В· LвҲЁ           В· exp O L          hi     .
                        n=0
                             L sc      Rn2           tn                  i=n+1
     PN вҲ’1                    P
                                  N вҲ’1
Since i=n+1 hi вүӨ L1 , exp O L i=n+1 hi        is a constant. Moreover, by our choice of hn , it
is always the case that hn вүӨ t2n вүӨ tn вҲ’ hn and that hn вүӨ L1 . Therefore
                       L2 dh4n                   L2 dh3n     L2 dhn     hn Пө2

                                        1
                           2
                                 L вҲЁ           вүӨ     2
                                                         вүӨ ОІ 2 L2 d = 2 ,
                         Rn          tn вҲ’ hn        Rn          2
                                                                         ОІ
                                                                      Пө
and thus
                                             N вҲ’1
                                             X   hn 2   hn Пө2 Пө2    Пө2
                                bN вҲҘ2 вүІ
                       E вҲҘxtN вҲ’ x                  Пөsc + 2 вүІ sc2 +      .
                                             n=0
                                                 L       ОІ    L    LОІ 2
We conclude that
                                             p                       Пөsc   Пө
                          W2 (xtN , x
                                    bN ) =                bN вҲҘ2 вүІ
                                                 E вҲҘxtN вҲ’ x              + вҲҡ .
                                                                      L   ОІ L

C.2   C ORRECTOR STEP

In this step we will be using the parallel algorithm in (Anari et al., 2024) to estimate the underdamped
Langevin diffusion process. Since we will be fixing the score function in time, we will use вҲҮ ln q to


                                                     30
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


denote the true score function for the diffusion process,
                                                   вҲҡ      and sb to denote the estimated score function.
We will choose the friction parameter to be Оі вүҚ L.

Algorithm 8 C ORRECTOR S TEP (PARALLEL ) (Anari et al., 2024)

Input parameters:
                          x0 , vb0 ) вҲј p вҠ— N (0, Id ), Number of steps N , Step size h, Score estimates
       вҖў Starting sample (b
                                                               h
         sb вүҲ вҲҮ ln q, Number of midpoint estimates R, Оҙ := R
      1. For n = 0, . . . , N вҲ’ 1:
          (a) Let tn = nh
                     (k)    (k)
          (b) Let (b
                   xn,i , vbn,i ) represent the algorithmic estimate of (xtn +ih/R , vtn +ih/R ) at iteration
              k.
          (c) Let (О¶ x , О¶ v ) be a correlated gaussian vector corresponding to change caused by the
              Brownian motion term in h/R time (see more detail in (Anari et al., 2024))
                                                       (0)   (0)
          (d) For i = 0, В· В· В· , R in parallel: Let (b
                                                     xn,i , vbn,i ) = (b
                                                                       xn , vbn )
          (e) For k = 1, В· В· В· , K:
                For i = 1, В· В· В· , R in parallel:
                     (k)       (kвҲ’1)                       (kвҲ’1)
                   x
                   bn,i := x  bn,iвҲ’1 + 1вҲ’exp(вҲ’Оіh/R)
                                               Оі       В· vbn,iвҲ’1 вҲ’ h/RвҲ’(1вҲ’exp(вҲ’Оіh/R))/Оі
                                                                                  Оі     В· sb(xkвҲ’1
                                                                                              n,j ) + О¶
                                                                                                        x

                     (k)                       (kвҲ’1)                         (kвҲ’1)
                    vbn,i = exp(вҲ’Оіh/R) В· vbn,iвҲ’1 вҲ’ 1вҲ’exp(вҲ’Оіh/R)
                                                         Оі      В· sb(xn,iвҲ’1 ) + О¶ v
          (f) (b                 xK
               xn+1 , vbn+1 ) = (bn,R , v
                                          K
                                        bn,R )
      2. Let tN = N h
      3. Return x
                bN , tN .


Let TN denote the total time the parallel corrector step is run (namely, TN = nh). Consider
two continuous underdamped Langevin diffusion processes uвҲ— (t) = (xвҲ— (t), v вҲ— (t)) and ut0 +t =
(xt0 +t , vt0 +t ) with coupled brownian motions. The first one start from position xвҲ— (0) = x
                                                                                             b0 вҲј p
and the second one start from position xt0 вҲј q. Both processes start with velocity v вҲ— (0) = vt0 вҲј
N (0, Id ). We will bound both the distance measure between xвҲ— (t) and the true sample xt0 +t , and
the distance measure between xвҲ— (tN ) and outputs of Algorithm 8. First, (Chen et al., 2023b) gives
the following bound on the total variation error between xвҲ— (TN ) and xtN .
Lemma C.7 ((Chen et al., 2023b), Lemma 9). If h вүІ вҲҡ1L , then

                                                             W2 (p, q)
                                     TV(xвҲ— (TN ), xtN ) вүІ          3/2
                                                                         .
                                                             L1/4 TN

Next, (Anari et al., 2024) bounds the discretization error in Algorithm 8 in terms of quantities that
                                              2                2
relates to the supremum of E вҲҘвҲҮ ln q(xвҲ— (t))вҲҘ and E вҲҘv вҲ— (t)вҲҘ where t вҲҲ [0, TN ].
Lemma C.8 ((Anari et al., 2024), Theorem 20, Implicit). Assume L вүҘ 1. In Algorithm 8, assume
K вүі log(d) (for sufficiently large constant), K вүІ 4 log R and h вүІ вҲҡ1L . Then

                                                    Оіdh3 h2   h4

                                     TN
                    xN , xвҲ— (TN )) вүІ вҲҡ В· Пө2sc + L2 ( 4 + 2 P + 4 Q) ,
                 KL(b
                                      L              R   R    R
                                     2                                               2
where P = suptвҲҲ[0,TN ] E[вҲҘv вҲ— (t)вҲҘ ] and Q = suptвҲҲ[0,TN ] E[вҲҘвҲҮ ln q(xвҲ— (t))вҲҘ ].

To reason about the value of P and Q, we will use the following lemma in (Chen et al., 2023b).
Lemma C.9 ((Chen et al., 2023b), Lemma 10). For any t вүІ вҲҡ1L ,
                                                         2
                                     E вҲҘuвҲ— (t) вҲ’ ut0 +t вҲҘ вүІ W22 (p, q).


                                                    31
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Lemma C.10. Assume L вүҘ 1. For any TN вүІ вҲҡ1L ,

                                                                    2
                              sup E[вҲҘвҲҮ ln q(xвҲ— (t))вҲҘ ] вүІ L2 W22 (p, q) + Ld
                            tвҲҲ[0,TN ]

and
                                                               2
                                        sup E вҲҘv вҲ— (t)вҲҘ вүІ W22 (p, q) + d.
                                      tвҲҲ[0,TN ]



Proof. Note that (q, N (0, Id )) is a stationary distribution of the underdamped Langevin diffusion
                                                                      2
process, hence xt вҲј q and vt вҲј N (0, Id ). Hence E вҲҘвҲҮ ln q(xt )вҲҘ вүӨ Ld by integration by parts.
                  2                  2
Similarly, E вҲҘvt вҲҘ = E[вҲҘN (0, Id )вҲҘ ] вүІ d. Since TN вүІ вҲҡ1L , for any t вҲҲ [0, TN ], we can now bound
                   2                     2
E вҲҘвҲҮ ln q(xвҲ— (t))вҲҘ and E вҲҘv вҲ— (t)вҲҘ by Theorem C.9 as follows:
                   2                               2                                   2
E вҲҘвҲҮ ln q(xвҲ— (t))вҲҘ вүӨ 2 В· E вҲҘвҲҮ ln q(xt )вҲҘ + 2 В· E вҲҘвҲҮ ln q(xвҲ— (t)) вҲ’ вҲҮ ln q(xt )вҲҘ
                                                           2                     2
                       вүІ Ld + L2 E вҲҘxвҲ— (t) вҲ’ xt вҲҘ вүІ Ld + L2 E вҲҘuвҲ— (t) вҲ’ ut вҲҘ вүІ Ld + L2 W22 (p, q),

and
                                  2                    2                    2
                       E вҲҘv вҲ— (t)вҲҘ вүӨ 2 В· E вҲҘvt вҲҘ + 2 В· E вҲҘv вҲ— (t) вҲ’ vt вҲҘ
                                                   2                    2
                                      вүІ E вҲҘvt вҲҘ + E вҲҘuвҲ— (t) вҲ’ ut вҲҘ вүІ d + W22 (p, q).

Theorem C.11. Let ОІ вүҘ 1 be an adjustable parameter. Algorithm 8 with parameter h = вҲҡ18L ,R =
       вҲҡ
ОІ В· Оҳ( Пөd ), K = 4 В· log(R) and TN вүІ вҲҡ1L has discretization error
                                        p                        Пөsc Пө  Пө
                xN , xвҲ— (TN )) вүІ
             TV(b                               xN , xвҲ— (TN )) вүІ вҲҡ + + вҲҡ В· W2 (p, q).
                                             KL(b
                                                                   L ОІ ОІ d


Proof. Since TN вүІ вҲҡ1L and h = Оҳ( вҲҡ1L ), N = O(1). Plugging Theorem C.10 into Theorem C.8,
we get that

                                          Оіdh3    h2                       h4

                       TN
   xN , xвҲ— (TN )) вүІ вҲҡ В· Пө2sc + L2
KL(b                                           +      В· (d + W 2
                                                               2 (p, q)) +    В· (L2
                                                                                    W 2
                                                                                      2 (p, q) + Ld)
                          L                R4    R2                        R4
                                                              L2

                       1           d     Ld Ld           L
                   вүІ В· Пө2sc + 4 + 2 + 4 +                  2
                                                             + 4 В· W22 (p, q)
                      L           R      R     R         R    R
                        2       2     2
                      Пө       Пө     Пө
                   = sc + 2 + 2 W22 (p, q).
                       L      ОІ    ОІ d
                                                                                вҲҡ
The first to second line is by combining terms and setting h = Оҳ( вҲҡ1L ), Оі = Оҳ( L), and the second
                                               вҲҡ
                                                                          xN , xвҲ— (TN )) yields the
to third line is by setting R = ОІ В· Оҳ( Пөd ). Taking the square root of KL(b
claim.

Theorem C.12. Let ОІ вүҘ 1 be an adjustable parameter. WhenвҲҡAlgorithm 8 is initialized at (b     x0 , vb0 ) вҲј
                                                                                   2
p вҠ— N (0, Id ), there exists parameters h = вҲҡ18L ,R = ОІ В· Оҳ( Пөd ), K = Оҳ(log( ОІПө2d )) and TN вүІ вҲҡ1L
such that the total variation distance between the final output of Algorithm 8 and the true distribution
can be bounded as
                                               Пөsc     Пө вҲҡ
                              TV(bxN , xtN ) вүІ вҲҡ + + L В· W2 (p, q).
                                                 L    ОІ


                                                  xN , xвҲ— (TN )) + TV(xвҲ— (TN ), xtN ). Combining
                                  xN , xtN ) вүӨ TV(b
Proof. By triangle inequality, TV(b
Theorem C.7 and Theorem C.11 yields the claim.


                                                               32
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


C.3       E ND - TO - END ANALYSIS

Algorithm 9 PARALLEL A LGORITHM

Input parameters:
                                                                      вҲҡ
          вҖў Start time T , End time Оҙ, Corrector steps time Tcorr вүІ 1/ L, Number of predictor-
            corrector steps N0 , Score estimates sbt
              b0 вҲј N (0, Id ).
      1. Draw x
      2. For n = 0, . . . , N0 :
             (a) Starting from x bn , run Algorithm 7 with starting time T вҲ’ n/L with total time
                                                          bвҖІn+1 .
                 min(1/L, T вҲ’ n/L вҲ’ Оҙ). Let the result be x
                                  вҖІ
             (b) Starting from x bn+1 , run Algorithm 8 for total time Tcorr and score estimate
                 sbT вҲ’(n+1)/L to obtain x
                                        bn+1 .
      3. Return x
                bN0 +1 .

                                                                        dвҲЁm22

Theorem C.13 (Parallel End to End Error). By setting T = Оҳ log           Пө 2     , Tcorr = вҲҡ1L , Оҙ =
                                              dвҲЁm22

      Пө2
Оҳ L2 (dвҲЁm 2 ) , and ОІ1 = ОІ2 = Оҳ       L log    Пө2      in Algorithm 7 and Algorithm 8, when Пөsc вүІ
          2
    Пө
Оҳ( вҲҡ ), the total variation distance between the output of Algorithm 9 and the target distribution
e
      L
x0 вҲј q вҲ— is
                                             TV(b
                                                xN0 +1 , x0 ) вүІ Пө,
                                            LdвҲЁm22

                          e В· log2
with iteration complexity Оҳ(L                        ).
                                              Пө


Proof. Let xtn be the result of running the true ODE for time T вҲ’ tn , starting from xT вҲј q вҲ— . Let ynвҖІ
be the result of running the predictor step in step n вҲ’ 1 of Algorithm 9, starting from xtnвҲ’1 вҲј qtnвҲ’1
and start time tnвҲ’1 . In addition, let ybn be the result of the corrector step in step nвҲ’1 of Algorithm 9,
starting from ynвҖІ .
We will first bound the error in one predictor + corrector step that starts at tnвҲ’1 = T вҲ’ (n вҲ’ 1)/L.
By triangle inequality of TV distance and data processing inequality (applied to x  bn and ybn ),
                               xn , xtn ) вүӨ TV(b
                            TV(b               xn , ybn ) + TV(b
                                                               yn , xtn )
                                          вүӨ TV(b
                                               xnвҲ’1 , xtnвҲ’1 ) + TV(b  yn , xtn )                              (31)
By Theorem C.6 parametrized by ОІ1 and Theorem C.12 parametrized by ОІ2 ,
                                      Пөsc   Пө   вҲҡ
                     TV(byn , xtn ) вүІ вҲҡ +     + L В· W2 (ynвҖІ , xtn )
                                        L ОІ2
                                                вҲҡ

                                      Пөsc   Пө          Пөsc     Пө
                                    вүІвҲҡ +      + L          + вҲҡ
                                        L ОІ2            L   ОІ1 L
                                      Пөsc       Пө
                                    вүІвҲҡ +                .
                                        L min(ОІ1 , ОІ2 )
The first line is by Theorem C.12, and the first to second line is by Theorem C.12. Next, note that
at the beginning of the process, t0 = T , and at the end of the process, tN0 +1 = Оҙ. By induction on
Equation (31),
             xN0 +1 , x0 ) вүӨ TV(x0 , xtN0 +1 ) + TV(b
          TV(b                                      xN0 +1 , xtN0 +1 )
                                                                     NX
                                                                      0 +1

                          вүӨ TV(x0 , xОҙ ) + TV(xT , N (0, Id )) +             TV(b
                                                                                yn , xtn )
                                                                     n=1

                                                                               Пө         Пө
                          вүӨ TV(x0 , xОҙ ) + TV(xT , N (0, Id )) + N0 В·          вҲҡsc +                      .
                                                                                 L   min(ОІ 1 , ОІ2 )



                                                      33
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025



                                       вҲҡ
By Theorem B.9, TV(xT , N (0, Id )) вүІ ( d + m2 ) exp(вҲ’T ).
                                                           By (Lee et al.,
                                                                          2023,  Lemma
                                                                                      6.4),
                                                            dвҲЁm2                           dвҲЁm2

TV(x0 , xОҙ ) вүӨ Пө. Therefore by setting T = Оҳ log       Пө2
                                                          2
                                                              , N0 = Оҳ L log     Пө2
                                                                                    2
                                                                                        and
                           2

                      dвҲЁm2                                                 e вҲҡПө ), we obtain
ОІ1 = ОІ2 = Оҳ L log       Пө2      in Algorithm 7 and Algorithm 8, when Пөsc вүІ Оҳ(  L
TV(b
   xN0 +1 , x0 ) вүІ Пө.
The iteration complexity of Algorithm 9 given above parameters is roughly number of predictor-
corrector steps times the iteration complexity in one predictor-corrector step. Note that in any cor-
rector step and any predictor step except the last one, only N = O(1) number of sub-stepsвҲҡ are
taken, therefore the iteration complexity of one predictor step (except the last step) is Оҳ(log( ОІ1Пө d ))
                                                                ОІ2 d
and iteration complexity of one corrector step is Оҳ(log( Пө22 )). In the last predictor step, the
                                 1

number of steps taken is O log ОҙL      = O(log(L) + T ), and thus the iteration complexity is
                          вҲҡ
Оҳ((log(L) + T ) В· log( ОІ1Пө d )). We conclude that the total iteration complexity of Algorithm 9 is
               вҲҡ                       !                                 вҲҡ !!
                                 ОІ22 d                                                               2

LT В· Оҳ(log(
            ОІ1 d
                    )) + Оҳ(log( 2 )) +Оҳ (log(L) + T ) В· log
                                                                       ОІ1 d
                                                                                 =Оҳ e L log2 Ld вҲЁ m2      .
              Пө                   Пө                                      Пө                         Пө



D    L OG - CONCAVE SAMPLING IN TOTAL VARIATION
In this section, we give a simple proof, using our observation about trading off the time spent on the
predictor and corrector steps, of an improved bound for sampling from a log-concave distribution in
total variation.
Definition D.1. A distribution with probability density p is a log-concave distribution if log p is
concave. Formally, for any x, y in the domain of p and for any О» вҲҲ (0, 1), log f (О»x + (1 вҲ’ О»)y) вүҘ
О» log f (x) + (1 вҲ’ О») log f (y).

Note that for this section, we assume that sb is the true score of the distribution and is known, as
is standard in the log-concave sampling literature. We begin by recalling Shen and LeeвҖҷs random-
ized midpoint method applied to approximate the underdamped Langevin process, for log-concave
sampling in the Wasserstein metric (Shen & Lee, 2019) in Algorithm 10.

Algorithm 10 R ANDOMIZED M IDPOINT M ETHOD (Shen & Lee, 2019)

Input parameters:
                         b0 , Starting v0 , Number of steps N , Step size h, Score function sb, u = L1 .
       вҖў Starting sample x
      1. For n = 0, . . . , N вҲ’ 1:
          (a) Randomly sample Оұ uniformly from [0, 1].
                                                          (n)     (n)   (n)
          (b) Generate Gaussian random variable (W1 , W2 , W3 ) вҲҲ R3d as in Appendix A
              of (Shen & Lee, 2019).
                             bn + 12 1 вҲ’ eвҲ’2Оұh vn вҲ’ 12 u Оұh вҲ’ 12 1 вҲ’ eвҲ’2(hвҲ’Оұh) sb(xn ) +

          (c) Let xbn+ 12 = x
              вҲҡ     (n)
                uW1 .
                                                                                 вҲҡ   (n)
                          bn + 12 1 вҲ’ eвҲ’2h vn вҲ’ 21 uh 1 вҲ’ eвҲ’2(hвҲ’Оұh) sb(xn+ 12 ) + uW2 .

          (d) Let x
                  bn+1 = x
                                                              вҲҡ  (n)
          (e) Let vn+1 = vn eвҲ’2h вҲ’ uheвҲ’2(hвҲ’Оұh) sb(xn+ 21 ) + 2 uW3 .
      2. Return x
                bN .

Theorem D.2 (Theorem 3 of (Shen & Lee, 2019), restated). Let sb = вҲҮ ln p, the score function of
a log-concave distribution p be such that 0 вүј m В· Id вүј Jsb(x) вүј L В· Id , for the Jacobian Jsb of sb.
                                               L
Let xb0 be the root of sb, and v0 = 0. Let Оә = m be  the condition number. For any 0 < Пө < 1, if we
                                                   1/3    1/6     вҲ’1/6
                                                                            Пө2/3 m1/3     вҲ’1/3

set the step size of Algorithm 10 as h = C min d1/6m
                                                   Пө
                                                        Оә 1/6 log       d
                                                                       Пөm  ,   d1/3   log       d
                                                                                               Пөm



                                                   34
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025



                                                                                    7/6 1/6
                                                                                                 Оәd1/3
for some small constant C and run the algorithm for N = 4Оә        20d
                                                            h log Пө2 m вүӨ O
                                                                         e         Оә    d
                                                                                   Пө1/3 m1/6
                                                                                             + Пө2/3 m1/3
iterations, then Algorithm 10 after N iterations can generate x
                                                              bN such that
                                          W2 (bxN , x) вүӨ Пө
where x вҲј p.
Now, we make the following simple observation вҖ“ if we run the corrector step from Section B.2
for a short time, we can convert the above Wasserstein guarantee to a TV guarantee. We carefully
trade off the time spent on the Randomized Midpoint step above and the corrector step to obtain the
improved dimension dependence. Our final algorithm is given in Algorithm 11.

Algorithm 11 L OG C ONCAVE S AMPLING (Shen & Lee, 2019)

Input parameters:
      вҖў Number of Randomized Midpoint steps Nrand , Corrector steps Time Tcorr вүІ вҲҡ1L , Random-
        ized Midpoint Step size hrand , Corrector step size hcorr , Score function sb.
     1. Let x
            b0 be the root of sb, and let v0 = 0.
     2. Run Algorithm 10 with Nrand steps and step size hrand , using x
                                                                      b0 , v0 , and let the result be
        bвҖІNrand .
        x
                                      bвҖІNrand for time Tcorr , using step size hcorr . Let the result be
     3. Run Algorithm 5 starting from x
        x
        bNrand .
     4. Return x
               bNrand .


We obtain the following guarantee with our improved dimension dependence of O(d  e 5/12 ).
Theorem D.3 (Log-Concave Sampling in Total Variation). Let sb = вҲҮ ln p be the score function of
a log-concave distribution p such that 0 вүј m В· Id вүј Jsb(x) вүј L В· Id  for the Jacobian Jsb of sb
                                                                                               . Let
      L                                                                  Пө2/3        вҲ’1/3 dОә

Оә= m    be the condition number. For any Пө < 1, if we set hrand = C d5/12    1/3 log       Пө     for
                                                 4/3 5/12                 Оә
a small constant C, Nrand = 4Оә       20dОә
                               h log Пө2   вүӨ Oe Оә 2/3
                                                    Пө
                                                      d
                                                             , hcorr = O
                                                                       e       Пө вҲҡ
                                                                           d17/36 L
                                                                                       and Tcorr =

O вҲҡLd11/18 , we have that Algorithm 11 returns x bNrand with
                                         TV(bxNrand , x) вүІ Пө
                                                                   4/3
for x вҲј p. Furthemore, the total iteration complexity is Oe d5/12 Оә2/3 +1 .
                                                                      Пө       Пө


Proof. By Theorem D.2, we have, for our setting of Nrand and hrand that, at the end of step 2 of
Algorithm 11,
                                                                  Пө
                                           xвҖІNrand , x) вүӨ
                                       W2 (b                        вҲҡ .
                                                             d1/12    L
Then, by the first part of Corollary B.7,
                                               вҲҡ 17/36

                                                                        Пө
                         TV(bxNrand , x) вүІ Пө + Ld              В·           вҲҡ     вүІ Пө.
                                                                    d17/36 L
                                                                       4/3 5/12
                                                                                  d5/12
Our iteration complexity is bounded by Nrand + Thcorr   corr
                                                              =O  e Оә 2/3
                                                                         Пө
                                                                           d
                                                                                +   Пө     as claimed.

E    H ELPER LEMMAS
Lemma E.1 (Corollary 1 of (Chen et al., 2023b)). For the ODE
                                 dxt = (xt + вҲҮ ln qt (xt )) dt ,
                2            2

if L вүҘ 1 and E вҲҘвҲҮ log qt (x)вҲҘ вүӨ L, we have, for 0 < s < t and h = t вҲ’ s,

                                                    2
                                                           2     2   1
                   E вҲҘвҲҮ ln qt (xt ) вҲ’ вҲҮ ln qs (xs )вҲҘ вүІ L dh L вҲЁ          .
                                                                     t

                                                    35
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Lemma E.2 (Implicit in Lemma 4 of (Chen et al., 2023b)). Suppose L вүҘ 1, h вүІ L1 and t0 вҲ’ h вүҘ
t0 /2. For ODEs starting at xt0 = x
                                  bt0 , where
                                     dxt = (xt + вҲҮ ln qt (xt )) dt
                                     db
                                      xt = (xt + sbt0 (b
                                                       xt0 )) dt,
we have

                                                            1
                                  bt0 вҲ’h вҲҘ2 вүІ h2 L2 dh2 L вҲЁ
                      E вҲҘxt0 вҲ’h вҲ’ x                              + Пө2sc .
                                                            t0
Lemma E.3 (Lemma B.1. of (Gupta et al., 2023a), restated). Let p0 be a distribution over Rd . For
x0 вҲј p0 , let xt = x0 + zt вҲј pt for zt вҲј N (0, tId ) independent of x0 . Then,
                                   pt (xt + Пө)         ПөT zt вҲҘПөвҲҘ2
                                               = E [e t вҲ’ 2t ]
                                     pt (xt )   zt |xt

and
                                                              h z i
                                                                  t
                                      вҲҮ ln pt (xt ) = E        вҲ’
                                                       zt |xt    t
Lemma E.4. For qt (yt ) вҲқ pe2t вҲ’1 (et yt ), for zt вҲј N (0, (e2t вҲ’ 1)Id ), we have

                                                                           вҲ’zt
                   вҲҮ ln qt (yt ) = et вҲҮ ln pe2t вҲ’1 (et y) = et Et
                                                                zt |e yt e2t вҲ’ 1

Furthermore,
                                                               d
                                             вҲҘвҲҮ ln qt (yt )вҲҘ2 вүІ

                                       E
                                     yt вҲјqt                     t

Proof. The first claim is an immediate consequence of the definition of qt and Lemma E.3. For the
second claim, note that
                                                     "                        2#
                                    2
                                           2t                         вҲ’zt
                   E вҲҘвҲҮ ln qt (yt )вҲҘ = e        E            E
                 yt вҲјqt                       yt вҲјqt     zt |et yt e2t вҲ’ 1

                                                                     вҲҘzt вҲҘ2

                                           2t
                                        вүӨe      E         E
                                              yt вҲјqt zt |et yt (e2t вҲ’ 1)2

                                                     вҲҘzt вҲҘ2

                                           2t
                                        =e E
                                              zt (e2t вҲ’ 1)2
                                            2t
                                           e В·d
                                        = 2t           since zt вҲј N (0, (e2t вҲ’ 1)Id )
                                          e вҲ’1
                                          d
                                        вүІ .
                                          t


                                                  36
