Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


S EBRA : D EBIASING THROUGH S ELF -G UIDED B IAS
R ANKING
  Adarsh Kappiyath1 , Abhra Chaudhuri2 , Ajay Jaiswal3 ,
 Ziquan Liu4 , Yunpeng Li1 , Xiatian Zhu1 , Lu Yin1∗
 1
   University of Surrey, 2 Fujitsu Research of Europe, 3 University of Texas at Austin
 4
   Queen Mary University of London



                                                A BSTRACT
             Ranking samples by fine-grained estimates of spuriosity (the degree to which spu-
             rious cues are present) has recently been shown to significantly benefit bias mit-
             igation, over the traditional binary biased-vs-unbiased partitioning of train sets.
             However, this spuriosity ranking comes with the requirement of human supervi-
             sion. In this paper, we propose a debiasing framework based on our novel Self-
             Guided Bias Ranking (Sebra), that mitigates biases (spurious correlations) via
             an automatic ranking of data points by spuriosity within their respective classes.
             Sebra leverages a key local symmetry in Empirical Risk Minimization (ERM)
             training – the ease of learning a sample via ERM inversely correlates with its
             spuriousity; the fewer spurious correlations a sample exhibits, the harder it is to
             learn, and vice versa. However, globally across iterations, ERM tends to devi-
             ate from this symmetry. Sebra dynamically steers ERM to correct this deviation,
             facilitating the sequential learning of attributes in increasing order of difficulty,
             i.e., decreasing order of spuriosity. As a result, the sequence in which Sebra
             learns samples naturally provides spuriousity rankings. We use the resulting fine-
             grained bias characterization in a contrastive learning framework to mitigate bi-
             ases from multiple sources. Extensive experiments show that Sebra consistently
             outperforms previous state-of-the-art unsupervised debiasing techniques across
             multiple standard benchmarks, including UrbanCars, BAR, CelebA, MultiNLI,
             and ImageNet-1K. Code, pre-trained models, and training logs are available at
             https://kadarsh22.github.io/sebra_iclr25/.


1       I NTRODUCTION

Distribution shifts driven by spurious correlations (aka biases or shortcuts) are arguably one of the
most studied forms of subpopulation shift (Koh et al., 2021; Yang et al., 2023). Models trained
on data that have certain easy-to-learn attributes, spuriously correlated with labels, can overly rely
on such spurious attributes, resulting in suboptimal performance during deployment (Geirhos et al.,
2019). Both supervised (Sagawa et al., 2020; Idrissi et al., 2022) and unsupervised (Nam et al., 2020;
Liu et al., 2021; Li et al., 2022; Park et al., 2023) methodologies for making neural networks robust
to spurious correlations, a task also known as debiasing, have been developed. To get around the ex-
pensive human labor involved in acquiring bias labels for training supervised debiasing algorithms,
unsupervised methods typically take a two-stage approach: an initial stage for bias identification and
a second stage for bias mitigation. Unsupervised bias identification often relies on certain character-
istics of spurious attributes, such as their relative ease of learning compared to target attributes (Nam
et al., 2020), formation of clusters in feature space (Sohoni et al., 2020), adherence to a low-rank
property (Huh et al., 2023), etc. This is followed by the mitigation step via resampling (Idrissi et al.,
2022), contrastive learning (Zhang et al., 2022), and pruning (Park et al., 2023), etc.
Existing bias identification methods typically categorize data points into two (Nam et al., 2020; Liu
et al., 2021) or more discrete groups (Sohoni et al., 2020; Yang et al., 2024). However, they do not
offer insights into how the strength of spurious correlations varies across the identified groups, nor
do they account for the variation in the strength of spurious correlations across instances within each
    ∗
        Corresponding author.


                                                      1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


group. Recent works, such as Singla & Feizi (2022); Moayeri et al. (2023), address these limitations
by ranking data points based on spuriosity—the degree to which common spurious cues are present.
However, these spuriosity / bias ranking methods rely on human supervision or auxiliary biased
models to identify biased features. Furthermore, they heavily rely on the interpretability of neural
features extracted from adversarially trained encoders and the effectiveness of the interpretability
techniques employed, which limits their applicability.
To address these limitations, we present Self-Guided Bias Ranking (Sebra), a spuriosity ranking
algorithm without the need for human intervention. Sebra is based on the observation of a local
symmetry in ERM (Empirical Risk Minimization) training – in a given iteration, the hardness of
learning a sample is inversely correlated with the amount of spurious features it contains. In other
words, the lower the amount of spurious features, the harder a sample is to learn, and vice versa.
We call this, the Hardness-Spuriosity Symmetry (Assumption 1), which consequently gives rise
to a corresponding conservation law (Theorem 1) relating the hardness of learning a sample to a
measure of its spuriosity. This implies that the spuriosity ranking can be derived by looking at the
trajectory (through the sample space) of a model that learns attributes sequentially in increasing order
of hardness. We empirically confirm the validity of the Hardness-Spuriosity Symmetry assumption
in Appendix G.2.
However, when training a neural network on samples with varying levels of spuriosity, globally
across iterations, ERM tends to deviate from this trajectory due to (a) reliance on spurious features,
since higher spuriosity samples are known to inhibit the learning of those with relatively lower levels
of spuriosity Qiu et al. (2024) and (b) non-uniform gradient updates received for samples of different
levels of spuriosity due to different values of the task loss (influenced by their levels of spuriosity),
leading to non-determinism in the order in which samples are learned. Sebra corrects this devi-
ation by steering the optimization pathway of a neural network by dynamically modulating ERM
through a pair of controller variables to follow the conservation law corresponding to the Hardness-
Spuriosity Symmetry, while minimizing the interference caused by samples of one spuriosity level
on the learning of the other, thereby enabling the network to learn attributes in increasing order of dif-
ficulty. Consequently, a readout of the order in which samples are learned along this pathway serves
as our predicted spuriosity ranking, requiring no human supervision. By leveraging the fine-grained
spuriosity rankings obtained through Sebra and incorporating them into a simple contrastive loss,
we outperform previous state-of-the-art unsupervised and supervised debiasing techniques across
multiple benchmarks, UrbanCars, BAR, CelebA, MultiNLI, and ImageNet-1K.
To summarize, we: ❶ Introduce a novel self-guided bias ranking framework, Sebra, to dynamically
rank the data points of each class on the decreasing order of the strength of spurious signals, without
any human supervision; ❷ Utilize these derived rankings to enable debiased learning using a sim-
ple contrastive learning framework; ❸ Empirically demonstrate the effectiveness of our proposed
approach across multiple datasets with spurious correlations, including UrbanCars, CelebA, BAR,
MultiNLI and ImageNet-1K.


2    R ELATED W ORKS

Bias Identification: A plethora of methods assume knowledge of bias either in the form of bias
labels Lee et al. (2021); Idrissi et al. (2022) or type of bias Geirhos et al. (2019); Chang et al.
(2021). Even though these methods produce superior debiasing results, obtaining bias annotations
for all biases or identifying the type of bias requires significant human efforts. This led to the
development of various inductive biases suitable for bias identification. One of the most commonly
used inductive biases for bias identification is the property of bias being easier to learn. In Nam et al.
(2020), bias is identified by obtaining a bias-only model through upweighting data points that are
easy to learn. Another popular bias identification strategy relies on training a model with a limited
network capacity using empirical risk minimization Liu et al. (2021), the hypothesis being that a
model with a small capacity would face difficulties in learning complex features and thus prefer to
learn easy spurious features. Such simple bias identification schemes has shown to be very useful for
datasets with single bias attributes but encounter Whac-A-Mole dilemma Li et al. (2023) when faced
with datasets with multiple spurious correlations. In Sohoni et al. (2020); Yang et al. (2024), clusters
based on biased attributes in the feature space are utilized for bias identification but provide no means
to characterize the nature of clusters discovered or how the strength of spurious attributes varies


                                                    2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


across these discovered clusters. Recently, Singla & Feizi (2022) proposed a method to identify
spurious and core attributes by analyzing neural features of adversarially trained encoders using
interpretability techniques like GradCAM and feature attacks. Building on these insights, Moayeri
et al. (2023) rank instances within a class based on the presence of these identified attributes, sorting
data in decreasing order of spuriosity. Although these methods offer a detailed characterization
of spurious attributes in the dataset, their dependence on human supervision and the quality of
interpretability techniques used can restrict their applicability. In contrast, our proposed ranking
framework orders data in decreasing order of easiness to learn as perceived by an ERM model,
without relying on human supervision or fragile interpretability techniques.
Bias Mitigation: Some of the simple bias mitigation strategies involve up-weighting bias conflicting
points and down-weighting bias aligned points, thereby promoting the model to learn target features
from the data Liu et al. (2021); Idrissi et al. (2022); Lee et al. (2021). Other approaches include
obtaining a debiased model by training a model to learn different mechanisms to that of a bias-only
model Nam et al. (2020), pruning Park et al. (2023) or forgetting the bias information from a biased
model Tiwari & Shenoy (2023). In the presence of group labels either inferred or via supervision, a
debiased model is obtained by minimizing worst group risk Sagawa et al. (2020). Although simple
upweighting methods have shown to be very effective in debiasing they lead to the underutilization
of diversity of the training data resulting in suboptimal performance. With the more fine-grained bias
identification scheme, we utilise the available data more efficiently using contrastive loss to facilitate
debiasing. Contrastive learning effectively debiases data Zhang et al. (2022); Jung et al. (2023), but
our ranking scheme refines pair selection, boosting debiasing performance and scalability to diverse
and large-scale datasets.


3     M ETHODOLOGY

In this section, we introduce a novel spuriosity-ranking framework, Sebra, designed to rank or or-
der data points in decreasing order of spuriosity. At its core, the framework integrates self-guided
weighting mechanisms into the standard Empirical Risk Minimization (ERM) using cross-entropy
loss, creating an objective that prioritizes data points by their spuriousness. These self-guided
weighting mechanisms guide ERM consistently along a pathway wherein attributes are learned
sequentially in the increasing order of hardness. As a result, the order in which instances transi-
tion from unlearned to learned naturally reflects the spuriosity of the data point. We demonstrate
the effectiveness of this ranked dataset for debiasing within a contrastive learning framework. Our
approach is formalized in Section 3.1, with a diagrammatic illustration in Fig. 1.


3.1   S EBRA : S ELF - GUIDED BIAS R ANKING

Intuition behind Sebra: Following the example in Fig. 1, consider the problem of classifying
“cows” and “camels”, where in the train set, cows are spuriously correlated with “green” back-
grounds (such as grasslands) in “daylight”, and camels are spuriously correlated with the “desert”
background at “nighttime”. Now, a model trained with ERM tends to classify the training datapoints
first based on the background, i.e., cows on grasslands v.s. camels on deserts, which implies that it is
the easiest attribute to learn Nam et al. (2020). However, when samples exhibiting the background
spurious correlation are dropped out from the training set, ERM learns to classify based on the light-
ing conditions, i.e., cows in daylight v.s. camels at nighttime. Finally, it is only when these are also
dropped from the training set does the model finally capture the core attributes of cows and camels.
Thus, when controlled with an appropriate steering mechanism (dropping of training samples corre-
sponding to the already-learned spurious attribute), the sequence in which ERM learns data points
follows a high-spuriosity to low-spuriosity pathway, naturally providing a spuriosity ranking. This
fine-grained ordering can then be exploited through contrastive learning for debiasing.
Notations: Given a train set X = {(xi , yi )}N i=1 with N data points across C classes, we aim to
rank them in decreasing order of spuriosity, i.e., if xi exhibits spurious cues than xj , then ρ(xi ) <
ρ(xj ), where ρ(x) is an integer in [0, N ] indicating the spuriosity rank of x. We use a neural
network fθ with parameters θ to drive the ranking process. All proofs and derivations are provided
in Appendix A.


                                                    3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                             Sebra                                                     Contrastive DeBiasing

                                                                                                                      Rank :    1        3       1        1


                                                                                                                                    {

                                                                                                                                                  {
 Training



                                                                                                                               positive pair   negative pair


                                                                                                           Epochs

                                                Append                          Append

      Bias Attribute 1(Easy) =

             Bias Attribute 2 =
                                  Ranking



      Core Attribute (Hard) =

            Upweighted Training


                                            High Spuriosity (Low Rank)                   Low Spuriosity (High Rank)
                                                                         Ranked List


Figure 1: In each step of Self-guided bias ranking (Sebra), datapoints are upweighted with ui and
then trained via ERM. Following this, we estimate vi for each sample to select them for subsequent
training. Samples for which vi transitions from 1 to 0 are ranked at each step and eliminated from
subsequent training. Any unranked samples are appended to the ranked list at the end of the training
phase. In the mitigation phase, negative pairs are formed using samples with the same rank, while
positive pairs are obtained using samples with a higher rank than the reference samples.
Definition 1. For a sample x ∈ X, let Fx be the set of all features types / attributes in x. An attribute
space A is the exhaustive collection of all feature types across all x ∈ X, i.e.,
                                                   [
                                             A=        Fx
                                                                          x∈X

Definition 2 (Attribute Types and Spuriosity Ranking). A causal attribute ac ∈ A is one that is
responsible for determining the label y of a datapoint x, ∀x ∈ X. A spurious attribute as ∈ A
is a non-causal attribute that does not determine the label y of any sample x ∈ X, but co-occurs
frequently with ac in X. We call the subspace of A covering all spurious features, As , the spuriosity
basis. The spuriosity measure µ(x) on X is the fraction of spurious attributes in As spanned by the
feature-type set Fx of a sample x ∈ X. A spuriosity ranking ρ(x) is an ordering on X such that:
                                              ρ(xi ) < ρ(xj ) ∀i, j ≤ N | µ(xi ) > µ(xj )

In other words, samples with high levels of spuriosity appear earlier in the ranking via ρ than samples
with lower levels of spuriosity.
Assumption 1 (Hardness-Spuriosity Symmetry). The hardness of learning a sample, and its corre-
sponding spuriosity measure, are symmetric to each other – the harder it is to learn a sample, the
lower its spuriosity measure, and vice versa.

Implementation of ρ(x): We leverage the Hardness-Spuriosity Symmetry to design a form of self-
guided bias identification, steering ERM consistently along a high-spuriosity to low-spuriosity path-
way.
This results in the rank of a data point xi being the epoch in which its cross-entropy loss (or a mono-
tonically increasing function of it) drops below a certain threshold, or in other words, its predicted
probability py (or a monotonically increasing function of it) of the correct class y exceeds a certain
threshold, determined by hyperparameters, as discussed below.
Fine-Grained Rank Resolution: Note that this specific criterion of ranking maps the N datapoint
to M buckets, where M ≤ N . In other words, multiple datapoints can get mapped to the same
rank bucket, if they transition below the loss / probability threshold together in the same iteration.
However, in our implementation, we also provide information about the spuriosity measure µ(x)
for every data point xi through a weighting factor called ui ∝ µ(x). Since µ(x) is a continuous-
valued function, sorting in the decreasing order of µ(x) provides a straightforward mechanism for


                                                                           4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


collision resolution and obtaining a fine-grained ranking among data points that inhabit the same
coarse-grained rank bucket.

3.1.1   F ORMULATION
Our ranking algorithm involves the following three key phases in each epoch:
 1 Selection: We design the selection mechanism to shift the model’s focus to a new subgroup once
a particular subgroup has been learned, for it to capture attribute types in order of increasing diffi-
culty across iterations. The training set is partitioned into samples that have been learned, i.e., easier
samples with high spuriosity, and those that have not yet been learned, i.e., difficult samples with
low spuriosity. The latter are carried forward for further updates to θ via ERM. This segregation-
based selection serves a dual purpose: it mitigates the influence of highly spurious features on the
learning of the less spurious ones, and it promotes the learning of attributes in increasing order of
difficulty. To implement this, we introduce a binary selection variable vi for each point xi , which
identifies a minimal subset of data points that maximizes the cross-entropy loss:
                                                    N
                                                    X   t
                                    min max            vi LCE (fθ (xi ), yi ) − λvit
                                     θ        v
                                                    i=1

vit LCE (fθ (xi ), yi ) is responsible for selecting points that have not yet been learned (i.e., those with
a high LCE ), while the −λvi prevents the trivial solution where all vit s are set to 1, minimizing the
number of points that are selected in a single epoch.
Furthermore, to mitigate the influence of previously learned highly spurious attributes on subsequent
learning, we condition the optimization on the state of vi in the previous iteration, i.e., on vit−1 as
follows:
                                    XN
                                        vit−1 vit LCE (fθ (xi ), yi ) − λvit ,

                          min max
                                θ        v
                                               i=1

and additionally restrict the domain of vit to {0, vit−1 } (instead of the general binary {0, 1}), where
vi0 = 1, ∀i ∈ [1, N ]. This dynamic domain constraint follows from the order on X induced by the
measure µ. It effectively implements the inductive bias that points with higher bias would always
be learned before points with fewer spurious features, leading to the result that once something has
been learned and ranked (with their corresponding vit set to 0), they need not be considered anymore.
                               (t−1)
Note, however, that before vi        becomes 0, (i.e., while it is still 1), solving for the optimal vit is
still effectively a general binary optimization problem on {0, 1}.
 2 Upweighting: Next, to counteract the non-uniform gradient updates inherent in ERM, and to
facilitate the ranking of points with high spuriosity before those with low spuriosity, we utilize the
inductive bias that ERM has a lower local risk, in any given iteration, for high spuriosity samples
relative to their lower spuriosity counterparts (Assumption 1). We do so by introducing a weighting
variable ui for each point xi proportional to the value of the spuriosity measure for that point, µ(xi )
as follows:
                                     XN
                                         vit−1 vit ui LCE (fθ (xi ), yi ) − λvit

                           min max
                            θ,u          v
                                              i=1
This essentially results in the selection of those points with the lowest LCE and having them ranked
before any of the other points with higher values of LCE (more difficult-to-learn points, and hence,
with fewer spurious features). In principle, following from Assumption 1, u could be any monoton-
ically decreasing function of LCE .
However, a shortcut solution to minimizing u is to set all ui = 0. We prevent this shortcut by incor-
porating the inductive bias that ui ∝ µ(xi ) into the optimization objective. For our specific case, we
use ui = e−t(LCE (fθ (xi ),yi )) , which has the effect that samples with high learnability / spuriosity are
upweighted by an exponential function of their spuriosity, where t(x) is a monotonically increasing
function of x. We incorporate this constraint into the objective as follows:
                                    N
                                    X
                                             vit−1 vit ui LCE (fθ (xi ), yi ) − λvit + βg(ui ) ,

                     min max                                                                            (1)
                      θ,u   v
                                    i=1


                                                               5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


where β is a hyperparameter determining the weight of this constraint, and g(ui ) is a convex function
meant to impose the constraint, whose form we uncover next.
Theorem 1 (Hardness-Spuriosity Conservation). Iff the spuriosity measure u∗i = e−t(LCE (fθ (xi ),yi ) ,
where t(x) is a monotonically increasing function of x, the variable ui in Eq. (1), across all values
of LCE (fθ (xi ), yi ), satisfies the following conservation law:
                                  ui LCE (fθ (xi ), yi ) + β(ui ln ui − ui ) = c,
            ∗
such that ui is the minimizer of the conserved function.
Intuition: Theorem 1 arises as a consequence of the Hardness-Spuriosity Symmetry (Assump-
tion 1), which requires the measures of hardness (LCE ) and spuriosity (ui ) to balance each other
out. It states that, for the solution to Eq. (1) to have the form e−t(LCE (fθ (xi ),yi ) , the quantity
ui LCE (fθ (xi ), yi ) + β(ui ln ui − ui ) should be conserved, i.e., a constant, for all valid choices
of ui . The implication is that the optimization on u should be restricted to the space of those values
that follow the conservation law. It formalizes the constraint that we need to impose on u in order to
avoid the shortcut of setting all ui = 0.
In other words, the solution to u in Eq. (1) is the minimum in the space of all values that satisfy
the conservation law. Based on this, we use g(ui ) = β(ui ln ui − ui ) in Eq. (1) to enforce the
conservation criterion, and obtain our final objective, which we optimize for all three sets of variables
θ, u, and v:
                                 N
                                 X
                                   vit−1 vit ui LCE (fθ (xi ), yi ) − λvit − βui + βui ln ui

            Lranking (θ, u, v) =
                                i=1
                                       min max Lranking (θ, u, v),
                                        θ,u    v

 3 Ranking: Finally, samples with high spuriosity, i.e., the ones that have been already learned and
dropped out of the training set in the selection phase, are appended to the rank list. Specifically, in
every epoch t, we select those xi s for which vi = 0 from the selection step, and append them to a
rank list Xranked (which is initially empty) as:
                                           t        t−1
                                         Xranked = Xranked || R,
where || is the concatenation operator between two lists, R is an ordered list of data points x such
that xi < xj =⇒ u(xi ) ≥ u(xj ); ∀xi , xj ∈ R and v t−1 (x) = 1, v t (x) = 0; ∀x ∈ R. Below
we discuss how Sebra progressively orders training samples based on spuriosity by optimizing the
variables associated with the above three phases.

3.2   O PTIMIZATION

Based on our formulation in Section 3.1.1, Sebra is parameterized by a set of three variables, θ, u,
and v, respectively corresponding to the Selection, Upweighting, and Ranking phases. Since they
are all independent, one can optimize Lranking wrt each of the variables by keeping the others fixed.
In each iteration, we first solve for vit to select the points that have not yet been sufficiently learnt,
compute their corresponding ui s, with which we upweight and minimize LCE wrt θ, (which is non-
zero for only those samples that have been selected by v in the beginning of the iteration), and finally,
set aside and rank samples whose vi s switched from 1 to 0 in this iteration to avoid interfering with
subsequent rankings.
Selection: We start by maximizing Lranking (θ, u, v) wrt v. Note, here, that solving for vit is a discrete
optimization problem, since vit ∈ {0, vit−1 }. Let k = ui LCE (fθ (xi ), yi ) − λ. This partitions the
search space into two halves, i.e., k ≥ 0 and k < 0, as follows:
                                                                                              
                                        XN
         max Lranking (v | θ, u) = max      vit−1 vit {ui LCE (fθ (xi ), yi ) − λ} +βui ln ui 
           v                         v                 |           {z             }
                                         i=1
                                                                     k

The optimal vi can be obtained in terms of the predicted probability of the correct class py as:

                                            0, if py > pcritical ,
                                   vit∗ =                                                             (2)
                                            1, otherwise.


                                                    6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Once the vit for a data point xi has been set to 0, we consider it as learned, and by the design of the
optimization objective, it does not influence the subsequent learning of the remaining points.
Upweighting and Training: We then solve for the minimization Lranking (θ, u, v) in u:
                                  N
                                  X
                                        vit−1 vit ui LCE (fθ (xi ), yi , θ) − λvit − βui + βui ln ui

          Lranking (u | θ, v) =
                                  i=1

Since L(u | θ, v) is a convex function, it can be minimized by equating its derivative wrt u to 0 and
solving the resulting equation (when vit = 1), which gives us the minimizer of L(u | θ, v) as:
                                                             1
                                                    u∗i = pyβ                                          (3)

We then optimize the parameters of the neural network θ as follows via regular mini-batch stochastic
gradient descent:
        min Lranking (θ | u, v) =⇒ θt = θt−1 − ∇θ Lranking = θt−1 − ui ∇θ LCE (fθ (xi ), yi )    (4)
         θ
Note how the gradients of the LCE (fθ (xi ), yi ) wrt θ are upweighted compared to vanilla SGD, by an
                                                               1/β
exponentially decreasing factor of LCE (fθ (xi ), yi ), i.e., py . This helps the model to converge and
rank datapoints with higher spuriosity before it moves on to those with lower levels of spuriosity.
                                                                 (t−1)∗
Ranking: Finally, we set aside the samples for which vi          = 1, vit∗ = 0, and consider them as
                                 t−1
ranked by appending them to Xranked , in decreasing order of their corresponding ui s, thus allowing
for fine-grained rank resolution. We provide the pseudocode for Sebra in Algorithm 1. Based on
the ordering obtained, we proceed in the next section, with formulating a contrastive learning based
objective for learning a metric space devoid of spurious correlations.

3.3   C ONTRASTIVE D EBIASING

The ranking objective introduced in Section 3.1 generates a class-wise ordering of data points in
the order of decreasing spuriosity. This fine-grained ranking can be leveraged for efficient debias-
ing. To demonstrate its effectiveness, we adopt a contrastive loss-based debiasing approach. While
contrastive learning has proven effective for debiasing (Zhang et al., 2022), the fine-grained bias
characterization offered by Sebra enables the selection of more informative contrastive pairs. This
approach surpasses traditional methods, which rely on simpler bias identification mechanisms, such
as GCE or partially trained ERM models. Additionally, contrastive learning-based approaches en-
able the utilization of the entire training dataset, unlike methods such as DFR Kirichenko et al.
(2023), which focus on the least spurious examples. Although the fine-grained bias identification
generated by sebra could be integrated into other debiasing strategies like DFR, we opt for a con-
trastive learning framework to showcase the full potential of Sebra.
Given a randomly sampled data point xi with rank r from class c, we sample another instance x−      n
from the same class c and rank r to form a negative pair (xi , x−
                                                                i ). This is motivated by the ranking
objective, which assigns the same rank to data points with similar levels of spurious correlations.
To form a positive pair, we pair xi with an instance of higher rank than r, as such instances are
less likely to share the same spurious features as xi . Using these contrastive pairs, we learn a
debiased representation by optimizing the contrastive loss while simultaneously updating the full
model via cross-entropy loss. For a classifier fθ with encoder fenc , which maps a data point x to its
representation z = fenc (x), the training objective is:
                           L̂(fθ ; x, y) = L̂sup
                                             con (fenc ; x, y) + γ L̂CE (fθ (x, y),                    (5)

where γ is a weighting coefficient. The supervised contrastive loss with M positive pairs and N
negative pairs is:
                                   "                                                   #
                                                         exp(z ⊤ zm
                                                                  +
                                                                    /τ )
             Lsup
              con (x; fenc ) = E       − log PM                   PN                     ,
                                                       ⊤ +                    ⊤ −
                                              m=1 exp(z zm /τ ) +    n=1 exp(z zn /τ )
                                        +
where τ is the temperature coefficent, zm , zn− and z ⊤ are the embeddings of positive, negative, and
reference samples respectively.


                                                         7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


4     E XPERIMENTAL S ETUP

This section outlines the experimental framework for evaluating the effectiveness of the proposed
spuriosity ranking and debiasing approach. We outline the datasets, evaluation metrics, and baselines
used, with implementation details and hyperparameters in Appendix J.
Datasets: We evaluate the proposed ranking and debiasing strategy on one synthetic and four natural
datasets with spurious correlations. The synthetic dataset, UrbanCars Li et al. (2023), focuses on
car-type classification with spurious correlations involving the background and co-occurring objects.
For natural datasets, we use CelebA Liu et al. (2015), which addresses spurious features like age and
gender in predicting emotions (smiling/sad) as per Hu et al. (2023). These datasets contain multiple
spurious correlations and bias annotations, enabling the definition of a ground truth rank order of
spuriosity and evaluating our method’s effectiveness. Additionally, we test on two natural vision
datasets, BAR (Nam et al., 2020) and ImageNet-1K Deng et al. (2009), and the natural language
dataset MultiNLI to demonstrate scalability across domains. Sample images and dataset details are
in Appendix B.
Evaluation Metrics: Quantitatively comparing spuriosity rankings is challenging due to the ab-
sence of ground truth rankings. For datasets with bias annotations, such as Urban Cars and CelebA,
where two biases are present (with Bias A being stronger than Bias B), we define the ground
truth ordering as follows: (Bias A aligned, Bias B aligned), (Bias A aligned, Bias B conflicting),
(Bias A conflicting, Bias B aligned), (Bias A conflicting, Bias B conflicting).      We compute
Kendall’s tau correlation Kendall (1938) to compare our ranking with this ground truth.
For datasets without bias annotations (e.g., BAR), we propose Performance Disparity (PD):
                        PD = AccuracyBottom k (Dtest ) − AccuracyTop k (Dtest )                    (6)

PD measures ranking quality by assessing accuracy differences between models trained on highly
vs. minimally spurious samples. High PD indicates effective separation of spuriosity levels.
To evaluate debiasing, we adopt and extend three UrbanCars metrics Li et al. (2023): BG Gap,
CoObj Gap, and BG + CoObj Gap, which quantify accuracy drops when spurious features are
unaligned. These metrics generalize to other datasets, e.g., Age Gap, Gender Gap, and Age +
Gender Gap for CelebA. Avg. GAP aggregates robustness across shifts. For BAR, we report
test accuracy on bias-conflicting samples, following Li et al. (2022). Further metric details are in
Appendix E.
Baselines: We compare the performance of the proposed approach with a supervised approach
Group DRO (Sagawa et al., 2020) and five popular unsupervised approaches ERM (Vapnik, 1999),
LfF (Nam et al., 2020), JTT (Liu et al., 2021), Debian (Li et al., 2022) and DFR (Kirichenko et al.,
2023). The supervised approaches assume the availability of shortcut labels for all the spurious
attributes while the unsupervised methods have access only to target labels. Both classes of methods
further assume access to a small supervised validation set for hyperparameter tuning.

4.1   R ESULTS

In this section, we compare the performance of the proposed method with various baselines and
datasets described in Section 4 to demonstrate its effectiveness in spuriosity ranking and debiasing.
Ranking Evaluation. As observed in Table 1, the proposed method produces a superior ordering
of data points as indicated by a higher value of Kendall’s tau-b coefficient for both datasets. The
inferior performance of Spuriosity Ranking (Moayeri et al., 2023) despite human supervision could
be attributed to the fact that biased attributes like background encompass multiple sub-attributes like
lighting, sky, terrain, etc, and different sub-attributes are captured by different neurons rather than
one or few neurons. Since these concepts are distributed across multiple neurons they need not be
contained in top-k activations Fig. 4, resulting in many of these attributes being not considered while
sorting the data.
Debiasing Evaluation. As shown in Table 2, our proposed Sebra outperforms all the unsuper-
vised methods in simultaneously mitigating multiple biases, as evidenced by the lower average gap
(Avg. GAP) metric across datasets. While Sebra may not always achieve the best performance on


                                                  8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


individual Bias GAP metrics, this is due to the whac-a-mole dilemma observed in previous meth-
ods, where mitigating one bias attribute exceptionally well can amplify the other bias attribute.

This can result in a very low Table 1: Quantitative comparison of Sebra with various base-
Bias GAP for one attribute, even lines. The results are shown in terms of Kendall’s τ for Urban
though the model remains highly Cars and CelebA, and Performance Disparity (PD) for BAR.
biased overall. Furthermore, the
proposed method consistently sur-      Method              Urban Cars        CelebA        BAR
passes previous approaches. Addi-      Metric             Kendall’s τ (↑) Kendall’s τ (↑) PD (↑)
tionally, our method performs com-     Random Ordering        0.02            -0.01        0.25
parably to prior single-bias unsu-     ERM-based Ranking      0.12            0.14         4.55
pervised methods in single-bias set-   Spuriosity Ranking     0.40            0.38        28.88
tings, highlighting its effectiveness. Sebra (Ours)           0.85            0.69        32.32
An extended version of Table 2 is
provided in Appendix D.2.

Table 2: Performance comparison across UrbanCars, CelebA, BAR, ImageNet, and MultiNLI
datasets. Sup.: Whether the model requires group or spurious attribute annotations (✗: not re-
quired, ✓: required). I.D. Acc. measures performance without subpopulation shift, while Avg GAP
does so in its presence. All results are reported as mean (standard deviation).

 Methods        Sup.                    UrbanCars                                            CelebA                        BAR
                       I.D. Acc. (↑)    WG Acc. (↑)    Avg GAP (↑)       I.D. Acc. (↑)   WG Acc. (↑)   Avg GAP (↑)      Test Acc. (↑)
 Group DRO      ✓      91.60 (1.23)     75.70 (1.79)   -10.30 (1.35)     90.08 (0.70)     37.9 (1.6)    -5.79 (1.63)         -
 ERM            ✗      97.60 (0.86)     33.20 (0.86)   -31.90 (3.92)     96.43 (0.13)     36.0 (1.7)   -22.83 (0.84)    68.00 (0.43)
 LfF            ✗      97.20 (2.40)     35.60 (2.40)   -31.06 (3.56)     95.12 (0.35)     35.5 (2.0)   -22.57 (1.26)    68.30 (0.97)
 JTT            ✗      95.80 (1.45)     33.30 (6.90)   -20.50 (2.61)     91.86 (1.48)     38.7 (2.4)   -26.81 (2.53)    68.14 (0.28)
 Debian         ✗      98.00 (0.89)     30.10 (0.89)   -31.40 (1.44)     96.28 (0.37)     41.1 (4.3)   -22.56 (0.54)    69.88 (2.92)
 DFR            ✗      89.70 (1.21)          -         -20.93 (2.61)     60.12 (1.28)         -        -19.16 (3.27)    69.22 (1.25)
 Sebra (Ours)   ✗      92.54 (2.10)     73.8 (3.28)    -10.57 (1.72)     88.61 (3.36)     65.3 (4.1)    -9.82 (3.06)    75.36 (2.23)

 Method         Sup.                                         ImageNet-1K                                                MultiNLI
                        I.D. Acc. (↑)     IN-W Gap (↑)      IN-9 Gap (↑)        IN-R Gap (↑)      Carton Gap (↑)       WG. Acc (↑)
 LLE            ✓           76.25              -6.18             -3.82              -54.89             +10                  -
 ERM            ✗           76.13             -26.64             -5.53              -55.96             +40                 66.8
 LfF            ✗           70.26             -17.57             -8.10              -56.54             +40                 63.6
 JTT            ✗           75.64             -15.74             -6.75              -55.70             +32                 69.1
 Debian         ✗           74.05             -20.00             -7.29              -56.70             +30                  -
 Sebra (Ours)   ✗           74.89             -14.77             -3.15              -54.81             +25                 72.3



4.2   A NALYSIS AND A BLATION S TUDIE

In this section, we present a comprehensive set of analyses and ablation studies to provide deeper
insights into the performance of Sebra. Specifically, we investigate how the training dynamics of
a model optimized using the proposed ranking objective differ from those of a standard empirical
risk minimization (ERM)–based model. This comparison elucidates how the proposed selection
and weighting mechanisms modulate the ERM training dynamics to facilitate spuriosity ranking.
Furthermore, we conduct ablations on the various components of our framework to quantify their
contributions to the overall ranking quality. Additional ablation studies are provided in Appendix G.
Analysis of Ranking Dynamics: In Section 3, we introduced Sebra, which integrates targeted
modifications to ERM to systematically rank data points in the decreasing order of spuriosity. To
rigorously assess the impact of these modifications, we conduct a detailed analysis of the training
dynamics under the Sebra objective compared to standard ERM. Specifically, we leverage the Ur-
banCars dataset, which includes bias annotations, enabling a detailed evaluation of how spurious
and intrinsic features are differentially learned across the two training paradigms. In Fig. 2, we
plot the accuracy of three visual cues—object (e.g., car body type), background, and co-occurring
objects—on the unbiased validation set by comparing the model’s {urban, country} predictions to
the corresponding labels. As shown in Fig. 2 (Left), both models initially prioritize the easiest bias
attribute (background). However, as training progresses, the sebra objective induces a more pro-
nounced forgetting of learned attributes compared to ERM, likely due to the selection mechanism


                                                                 9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                        90
                                     Background Bias     80
                                                              Co-Occurring Object Bias               Car Type Core Attribute
                                                                                            80
                        80                               75


           Accuracy %
                                                         70                                 70
                        70
                                                         65
                        60                                                                  60
                                                         60
                        50                               55                                 50
                             0   3     6    9 12 15 18        0   3    6       9 12 15 18        0     3   6     9 12 15 18
                                           Epochs                            Epochs                            Epochs
                                                                      Ours         ERM


Figure 2: Training dynamics of Sebra and ERM monitored in terms of accuracies of background
bias (left), co-occurring object bias (center), and core attribute (right).


through vi that refocuses the model’s attention on other subgroups. The aggressive forgetting un-
der the sebra framework overcomes the slowdown in the convergence of difficult attributes in the
presence of simpler correlated features (Qiu et al., 2024), as evidenced by the higher peaks for
both target and co-occurring object attributes. Another interesting observation is that, for relatively
difficult bias attributes, such as co-occurring objects, the naive ERM formulation struggles to dif-
ferentiate them from core attributes, as indicated by a simultaneous increase in accuracies in Fig. 2
(center and right). Sebra effectively addresses this challenge by leveraging the upweighting factor
ui , which amplifies the influence of highly spurious instances, thereby facilitating the progressive
learning of these attributes. Additionally, the self-guided mechanism driven by ui enhances overall
performance, as demonstrated by the ranking improvements shown in Table 3. The non-overlapping
peaks indicate that instances with a higher prevalence of respective attributes are assigned differ-
ent ranks. Therefore, the ranking objective of sebra leads to well-segregated sequential learning of
different shortcuts in the decreasing order of spuriosity. This analysis confirms our intuition and
provides empirical evidence that the sebra efficiently ranks data in decreasing order of spuriosity.
Effect of Loss Components: To evaluate the con-
tribution of various loss components, we conduct an Table 3: Ablation study of different compo-
ablation study by systematically removing compo- nents used in Sebra.
nents and measuring their impact on the quality of
the resulting rankings using Kendall’s τ coefficient.      LCE (θ) Lranking (vi ) Lranking (ui ) Kendall’s τ (↑)
The results of this analysis are shown in Table 3.            ✓          -              -        0.12
When using only LCE , corresponding to standard               ✓         ✓               -        0.79
                                                              ✓         ✓              ✓         0.85 (Sebra)
ERM training, we observe that ERM cannot alone
rank data points effectively. To address this, we define a proxy ranking based on the epoch at which
the predicted probability of the target attribute surpasses a fixed threshold. As shown in Table 3, the
model trained with naive cross-entropy loss exhibits a low correlation with the ground truth rank-
ing, as indicated by the low Kendall’s τ . This suggests that naive cross-entropy fails to capture the
underlying spuriosity of the data. The slightly positive value of τ likely reflects ERM’s inherent,
albeit weak, capacity to asynchronously learn different attributes. When vi is added to the objective
function, the ranking quality improves significantly. This suggests that ERM’s poor bias ranking per-
formance may be due to interference from the easiest attributes when learning more complex ones.
By incorporating both vi and ui into the training objective, the ranking quality further improves to
0.85, underscoring their importance in enhancing performance.

5    C ONCLUSION AND F UTURE W ORKS

We propose a novel debiasing strategy, Sebra, based on a fine-grained ranking of data points in
decreasing order of spuriosity, obtained without any human supervision. Sebra facilitates spuriosity
ranking by modulating the training dynamics of a simple ERM model to iteratively focus on highly
spurious data points while simultaneously excluding already ranked datapoints from the ranking
process. We further demonstrate how this fine-grained bias ordering enhances bias mitigation, by
considering a contrastive learning-based approach as an exemplar on various datasets. Future work
could explore bias mitigation strategies tailored to Sebra’s rankings, refine the ranking scheme, and
develop unsupervised metrics for evaluating spuriosity rankings.


                                                                        10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


6   ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

Adarsh Kappiyath thanks Silpa Vadakkeeveetil Sreelatha for invaluable conversations and feedback
throughout this project. Additionally, we would like to thank the University of Surrey for providing
the valuable computing infrastructure needed for this project.

R EFERENCES

C. Chang, G. Adam, and A. Goldenberg. Towards robust classification model by counterfactual and
  invariant data generation. In CVPR, 2021.
Jia Deng, Wei Dong, Richard Socher, Li-Jia Li, Kai Li, and Li Fei-Fei. Imagenet: A large-scale
   hierarchical image database. In ICPR, 2009.
Robert Geirhos, Patricia Rubisch, Claudio Michaelis, Matthias Bethge, Felix A. Wichmann, and
  Wieland Brendel. Imagenet-trained CNNs are biased towards texture; increasing shape bias im-
  proves accuracy and robustness. In ICLR, 2019.
Rui Hu, Yahan Tu, and Jitao Sang. Echoes: Unsupervised debiasing via pseudo-bias labeling in an
  echo chamber. In Proceedings of the 31st ACM International Conference on Multimedia. ACMM,
  2023.
Minyoung Huh, Hossein Mobahi, Richard Zhang, Brian Cheung, Pulkit Agrawal, and Phillip Isola.
 The low-rank simplicity bias in deep networks. TMLR, 2023.
Badr Youbi Idrissi, Martin Arjovsky, Mohammad Pezeshki, and David Lopez-Paz. Simple data
  balancing achieves competitive worst-group-accuracy. In CLeaR, 2022.
Yeonsung Jung, Hajin Shim, June Yong Yang, and Eunho Yang. Fighting fire with fire: Contrastive
  debiasing without bias-free data via generative bias-transformation. In ICML. PMLR, 2023.
Maurice G Kendall. A new measure of rank correlation. Biometrika, 1938.
Polina Kirichenko, Pavel Izmailov, and Andrew Gordon Wilson. Last layer re-training is sufficient
  for robustness to spurious correlations. In The Eleventh International Conference on Learning
  Representations, 2023. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=Zb6c8A-Fghk.
Pang Wei Koh, Shiori Sagawa, Henrik Marklund, Sang Michael Xie, Marvin Zhang, Akshay Balsub-
  ramani, Weihua Hu, Michihiro Yasunaga, Richard Lanas Phillips, Irena Gao, Tony Lee, Etienne
  David, Ian Stavness, Wei Guo, Berton Earnshaw, Imran Haque, Sara M Beery, Jure Leskovec,
  Anshul Kundaje, Emma Pierson, Sergey Levine, Chelsea Finn, and Percy Liang. Wilds: A bench-
  mark of in-the-wild distribution shifts. In ICML, 2021.
Jungsoo Lee, Eungyeup Kim, Juyoung Lee, Jihyeon Lee, and Jaegul Choo. Learning representation
  via disentangled feature augmentation. In NeurIPS, 2021.
Zhiheng Li, Anthony Hoogs, and Chenliang Xu. Discover and Mitigate Unknown Biases with
  Debiasing Alternate Networks. In The European Conference on Computer Vision (ECCV), 2022.
Zhiheng Li, Ivan Evtimov, Albert Gordo, Caner Hazirbas, Tal Hassner, Cristian Canton Ferrer,
  Chenliang Xu, and Mark Ibrahim. A whac-a-mole dilemma: Shortcuts come in multiples where
  mitigating one amplifies others. In CVPR, 2023.
Yong Lin, Shengyu Zhu, Lu Tan, and Peng Cui. Zin: When and how to learn invariance without
  environment partition? In NeurIPS, 2022.
Evan Z Liu, Behzad Haghgoo, Annie S Chen, Aditi Raghunathan, Pang Wei Koh, Shiori Sagawa,
  Percy Liang, and Chelsea Finn. Just train twice: Improving group robustness without training
  group information. In ICML. PMLR, 2021.
Ziwei Liu, Ping Luo, Xiaogang Wang, and Xiaoou Tang. Deep learning face attributes in the wild.
  In Proceedings of International Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV), 2015.


                                                11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Mazda Moayeri, Wenxiao Wang, Sahil Singla, and Soheil Feizi. Spuriosity rankings: Sorting data
 to measure and mitigate biases. In NeurIPS, 2023.
Junhyun Nam, Hyuntak Cha, Sungsoo Ahn, Jaeho Lee, and Jinwoo Shin. Learning from failure:
  Training debiased classifier from biased classifier. In Advances in Neural Information Processing
  Systems, 2020.
Geon Yeong Park, Sangmin Lee, Sang Wan Lee, and Jong Chul Ye. Training debiased subnetworks
  with contrastive weight pruning. In CVPR, 2023.
GuanWen Qiu, Da Kuang, and Surbhi Goel. Complexity matters: Feature learning in the presence
  of spurious correlations. In ICML, 2024.
Shiori Sagawa, Pang Wei Koh*, Tatsunori B. Hashimoto, and Percy Liang. Distributionally robust
  neural networks. In ICLR, 2020.
Sahil Singla and Soheil Feizi. Salient imagenet: How to discover spurious features in deep learning?
  In ICLR, 2022.
Nimit Sohoni, Jared Dunnmon, Geoffrey Angus, Albert Gu, and Christopher Ré. No subclass left
  behind: Fine-grained robustness in coarse-grained classification problems. In NeurIPS, 2020.
Rishabh Tiwari and Pradeep Shenoy. Overcoming simplicity bias in deep networks using a feature
  sieve. In ICML, 2023.
Vladimir Vapnik. An overview of statistical learning theory. IEEE Trans. Neural Networks, 1999.
Adina Williams, Nikita Nangia, and Samuel Bowman. A broad-coverage challenge corpus for sen-
  tence understanding through inference. In Marilyn Walker, Heng Ji, and Amanda Stent (eds.),
  Proceedings of the 2018 Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association for Com-
  putational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies, Volume 1 (Long Papers), New Orleans,
  Louisiana, June 2018. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/N18-1101.
  URL https://aclanthology.org/N18-1101/.
Yu Yang, Eric Gan, Gintare Karolina Dziugaite, and Baharan Mirzasoleiman. Identifying spurious
  biases early in training through the lens of simplicity bias. In Proceedings of The 27th Interna-
  tional Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics. PMLR, 2024.
Yuzhe Yang, Haoran Zhang, Dina Katabi, and Marzyeh Ghassemi. Change is hard: A closer look at
  subpopulation shift. In ICML, 2023.
Michael Zhang, Nimit S Sohoni, Hongyang R Zhang, Chelsea Finn, and Christopher Re. Correct-
 n-contrast: a contrastive approach for improving robustness to spurious correlations. In ICML,
 2022.


                                                12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A     P ROOFS AND D ERIVATIONS

A.1   P ROOF OF T HEOREM 1

Proof. We start by first proving the case when u∗i = e−t(LCE (xi ,yi ,θ)) leads to the conservation law,
i.e., u∗i = e−t(LCE (xi ,yi ,θ)) =⇒ ui LCE (xi , yi , θ) + β(ui ln ui − ui ) = c.

             min ui LCE (xi , yi , θ) − λvit + βg(ui ) =⇒ LCE (xi , yi , θ) + βg ′ (ui ) = 0
               u
                              1                                      1
              =⇒ g ′ (ui ) = − LCE (xi , yi , θ) =⇒ u∗i = (g ′ )−1 (− LCE (xi , yi , θ))
                              β                                      β

Now, we know that u∗i = e−t(LCE (xi ,yi ,θ)) . Considering t = β1 x, we have, (g ′ )−1 (x) = ex =⇒
g ′ (x) = ln x. Then,
                                                Z                    Z
                        1                                          1
             ln ui ∗ = − LCE (xi , yi , θ) =⇒     ln ui ∗ dui = −       LCE (xi , yi , θ) dui
                        β                                          β
                        =⇒ ui LCE (xi , yi , θ) + β(ui ln ui − ui ) = c = λvit ,

since λvit was the constant that vanished under the derivative. This proves the statement in the
direction u∗i = e−t(LCE (xi ,yi ,θ)) =⇒ ui LCE (xi , yi , θ) + β(ui ln ui − ui ) = c.
Next, we prove the statement in the other direction, i.e., when minimizing the conserved function
leads to the exponentially decreasing characteristic of u∗i . Solving for the minimizer of the conser-
vation expression, we get:
      u∗i = min ui LCE (xi , yi , θ) + β(ui ln ui − ui ) − λvit =⇒ LCE (xi , yi , θ) + β ln ui = 0
             u
                        1                              1
          =⇒ ln ui ∗ = − LCE (xi , yi , θ) =⇒ u∗i = e− β LCE (xi ,yi ,θ) = e−t(LCE (xi ,yi ,θ)) ,
                        β
where t = β1 x. This proves the statement in the direction ui LCE (xi , yi , θ) + β(ui ln ui − ui ) =
c =⇒ u∗i = e−t(LCE (xi ,yi ,θ)) , and completes the proof of the theorem.

A.2   S OLUTION FOR ui

            ∂
               Lranking (u | θ, v) = 0 =⇒ vit LCE (xi , yi , θ) − β + β[1 + ln ui ] = 0
           ∂ui
                                         1
        =⇒ ln py = β ln ui =⇒ ln ui = ln py =⇒ ln ui = ln py 1/β =⇒ u∗i = p1/β          y
                                         β

A.3   S OLUTION FOR vi

Case 1 (k ≥ 0): When k ≥ 0, the optimal solution is vit∗ = 1, ensuring L(v | θ, u) ≥ 0. Otherwise,
Lranking (v | θ, u) = 0, which is always less than or equal to when vit = 1. Thus, vit = 1 is the
maximizer of Lranking (v | θ, u) when k ≥ 0.
Below, we derive the condition for optimality in terms of the predicted probability of the correct
class py (this applies only when vit−1 = 1):

                   ui LCE (xi , yi , θ) − λ ≥ 0 =⇒ ui ln py ≤ −λ =⇒ py ≤ e−λ/ui

Case 2 (k < 0): When k < 0, the optimal solution is vit∗ = 0. If vit = 0, Lranking (v | θ, u) = vit k
would be negative. Thus, vit = 0 maximizes Lranking (v | θ, u) in this case. Similarly to Case 1, we
derive the condition for optimality when k < 0 in terms of the predicted probability of the correct
class py :
                                             py > e−λ/ui .


                                                   13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                            1/β
We consider the inequality py > e−λ/py , where λ and β are constants, and aim to rewrite the
relationship in an analytically solvable form. Taking the natural logarithm of both sides of the
inequality, we obtain
                                                     λ
                                         ln(py ) > − 1/β .                                   (7)
                                                    py
                              1/β
By multiplying through by py        (valid for py > 0), this simplifies to

                                            p1/β
                                             y   ln(py ) > −λ.                                     (8)

                                                                     1/β
To simplify further, we introduce the substitution z = py , which implies py = z β . Substituting
into the inequality gives
                                                      λ
                                          z ln(z) > − .                                       (9)
                                                      β
At this point, we solve for z explicitly. The equation z ln(z) = C (where C = − βλ ) is a well-known
form that can be solved using the Lambert W -function. The Lambert W -function is defined as the
inverse of yey = x, such that y = W (x). Rewriting z ln(z) in exponential form, we obtain

                                                          λ
                                          ln(z) = W −         .                                  (10)
                                                          β
Exponentiating both sides gives the explicit solution for z:

                                               z = eW (− β ) .
                                                                 λ
                                                                                                  (11)

                                                     1/β
Returning to the original substitution z = py , we substitute back to express py in terms of the
Lambert W -function:
                                              = eW ( − β ) .
                                                       λ
                                         p1/β
                                          y                                                 (12)
Finally, raising both sides to the power of β gives the solution for py :
                                                           β
                                         py = eW (− β ) .
                                                       λ
                                                                                                  (13)

                                                                                    1/β
This expression represents the critical value of py where the equality py = e−λ/py        holds. Thus,
                         1/β
the inequality py > e−λ/py can now be interpreted as
                                                        β
                                         py > eW (− β ) .
                                                     λ
                                                                                                  (14)

The Lambert W -function provides an explicit solution for equations where a variable appears both
inside and outside of a logarithmic or exponential function. This result establishes the threshold
pcritical , defined as
                                                         β
                                           = eW (− β ) ,
                                                      λ
                                     p    critical                                            (15)
which represents the critical value of py where equality holds. Due to the monotonically decreasing
nature of exponential, the inequality
                                                               λ
                                                            − 1/β
                                                py > e          py


can thus be rewritten as:
                                                py > pcritical ,                                  (16)
where pcritical depends only on the constants λ and β through the Lambert W -function. This re-
                                                          1/β
formulation establishes that for the inequality py > e−λ/py to hold, py must strictly exceed the
threshold pcritical .


                                                           14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


B    DATASETS



We evaluate the proposed method across three distinct datasets, each designed to explore different
facets of bias and debiasing techniques. Below, we provide a succinct overview of each dataset:


     1. UrbanCars Li et al. (2023): This synthetic dataset is purposefully crafted to investigate
        debiasing methodologies amidst multiple spurious correlations. Comprising two classes -
        UrbanCar and Country Car - each class encompasses 4000 samples. The dataset is char-
        acterized by two biased attributes: Background and Co-Occurring Object. UrbanCars fea-
        ture city-like backgrounds with co-occurring objects such as traffic signs and fire hydrants,
        while Country Cars are set against rural backgrounds, predominantly featuring animals.
        UrbanCars is publicly available on Kaggle.


     2. CelebA: A versatile dataset featuring celebrity faces alongside 40 binary attributes. We
        focus on the ’smile’ attribute as the target, with biases introduced by age and gender. This
        configuration was introduced in Hu et al. (2023), and we employ their open-source code to
        obtain the data.


     3. Biased Action Recognition (BAR) Nam et al. (2020): The Biased Action Recognition
        (BAR) dataset contains real-world images categorized into six action classes, each bi-
        ased towards particular locations. The dataset includes six prevalent action-location pairs:
        Climbing on a Rock Wall, Diving underwater, Fishing on a Water Surface, Racing on a
        Paved Track, Throwing on a Playing Field, and Vaulting into the Sky. The testing set
        is composed exclusively of samples with conflicting biases. Therefore, achieving higher
        accuracy on this set signifies improved debiasing performance.


     4. ImageNet-1K Deng et al. (2009): ImageNet-1K is a large-scale dataset consisting of over
        one million high-resolution images categorized into 1,000 distinct object classes. The
        dataset includes a diverse range of real-world objects across various categories such as
        animals, vehicles, and everyday items, making it a benchmark for visual recognition tasks.
        ImageNet-1K is widely used for training and evaluating deep learning models, and achiev-
        ing high accuracy on this dataset demonstrates strong generalization and recognition capa-
        bilities, with an emphasis on overcoming challenges posed by large-scale, varied data.


     5. MultiNLI Williams et al. (2018): The MultiNLI (Multi-Genre Natural Language Infer-
        ence) dataset is a large-scale benchmark for evaluating models on the task of natural lan-
        guage inference (NLI). It consists of 433k sentence pairs drawn from a wide variety of
        genres, including government, fiction, and telephone conversations, among others. Each
        pair is annotated with one of three labels: entailment, contradiction, or neutral. MultiNLI
        is designed to test a model’s ability to generalize across diverse linguistic contexts, and
        achieving high performance on this dataset indicates a model’s robustness in understanding
        complex sentence relationships and overcoming genre-specific biases in natural language
        processing tasks.


                                                15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                  90.25%   4.25%   4.25%   0.25%                  90.25%    4.25%   4.25%   0.25%


                                                                     Urban Car
                    Smiling
                    Non-smiling


                                                                    Country Car
                                     BiasA unalign BiasB align-G3                          BiasA & B align-G1
                                     BiasA align BiasB unalign-G2                          BiasA & B unalign-G4


Figure 3: Dataset samples: Images from various datasets with multiple spurious correlations used in
our experiments are shown below. For CelebA and UrbanCars dataset each column depicts multiple
groups categorised based on biased features, as well as their proportions in the training set, each
row displays samples from various classes. Images at the bottom demonstrates samples from BAR
dataset from 6 classes. The images with red border lines belong to BAR evaluation set, and others
belong to BAR training set.



C    BASELINES

We evaluate the proposed method against a series of unsupervised and supervised bias mitigation
techniques. Below, we provide a concise overview of each method:

     1. GroupDRO: Sagawa et al. (2020) A supervised bias mitigation technique leveraging group
        labels to identify and mitigate biases across various groups in the training data. The objec-
        tive is to minimize the worst group accuracy across the identified groups.

     2. ERM Vapnik (1999): Empirical Risk Minimization, employing cross-entropy loss and l2
        regularization.

     3. Learning from Failure (LfF): Nam et al. (2020) This approach utilizes the Generalized
        Cross-Entropy (GCE) loss to derive a bias-only model. Subsequently, it learns a debiased
        model by reweighting the bias-conflicting points to learn a debiased model.

     4. JTT: Liu et al. (2021) This method uses a ERM model trained for few epochs and identifies
        the misclassifications obtained by the model as bias conflicting samples and is upweighted
        for debiased learning.

     5. Debian: Li et al. (2022) Introducing a novel bias identification scheme relying on the equal
        opportunity violation criteria, followed by bias mitigation strategies.

     6. DFR: (Kirichenko et al., 2023) demonstrates that ERM model captures non-spurious at-
        tributes even when trained with biased training data and thus simple last layer retraining
        with unbiased data is sufficient for debiasing.


                                                                   16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


D     R ESULTS

D.1    Q UALITATIVE R ESULTS


      Darkness       Pointy Structures          Text             Stone Buidings        Dark Sky

Figure 4: Top 5 spurious concepts discovered using Spuriosity rankings introduced in Moayeri et al.
(2023). As observed, the identified neurons capture only a subset of features corresponding to the
spurious attribute ’background’; thus, ranking relying on top-k highly activating neurons would only
rely on partial characteristics of spurious features.


                                                       Class 0 : UrbanCars

  Top Ranked


Bottom Ranked


                                                     Class 1 : Country Cars

 Top Ranked


Bottom Ranked


Figure 5: Qualitative Analysis on UrbanCars Dataset: Examples of top-ranked (high-spurious) and
bottom-ranked(low-ranked) samples as ranked by Sebra, showcasing a range of samples from both
the classes.


                 Low Spuriosity                                      High Spuriosity
Figure 6: Qualitative Analysis on the ImageNet-1K Dataset. Sebra identifies spurious correlations
in three classes. In the ’Carton’ class, Sebra detects watermark shortcuts, while in the ’Shark’ and
’Jackfruit’ classes, deep-sea and tree backgrounds are flagged as spurious features.


                                                17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                       Diving


                Top Ranked



              Bottom Ranked


                                                      Throwing


               Top Ranked



              Bottom Ranked


                                                       Racing


               Top Ranked



              Bottom Ranked


                                                    Pole Vaulting


               Top Ranked



              Bottom Ranked


                                                     Climbing


               Top Ranked



              Bottom Ranked


                                                      Fishing


               Top Ranked



              Bottom Ranked



Figure 7: Qualitative Analysis on BAR Dataset: Examples of top-ranked and bottom-ranked samples
as ranked by Sebra, showcasing a range of samples across different classes.


                                               18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


D.2    Q UANTITATIVE R ESULTS

Table 4: Performance comparison on the UrbanCars dataset. Sup.: Whether the model requires
group or spurious attribute annotations in advance (✗: not required, ✓: required). The best-
performing results among unsupervised methods are marked in bold.The baseline results are taken
from Li et al. (2023)

            Methods         Sup.    I.D. Acc. (↑)    BG GAP (↑)          CoObj GAP (↑)        BG + CoObj GAP (↑)
            Group DRO       ✓       91.60(1.23)      -10.90 (1.08)          -3.60 (0.19)              -16.40 (2.80)
            ERM             ✗       97.60 (0.86)     -15.30 (1.35)         -11.20 (5.07)              -69.20 (5.34)
            LfF             ✗       97.20 (2.40)     -11.60 (1.23)         -18.40 (4.01)              -63.20 (2.21)
            JTT             ✗       95.80 (1.45)      -8.10 (1.08)         -13.30 (4.28)              -40.10 (2.48)
            Debian          ✗       98.00 (0.89)     -14.90 (1.08)         -10.50 (1.47)              -69.00 (1.78)
            DFR             ✗       89.70 (1.21)     -10.70 (1.85)          -6.90 (2.56)              -45.20 (3.42)
            Sebra           ✗       92.54 (2.10)      -6.54 (1.38)          -7.84 (1.38)              -17.34 (2.40)



Table 5: Performance comparison on the CelebA and BAR. Sup. indicates whether the method is
supervised for bias (✓) or not (✗). The best results among unsupervised methods are marked in bold.

           Methods      Sup.                                    CelebA                                          BAR
                                I.D. Acc (↑)   Gender GAP (↑)    Age GAP (↑)      Gender+Age GAP (↑)        Test Acc. (↑)
           Group DRO    ✓       90.08 (0.70)     -5.67 (2.23)        -2.6 (2.4)        -9.11 (3.34)               -
           ERM          ✗       96.43 (0.13)     -22.7 (1.34)     -2.03 (0.77)         -43.77 (0.42)         68.00 (0.43)
           LfF          ✗       95.12 (0.35)    -24.14 (1.28)      -1.33 (1.2)         -42.26 (1.32)         68.30 (0.97)
           JTT          ✗       91.86 (1.48)    -31.07 (1.21)     -3.51 (2.44)         -45.85 (3.93)         68.14 (0.28)
           Debian       ✗       96.28 (0.37)    -22.03 (1.26)     -3.23 (1.65)         -42.41 (0.49)         69.88 (2.92)
           DFR          ✗       60.12 (1.28)    -12.16 (5.34)    -17.36 (3.23)         -27.96 (1.24)         69.22 (1.25)
           Sebra        ✗       88.61 (3.36)     -2.21 (3.51)     -6.89 (3.04)         -20.36 (2.64)         75.36 (2.23)


E     M ETRICS

This section provides a detailed mathematical description of the evaluation metrics used throughout
the paper.

      1. In-Domain Accuracy (I.D. Acc): This metric represents the weighted average accuracy
         across groups, where the weights are determined by the correlation strength (i.e., fre-
         quency) of each group in the training data. It is designed to assess model performance
         under conditions where group distribution remains consistent with the training set.
                                                                      G
                                                                      X
                                                    I.D. Acc =               wi · Acci ,                                    (17)
                                                                       i=1

         where wi denotes the weight of group i, and Acci represents the accuracy for group i.
      2. Bias GAP: This metric captures the difference between In-Domain Accuracy (I.D. Acc)
         and the accuracy on groups where the specific bias is less pronounced. It quantifies the
         model’s performance drop when tested on groups that diverge from the biases present in
         the training data.
                                 Bias GAP = I.D. Acc − Accuncommon ,                         (18)
         where Accuncommon represents the accuracy on groups with less prevalent bias.
      3. Kendall’s Tau Coefficient: Kendall’s Tau is a non-parametric statistic that assesses the
         ordinal association between two variables. It ranges from -1 (perfect negative correlation)
         to 1 (perfect positive correlation), with 0 indicating no correlation. Particularly suitable for
         ranked data, Kendall’s Tau is more robust than Pearson’s correlation when the data distri-
         bution is non-normal or the relationship between variables is non-linear. The coefficient is
         computed by comparing the number of concordant and discordant pairs in the dataset.


                                                                19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


F     A PPLICATIONS B EYOND D EBIASING

This section highlights the wide-ranging applications of Sebra, demonstrating its utility beyond
just debiasing tasks. In particular, we demonstrate that sebra faciliates additional utilities beyond
debiasing like outlier and noise detections as well as discovery on unknown biases.

F.1   O UTLIER AND N OISE D ETECTION

Training datasets often consist of samples from various sources, annotated by individuals with dif-
fering expertise and background knowledge. As a result, it is common for such datasets to contain
outliers or mislabeled instances. When these corrupted samples are incorporated into the training
process, they can negatively impact model performance, especially if the label noise is prevalent or
severe.
Sebra’s proposed ranking scheme provides a natural mechanism to address these issues. Specifi-
cally, in datasets containing outliers or mislabeled samples, Sebra assigns the highest ranks to these
corrupted instances. This ranking system makes it easy to identify and segregate noisy data. For in-
stance, in the Living17 dataset, we demonstrate how Sebra effectively ranks samples across several
classes, identifying both the highest- and lowest-ranked samples, as shown in Fig. 8.
The ability to segregate noisy data facilitates an efficient filtration process, which mitigates the
negative impact of corrupted samples on model training. This leads to enhanced model robustness
and ensures better performance in downstream tasks by focusing on cleaner, more reliable data.

                                                 Class : Salmander

                    Low Ranked



                    High Ranked


                                                   Class : Parrot

                    Low Ranked



                    High Ranked


                                                  Class : Butterfly

                    Low Ranked



                    High Ranked


                                                   Class : Turtle

                    Low Ranked



                    High Ranked



Figure 8: Qualitative Analysis on the Living17 Dataset. Examples of the least- and highest-ranked
samples from select classes of the Living17 dataset. Sebra assigns higher ranks to mislabeled and
outlier samples, enabling their identification and removal in downstream task processing.


F.2   D ISCOVERY OF U NKNOWN B IASES

Datasets often contain various biases, some of which are difficult to identify due to their inherent
nature. The Spuriosity ranking generated by Sebra facilitates the discovery of such previously un-


                                                 20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


known biases. Through qualitative inspection of the various segregations identified by Sebra, we
uncovered two previously unknown biases in widely used synthetic datasets for debiasing studies,
as shown in Fig. 9. Specifically, in the UrbanCars dataset, we observed that the color and appear-
ance of the car are spuriously correlated with the ’UrbanCars’ category. Similarly, in the Landbirds
dataset, a spurious correlation between the color of the birds and the ’Landbirds’ category was iden-
tified. These subgroups were flagged as relatively high in spuriosity by Sebra, revealing biases that
were not previously apparent.

                                          Unknown Bias Discovered:Red Color / Sporty looks


                                                  Unknown Bias Discovered: Color


                                                  Unknown Bias Discovered: Color


Figure 9: Discovery of Unknown Biases in Synthetic Datasets. Examples of spurious correlations
uncovered by Sebra in two widely used synthetic datasets for debiasing studies. In the Urban-
Cars dataset, a spurious correlation between car color and the ’UrbanCars’ category was identified.
Similarly, in the Landbirds dataset, a spurious correlation between bird color and the ’Landbirds’
category was observed. Sebra’s Spuriosity ranking facilitated the identification of these previously
unknown biases, aiding in their detection and mitigation.



Algorithm 1: Pseudocode of Sebra
Input: A neural network fθ , Xtrain = {(xi , yi )}N
                                                  i=1 , where yi ∈ {1, . . . , C}, maximum rank R, and
         upweighting and selection hyperparameters β and λ, respectively.
Output: Xranked = {(Xc , ρ(xi )}C  c=1
Initialize t = 0
while t < R do
     Obtain py = fθ (x, y) to compute u∗i using equation 3                           ▷Up-weighting
     Update the model parameters trained with upweighted points using equation 4               ▷Training
     Compute vit∗ using equation 2 to select samples for subsequent training                ▷Selection
     if vit = 0 and vit−1 = 1 then
           ρ(xi ) = t                                                      ▷Ranking
    Increment t = t + 1


G     A DDITIONAL A BLATION S TUDIES AND E MPIRICAL VALIDATIONS

G.1    E FFECT OF VARYING β

The Sebra objective introduced in Section 3.1 involves two key hyperparameters, λ and β. In
this section, we investigate the sensitivity of the proposed ranking scheme to different values of
β. Specifically, we plot the variation of Kendall’s τ metric as a function of increasing β values
in Fig. 10. As shown, the ranking quality demonstrates an almost linear decreasing trend as β in-
creases, suggesting that smaller values of β are preferable for optimal performance. This behavior
simplifies the hyperparameter search, as the optimal β appears to lie within the range (0, 1), reducing
the computational cost associated with hyperparameter tuning.


                                                         21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                                                                       0.86


                                                                               Kendall's Coefficient
                                                                                                       0.84

                                                                                                       0.82

                                                                                                       0.80

                                                                                                       0.78
                                                                                                              1    2        3   4   5



                                                                      Figure 10: Sensitivity of ranking quality to β


G.2           E MPIRICAL VALIDATION OF H ARDNESS -S PURIOSITY S YMMETRY

Lin et al. (2022) et al.have theoretically demonstrated that unsupervised bias discovery is funda-
mentally impossible without the incorporation of additional inductive biases or meta-data. In this
work, we leverage the concept of Hardness-Spuriosity Symmetry as an inductive bias to derive a
continuous measure of spuriosity. This symmetry has been explored in prior studies, such as Nam
et al. (2020); Qiu et al. (2024). Here, we refine and formalize this concept, proposing a method to
quantitatively assess spuriosity.
To empirically validate this assumption, we present a plot of the training loss for samples with and
without spurious correlations, generated by training a model using Empirical Risk Minimization
(ERM) on the Urbancars, Celeb A and BAR dataset. As shown in Fig. 11, samples containing spuri-
ous correlations (i.e., bias attributes) exhibit a rapid decrease in loss, whereas non-spurious samples,
which lack such shortcut attributes, show a much slower decline in loss. This discrepancy provides
empirical support for our hypothesis that the difficulty of learning from a sample is inversely related
to its spuriosity.

                     Loss vs Epochs for Different Sample Types
    0.6
                                                    Non Spurious Samples
                                                    Spurious Samples
    0.5


    0.4
 Loss


    0.3


    0.2


    0.1


    0.0
          0     10              20             30                40       50
                                     Epochs
                     (a) Urban Cars                                                                               (b) CelebA            (c) BAR

Figure 11: Empirical Validation of Hardness-Spuriosity Symmetry: Training loss vs. epochs for
samples with and without spurious correlations on the UrbanCars, CelebA and BAR dataset. Sam-
ples with spurious correlations demonstrate a rapid decrease in loss compared to samples without
such correlations, suggesting that higher spuriosity corresponds to easier learning.



H             C OMPUTATIONAL C OST

The computational cost of debiasing via self-guided bias ranking can be divided into two compo-
nents: the cost of spuriosity ranking with Sebra and the cost of contrastive debiasing. Sebra’s low
computational complexity arises from the closed-form solution for the weighting variable and the
progressive removal of data points during ranking, which accelerates the process. However, the cost
of bias mitigation using contrastive learning is higher due to its reliance on the full diversity of data
rather than a limited subset. To quantify Sebra’s computational complexity, we provide a detailed
breakdown of the time (in wall-clock minutes) required for both the ranking and debiasing phases
of our proposed framework in Table 6. For comparison, we also include the corresponding time for


                                                                                                                       22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


ERM on the UrbanCars dataset. All the measurements were done using a single Nvidia RTX 3090
GPU.

                  Method                                                  Time
                  Sebra - Ranking                                       5 minutes
                  Sebra - Contrastive Debiasing (Bias Mitigation)      52 minutes
                  ERM (Empirical Risk Minimization)                    32 minutes

    Table 6: Time breakdown of Sebra’s ranking and bias mitigation steps compared to ERM.


I   L IMITATIONS

While Sebra demonstrates strong bias ranking capabilities and superior debiasing performance, it
remains sensitive to label noise. Another limitation arises in datasets with multiple sub-population
shifts, such as class imbalance. In such cases, the model may overemphasize a particular class, re-
sulting in an increasingly unbalanced dataset during training. This imbalance can lead to learning
collapse and a failure in ranking performance. Extending Sebra to handle these more complex sce-
narios, such as bias ranking in the presence of multiple sub-population shifts, could be a promising
direction for future research.

J   R EPRODUCIBILITY

In this section, we outline the hyperparameters used in our proposed approach across various
datasets. The optimal hyperparameters obtained for various datasets are summarised in Table 7.
All experiments were conducted using a single RTX 3090 GPU. To facilitate reproducibility, we
intend to release a user-friendly version of the code publicly along with the pre-trained models post-
acceptance. We provide all implementation details and hyperparameters to facilitate reproducibility
in Table 7. All the datasets used are publicly available or can be generated with publicly available
resources.
Implementation Details: We use the same architectures and experimental setups as previous studies
Li et al. (2022); Nam et al. (2020) to ensure fair comparisons. Specifically, we utilize ResNet-50
for the UrbanCars, and ResNet-18 for CelebA and BAR datasets. The optimal hyperparameters are
selected based on experiments conducted on a small validation set with bias annotations, following
the approach in Liu et al. (2021); Li et al. (2022) for CelebA and UrbanCars. For BAR, no bias
annotations are used, even during validation and validation set is obtained by random split of training
set in 80:20 ratio. To ensure statistical robustness, we perform four independent trials with different
random seeds and report the mean and standard deviation of the results.

Table 7: Optimal hyper-parameters for the BAR, UrbanCars, CelebA, and ImageNet datasets deter-
mined through hyper-parameter search.

               Parameter               UrbanCars         BAR           CelebA        ImageNet
                                                −3             −4             −3
           Learning Rate (LR)          1.0 × 10        1.0 × 10      1.0 × 10       1.0 × 10−3
               batch Size                  128              64            64            512
               optimiser                  SGD             Adam          SGD            SGD
               momentum                    0.1               -           0.8            0.5
              weight decay                0.001              0       1.0 × 10−4     1.0 × 10−4
                pcritical                  0.75            0.75           0.7            0.1
                   β                       1.25            1.42          1.25           1.42
                   γ                       0.5             0.5             1              1
                   τ                       0.05            0.15          0.05            0.1


                                                  23
