Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


L INEAR COMBINATIONS OF LATENTS IN GENERATIVE
MODELS : SUBSPACES AND BEYOND

    Erik Bodin1                        Alexandru Stere4                             Dragos D. Margineantu5

                         Carl Henrik Ek1,3                             Henry Moss1,2

       1                                    2                                   3
           University of Cambridge              Lancaster University                Karolinska Institutet
                          4                                            5
                              Boeing Commercial Airplanes                  Boeing AI


                                                 A BSTRACT
            Sampling from generative models has become a crucial tool for applications like
            data synthesis and augmentation. Diffusion, Flow Matching and Continuous Nor-
            malising Flows have shown effectiveness across various modalities, and rely on
            latent variables for generation. For experimental design or creative applications that
            require more control over the generation process, it has become common to manip-
            ulate the latent variable directly. However, existing approaches for performing such
            manipulations (e.g. interpolation or forming low-dimensional representations) only
            work well in special cases or are network or data-modality specific. We propose
            Latent Optimal Linear combinations (LOL) as a general-purpose method to form
            linear combinations of latent variables that adhere to the assumptions of the gener-
            ative model. As LOL is easy to implement and naturally addresses the broader task
            of forming any linear combinations, e.g. the construction of subspaces of the latent
            space, LOL dramatically simplifies the creation of expressive low-dimensional
            representations of high-dimensional objects.


1     I NTRODUCTION
Generative models are a cornerstone of machine learning, with diverse applications including image
synthesis, data augmentation, and creative content generation. Diffusion models (Ho et al., 2020;
Song et al., 2020a;b) have emerged as a particularly effective approach to generative modeling for
various modalities, such as for images (Ho et al., 2020), audio (Kong et al., 2020), video (Ho et al.,
2022), and 3D models (Luo & Hu, 2021). A yet more recent approach to generative modelling is
Flow Matching (Lipman et al., 2022), built upon Continuous Normalising Flows (Chen et al., 2018),
that generalises diffusion to allow for different probability paths between data and latent distribution,
e.g. defined through optimal transport (Gulrajani et al., 2017; Villani et al., 2009).
As well as generation, these models allow inversion where, by running the generative procedure
in the opposite direction, data objects can be transformed deterministically into a corresponding
realisation in the latent space. Such invertible connections between latent and data space provide a
convenient mechanism for controlling generated objects by manipulating their latent vectors. The
most common manipulation is to attempt semantically meaningful interpolation of two generated
objects (Song et al., 2020a;b; Luo & Hu, 2021) by interpolating their corresponding latent vectors.
However, the optimal choice of interpolant remains an open question, with simple approaches like
linear interpolation leading to intermediates for which the model fails to generate plausible objects.
White (2016) argues that poor quality generation under linear interpolation is due to a mismatch
between the norms of the intermediate vectors and those of the Gaussian vectors that the model
has been trained to expect. Indeed, it is well-known that the squared norm of a D-dimensional unit
Gaussian follows the chi-squared
                        √        distribution. Consequently, likely samples are concentrated in a tight
annulus around a radius D — a set which is not closed under linear interpolation. Because of this it
is common to rely instead on spherical interpolation (Shoemake, 1985) (SLERP) that maintains similar


                                                       1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


norms as the endpoints. Motivated by poor performance of interpolation between the latent vectors
provided by inverting natural images, alternatives to SLERP have recently been proposed (Samuel
et al., 2023; Zheng et al., 2024). However, these procedures are costly, have parameters to tune, and
— like SLERP — are challenging to generalise to other types of manipulations beyond interpolation,
such as constructing the subspaces needed for latent space optimisation methods (Gómez-Bombarelli
et al., 2018), or adapting to more diverse latent distributions beyond Gaussian.
In this work, we demonstrate that successful generation from latent vectors is strongly dependent on
whether their broader statistical characteristics match those of samples — a stronger condition than
just having e.g. likely norms. We show that effective manipulation of latent spaces can be achieved
by following the simple guiding principle of adhering to the modelling assumptions of the generation
process. Our primary contributions are as follows:
           • We show that even if a latent leads to a valid object upon generation, it can fail to provide
             effective interpolation if it lacks the typical characteristics of samples from the latent
             distribution — as diagnosed by statistical distribution tests.
           • We introduce Latent Optimal Linear combinations (LOL) — an easy-to-implement method
             for ensuring that interpolation intermediates continue to match the latent distribution.
           • We show that LOL — a closed-form transform that makes no assumptions about the
             network structure or data modality — constitutes a Monge optimal transport map for linear
             combinations to a general class of latent distributions.
           • We demonstrate that LOL can be applied to define general linear combinations beyond
             interpolations, including centroids (Figure 2) and, in particular, to define meaningful low-
             dimensional latent representations (Figure 1) — a goal achieved previously with significant
             expense and only for specific architectures.
             Implementation and examples: https://github.com/bodin-e/linear-combinations-of-latents
      x1


      x2


      x3


      x4


      x5


Figure 1: Low-dimensional latent subspaces. A 5-dimensional subspace from the flow matching
model Stable Diffusion 3 (Esser et al., 2024) extracted using LOL (left) from the latents corresponding
to images x1 , . . . , x5 . The left plot show generations from uniform grid points across an axis-aligned
slice of the subspace coordinate system, centered around the coordinate for x1 . Each coordinate in
the subspace correspond to a linear combination of latents, which define basis vectors. The right plot
shows the corresponding subspace without the proposed LOL transformation. See Figure 6, Figure 7
and Section G in the appendix for additional examples.


2      BACKGROUND
2.1        G ENERATIVE M ODELLING WITH L ATENT VARIABLES

The methodology in this paper applies to any generative model that transforms samples from a known
distribution in order to model another distribution — typically, a complicated distribution of high-


                                                      2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


      x1          x2           x3         Euclidean       S. Euclidean     M. n. Euclidean   NAO   LOL


Figure 2: Centroid determination. Generation using Stable Diffusion 2.1 (Rombach et al., 2022)
from the centroid of the latents corresponding to images x1 , x2 , x3 using different methods. Note
that our proposed method removes several artifacts, such as unrealistic headlights and chassi texture.


dimensional objects. For clarity of exposition, we focus on popular Diffusion and Flow Matching
models using Gaussian latents, and then extend to general latent distributions in the appendix.
Diffusion models learn a process that reverses the effect of gradually adding noise to training data (Ho
et al., 2020). The noise level is governed by a schedule designed so that the noised samples at the final
time index T follow the latent distribution x(T ) ∼ p(x). To sample from the diffusion model, one
starts by drawing a sample from the latent distribution before iteratively evaluating the reverse process
with learnt parameters θ, denoising step-by-step, generating a sequence {x(T ) , x(T −1) , . . . , x(0) }
                                     x(t−1) ∼ pθ (x(t−1) | x(t) ),
finally producing a generated object x(0) . Diffusion has also been extended to the continuous time
setting by Song et al. (2020b), where the diffusion is expressed as a stochastic differential equation.
Note that, by using the Denoising Diffusion Implicit Model (DDIM) (Song et al., 2020a) or the
probability flow formulation in Song et al. (2020b), the generation process can be made deterministic,
i.e. the latent representation x(T ) ∼ p(x) completely specifies the generated object x(0) .
Flow Matching Lipman et al. (2022) is an efficient approach to train Continuous Normalising Flows
(CNF) Chen et al. (2018) — an alternative class of generative models that builds complicated distribu-
tions from simple latent distributions using differential equations. CNFs model the evolution of data
points over continuous time using an ordinary differential equation (ODE) parameterized by a neural
network, providing a deterministic relationship between latent and object space. Mathematically,
the transformation of a latent sample x(T ) ∼ p(x) at time t = T to x(t) at time t is governed
by f (x(t) , t; θ), where f (·; θ) is a neural network with parameters θ. Flow matching allows the
transformation dynamics of the CNF to be learnt without needing to simulate the entire forward
process during training, which improves stability and scalability.
Note that both diffusion and flow matching models can generate in a deterministic manner, where
the realisation of the latent variable completely specifies the generated data object, e.g. the image.
Moreover, by running their deterministic generation formulation in reverse, one can obtain the
corresponding latent representation associated with a known object, referred to as “inversion”. In
this paper we focus on the effect of properties of the latent vectors, and their manipulation, on the
generation process. For simplicity of notation, henceforth we drop the time index and refer to the
latent variable x(T ) as x, and use subscript indexing to denote realisations of the latent variable.

2.2   I NTERPOLATION OF L ATENTS

Linear Interpolation. The most common latent space manipulation is interpolation, where we are
given two latent vectors x1 and x2 , referred to as seed latents (or seeds), and obtain intermediate
latent vectors. The simplest approach is to interpolate linearly between the seeds to get intermediates
                              w
                             ylin = wx1 + (1 − w)x2            for       w ∈ [0, 1].
Spherical Interpolation. However, as discussed in (White, 2016) in the context of Variational
Autoencoders (Kingma, 2013) and Generative Adversarial Networks (Goodfellow et al., 2014), linear
interpolation yields intermediates with unlikely norms for Gaussian samples and results in highly
implausible generated objects (e.g. all-green images). Consequently, it is common to instead use


                                                      3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


spherical interpolation (SLERP) (Shoemake, 1985), which instead builds interpolants via
           w        sin wθ      sin((1 − w)θ)                                    ⟨x1 , x2 ⟩
         ySLERP =          x1 +                 x2 for w ∈ [0, 1] cos θ =                     ,
                     sin θ            sin θ                                    ||x1 ||||x2 ||
to maintain similar norms for the intermediates as the endpoints. SLERP has become popular and is
the standard method for interpolation also in the more recent models (Song et al., 2020a;b).
Norm-aware Optimisation. Motivated by poor performance of SLERP when interpolating between
the latent vectors corresponding to inverted natural images (rather than using those sampled directly
from the model’s latent distribution), Zheng et al. (2024) propose to add additional Gaussian noise
to interpolants via the inversion procedure to control a trade-off between generation quality and
adherence to the seed images (i.e. the images corresponding to the latents at the interpolation end-
points). Alternatively, Samuel et al. (2023) advocate for Norm-Aware Optimisation (NAO) which
uses back-propagation to identify interpolation paths γ : [0, 1] → Rd that solve
                             Z
                        inf − log P(γ(s))ds s.t. γ(0) = x1 , γ(1) = x2 ,
                                     γ
                          d
where log P : R → R is the log likelihood of the squared norm under its sampling distribution
χ2 (D) for unit Gaussian samples. NAO can also calculate centroids of K latents by simultaneous
optimisation of paths between the centroid and each respective latent.
All the proposed interpolation methods above aim to make the intermediates adhere to statistics of
Gaussian samples, however, require significant computation, have hyperparameters to tune, or lack
theoretical guarantees. Moreover — in common with spherical interpolation — they are difficult to
generalise beyond Gaussian latent variables or to more general expressions of the latents beyond
interpolation, such as building subspaces based on their span — as required to build expressive
low-dimensional representations.
In this work we will propose a simple technique that guarantees that interpolations follow the latent
distribution if the original (seed) latents do, applies to a general class of latent distributions, and
enables us go beyond interpolation. Moreover, we will address how to assess the distributional
assumption of the seed latents, to simplify the diagnosis of errors at the source.
                             SD2.1 (diffusion)                                                           SD3 (flow matching)
    x(i) ∼ N (µ, Σ)   argmax p(|| · ||) argmax p(|| · ||)   N (x∗ ; µ, Σ)       x(i) ∼ N (µ, Σ)   argmax p(|| · ||) argmax p(|| · ||)   N (x∗ ; µ, Σ)


          1                   2                 3                                     1                  2                  3


Figure 3: Likelihood and norm insufficient. Column (1) of each panel shows an image generated
using a random sample from the associated Gaussian latent distribution for the diffusion model
of Rombach et al. (2022) (left side) and the flow matching model of Esser et al. (2024) (right side).
Columns (2) and (3) both show images generated from latents with the most likely norm according
to their respective latent distribution. Columns (2) use the same Gaussian samples as in columns
(1) but rescaled to have this norm, also yielding realistic images. Meanwhile, columns (3) show
the failed generation from constant vectors sI scaled to have the most likely norm according to the
latent distribution but lacking other characteristics (e.g. not having all-equal values) that the network
was trained to expect, even though its likelihood N (sI; µ, Σ) is typical of real samples. Moreover,
the distribution mode µ, which also lacks needed characteristics , has vastly higher log likelihood
than any realistic sample; -33875 and -135503 for the two models, respectively. See Table 2 for an
example of failed generation using the mode µ.


3      A SSESSING VALIDITY OF LATENTS VIA DISTRIBUTION TESTING
Before introducing our proposed method, we first explore evidence for our central hypothesis that
tackles a misconception underpinning current interpolation methods for Gaussian latents:
Having a latent vector with a norm that is likely for a sample from the latent distribution N (µ, Σ)
is not a sufficient condition for plausible sample generation. Rather, plausible generation requires


                                                                            4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


a latent vector with characteristics that match those of a sample from N (µ, Σ) more generally (as
evaluated by normality tests), with a likely norm being only one such characteristic.
The characteristics of the random variable x may be described by a collection of statistics, e.g. its
mean, variance or norm. Above, we hypothesise that if a specified latent x∗ has an extremely unlikely
value for a characteristic for which the network has come to rely, then implausible generation will
follow. A norm is unlikely if it has a low likelihood under its sampling distribution; for unit Gaussians
it is χ(D), see Section 1. While the norm has been shown to often be an important statistic (Samuel
et al., 2023), our Figure 3 illustrates on a popular diffusion model (Rombach et al., 2022) and a flow
matching model (Esser et al., 2024) that a latent with a likely norm — even the most likely — can
still induce failure in the generative process if other evidently critical characteristics are unmet.


                                                                         Inversion budget

        Original      1 step   2 steps    4 steps   8 steps   16 steps       32 steps       64 steps   100 steps   200 steps   500 steps   999 steps
Image


        Rec. error:   0.340    0.390      0.184      0.230    0.0539         0.0295         0.0225     0.0185      0.0181      0.0199      0.0178
           p-value      0         0      1.2e−58    2.5e−15   2.3e−5         7.4e−3         1.9e−2     8.4e−2      1.2e−1      1.4e−1      1.6e−1


Figure 4: Normality testing of latent vectors obtained from inversion. We show the LPIPS (Zhang
et al., 2018) reconstruction errors (second row, in red) of 200 inverted randomly selected images
across 50 random classes from ImageNet1k (Deng et al., 2009), the p-values of their inversions (third
row), and rejection rates (bottom row) of the Kolmogorov-Smirnov normality test applied to the
corresponding latent obtained from inversion under various step budgets. We use the diffusion model
of Rombach et al. (2022), always using its maximum number of steps (999) for generation, and
denote the 10th, 50th and 90th percentiles with black lines. The first row shows image reconstructions
using its inversion at each budget, highlighted in red when the latent was rejected (p < 1e−3 ), with
the interpretation that the characteristics of the latent were unlikely for a real sample according to
the KS test. We note the strong correlation between inversion budgets providing low reconstruction
errors and those for which the p-values of the latents are realistic — taking values likely to occur
by chance for real samples. However, as we will see in Figure 5, there are still many latents with
low reconstruction error yet extremely low p-value, and this often severely affects the quality of its
interpolants.



In general, neural networks have many degrees of freedom, and so it is difficult to determine
and list the input characteristics that a specific model relies on. Therefore, rather than trying to
determine all necessary statistics for each model, we propose instead to rely on standard methods
for distribution testing, a classic area of statistics (Razali et al., 2011; Kolmogorov, 1933; Shapiro
& Wilk, 1965) — here exploring the (null) hypothesis that a latent vector x∗ ∈ RD is drawn from
N (µ, Σ). Popular normality tests consider broad statistics associated with normality. For example,
the Kolmogorov–Smirnov (Kolmogorov, 1933) test considers the distribution of the largest absolute
difference between the empirical and the theoretical cumulative density function across all values.


                                                                         5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                Seeds                                                   Interpolations


   Visual quality ≈ 1   Visual quality ≈ 2   Visual quality ≈ 3    Visual quality ≈ 4             Visual quality ≈ 5


Figure 5: Lack of normality is linked to failure of interpolants The left and middle panels shows
LPIPS (Zhang et al., 2018) reconstruction error (after 999 generation steps) and the Kolmogorov-
Smirnov p-value for all inversions presented in Figure 4, split into two plots due to the vast dynamic
range of p-values. Although latents with high (realistic) p-values tend to have low reconstruction
errors, there are many latents with low reconstruction errors that also have low p-values. The right
panel shows Q-Align visual quality scores (Wu et al., 2023) for spherical interpolants between pairs
of inversions selected from matching ImageNet1k (Deng et al., 2009) image classes, demonstrating
that choosing seed latents with both low reconstruction error (< 0.05) and high p-values (> 1e−3 )
allows us to avoid low-quality interpolants that would arise when choosing seeds by reconstruction
error alone. For reference, we include examples of interpolants at each visual quality level.


3.1    T HE SAMPLE CHARACTERISTICS OF SEED LATENTS AFFECT THEIR INTERPOLATIONS

An ability to identify latents that lack the necessary characteristics for good quality generation
is critical when manipulating latents that are not acquired by explicitly sampling from the latent
distribution. Indeed, as we show below, using such deficient latents as seeds for interpolation can
severely affect the quality of interpolants, for example when interpolating between inverted natural
images (the most common way to obtain a seed latent, see Section 2). As inversion is subject to
a finite computation budget (i.e. finite inversion steps), numerical imprecision, and because the
particular data instance may not be drawn from the distribution of the model’s training data, the
resulting latent vector x∗ may not correspond to a sample from the latent distribution. We will now
show that distribution testing is helpful for identifying such deficient latents, providing an opportunity
to apply corrections or review the examples or inversion setup, before performing interpolation.
Figure 4 demonstrates that inversions having realistic p-values are strongly correlated with them
reproducing their original image with good quality. The p-value indicates the probability of observing
the latent vector by chance given that it is drawn from the latent distribution N (µ, Σ). If this value
is extremely low that is a strong indicator that the latent lacks characteristics expected of samples
from N (µ, Σ). In the figure we see that at low inversion budgets (with high reconstruction errors)
most p-values are 1e−50 or lower, and then reach values you expect to see by chance for real samples
(around 1e−3 ) at budgets where the reconstruction errors tend to be small. However, we will show
that the p-value provides additional information about the quality of the latents than provided by
reconstruction error alone.
We now examine how the p-values of two inversions relate to our ability to interpolate them with good
quality. Figure 5 shows that although latents with realistic p-values tend to have low reconstruction
errors, there are many latents with low reconstruction errors that have low p-values. Therefore, just
because the process of going from object to latent and back reproduces the object, this does not
necessarily mean that the resulting latent is well characterised as a sample from N (µ, Σ). The lack
of such characteristics can be inherited when manipulating the latent; in Appendix 8 we show that
interpolants typically inherit low p-values from their seed latents. Figure 5 also demonstrates that if


                                                      6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


we beyond requiring inversions to reconstruct their original objects also require their p-values to be
realistic — at levels expected of real samples — we are able to avoid many low quality interpolants
downstream, by not using the rejected latents as seeds. In other words, the normality test helps us
discover when the latents acquired from inversion lack characteristics of real samples, as this lack
prevents them from being reliably used as seeds. Distribution testing the latents can be helpful for
debugging the inversion setup — which typically involves solving an ODE — and assessing the
settings used. In Appendix E we investigate the effectiveness of a range of other classic normality
tests and tests based on the likelihood N (x∗ ; µ, Σ) as well as the likelihood of the norm statistic.
We assess these methods across a suite of test cases including vectors with unlikely characteristics,
and for which we know, through failed generation, violate the assumptions of the generative model.

4    L INEAR COMBINATIONS OF LATENTS
Now, equipped with the knowledge that matching broad characteristics of a sample from the latent
distribution is critical, we propose a simple scheme for forming linear combinations of seed latents
— which we now will assume are sampled from the latent distribution — to maintain their sample
characteristics. We will focus on Gaussian latents in this section, and present an extension to general
latent distributions in Appendix A. In this section we change the notation slightly, where a seed
latent xk ∈ RD rather than being a realisation of a random variable — a vector of known values — it
is a random variable following the latent distribution (here, N (µ, Σ)). We assume access to K such
seed latent variables {xk }K k=1 and attempt to form new variables following the same distribution.

Let y be a linear combination of the K Gaussian latent variables xk ∼ N (µ, Σ)
                                             K
                                             X
                                      y :=         wk xk = wT X,                                     (1)
                                             k=1

where wk ∈ R, w = [w1 , w2 , . . . , wK ] and X = [x1 , x2 , . . . , xK ]. Then we have that y is also a
Gaussian random variable, with mean and covariance
                                                    K
                                                    X                                K
                                                                                     X
              y ∼ N (αµ, βΣ)                 α=           wk                    β=         wk2 .     (2)
                                                    k=1                              k=1


In other words, y is only distributed as N (µ, Σ) in the specific case where (a) αµ = µ and (b)
βΣ = Σ — an observation which we now use to explain the empirically observed behaviour of
existing interpolation methods. Firstly, for linear interpolation, where w = [v, 1 − v], v ∈ [0, 1], (b)
holds only for the endpoints v = {0, 1}, and so leads to implausible generations for interpolants (as
we demonstrate empirically in Figure 11). In contrast, in the popular case of high-dimensional unit
Gaussian latent vectors, spherical interpolants have β ≈ 1, ∀v ∈ [0, 1], as proven in Appendix C,
and (a) is met as α0 = 0, which is consistent with plausible interpolations (see Figure 11).
In this work, we instead propose transforming linear combinations such that α = β = 1, for any
w ∈ RK , thus exactly meeting the criteria for any linear combination and any choice of µ and Σ.
We define a transformed random variable z to use as the latent instead of the linear combination y
                                                               K
                                                               X
                                 z := Tw,µ (y) = Tw,µ (              wk xk ),                        (3)
                                                               k=1

where Tw,µ (y) := (1 − √αβ )µ + √yβ , for which it holds that z ∼ N (µ, Σ) given latent variables
xk ∼ N (µ, Σ). Here, Tw,µ : RD → RD is the map that transforms samples from the distribution of
a linear combination of N (µ, Σ)-variables with weights w into N (µ, Σ). In Appendix B we show
that this transport map is Monge optimal, and extend it to general distributions in Appendix A. The
weights w, which via α and β together with the set of K seed latents specify the transformed linear
combination z, depend on the operation, represented as particular linear combinations. Below are a
few examples of popular operations (linear combinations) to form y; these are used as above to, for
the corresponding weights w, obtain z following the distribution expected by the generative model.

       • Interpolation: y = wT X, where X = [x1 , x2 ], w = [w1 , 1 − w1 ] and w1 ∈ [0, 1].


                                                     7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                                               1 K
       • Centroid Determination: y = wT X, where X = [x1 , . . . , xK ], w = [ K ] .
       • Subspaces: Suppose we wish to build a navigable subspace spanned by linear combinations
         of K latent variables. By performing the QR decomposition of X := [x1 , x2 , . . . , xK ] ∈
         RD×K to produce a semi-orthonormal matrix U ∈ RD×K (as the Q-matrix), we can
         then define a subspace projection of any new x into the desired subspace via s(x) :=
         U U T x = U h ∈ RD . The weights w for a given point in the subspace s(x) are given
         by w = X† s(x) = X† U h ∈ RK where X† is the Moore–Penrose inverse of X. See
         the derivation of the weights and proof in Appendix D. One can directly pick coordinates
         h ∈ RK , compute the subspace projection y = U h, and then subsequently use the transport
         map (defined by Equation 3) to the latent space to obtain z. In Figure 1 we use grids in RK
         to set h, used as above together with a basis (defined by U ) from a set of latents.


5     E XPERIMENTS

We now assess our proposed transformation scheme LOL experimentally. To verify that LOL matches
or exceeds current methods for Gaussian latents for currently available operations — interpolation
and centroid determination — we perform qualitative and quantitative comparisons to their respective
baselines. We then demonstrate new capabilities with several examples of low-dimensional subspaces
on popular diffusion models and a popular flow matching model.

5.1   I NTERPOLATION AND CENTROID DETERMINATION

For the application of interpolation, we compare our proposed LOL to linear interpolation (LERP),
spherical linear interpolation (SLERP), and Norm-Aware Optimization (NAO) Samuel et al. (2023).
In contrast to the all the other considered
interpolation methods (including LOL)                                Interpolation
which only involve closed-form expres-          Method                    Accuracy    FID ↓     Time
sions, NAO requires numerical optimisa-         LERP                      3.92%        199      6e−3 s
tion. We closely follow the evaluation          SLERP                     64.6%        42.6     9e−3 s
protocol in Samuel et al. (2023), basing        NAO                       62.1%        46.0      30s
the experiments on Stable Diffusion (SD)        LOL (ours)                67.4%        38.9     6e−3 s
2.1 (Rombach et al., 2022) and inversions                       Centroid determination
of random images from 50 random classes         Method                   Accuracy      FID ↓    Time
from ImageNet1k (Deng et al., 2009), and        Euclidean                 0.286%        310     4e−4 s
assess visual quality and preservation of se-   Standardised Euclidean     44.6%       88.8     1e−3 s
mantics using Fréchet Inception Distance       Mode norm Euclidean        44.6%       88.4     1e−3 s
(FID) (Heusel et al., 2017) and class pre-      NAO                        44.0%       93.0      90s
diction accuracy, respectively. For the in-     LOL (ours)                 46.3%       87.7     6e−4 s
terpolation we (randomly without replace-
ment) pair the 50 images per class into 25        Table 1: Quantitative comparisons of baselines.
pairs, forming 1250 image pairs in total.
                                                                                    1
                                                                                      PK
For the centroid determination we compare to NAO, the Euclidean centroid x̄ = K         k=1 xk and
two transformations thereof; “standardised Euclidean”, where x̄ is subsequently standardised to have
mean zero and unit variance (as SD 2.1 assumes), and√“mode norm Euclidean”, where x̄ is rescaled
for its norm to equal the maximum likelihood norm D. For each class, we form 10 3-groups, 10
5-groups, 4 10-groups and 1 25-group, sampled without replacement per group, for a total of 1250
centroids per method. For more details on the experiment setup and settings, see Appendix F.
In Table 1 we show that our method outperforms or maintains the performance of the baselines
in terms of FID distance and accuracy, as calculated using a pre-trained classifier following the
evaluation methodology of Samuel et al. (2023). For an illustration of centroids and interpolations,
see Figure 2 and Figure 16, respectively. The evaluation time of an interpolation path and centroid,
shown with one digit of precision, illustrate that the closed-form expressions are significantly faster
than NAO. Surprisingly, NAO did not perform as well as spherical interpolation and several other
baselines, despite using their implementation, which was outperforming these methods in Samuel
et al. (2023). We note one discrepancy is that we report FID distances using (2048) high-level features,
while in their work they are using (64) low-level features, which in Seitzer (2020) is recommended


                                                   8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


against as it does not necessarily correlate with visual quality. In the appendix we include FID
distances using all settings of features. We note that, in our setup, the baselines perform substantially
better than reported in Samuel et al. (2023) — including NAO in terms of FID distances using the
64 low-level feature setting (1.30 in our setup vs 6.78 in their setup), and class accuracy during
interpolation (62% vs 52%). See Section H in the appendix for more details and ablations.
      x1


      x2


      x3


      x4


      x5


Figure 6: Low-dimensional subspaces. The latents x1 , . . . , x5 (corresponding to images) are
converted into basis vectors and used to define a 5-dimensional subspace. The grids show generations
from the flow matching model Stable Diffusion 3 (Esser et al., 2024) over uniform grid points in the
subspace coordinate system, where the left and right grids are for the dimensions {1, 2} and {3, 4},
respectively, centered around the coordinate for x1 . Each coordinate in the subspace correspond to a
linear combination of the basis vectors, which through LOL all yield high-quality generations.


5.2        L OW- DIMENSIONAL SUBSPACES


   x1



   x2



   x3


Figure 7: Model-agnostic subspace definitions. The latents x1 , x2 and x3 — which via the
generative model correspond to 3D designs — are converted into basis vectors and used to define a
three-dimensional subspace. The left plot shows the generated designs corresponding to a ten-by-ten
grid in a two-dimensional slice of the subspace, shown over a region. The right plot shows the
wavedrag, as evaluated by simulation in OpenVSP (McDonald & Gloudemans, 2022) for the designs
over a 100-by-100 grid in the same region, with the respective design coordinates (from the left plot)
shown as black dots. We trained the SLIDE (Lyu et al., 2023) diffusion model on ShapeNet (Chang
et al., 2015). LOL allows subspaces to be defined without any model-specific treatment.

In Figure 1 and Figure 6 we illustrate slices of a 5-dimensional subspace of the latent space of a flow
matching model, indexing high-dimensional images of sports cars and rocking chairs, respectively.


                                                   9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


The subspaces here are defined using five images (one per desired dimension), formed using our LOL
method described in Section 4 to transform the linear combinations of the corresponding projections.
Our approach is dimensionality and model-agnostic, which we illustrate in Figure 7, where the
same procedure is used on a completely different model without adaptations — where we define
a three-dimensional subspace based on three designs in a point cloud diffusion model with mesh
reconstruction. We evaluate designs in this subspace using a simple computational fluid dynamics
simulation to illustrate that our approach allows objective functions to be defined over the space, in
turn allowing off-the-shelf optimisation methods to be applied to search for designs. In Figure 9
in the appendix we show corresponding grids to the sports cars in Figure 1 without the proposed
LOL transformation, which either leads to implausible images or the same image for each coordinate,
depending on the model. In the appendix (Section G) we also include more slices and examples;
including subspaces using the diffusion model Stable Diffusion 2.1 (Rombach et al., 2022).


6    R ELATED WORK

Generative models with non-Gaussian priors. In Fadel et al. (2021) and Davidson et al. (2018),
in the context of normalizing flows and VAEs, respectively, Dirichlet and von Mises-Fisher prior
distributions are explored with the goal of improving interpolation performance. However, these
methods require training the model with the new latent distribution, which is impractical and untested
for the large pretrained models we consider.
Conditional Diffusion. An additional way to control the generation process of a diffusion model is to
guide the generative process with additional information, such as text and labels, to produce outputs
that meet specific requirements, such as where samples are guided towards a desired class (Dhariwal
& Nichol, 2021; Ho & Salimans, 2022), or to align outputs with text descriptions (Radford et al.,
2021). Conditioning is complementary to latent space manipulation. For example, when making
Figure 1 we used conditioning (a prompt) to constrain the generation to sports cars, however, the
variation of images fulfilling this constraint is encoded in the latent space.
Low-dimensional representations. We have shown that LOL can provide expressive low-
dimensional representations of latent spaces of generative models. To the best of our knowledge, the
most closely related line of work was initiated in Kwon et al. (2022), where it was shown that semantic
edit directions can recovered from activations of a UNet (Ronneberger et al., 2015) denoiser network
during generation. Using a pretrained CLIP (Contrastive Language-Image Pre-Training) (Radford
et al., 2021) model to define directions within the inner-most feature map of the UNet architecture,
named h-space, they show that some semantic edits, such as adding glasses to an image of a per-
son, correspond to linear edits in the h-space. More recently, Haas et al. (2024) demonstrate that
h-space edit directions can also be found through Principle Component Analysis, and Park et al.
(2023) propose a pullback metric that transfers edits in the h-space into the original latent space.
However, while these three approaches demonstrate impressive editing capabilities on images, they
all require a modification to the generative process and are limited to diffusion models built with
UNet architectures. In our work low-dimensional representations are instead formed in closed-form
as linear subspaces based on a (free) choice of latent basis vectors. These basis vectors could be
obtained through various methodologies, including via the pull-back metric in Park et al. (2023),
which may be interesting to explore in future work.


7    C ONCLUSION

In this paper we propose LOL, a general and simple scheme to define linear combinations of latents
that maintain a prespecified latent distribution and demonstrate its effectiveness for interpolation
and defining subspaces within the latent spaces of generative models. Of course, these linear
combinations only follow the desired distribution if the original (seed) latents do. Therefore, we
propose the adoption of distribution tests to assess the validity of latents obtained from e.g. inversions.
Still, the existing methods for distribution testing may not align perfectly with a given network’s
expectations — e.g. many tests may be stricter than necessary for the network — and it may be
an interesting direction of future work to develop tailored methods, along with more extensive
comparisons of existing tests in the context of generative models.


                                                   10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We thank Samuel Willis and Daattavya Aggarwal (University of Cambridge) for their valuable
contributions. Samuel contributed important ideas related to computational fluid dynamics simulation
and the SLIDE model, and constructed the setup and plots used in Figure 7. Daattavya assisted in
verifying proofs and offered comments that greatly improved the manuscript.

R EFERENCES
Robert B Ash. Information theory. Courier Corporation, 2012.
Angel X Chang, Thomas Funkhouser, Leonidas Guibas, Pat Hanrahan, Qixing Huang, Zimo Li,
  Silvio Savarese, Manolis Savva, Shuran Song, Hao Su, et al. Shapenet: An information-rich 3d
  model repository. arXiv preprint arXiv:1512.03012, 2015.
Ricky TQ Chen, Yulia Rubanova, Jesse Bettencourt, and David K Duvenaud. Neural ordinary
  differential equations. Advances in neural information processing systems, 31, 2018.
Harald Cramér. On the composition of elementary errors: First paper: Mathematical deductions.
  Scandinavian Actuarial Journal, 1928(1):13–74, 1928.
Tim R Davidson, Luca Falorsi, Nicola De Cao, Thomas Kipf, and Jakub M Tomczak. Hyperspherical
  variational auto-encoders. In 34th Conference on Uncertainty in Artificial Intelligence 2018, UAI
  2018, pp. 856–865. Association For Uncertainty in Artificial Intelligence (AUAI), 2018.
Jia Deng, Wei Dong, Richard Socher, Li-Jia Li, Kai Li, and Li Fei-Fei. Imagenet: A large-scale
   hierarchical image database. In 2009 IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition,
   pp. 248–255. Ieee, 2009.
Prafulla Dhariwal and Alexander Nichol. Diffusion models beat gans on image synthesis. Advances
  in neural information processing systems, 34:8780–8794, 2021.
Patrick Esser, Sumith Kulal, Andreas Blattmann, Rahim Entezari, Jonas Müller, Harry Saini, Yam
  Levi, Dominik Lorenz, Axel Sauer, Frederic Boesel, et al. Scaling rectified flow transformers for
  high-resolution image synthesis. In Forty-first International Conference on Machine Learning,
  2024.
Samuel G Fadel, Sebastian Mair, Ricardo da S. Torres, and Ulf Brefeld. Principled interpolation in
  normalizing flows. In Machine Learning and Knowledge Discovery in Databases. Research Track:
  European Conference, ECML PKDD 2021, Bilbao, Spain, September 13–17, 2021, Proceedings,
  Part II 21, pp. 116–131. Springer, 2021.
Rafael Gómez-Bombarelli, Jennifer N Wei, David Duvenaud, José Miguel Hernández-Lobato,
  Benjamı́n Sánchez-Lengeling, Dennis Sheberla, Jorge Aguilera-Iparraguirre, Timothy D Hirzel,
  Ryan P Adams, and Alán Aspuru-Guzik. Automatic chemical design using a data-driven continuous
  representation of molecules. ACS central science, 4(2):268–276, 2018.
Ian Goodfellow, Jean Pouget-Abadie, Mehdi Mirza, Bing Xu, David Warde-Farley, Sherjil Ozair,
  Aaron Courville, and Yoshua Bengio. Generative adversarial nets. Advances in neural information
  processing systems, 27, 2014.
Ishaan Gulrajani, Faruk Ahmed, Martin Arjovsky, Vincent Dumoulin, and Aaron C Courville.
   Improved training of wasserstein gans. Advances in neural information processing systems, 30,
   2017.
René Haas, Inbar Huberman-Spiegelglas, Rotem Mulayoff, Stella Graßhof, Sami S Brandt, and
  Tomer Michaeli. Discovering interpretable directions in the semantic latent space of diffusion
  models. In 2024 IEEE 18th International Conference on Automatic Face and Gesture Recognition
  (FG), pp. 1–9. IEEE, 2024.
Martin Heusel, Hubert Ramsauer, Thomas Unterthiner, Bernhard Nessler, and Sepp Hochreiter. Gans
 trained by a two time-scale update rule converge to a local nash equilibrium. Advances in neural
 information processing systems, 30, 2017.


                                                11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Jonathan Ho and Tim Salimans. Classifier-free diffusion guidance. arXiv preprint arXiv:2207.12598,
  2022.

Jonathan Ho, Ajay Jain, and Pieter Abbeel. Denoising diffusion probabilistic models. Advances in
  neural information processing systems, 33:6840–6851, 2020.

Jonathan Ho, Tim Salimans, Alexey Gritsenko, William Chan, Mohammad Norouzi, and David J
  Fleet. Video diffusion models. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 35:8633–8646,
  2022.

Diederik P Kingma. Auto-encoding variational bayes. arXiv preprint arXiv:1312.6114, 2013.

An Kolmogorov. Sulla determinazione empirica di una legge didistribuzione. Giorn Dell’inst Ital
 Degli Att, 4:89–91, 1933.

Zhifeng Kong, Wei Ping, Jiaji Huang, Kexin Zhao, and Bryan Catanzaro. Diffwave: A versatile
  diffusion model for audio synthesis. arXiv preprint arXiv:2009.09761, 2020.

Mingi Kwon, Jaeseok Jeong, and Youngjung Uh. Diffusion models already have a semantic latent
 space. arXiv preprint arXiv:2210.10960, 2022.

Richard J Larsen and Morris L Marx. An introduction to mathematical statistics. Prentice Hall
  Hoboken, NJ, 2005.

Yaron Lipman, Ricky TQ Chen, Heli Ben-Hamu, Maximilian Nickel, and Matt Le. Flow matching
  for generative modeling. arXiv preprint arXiv:2210.02747, 2022.

Shitong Luo and Wei Hu. Diffusion probabilistic models for 3d point cloud generation. In Proceedings
  of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 2837–2845, 2021.

Zhaoyang Lyu, Jinyi Wang, Yuwei An, Ya Zhang, Dahua Lin, and Bo Dai. Controllable mesh genera-
  tion through sparse latent point diffusion models. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on
  computer vision and pattern recognition, pp. 271–280, 2023.

Robert A McDonald and James R Gloudemans. Open vehicle sketch pad: An open source parametric
  geometry and analysis tool for conceptual aircraft design. In AIAA SciTech 2022 Forum, pp. 0004,
  2022.

Eric Nalisnick, Akihiro Matsukawa, Yee Whye Teh, and Balaji Lakshminarayanan. Detecting out-of-
  distribution inputs to deep generative models using typicality. arXiv preprint arXiv:1906.02994,
  2019.

Yong-Hyun Park, Mingi Kwon, Jaewoong Choi, Junghyo Jo, and Youngjung Uh. Understanding the
  latent space of diffusion models through the lens of riemannian geometry. Advances in Neural
  Information Processing Systems, 36:24129–24142, 2023.

Karl Pearson. X. on the criterion that a given system of deviations from the probable in the case of
  a correlated system of variables is such that it can be reasonably supposed to have arisen from
  random sampling. The London, Edinburgh, and Dublin Philosophical Magazine and Journal of
  Science, 50(302):157–175, 1900.

Gabriel Peyré and Marco Cuturi. Computational optimal transport, 2020. URL https://arxiv.
  org/abs/1803.00567.

Alec Radford, Jong Wook Kim, Chris Hallacy, Aditya Ramesh, Gabriel Goh, Sandhini Agarwal,
  Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, Pamela Mishkin, Jack Clark, et al. Learning transferable visual
  models from natural language supervision. In International conference on machine learning, pp.
  8748–8763. PMLR, 2021.

Nornadiah Mohd Razali, Yap Bee Wah, et al. Power comparisons of shapiro-wilk, kolmogorov-
  smirnov, lilliefors and anderson-darling tests. Journal of statistical modeling and analytics, 2(1):
  21–33, 2011.


                                                 12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Robin Rombach, Andreas Blattmann, Dominik Lorenz, Patrick Esser, and Björn Ommer. High-
  resolution image synthesis with latent diffusion models. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF confer-
  ence on computer vision and pattern recognition, pp. 10684–10695, 2022.
Olaf Ronneberger, Philipp Fischer, and Thomas Brox. U-net: Convolutional networks for biomedical
  image segmentation. In Medical image computing and computer-assisted intervention–MICCAI
  2015: 18th international conference, Munich, Germany, October 5-9, 2015, proceedings, part III
  18, pp. 234–241. Springer, 2015.
Dvir Samuel, Rami Ben-Ari, Nir Darshan, Haggai Maron, and Gal Chechik. Norm-guided latent space
  exploration for text-to-image generation. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 36,
  2023.
Maximilian Seitzer. pytorch-fid: FID Score for PyTorch. https://github.com/mseitzer/
 pytorch-fid, August 2020. Version 0.3.0.
Samuel Sanford Shapiro and Martin B Wilk. An analysis of variance test for normality (complete
  samples). Biometrika, 52(3-4):591–611, 1965.
Ken Shoemake. Animating rotation with quaternion curves. In Proceedings of the 12th annual
  conference on Computer graphics and interactive techniques, pp. 245–254, 1985.
Jiaming Song, Chenlin Meng, and Stefano Ermon. Denoising diffusion implicit models. arXiv
   preprint arXiv:2010.02502, 2020a.
Yang Song, Jascha Sohl-Dickstein, Diederik Kingma, Abhishek Kumar, Stefano Ermon, and Ben
  Poole. Score-based generative modeling through stochastic differential equations. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2011.13456, 2020b.
Michel Talagrand. Concentration of measure and isoperimetric inequalities in product spaces.
 Publications Mathématiques de l’Institut des Hautes Etudes Scientifiques, 81:73–205, 1995.
Zhengzhong Tu, Hossein Talebi, Han Zhang, Feng Yang, Peyman Milanfar, Alan Bovik, and Yinxiao
  Li. Maxvit: Multi-axis vision transformer. In European conference on computer vision, pp.
  459–479. Springer, 2022.
Cédric Villani et al. Optimal transport: old and new, volume 338. Springer, 2009.
Tom White. Sampling generative networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:1609.04468, 2016.
Haoning Wu, Zicheng Zhang, Weixia Zhang, Chaofeng Chen, Liang Liao, Chunyi Li, Yixuan Gao,
  Annan Wang, Erli Zhang, Wenxiu Sun, et al. Q-align: Teaching lmms for visual scoring via
  discrete text-defined levels. arXiv preprint arXiv:2312.17090, 2023.
Richard Zhang, Phillip Isola, Alexei A Efros, Eli Shechtman, and Oliver Wang. The unreasonable
  effectiveness of deep features as a perceptual metric. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on
  computer vision and pattern recognition, pp. 586–595, 2018.
PengFei Zheng, Yonggang Zhang, Zhen Fang, Tongliang Liu, Defu Lian, and Bo Han. Noisediffusion:
  Correcting noise for image interpolation with diffusion models beyond spherical linear interpolation.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.08840, 2024.


A    O PTIMAL TRANSPORT MAP FOR GENERAL LATENT LINEAR COMBINATIONS
     WITH INDEPENDENT ELEMENTS

In Section 4 we introduced LOL for Gaussian latent variables, the most commonly used latent
distribution in modern generative models. We now extend LOL to general latent distributions with
independent real-valued elements, provided the cumulative distribution function (CDF) and its inverse
is known for each respective element.
Let p(x) be a distribution with independent components across elements, such that p(x) =
QD
  d=1 pd (x
           (d)
               ), where pd is the distribution of element x(d) ∈ R with CDF Φd and inverse CDF Φ−1
                                                                                                d .


                                                 13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Given linear combination weights {wk }K                             K
                                      k=1 , wk ∈ R, and seeds {xk }k=1 , xk ∼ p, we obtain z ∼ p
                                 (d) D
via the transport map T{w} := {T{w} }d=1 defined per latent element z (d) as:
              (d)   (d)                                                                   (d)           (d)
 z (d) := T{w} ({xk }) = Φ−1
                          d (Φϵ (ϵ
                                   (d)
                                       )) ϵ(d) = Tw,0 (                          (d)
                                                                                       ) ϵk = Φ−1
                                                                                               ϵ (Φd (xk )), (4)
                                                                    PK
                                                                         k=1 wk ϵk


where Φϵ is the CDF of the standard Gaussian, and Tw,0 : R → R is the transport map for standard
Gaussians as defined in Equation 3. We will now show that the proposed map leads to the target
distribution p and then show that this map is Monge optimal, leveraging results from Section B.
Lemma 1. Let z be a transformed variable defined through the transport map T{w} applied to a
linear combination of independent latent variables xk ∼ p(x), such that
                                                                            K
                                        (d)   (d)                                       (d)
                                                                            X
                          z   (d)
                                    = T{w} ({xk }) = Φ−1
                                                      d (Φϵ (Tw,0 (               wk ϵk )))
                                                                            k=1

where
                                              (d)                  (d)
                                             ϵk = Φ−1
                                                   ϵ (Φd (xk )).

Then, z ∼ p(x), meaning that the transformed variable follows the target latent distribution.


Proof. We prove that z ∼ p(x) by verifying that each element z (d) follows the corresponding
marginal distribution pd .
        (d)                                                                                     (d)
Since xk ∼ pd , its cumulative distribution function (CDF) is given by Φd (xk ). Defining the
                            (d)               (d)                  (d)
standard normal equivalent ϵk = Φ−1  ϵ (Φd (xk )), we know that ϵk     ∼ N (0, 1) because the
                    −1
transformation via Φϵ preserves uniformity.
Now, consider the weighted sum:
                                                         K
                                                                  (d)
                                                         X
                                                ϵ(d) =         wk ϵk .
                                                         k=1
              (d)
Since the ϵk are independent standard normal variables, the resulting sum follows:

                         ϵ(d) ∼ N (α · 0, β · 1) = N (0, β),
         PK             PK
where α = k=1 wk and β = k=1 wk2 .
Applying the optimal Gaussian transport map Tw,0 (as proven in Section B) to ϵ(d) , we obtain:

                                                              ϵ(d)
                                               Tw,0 (ϵ(d) ) = √ .
                                                                β

Since ϵ(d) ∼ N (0, β), it follows that:

                                                    ϵ(d)
                                                    √ ∼ N (0, 1).
                                                      β
Thus, applying the standard normal CDF, we get:

                                           Φϵ (Tw,0 (ϵ(d) )) ∼ U (0, 1),
which is a uniform distribution.
Finally, applying the inverse CDF Φ−1
                                   d of the target distribution pd results in:

                                       z (d) = Φ−1
                                                d (Φϵ (Tw,0 (ϵ
                                                               (d)
                                                                   ))) ∼ pd .
Since this holds for each d, we conclude that z ∼ p(x), proving that the transport map correctly
transforms the linear combination into the desired latent distribution.


                                                         14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Lemma 2. The transport map T{w} defined element-wise as
                                                                     K
                                (d)      (d)                                      (d)
                                                                     X
                       z (d) = T{w} ({xk }) = Φ−1
                                               d (Φϵ (Tw,0 (               wk ϵk )))
                                                                     k=1

where
                                        (d)                  (d)
                                       ϵk = Φ−1
                                             ϵ (Φd (xk )),
is the Monge optimal transport map, minimizing the quadratic Wasserstein distance W2 between the
source distribution of the weighted sum of independent elements and the target latent distribution p.

Proof. We want to show that T{w} minimizes the quadratic Wasserstein distance W2 between the
source distribution (the weighted sum of independent seeds) and the target distribution.

Step 1: General Theorem for One-Dimensional Optimal Transport For two probability mea-
sures P and Q on R with cumulative distribution functions (CDFs) FP and FQ , respectively, the
optimal transport map in the W2 sense (which minimizes the expected squared Euclidean distance) is
given by the monotone increasing function:

                                           T ∗ = FQ−1 ◦ FP .

This result follows from classical optimal transport theory for univariate distributions (see Remark
2.30 in Peyré & Cuturi (2020)).

Step 2: Applying to Our Case     For each element d, the source distribution is given by the weighted
sum:

                                                   K
                                                            (d)
                                                   X
                                          ϵ(d) =         wk ϵk .
                                                   k=1

        (d)                                                        (d)
Each ϵk is obtained by transforming the original variable xk using:

                                        (d)                  (d)
                                       ϵk = Φ−1
                                             ϵ (Φd (xk )).

              (d)
Since the ϵk are independent standard normal variables, their weighted sum follows:

                                                                    K
                                                                    X
                             ϵ(d) ∼ N (0, β),      where      β=          wk2 .
                                                                    k=1

To map this distribution to the standard normal N (0, 1), the optimal transport map for Gaussians
(derived in Section B) is:

                                                         ϵ(d)
                                          Tw,0 (ϵ(d) ) = √ .
                                                           β

Applying the standard normal CDF Φϵ to this transformation ensures that:

                                      Φϵ (Tw,0 (ϵ(d) )) ∼ U (0, 1).

By the general optimal transport theorem stated in Step 1, the optimal transport map to the target
distribution pd is then:

                                   z (d) = Φ−1
                                            d (Φϵ (Tw,0 (ϵ
                                                           (d)
                                                               ))).


                                                   15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Since each element d is mapped independently using the element-wise Monge optimal transport map,
the full transformation T{w} is optimal in the Monge sense, minimizing the quadratic Wasserstein
distance W2 .
Thus, T{w} is the Monge optimal transport map from the distribution of the weighted sum of
independent elements to the target latent distribution p, completing the proof.


B    O PTIMAL TRANSPORT MAP FOR G AUSSIAN LATENT LINEAR COMBINATIONS

In Section 4 we introduced LOL, which we use to transform random variables arising from linear com-
binations — for example interpolations or subspace projections — to the latent distribution N (µ, Σ)
via a transport map Tw,µ defined per set of linear combination weights w = [w1 , . . . , wK }, wk ∈ R.
We will now derive the distribution of a (uncorrected) linear combination y — which we show does
not match the latent distribution — followed by the distribution of the transformed variable z, which
we show does. We will then show that the proposed transport map Tw,µ is Monge optimal.
Lemma 3. Let y be a linear combination of K i.i.d. random variables xk ∼ N (µ, Σ), where y is
defined as
                                      XK
                                 y :=     wk xk = wT X,
                                                k=1

with wk ∈ R, y ∈ RD , xk ∈ RD , w = [w1 , w2 , . . . , wK ], K ∈ N>0 and X = [x1 , x2 , . . . , xK ].
Then y is a Gaussian random variable with the distribution
                                             y ∼ N (αµ, βΣ),
where
                                          K
                                          X                             K
                                                                        X
                                   α=           wk    and β =                 wk2 .
                                          k=1                           k=1



Proof. Given xk ∼ N (µ, Σ), we know that each xk has mean µ and covariance matrix Σ.
                   PK
Define y = wT X = k=1 wk xk .
First, we calculate the mean of y:

                       "K           #     K                       K                   K
                                                                                                 !
                        X                 X                       X                   X
            E[y] = E           wk xk =          wk E[xk ] =             wk µ =              wk       µ = αµ.
                         k=1              k=1                     k=1                 k=1


Next, we calculate the covariance of y:

                                                K
                                                              !       K
                                                X                     X
                          Cov(y) = Cov                wk xk       =         wk2 Cov(xk ),
                                                k=1                   k=1

since the xk are i.i.d. and thus Cov(x(i) , x(j) ) = 0 for i ̸= j.
Given that xk ∼ N (µ, Σ), we have Cov(xk ) = Σ. Therefore,

                                          K                   K
                                                                          !
                                          X                   X
                               Cov(y) =         wk2 Σ =             wk2       Σ = βΣ.
                                          k=1                 k=1

                                        PK                        PK       2
Hence, y ∼ N (αµ, βΣ) with α =            k=1 wk and β =              k=1 wk .


                                                       16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Lemma 4. Let z be defined as
                                                                        K               K
                                           α      y                     X               X
        z = Tw,µ (y)       Tw,µ (y) = (1 − √ )µ + √                α=         wk   β=         wk2
                                            β       β                   k=1             k=1

with y ∼ N (αµ, βΣ). Then z ∼ N (µ, Σ).

Proof. Given y ∼ N (αµ, βΣ), we need to show that z ∼ N (µ, Σ).
First, we calculate the mean of z:

                                                               α          1
                E[z] = E [a + By] = a + BE[y] =             1− √     µ + √ αµ = µ,
                                                                 β         β
where
                                            α                    1
                               a=        1− √         µ and B = √ I.
                                              β                   β

Next, we calculate the covariance of z:

                                                        1    1
                  Cov(z) = Cov (a + By) = BCov(y)B T = √ βΣ √ = Σ.
                                                         β    β

Since z has mean µ and covariance Σ, we conclude that

                                             z ∼ N (µ, Σ).


Lemma 5. The transport map Tw,µ defined by
                                                     α      y
                                     Tw,µ (y) = (1 − √ )µ + √
                                                      β       β
is the Monge optimal transport map, minimizing the quadratic Wasserstein distance W2 between
N (αµ, βΣ) and N (µ, Σ).

Proof. In optimal transport theory, the Monge problem seeks a transport map T : RD → RD
that pushes forward the source distribution N (µy , Σy ) to the target distribution N (µz , Σz ) while
minimizing the expected squared Euclidean distance:

                       W22 (N (µy , Σy ), N (µz , Σz )) = inf E[∥T (y) − y∥2 ].
                                                            T ∈M

The optimal transport map for Gaussian distributions is given by the affine transformation:

                                      T (y) = µz + A(y − µy ),

where A is defined as

                               A := Σ−1/2
                                     y    (Σ1/2   1/2 1/2 −1/2
                                            y Σz Σy )    Σy .
See Remark 2.31 in Peyré & Cuturi (2020).
Setting the parameters


                           µy = αµ,                                Σy = βΣ,                         (5)
                           µz = µ,                                 Σz = Σ,                          (6)


                                                      17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


we compute A:


                                                                     1
                     A = (βΣ)−1/2 ((βΣ)1/2 Σ(βΣ)1/2 )1/2 (βΣ)−1/2 = √ I.                                  (7)
                                                                      β

Thus, the optimal transport map simplifies to


                                         1                α      y
                       z := T (y) = µ + √ (y − αµ) = (1 − √ )µ + √ .                                      (8)
                                          β                β      β

Since this matches exactly with Tw,µ , we conclude that Tw,µ is the Monge optimal transport map
minimising the quadratic Wasserstein distance.



C    S PHERICAL INTERPOLANTS OF HIGH - DIMENSIONAL UNIT G AUSSIAN
     RANDOM VARIABLES ARE APPROXIMATELY UNIT G AUSSIAN

Spherical linear interpolation (SLERP) (Shoemake, 1985) is defined as
                                            y = w1 x1 + w2 x2                                             (9)
where
                                                        sin vi θ
                                              wi :=              ,                                       (10)
                                                         sin θ
vi ∈ [0, 1] and v2 = 1 − v1 and cos θ = ||x⟨x11||||x
                                                ,x2 ⟩
                                                     2 ||
                                                          , where cos θ is typically referred to as the cosine
similarity of x1 and x2 .
As such, using Equation 2, we obtain
                      K
                      X            sin v1 θ sin v2 θ                      sin2 v1 θ sin2 v2 θ
                 α=         wk =           +               and β =                 +                     (11)
                      k=1
                                    sin θ    sin θ                         sin2 θ    sin2 θ

As discussed in Section 4, for a linear combination y to be a random variable following distribution
N (µ, Σ), given that x1 and x2 do, it must be true that αµ = µ and βΣ = Σ.
A common case is using unit Gaussian latents (as in e.g. the models Esser et al. (2024) and Rombach
et al. (2022) used in this paper), i.e. where µ = 0, Σ = I. In this case it trivially follows that
αµ = µ since α0 = 0. We will now show that β ≈ 1 in this special (i.e. unit Gaussian) case.
Lemma 6. Let
                                            sin2 vθ sin2 (1 − v)θ
                                      β=            +             ,
                                             sin2 θ    sin2 θ
               ⟨x1 ,x2 ⟩
where cos θ = ∥x 1 ∥∥x2 ∥
                          and x1 , x2 ∼ N (0, I). Then β ≈ 1 for large D, ∀v ∈ [0, 1].

Proof. Since x1 , x2 ∼ N (0, I), each component x1j and x2j for j = 1, . . . , D are independent
standard normal random variables. The inner product ⟨x1 , x2 ⟩ is given by:
                                                        D
                                                        X
                                         ⟨x1 , x2 ⟩ =         x1j x2j .
                                                        j=1

The product x1j x2j follows a distribution known as the standard normal product distribution. For
large D, the sum of these products is approximately normal due to the Central Limit Theorem (CLT),
with:
                                        ⟨x1 , x2 ⟩ ∼ N (0, D).


                                                      18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025



                                                       PD
Next, consider the norms ∥x1 ∥ and ∥x2 ∥. Each ∥xi ∥2 = j=1 x2ij is a chi-squared random variable
with D degrees of freedom. For√large D, by the central limit theorem, ∥xi ∥2 ∼ N (D, 2D), and
therefore ∥xi ∥ is approximately D.
Thus, for large D,

                              ⟨x1 , x2 ⟩  N (0, D) N (0, D)                         1
                  cos(θ) =               ≈√    √ =          =N                 0,           .
                             ∥x1 ∥∥x2 ∥     D· D      D                             D

Thus, θ ≈ π/2, which implies sin(θ) ≈ 1. Therefore:
                        sin2 (vθ) sin2 ((1 − v)θ)
                  β=             +                ≈ sin2 (vθ) + sin2 ((1 − v)θ).
                          sin2 θ       sin2 θ

Using the identity sin2 (a) + sin2 (b) = 1 − cos2 (a − b),
                             β ≈ 1 − cos2 (vθ − (1 − v)θ) = 1 − cos2 (θ)

Given v ∈ [0, 1] and θ ≈ π/2 for large D, the argument of cos remains small, leading to cos(·) ≈ 0.
Hence,
                                              β ≈ 1.

Therefore, for large D, it follows that β ≈ 1.



Empirical verification To confirm the effectiveness of the approximations used above for values
of D which are typical for popular generative models that use unit Gaussian latents, we estimate the
confidence interval of β using 10k samples of x1 and x2 , respectively, where xi ∼ N (0, I). For
Stable Diffusion 3 (Esser et al., 2024), a flow matching model with D = 147456, the estimated 99%
confidence interval of β is [0.9934, 1.0067] for v = 0.5 where the error is largest. For Stable Diffusion
2.1 (Rombach et al., 2022), a diffusion model with D = 36864, the corresponding confidence interval
of β is [0.9868, 1.014].

D    L INEAR COMBINATION WEIGHTS OF SUBSPACE PROJECTIONS
In Section 4 we introduced LOL, which we use to transform latent variables arising from linear
combinations such that they maintain the the latent distribution. This transformation depends on the
weights w which specify the linear combination. We will now derive the linear combination weights
for subspace projections.
Lemma 7. Let U ∈ RD×K be a semi-orthonormal matrix. For a given point x ∈ RD , the subspace
projection is s(x) = U U T x. The weights w ∈ RK such that s(x) is a linear combination of
x1 , x2 , . . . , xK (columns of A = [x1 , x2 , . . . , xK ] ∈ RD×K ) can be expressed as w = A† s(x),
where A† is the Moore-Penrose inverse of A.

Proof. The subspace projection s(x) of x ∈ RD is defined as:
                                           s(x) = U U T x.

We aim to express s(x) as a linear combination of the columns of A = [x1 , x2 , . . . , xK ] ∈ RD×K .
That is, we seek w ∈ RK such that:
                                         s(x) = Aw.

By definition, the Moore-Penrose inverse A† of A satisfies the following properties:

      1. AA† A = A
      2. A† AA† = A†


                                                   19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


        3. (AA† )T = AA†

        4. (A† A)T = A† A

Since s(x) is in the subspace spanned by the columns of A, there exists a w such that:
                                             s(x) = Aw.

Consider a w′ ∈ RK constructed using the Moore-Penrose inverse A† :
                                            w′ = A† s(x).

We now verify that this w′ satisfies the required equation. Substituting back
                                         Aw′ = A(A† s(x))
and using the property of the Moore-Penrose inverse AA† A = A, we get:
                                          AA† s(x) = s(x).

Thus:
                                            Aw′ = s(x),
which shows that w′ = A† s(x) is indeed the correct expression for the weights.
From uniqueness of w for a given set of columns x1 , x2 , . . . , xK (see Lemma 8), we have proven
that the weights w for a given point in the subspace s(x) are given by:
                                            w = A† s(x).



Lemma 8. The weights w ∈ RK such that s(x) is a linear combination of x1 , x2 , . . . , xK (columns
of A = [x1 , x2 , . . . , xK ] ∈ RD×K ) are unique.

Proof. Suppose there exist two different weight vectors w1 and w2 such that both satisfy the equation:
                                        s(x) = Aw1 = Aw2 .

Then, subtracting these two equations gives:
                                         Aw1 − Aw2 = 0.

This simplifies to:
                                          A(w1 − w2 ) = 0.

Let v = w1 − w2 . Then:
                                               Av = 0.

Since v ∈ RK , this equation implies that v lies in the null space of A. However, the assumption that
A has full column rank (since A is used to represent a linear combination for s(x)) implies that A
has no non-zero vector in its null space, i.e., Av = 0 only when v = 0.
Therefore:
                                       v = 0 =⇒ w1 = w2 .

This shows that the weights w are unique, and there cannot be two distinct sets of weights w1 and
w2 that satisfy the equation s(x) = Aw.
Hence, we conclude that the weights w such that s(x) is a linear combination of x1 , x2 , . . . , xK are
unique.


                                                  20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


E    N ORMALITY TEST COMPARISON

We will now investigate the effectiveness of a range of classic normality tests and tests based on the
likelihood N (x∗ ; µ, Σ) as well as the likelihood of the norm statistic. We assess these methods across
a suite of test cases including for vectors with unlikely characteristics and which we know, through
failed generation, violate the assumptions of the model. In order to improve statistical power and
detect even small deviations from normality of a single instance x∗ ∈ RD , we transform the single
high-dimensional latent into a large collection of (D) i.i.d. unit Gaussian samples {ϵi }D     i=1 , and test
the hypothesis ϵ1 , . . . , ϵd ∼ N (0, 1) where ϵ = Σ−1 (x − µ), ϵ = [ϵ1 , . . . , ϵd ]. Note that rejecting
the hypothesis ϵ1 , . . . , ϵd ∼ N (0, 1) corresponds to rejecting the hypothesis that x∗ ∼ N (µ, Σ).
We compare popular alternatives for normality testing that assume a known mean and variance and
that are applicable to very large sample sizes, including Kolmogorov-Smirnov (Kolmogorov, 1933),
Shapiro-Wilk (Shapiro & Wilk, 1965), Chi-square (Pearson, 1900), and Cramér–von Mises (Cramér,
1928). We assess these methods on a suite of test cases of vectors which are extremely unlikely
under the model’s latent distribution and which we know through failed generation violates the
characteristic assumptions of the diffusion model, as well as assess the ”positive case” where the
sample does follow the latent distribution, x∗ ∼ N (µ, Σ). We report the [0.1%, 99.9%]-confidence
interval of the p-value produced by each respective method on 1e4 random samples in the stochastic
test cases. We also include the likelihood N (x∗ ; µ, Σ) and the likelihood of the norm statistic.
The results are reported in Table 2. We find that Kolmogorov-Smirnov and Cramér–von Mises both
succeed in reporting a lower 99.9th percentile p-value for each tested failure case than the 0.1th
percentile assigned to real samples. Kolmogorov-Smirnov did so with the largest gap, reporting
extremely low p-values for all failure cases while reporting calibrated p-values for the positive case.
Shapiro-Wilk, which in the literature often is regarded as one of the most powerful tests (Razali
et al., 2011), did not work well in our context in contrast to the other normality testing methods, as
it produced high p-values also for several of the failure cases. An explanation may be that in our
context we have sample sizes of tens of thousands (same as the dimensionality of the latent D), while
comparisons in the literature typically focuses on smaller sample sizes, such as up to hundreds or a
few thousand (Razali et al., 2011). The Chi-square test is a test for discrete distributions. However, it
is commonly used on binned data (Larsen & Marx, 2005) to approximate a continuous distribution as
discrete. We do this, using histograms of 30 bins. This test successfully produced very low p-values
for each failure case, but also did so for many valid samples, yielding a 0.1% of 0. The likelihood
N (x∗ ; µ, Σ) assigns high likelihoods to vectors x∗ near the mode irrespective of its characteristics.
We note that it fails to distinguish to failure cases from real samples, and in some cases assigns
much higher likelihood to the failure cases than real data. The insufficiency of the likelihood to
describe the feasibility of samples is a phenomenon present in cases of high-dimensionality and
low joint dependence between these dimensions; this is due to the quickly shrinking concentration
of points near the centre (or close to µ, where the likelihood is highest) as the dimensionality is
increased (Talagrand, 1995; Ash, 2012; Nalisnick et al., 2019). The norm statistic we note successfully
assigns low likelihoods to some failure cases, where the norm is atypical, but fails to do so in most of
the tested cases.
In summary, we find that Kolmogorov-Smirnov and Cramér–von Mises both correctly rejects the
failure cases (by assigning low p-values) while reporting calibrated p-values for real samples, with
Kolmogorov-Smirnov doing so with the lowest p-values for all failure cases.


F    I NTERPOLATION AND CENTROID DETERMINATION SETUP DETAILS

Baselines For the application of interpolation, we compare to linear interpolation (LERP), spherical
linear interpolation (SLERP), and Norm-Aware Optimization (NAO) (Samuel et al., 2023), a recent
approach which considers the norm of the noise vectors. In contrast to the other approaches which
only involve closed-form expressions, NAO involves a numerical optimization scheme based on a
discretion of a line integral. For the application of centroid determination we compare to NAO, the
                           1
                             PK
Euclidean centroid x̄ = K       k=1 xk , and two transformations of the Euclidean centroid; ”standard-
ised Euclidean”, where x̄ is subsequently standardised to have mean zero and unit variance, and
”mode norm Euclidean”, where x̄ is rescaled to have the norm equal to the (square root of the) mode


                                                     21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Test case:             x(i) ∼ N (0, I)    0     s1     n(1)   n(ramp)     0.1x(i)       x(i) + 0.1     n(duplicates) n(5% rescaled) n(1% rescaled)


Method/value
log N (x(i); 0, I)      [−5e4, −5e4]     −3e4   −5e4   −3e4    −5e4     [−3e4, −3e4] [−5e4, −5e4] [−5e4, −5e4]         [−5e4, −5e4]      [−5e4, −5e4]
log χ2(||x(i)||2; D)     [−1e1, −7]      −∞      −7    −∞        −7     [−7e4, −7e4]     [−2e1, −7]        [−7, −7]       [−7, −7]          [−7, −7]
Shapiro-Wilk              [2e−4, 1]       1       1     1      5e−72           −3
                                                                           [8e , 1]          −3
                                                                                          [8e , 1]     [1e , 8e ] [3e−105, 1e−99]
                                                                                                            −50   −19
                                                                                                                                         [2e−85, 2e−69]
Chi-square                  [0, 1]        0       0     0         0          [0, 0]   [6e−149, 9e−45]     [0, 1e−216]       [0, 0]            [0, 0]
Cramer-von-Mises          [2e−4, 1]      5e−7    0.0   5e−7     1e−8     [4e−7, 4e−7]   [2e−9, 2e−8]    [4e−12, 7e−4]   [2e−8, 6e−8]      [2e−11, 5e−9]
Kolmogorov-Smirnov        [5e−4, 1]       0       0     0      2e−105        [0, 0]    [9e−77, 9e−37] [1e−129, 7e−10] [8e−252, 2e−177]   [1e−31, 2e−12]
                                          1      2      3       4            5              6               7               8                 9


Table 2: Normality testing of latents Reported is the [0.1%, 99.9%]-confidence interval of the p-
value produced by each respective normality testing method on 1e4 random samples in the stochastic
test cases. We also report the log likelihood of the vector x(i) under the latent distribution and the
likelihood of the norm statistic. The diffusion model in Rombach et al. (2022) is used in this example.
Green colour for the respective failure test case indicate the method assigning a lower p-value or
likelihood to the failure case to at least 99.9% of the failure samples than the lowest 0.1% of real
samples, to illustrate that it was successful in distinguishing the failure samples. Chi-square assigns
low p-values to many real samples as well, which we indicate in red. The images show the generated
image from a random failure sample of the test case. In (failure) Test 1 in column 1 the latent is 0,
the mode of the latent distribution for this model N (0, I). In Test 2 it is the constant vector with
the maximum likelihood norm of the norm sampling distribution. In Test 3 the constant vector is
instead normalised to have its first two moments matching the latent’s marginal distribution. n(·)
indicate that the vector(s) of the test case is normalised to have zero mean and unit variance. In Test 4
a linspace vector [−1, . . . , 1]D have been similarly normalised. In Test 5 and 6 the normal samples
(from the left most column) have been transformed with scaling and a bias, respectively. In Test 7
random selections of 1% of the dimensions [1, · · · , D] of the normal samples have been repeated
(100 times) and subsequently normalised by n(·). In Test 8 and 9 a proportion of the dimensions of
the normal samples have been multiplied by 5 (with indices selected randomly) and the whole vectors
are subsequently normalised by n(·), where the proportion is 5% and 1%, respectively.


of χ2 (D), the chi-squared distribution with D degrees of freedom, which is the maximum likelihood
norm given that x has been generated from a unit Gaussian with D dimensions.

Evaluation sets We closely follow the evaluation protocol in Samuel et al. (2023), where we base
the experiments on Stable Diffusion 2 (Rombach et al., 2022) and inversions of random images from
ImageNet1k (Deng et al., 2009). We (uniformly) randomly select 50 classes, each from which we
randomly select 50 unique images, and find their corresponding latents through DDIM inversion (Song
et al., 2020a) using the class name as prompt. We note that the DDIM inversion can be sensitive to
the number of steps. Therefore, we made sure to use a sufficient number of steps for the inversion
(we used 400 steps), which we then matched for the generation; see Figure 15 for an illustration
of the importance of using a sufficient number of steps. We used the guidance scale 1.0 (i.e. no
guidance) for the inversion, which was then matched during generation. Note that using no guidance
is important both for accurate inversion as well as to not introduce a factor (the dynamics of prompt
guidance) which would be specific to the Stable Diffusion 2.1 model.
For the interpolation setup we randomly (without replacement) pair the 50 images per class into 25
pairs, forming 1250 image pairs in total. In between the ends of each respective pair, each method then
is to produce three interpolation points (and images). For the NAO method, which needs additional
interpolation points to approximate the line integral, we used 11 interpolation points and selected
three points from these at uniform (index) distance, similar to in Samuel et al. (2023).
For the centroid determination setup we for each class form 10 3-groups, 10 5-groups, 4 10-groups
and 1 25-group, sampled without replacement per group1 ; i.e. each method is to form 25 centroids
per class total, for an overall total of 1250 centroids per method. Similarly to the interpolation setup,
for NAO we used 11 interpolations points per path, which for their centroid determination method
entails K paths per centroid.

   1
     But with replacement across groups, i.e. the groups are sampled independently from the same collection of
images.


                                                              22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 8: Low p-values are inherited by interpolants The x-axis show the lower Kolmogorov-
Smirnov p-value of the two seed latents for each corresponding spherical interpolation in Figure 5,
and the y-axis show the p-value of the resulting interpolant. Due to the vast dynamic range of the
p-values, the scatter plot is shown in full on the left, and zoomed in on the upper-right quadrant on
the right. We note that when any of the two seed latents have a small p-value this largely tend to be
inherited by the interpolant. The Pearson correlation coefficient is 0.79 for the indicator of acceptance
(defined as 1 if the p-value is greater than 1e−3 and 0 otherwise) and 0.66 for the log10 p-values.


Evaluation We, as in Samuel et al. (2023), assess the methods quantitatively based on visual quality
and preservation of semantics using FID distances and class prediction accuracy, respectively.
The FID distances are computed using the pytorch-fid library (Seitzer, 2020), using all evaluation im-
ages produced per method for the interpolation and centroid determination respectively, to maximize
the FID distance estimation accuracy.
For the classification accuracy, we used a pre-trained classifier, the MaxViT image classification
model (Tu et al., 2022) as in Samuel et al. (2023), which achieves a top-1 of 88.53% and 98.64%
top-5 accuracy on the test-set of ImageNet.
See results in Section H.

G    A DDITIONAL QUALITATIVE RESULTS
See Figure 9 for a demonstration of subspaces of latents without the LOL transformation introduced
in Equation 3, using a diffusion model (Rombach et al., 2022) and a flow matching model (Esser
et al., 2024), respectively. The setup is identical (with the same original latents) as in Figure 12 and
Figure 1, respectively, except without applying the proposed (LOL) transformation.
See Figure 10 for additional slices of the sports car subspace shown in Figure 1.
See Figure 12 and Figure 13 for Stable Diffusion 2.1 (SD2.1) versions of the Stable Diffusion 3 (SD3)
examples in Figure 1 and Figure 6, with an otherwise identical setup including the prompts. Just like
in the SD3 examples LOL defines working subspaces. However, as expected since SD2.1 is an older
model than SD3, the visual quality of the generations is better using SD3.
See Figure 11 for an interpolation example.
In the examples above the SD2.1 and SD3 models are provided with a text prompt during the
generation. See Figure 14 for an example where the original latents ({xi }) were obtained using
DDIM inversion (from images) without a prompt (and guidance scale 1.0, i.e. no guidance), allowing
generation without a prompt. This allows us to also interpolate without conditioning on a prompt.
We note that, as expected without a prompt, the intermediates are not necessarily related to the end
points (the original images) but still realistic images are obtained as expected (except for using linear
interpolation, see discussion in Section 4) and the interpolations yield smooth gradual changes.


                                                   23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025



    x1                                                 x1


    x2                                                 x2


    x3                                                 x3


    x4                                                 x4


    x5                                                 x5


Figure 9: Without LOL transformation. The setup here is exactly the same as in Figure 12 and
Figure 1, respectively, except without the proposed (LOL) transformation (see Equation 3). The
prompt used is ”A high-quality photo of a parked, colored sports car taken with a DLSR camera with
a 45.7MP sensor. The entire sports car is visible in the centre of the image. The background is simple
and uncluttered to keep the focus on the sports car, with natural lighting enhancing its features.”.
We note that the diffusion model does not produce images of a car without the transformation, and
neither model produce anything else than visually the same image for all coordinates.

    x1


    x2


    x3


    x4


    x5


Figure 10: Additional slices of a sports car subspace. The latents x1 , . . . , x5 (corresponding to
images) are converted into basis vectors and used to define a 5-dimensional subspace. The grids
show generations from uniform grid points in the subspace coordinate system, where the left and
right grids are for the dimensions {1, 2} and {3, 4}, respectively, centered around the coordinate for
x1 . Each coordinate in the subspace correspond to a linear combination of the basis vectors. The
flow matching model Stable Diffusion 3 (Esser et al., 2024) is used in this example. See Figure 1 for
another slice of the latent subspace.


H    A DDITIONAL QUANTITATIVE RESULTS AND ANALYSIS

In Table 1 we show that our method outperforms or maintains the performance of the baselines
in terms of FID distances and accuracy, as calculated using a pre-trained classifier following the
evaluation methodology of Samuel et al. (2023). For an illustration of centroids and interpolations,
see Figure 2 and Figure 16, respectively. The evaluation time of an interpolation path and centroid,
shown with one digit of precision, illustrate that the closed-form expressions are significantly faster
than NAO. Surprisingly, NAO did not perform as well as spherical interpolation and several other
baselines, despite using their implementation, which was outperforming these methods in Samuel


                                                  24
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


             x1                                 interpolations                                   x2


LERP
SLERP
NAO
LOL


Figure 11: Interpolation. Shown are generations from equidistant interpolations of latents x1 and
x2 (in v ∈ [0, 1]) using the respective method. The diffusion model Stable Diffusion 2.1 (Rombach
et al., 2022) is used in this example.

        x1


        x2


        x3


        x4


        x5


Figure 12: Low-dimensional subspaces. The latents x1 , . . . , x5 (corresponding to images) are
converted into basis vectors and used to define a 5-dimensional subspace. The grids show generations
from uniform grid points in the subspace coordinate system, where the left and right grids are for the
dimensions {1, 3} and {2, 4}, respectively, centered around the coordinate for x1 . Each coordinate
in the subspace correspond to a linear combination of the basis vectors. The diffusion model Stable
Diffusion 2.1 (Rombach et al., 2022) is used in this example.


et al. (2023). We note one discrepancy is that we report FID distances using (2048) high-level features,
while in their work they are using (64) low-level features, which in Seitzer (2020) is recommended
against as it does not necessarily correlate with visual quality. In Table 3 we report results with all
feature settings. We note that, in our setup, the baselines perform substantially better than reported
in Samuel et al. (2023) — including NAO in terms of FID distances using the 64 low-level feature
setting (1.30 in our setup vs 6.78 in their setup), and class accuracy during interpolation (62% vs
52%), which we study below.
The number of DDIM inversion steps used for the ImageNet images is not reported in the NAO
setup (Samuel et al., 2023), but if we use 1 step instead of 400 (400 is what we use in all our
experiments) the class preserving accuracy of NAO for centroid determination, shown in Table 4,
resemble theirs more, yielding 58%. As we illustrate in Figure 5 and Figure 15, a sufficient number of
inversion steps is critical to acquire latents which not only reconstructs the original image but which
can be successfully interpolated. We hypothesise that a much lower setting of DDIM inversions


                                                   25
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


     x1


     x2


     x3


     x4


     x5


Figure 13: Low-dimensional subspaces. The latents x1 , . . . , x5 (corresponding to images) are
converted into basis vectors and used to define a 5-dimensional subspace. The grids show generations
from uniform grid points in the subspace coordinate system, where the left and right grids are for the
dimensions {1, 3} and {2, 4}, respectively, centered around the coordinate for x1 . Each coordinate
in the subspace correspond to a linear combination of the basis vectors. The diffusion model Stable
Diffusion 2.1 (Rombach et al., 2022) is used in this example.


steps were used in their setup than in ours, which would be consistent with their norm-correcting
optimization method having a large effect, making otherwise blurry/superimposed images intelligible
for the classification model.

                                          Interpolation
    Method                    Accuracy FID 64        FID 192         FID 768      FID 2048      Time
    LERP                       3.92%       63.4         278            2.18         199         6e−3 s
    SLERP                      64.6%       2.28        4.95           0.173         42.6        9e−3 s
    NAO                        62.1%       1.30        4.11           0.195         46.0         30s
    LOL (ours)                 67.4%       1.72        3.62           0.156         38.9        6e−3 s
                                     Centroid determination
    Method                    Accuracy FID 64        FID 192         FID 768      FID 2048      Time
    Euclidean                 0.286%       67.7         317            3.68         310         4e−4 s
    Standardized Euclidean     44.6%       5.92        21.0           0.423         88.8        1e−3 s
    Mode norm Euclidean        44.6%       6.91        21.6           0.455         88.4        1e−3 s
    NAO                        44.0%       4.16        15.6           0.466         93.0         90s
    LOL (ours)                 46.3%       9.38        25.5           0.455         87.7        6e−4 s

Table 3: Full table with class accuracy and FID distances using each setting in Seitzer (2020). Note
that FID 64, 192, and 768 is not recommended by Seitzer (2020), as it does not necessarily correlate
with visual quality. FID 2048 is based on the final features of InceptionV3 (as in Heusel et al. (2017)),
while FID 64, 192 and 768 are based on earlier layers; FID 64 being the first layer.


I     A DDITIONAL I MAGE N ET INTERPOLATIONS AND CENTROIDS


                                                   26
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


          x1                                     interpolations                                   x2
LERP
SLERP
NAO
LOL


Figure 14: Interpolation during unconditional generation. Shown are generations from equidistant
interpolations of latents x1 and x2 using the respective method. The latents x1 and x2 were obtained
from DDIM inversion (Song et al., 2020a) with an empty prompt, and all generations in this example
are then carried out with an empty prompt. The larger images show interpolation index 8 for SLERP,
NAO and LOL, respectively. The diffusion model Stable Diffusion 2.1 (Rombach et al., 2022) is used
in this example.


                                 Centroid determination of invalid latents
        Method                   Accuracy FID 64        FID 192 FID 768           FID 2048      Time
        Euclidean                 42.3%        25.7        59.3         1.23        170         4e−4 s
        Standardized Euclidean    46.6%        3.35        16.6         1.23        175         1e−3 s
        Mode norm Euclidean       50.6%        2.08        8.74         1.19        173         1e−3 s
        NAO                       57.7%        3.77        13.3         1.05        150          90s
        LOL (ours)                48.6%        2.96        12.5         1.22        171         6e−4 s

Table 4: Centroid determination results if we would use a single step for both the DDIM inversion
and generation (not recommended). This results in latents which do not follow the correct distribution
N (µ, Σ) and which, despite reconstructing the original image exactly if generating also using a
single step, cannot be used successfully for interpolation, see Figure 5. As illustrated in the figure,
interpolations of latents obtained through a single step of DDIM inversion merely results in the
two images being superimposed. Note that the class accuracy is much higher for all methods on
such superimposed images, compared to using DDIM inversion settings which allow for realistic
interpolations (see Table 3). Moreover, the FID distances set to use fewer features are lower for these
superimposed images, while with recommended setting for FID distances (with 2048 features) they
are higher (i.e. worse), as one would expect by visual inspection. The NAO method, initialized by the
latent yielding the superimposed image, then optimises the latent yielding a norm close to norms of
typical latents, which as indicated in the table leads to better ”class preservation accuracy”. However,
the images produced with this setting are clearly unusable as they do not look like real images.



                                                    27
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


          1 step        2 steps          16 steps         100 steps        500 steps        999 steps
Image 1
LERP
SLERP
NAO
LOL
Image 2


Figure 15: Accurate DDIM inversions are critical for interpolation. Shown is the interpolation
(center) of Image 1 and Image 2 using each respective method, after a varying number of budgets
of DDIM inversion steps (Song et al., 2020a). For each budget setting, the inversion was run
from the beginning. We note that although a single step of DDIM inversion yields latents which
perfectly reconstructs the original image such latents do not lead to realistic images, but merely visual
”superpositions” of the images being interpolated.


                                                    28
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


        x1                                       interpolations                                             x2
LERP
SLERP
NAO
LOL


Figure 16: Interpolation. Shown are generations from equidistant interpolations of latents x1 and
x2 using the respective method. The latents x1 and x2 were obtained from DDIM inversion (Song
et al., 2020a) of two random image examples from one of the randomly selected ImageNet classes
(”Chesapeake Bay retriever”) described in Section 5. The larger images show interpolation index 6
for SLERP, NAO and LOL, respectively. The diffusion model Stable Diffusion 2.1 (Rombach et al.,
2022) is used in this example.


        x1   x2         x3        x4        x5           Euclidean   S. Euclidean   M.n. Euclidean   NAO   LOL


Figure 17: ImageNet centroid determination. The centroid of the latents x1 , x2 , x3 as determined
using the different methods, with the result shown in the respective (right-most) plot. The diffusion
model Stable Diffusion 2.1 (Rombach et al., 2022) is used in this example.


                                                    29
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


   x1         x3        x5         x7        x10        Euclidean   S. Euclidean   M.n. Euclidean   NAO   LOL


   x1         x5        x10       x15        x25        Euclidean   S. Euclidean   M.n. Euclidean   NAO   LOL


Figure 18: Centroid determination of many latents. The centroid of the latents as determined
using the different methods, with the result shown in the respective (right-most) plot. Ten and 25
latents are used in the first two and second two examples (rows), respectively, and the plots show a
subset of these in the left-most plots. We noted during centroid determination of many latents (such
as 10 and 25) that the centroids were often unsatisfactory using all methods; blurry, distorted etc. For
applications needing to find meaningful centroids of a large number of latents, future work is needed.
The diffusion model Stable Diffusion 2.1 (Rombach et al., 2022) is used in this example.


                                                   30
