Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


T HE S AME BUT D IFFERENT: S TRUCTURAL S IMILAR -
ITIES AND D IFFERENCES IN M ULTILINGUAL L AN -
GUAGE M ODELING

 Ruochen Zhang1∗ Qinan Yu2∗ † Matianyu Zang1                      Carsten Eickhoff3   Ellie Pavlick1
 1                          2                         3
     Brown University           Stanford University       University of Tübingen



                                                 A BSTRACT

             We employ new tools from mechanistic interpretability to ask whether the internal
             structure of large language models (LLMs) shows correspondence to the linguistic
             structures which underlie the languages on which they are trained. In particular,
             we ask (1) when two languages employ the same morphosyntactic processes, do
             LLMs handle them using shared internal circuitry? and (2) when two languages
             require different morphosyntactic processes, do LLMs handle them using differ-
             ent internal circuitry? In a focused case study on English and Chinese multilingual
             and monolingual models, we analyze the internal circuitry involved in two tasks.
             We find evidence that models employ the same circuit to handle the same syntac-
             tic process independently of the language in which it occurs, and that this is the
             case even for monolingual models trained completely independently. Moreover,
             we show that multilingual models employ language-specific components (atten-
             tion heads and feed-forward networks) when needed to handle linguistic processes
             (e.g., morphological marking) that only exist in some languages. Together, our re-
             sults are revealing about how LLMs trade off between exploiting common struc-
             tures and preserving linguistic differences when tasked with modeling multiple
             languages simultaneously, opening the door for future work in this direction.


1        I NTRODUCTION
As large language models (LLMs) have become the undisputed state of the art for building English
language technology, there is decided interest in replicating their success across the full range of
human languages. However, very little is known about the internal structure of LLMs, and whether
such structure is conducive to acquiring broad multilingual capabilities. In fact, recent research
has produced seemingly contradictory findings, such as evidence that multilingual models adopt
language-specific representations (Tang et al., 2024; Choenni et al., 2024), while simultaneously
showing good transfer across languages even in cases that would appear to have no superficial simi-
larities that can be exploited to aid such transfer (Pires et al., 2019). Given the importance of building
technology for diverse languages, there is a need for a more precise understanding of how LLMs
represent structural similarities and differences across languages, and whether such representations
accord with our intuitive understanding of how languages work.
In this paper, we present a focused case study on the relationship between English and Chinese
processing in LLMs. We employ tools from the growing subfield of mechanistic interpretability in
order to ask whether the internal structure of LLMs show correspondence to the linguistic struc-
tures which underlie the languages on which they are trained. We focus on only the most minimal
criteria of correspondence. In particular, we ask (1) when these two languages employ the same
morphosyntactic processes, do LLMs handle them using shared internal circuitry? and (2) when
these two languages require different morphosyntactic processes, do LLMs handle them using dif-
ferent internal circuitry? While these questions seem simple, their answers are non-obvious. LLMs
readily employ overlapping circuitry for tasks that do not necessarily seem “the same” to humans
     ∗
         Equal Contribution. Correspondence to ruochen zhang@brown.edu.
     †
         Work done at Brown University.


                                                          1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


(Merullo et al., 2024), and at the same time, neural networks frequently differentiate concepts due
to surface form variation (Olah et al., 2020), even when humans would easily identify them as part
of the same abstract category.
Using English and Chinese multilingual and monolingual models, we analyze the internal circuitry
involved in two tasks, one focusing on indirect object identification (IOI) which is virtually identical
between the languages, and one which involves generating paste tense verbs that require morpho-
logical marking in English but not in Chinese. Our contributions are as follows:

       • We show that a multilingual model uses a single circuit to handle the same syntactic process
         independently of the language in which it occurs (§3.4).
       • We show that even monolingual models trained independently on English and Chinese
         each adopt nearly the same circuit for this task (§3.5), suggesting a surprising amount of
         consistency with how LLMs learn to handle this particular aspect of language modeling.
       • Finally, we show that, when faced with similar tasks that require language-specific morpho-
         logical processes, multilingual models still invoke a largely overlapping circuit, but employ
         language-specific components as needed. Specifically, in our task, we find that the model
         uses a circuit that consists primarily of attention heads to perform most of the task, but em-
         ploys the feed-forward networks in English only to perform morphological marking that is
         necessary in English but not in Chinese (§4).

Although the scope of our study is restricted to one language pair and a few phenomena, our results
provide informative insights into how LLMs trade off between exploiting common structures and
preserving linguistic differences when tasked with modeling multiple languages simultaneously.
Our experiments can lay the groundwork for future works which seek to improve cross-lingual
transfer through more principled parameter updates (Wu et al., 2024), as well as work which seeks
to use LLMs in order to improve the study of linguistic and grammatical structure for its own sake
(Lakretz et al., 2021; Misra & Kim, 2024).

2     A NALYSIS M ETHODS
In this work, we are interested in analyzing how large language models (LLMs) trained in different
languages differ in terms of the algorithms and mechanisms they invoke to handle various aspects of
language processing. To do this, we employ a few recently developed analysis techniques, described
below. These techniques are similar in spirit, but differ in certain details that matter for our analysis.
For the most part, we find converging evidence for the paper’s main claims across both techniques.
When results differ in interesting ways, we comment in our results sections.

2.1   PATH PATCHING

Path patching (Wang et al., 2023; Goldowsky-Dill et al., 2023; Vig et al., 2020; Hanna et al., 2023;
Tigges et al., 2023b) has become the most standard and widely-accepted technique within the still-
new subfield of mechanistic interpretability. The goal of path patching is to localize specific circuits
within the weights in a trained neural network that play a causal role in model behavior. The setup
requires a pair of contrastive inputs, one referred to as the clean input and the other as the corrupted
input. Path patching caches the activations for both inputs and then replaces the values of individual
heads on the clean input with the values those heads would have taken had they been run on the
corrupted input. In this way, the method aims to find the specific important head which maximally
explains the final logits. Working backward, i.e., through patching the important heads at each layer,
path patching has been used to identify full circuits that carry out the task. On its own, path patching
only identifies important heads. To gain insight into the specific functions of these heads, path
patching is usually used with logit attribution (Nostalgebraist, 2020; Belrose et al., 2023; Dar et al.,
2023; Yu et al., 2023) which projects activations into the vocabulary space, as well as with bespoke
analysis techniques invented by prior work to explain specific types of heads, such as duplicate-token
detection heads or copy heads (Wang et al., 2023).
The advantage of path patching is primarily its wide adoption, which makes it easier to trust results,
and enables us to compare with prior work in order to vet the results we are seeing (i.e., checking
that we reproduce prior work when we expect to do so). The primary downside is that the method


                                                    2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


requires careful design of the minimal pair templates. The circuit that is discovered is highly depen-
dent on how these pairs are defined. Moreover, in some of our language pairs, a comparable design
of such templates is not possible (see § 4). Thus, we explore additional techniques.

2.2       I NFORMATION F LOW ROUTES

Given the aforementioned drawbacks of path patching, we also employ the information flow routes
method (Ferrando & Voita, 2024; Tufanov et al., 2024). At each timestep, this method computes
the contribution of each head to the residual streams. These heads are then aggregated over the
entire attention block to construct a graph of the information flow that show which residual stream
at which layer is important to the current residual stream value update across different timesteps.
In this method, different from path patching where we can see circuit components across layers,
the importance can only be computed every two layers. Compared to path patching, information
flow routes have the advantage of not requiring minimal pairs of inputs. The tradeoff is that (1)
the method is new and thus we do not benefit from clear expectations about what it should yield in
certain settings and (2) this method tends to discover more generic components and larger circuits. In
our paper, we thus use both information flow routes, and path patching along with logit attribution
in conjunction for analysis at different granularity levels. Unless otherwise stated, both methods
produce results that are consistent with the primary claims we make in each experimental section.

3       TASKS WITH C OMMON L INGUISTIC S TRUCTURE ACROSS L ANGUAGES
3.1       Q UESTIONS

We first ask whether large language models (LLMs) will learn to use shared circuitry for different
languages, specifically for aspects of language processing that reflect similar structures across lan-
guages. That is: if two distinct languages use similar morphosyntactic structure but realize it using
different lexical items, will an LLM treat these as the same (handling them with the same abstract
internal circuit) or as different (handling them with distinct, language-specific circuits)? We ask this
question first in the case of multilingual models, and second in the case of monolingual models.

3.2       I NDIRECT O BJECT I DENTIFICATION (IOI) TASK

We set up our data following the original IOI paper (Wang et al., 2023). IOI consists of sentences
such as “Susan and Mary went to the bar. Susan gave a drink to [BLANK]”, in which the model is
expected to predict Mary. These names are tokenized as one single token in the models. To diversify
the data, we use fifteen different templates for the actions. We also use ChatGPT to translate the
templates and names into Chinese and have them manually inspected by native speakers.
Wang et al. (2023) identifies a specific circuit within GPT2 (Radford et al., 2019) for performing
the IOI task. At a high level, the circuit reveals that the model runs the following algorithm: first, it
identifies that there is a duplicated name (in the above example, Susan). Second, it inhibits attention
to this duplicated name. Third, it copies the remaining (non-duplicated) name. These steps are
carried out by a set of functionally specialized attention heads: Previous Token Heads, Duplicate
Token Heads, Induction Heads, S-inhibition Heads, and Name Mover Heads. Duplicate Token
Heads attend to the token position of Susan and identify this name token is mentioned twice in the
sentence. S-inhibition Heads inhibit the Name Movers’ attention to both occurrences of Susan. The
Name Mover Heads output the remaining name (Mary). More detailed descriptions of these heads
are given in prior work (Wang et al., 2023; Merullo et al., 2024). For our purposes, what is important
is whether the same heads are important and perform the same roles across languages.

3.3       M ODELS

We use BLOOM-560M1 (Workshop et al., 2022) as our multilingual model. We first evaluate
whether BLOOM is able to complete the task by checking if it always prefers the correct name
over the incorrect name. We use both accuracy and zero-rank rate to measure the model perfor-
mances. Accuracy computes the percentage of times when the probability of predicting the correct
    1
        We refer to the model as BLOOM for simplicity below.


                                                      3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 1: Attention heads activation frequency comparison between English IOI, Chinese IOI and
English control tasks. Left: Comparison between English IOI and Chinese IOI on BLOOM (with
specific functional heads in different marker types). Right: Comparison between English IOI and
English Tense on BLOOM. For pairs of heads with non-zero activation frequency, they are shaded
based on their value difference. Darker gray means smaller differences. The left graph has more
number of shaded head pairs compared to the right, indicating a greater similarity between the
activated heads.


name is higher than the other name. The zero-rank rate measures the percentage of times where
the correct name is the actual top answer. In the IOI task, BLOOM has an accuracy of 100% and a
zero-rank accuracy of 96% in English and 95% accuracy and 93% zero-rank accuracy in Chinese.
As a multilingual model, BLOOM has a high and comparable performance between Chinese and
English.
For experiments with monolingual models, we select GPT2-small (Radford et al., 2019) as our
English-only model and CPM-distilled 2 as our Chinese-only model3 . These two models have the
same architecture and contain the same number of parameters. GPT2-small has a 99.5% accuracy
and CPM has an 84.5% accuracy. The zero-rank rate for GPT2 is 97.5% meaning that the correct
name has the highest probability most of the time. CPM has a zero-rank accuracy of 57.5%. Both
models are able to complete the task while the performance of GPT2 is comparably better.

3.4    R ESULTS ON M ULTILINGUAL M ODEL

We first validate whether the English and Chinese tasks share the same important heads. We use
the information flow routes technique across 50 examples respectively in English and Chinese. We
calculate the activation frequency for every head component. If one head is highly activated4 then it
indicates this head is important for the task. In Figure 1, we observe a high overlap in the important
heads used between languages. The heads that are shown to be important to solve the task in English
are also important in Chinese. As a comparison, we compare with the BLOOM’s activated heads
   2
       https://huggingface.co/mymusise/CPM-Generate-distill
   3
       We refer GPT2-small as GPT2 and CPM for CPM-distilled below for simplicity.
     4
       Following Ferrando & Voita (2024), we set the threshold τ = 0.03. We consider a head is highly activated
if its contribution value surpasses τ .


                                                      4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


           When      当

   IO      Mary      玛丽

            and      和

   S1      John      约翰                                 Previous Token Head
                                                           4.0 5.0 6.0 6.2 7.0
  S1 +1    went      去

            to
                                   Duplicate Token Head                            Induction Head
            the      商店                                                          6.12 7.6 7.10 7.12 8.9 8.11
                                        0.9 7.8 11.10                               8.13 9.11 10.10 10.11
           store

             ,        ,
                                                                                 S-Inhibition Head               Name Mover Head
   S2      John      约翰                                                            12.6 14.6 16.5 19.4         18.7 18.8 19.8 19.11 20.8 20.9
                                                                                        21.2 22.3               20.10 20.11 20.12 21.9 21.10
           gave      把

             a       小吃
                                                                                                               Negative Name Mover
           snack                                                                                                      17.9 19.15 21.6

  END       to       给了


Figure 2: Illustration of IOI circuits of English and Chinese on BLOOM-560M model. Blue-framed
rectangles or texts are the components used in English IOI and orange-framed ones are for Chinese
IOI. Heads marked in black are the shared functional heads between English and Chinese IOI. The
English and Chinese IOI circuits are highly similar as they use most of the same components for the
same functionality to implement the algorithms.

from an unrelated task (specifically, the past tense task described in § 4.2) as a control. If the circuit
overlap is indeed indicative of the model exploiting shared algorithmic structure, we would expect
that the overlap between English and Chinese variants of the same linguistic task should be higher
than the overlap between English for two tasks that invoke dissimilar linguistic (i.e., syntactic and
semantic) structures. Indeed, compared with the high overlap between the IOI task in Chinese and
English, significantly different heads are used in the control task. To measure the similarity between
the activation patterns, we compute the Pearson Correlation Coefficient ρ (Freedman et al., 2007)
between the head activation frequency for the two task pairs. While ρ between English and Chinese
IOI task is 0.72, ρ between English IOI and English control task is 0.48. Anecdotally, we observe
that many of the heads that are shared between English IOI and control are also shared with Chinese
IOI. This suggests that these might be generically important heads which we expect to appear in a
wide range of tasks, although further work is needed to test this hypothesis quantitatively.
We continue to examine if these shared functionalities are the same as the ones defined in Wang
et al. (2023). In Figure 2, we identified functionalities of the important components in Figure 1 in
Chinese and English in BLOOM. We first use path patching to identify the components and then use
the specific metrics mentioned in Wang et al. (2023) to validate their functionalities. Both of these
experiments return highly similar results5 . The functionalities we identify align with Wang et al.
(2023). This suggests that not only is the mechanism (i.e., the heads and their functionality) shared
across English models (GPT2 and BLOOM), but moreover this same mechanism is shared nearly
exactly between Chinese and English within BLOOM.

3.5       R ESULTS ON M ONOLINGUAL M ODELS

While the cross-lingual circuit overlap in a multilingual model is not obvious (i.e., it requires ab-
stracting over patterns that manifest using disjoint sets of surface forms), it is also reasonable to
assume that the convergence stems from the model’s broader multilingual training data and objec-
tive. We thus ask whether similar patterns arise even when models are trained independently in
English and in Chinese. For this analysis, as mentioned, we use the English-only model GPT2-
small and a distilled version of the Chinese-only model CPM-Generate (Zhang et al., 2020) for their
exact same architecture.
We discover circuits with path patching which gives similar results and identifies the same compo-
nents that are important for the circuits. In both GPT2 and CPM, we identified similar circuits as
Wang et al. (2023) outlined in Figure 3. This is surprising as it suggests that at a high level, the
   5
       Detailed analysis can be found in §B.1


                                                                      5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


           When    当

    IO     Mary    玛丽

           and     和

    S1     John    约翰

           went    去
                             Duplicate Token Head    Induction Head
            to                      1.8 4.2               4.1 5.5
                                  0.1 0.10 3.0        5.5 5.8 5.9 6.9
            the    商店

           store
                                                    S-Inhibition Head    Name Mover Head
             ,     ,                                        7.0             8.9 9.10 11.7
                                                      5.5 5.8 5.9 6.9       9.9 9.6 10.0
    S2     John    约翰                                                                         Copy Suppression
           gave    把                                                                                11.2

            a      小吃
                                                                        Negative Name Mover
           snack                                                             10.7 11.10

    END     to     给了


Figure 3: English and Chinese IOI task circuits. Blue highlights are components used and inputs
for the English task in GPT2. Orange highlights are for CPM. The components with both blue and
orange frames are shared in both the English and Chinese circuits. In each of these heads, blue
texts indicate the heads in the English Circuit and orange in Chinese. The Negative Name Mover
heads appear only in the English model. Copy Suppression Head appears only in the Chinese model.
Despite trained on completely different data, models still implement largely similar algorithms to
solve tasks in different languages.


LLMs consistently converge to highly similar algorithms for solving this type of task, even when
trained on very different languages. That said, we do observe some differences between the circuits.
In GPT2, Wang et al. (2023) identifies Negative Name Mover Heads. These heads write negatively
in the direction of the name tokens. Similarly, Negative Name Mover Heads are found in the cir-
cuit in GPT2. However, we didn’t observe any Negative Name Mover Heads in CPM, instead of
observed the Copy Suppression Head. Such heads are identified by McDougall et al. (2023b) in the
Pythia model (Biderman et al., 2023). Instead of reading the information flow from the S-inhibition
head, Copy Suppression Heads read directly from the Duplicate Token Heads and suppress the logit
of the repeated token in the output. This divergence could provide a good starting point for future
work on predicting when and how specific circuitry emerges during training (see Discussion §5).

4        TASKS WITH L ANGUAGE -S PECIFIC S TRUCTURE
4.1       Q UESTIONS

The above results show that LLMs are capable of recognizing structural parallels across languages,
and even that monolingual models, trained without explicit influence from other languages, con-
verge on similar algorithms for similar structures. We next ask: what happens when languages
exhibit dissimilar structures? In reality, languages exhibit immense morphological and syntactic
variation, and there is never a perfect one-to-one correspondence between the structural elements of
different languages. A straightforward example of this phenomenon is the fact that English includes
morphological markers for tense (e.g., walk vs. walked) while Chinese does not. We thus ask, given
such variation, do LLMs adopt different circuitry for different languages, or rather do they continue
to invoke shared circuitry but employ language-specific subroutines as needed?

4.2       PAST T ENSE TASK

We construct minimum pair templates in English: “Now I verbpresent . Yesterday I also verbpast .” and
“Yesterday I verbpast . Now I also verbpresent .”. For Chinese, we construct the exact same template in
Chinese “现在我verbpresent 。昨天我也verbpast 。” and “昨天我verbpast 。现在我也verbpresent 。”6 .
To collect the verbs, we start with the English verb tense dataset from Big-bench (Srivastava et al.,
2022) and filter the verbs to only retain those with regular inflection rules. Then all English verbs are
translated, deduplicated and filtered with native speakers’ manual inspection. Notice that in Chinese,
there are no morphological markers between verbpresent and verbpast . Both of them refer to the stem
    6
        现在-Now，昨天-Yesterday, 我-I, 也-also


                                                        6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 4: (a) Head activation frequency comparison between English and Chinese past tense task
on Qwen. (b) Illustration of the tense circuits in Qwen that contains three components we focus
on: copy heads, past tense heads and feed-forward layers. (c) Top promoted tokens from copy head
and past tense head. Words highlighted in either blue and orange are expected model predictions.
Gray tokens are the specific tokens that the head promotes. Here the copy head is 21.3 and the past
tense head is 19.4. As shown in (a), the copy head has a similarly high activation frequency in both
languages whereas the past tense head is only frequently activated in English.

form of the verb. By leveraging this distinction between the English and Chinese languages, we are
able to investigate the mechanistic differences required when models process semantic equivalent
tasks but with different morphosyntactic rules. Our analysis on this task focuses more specifically
on multilingual models instead of monolingual models since they allow us to more directly observe
the structral similarities between the circuitries.

4.3    M ODELS

We use Qwen2-0.5B-instruct7 (Yang et al., 2024) for the task for its better benchmark performance
compared to BLOOM8 . The final verb collection contains 62 English verb instances and their Chi-
nese translation and themselves are both single tokens after being processed by the Qwen tokenizer.
For the English task, Qwen reaches 96.77% accuracy for the normal input and 58.06% for the zero-
rank rate. In Chinese, as there are no minimal pairs, we can only obtain a zero-rank rate of 25.81%.

4.4    R ESULTS

In Figure 4, compared to the active heads distribution on the IOI task, we notice that some early-layer
heads have high activation frequencies that are shared in both English and Chinese tasks. However,
there are much fewer shared heads in the later layers of the model. Specifically for the Chinese task,
we observe that almost no heads have high activation frequency in the later layers (Layer 19-20).
We posit that some heads that are shown to be more active in these later layers are responsible for
the additional inflection rule unique to the English task in our setting, which is unnecessary to the
Chinese task.
   7
     We refer to the model as Qwen below for simplicity.
   8
     Here we replace the model of interest from BLOOM to Qwen. Qwen is similarly a multilingual language
model but with a strong language focus on both English and Chinese. It achieves comparable performances in
English compared to BLOOM but significantly better performance in Chinese, which is necessary for extracting
the circuits. See Table 1 in the Appendix for the performance comparison.


                                                     7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


4.5    F UNCTION -S PECIFIC H EADS

Through path patching, we observe that heads 19.4 and 19.59 exert the most significant influence
on the final logits (Refer to Appendix C for details). Examining the top promoted words from the
most positive projections into the model vocabulary space (Figure 4 (c)), we find that they generally
favor past-tense words in English (e.g., was, were, and other past-tense verbs unrelated to the target
verb). Among the top-promoted tokens, we also notice Chinese verbs with the suffix ”了” (e.g., 进
行了，can be translated to “done”.), where ”了” is commonly used to indicate the completion of an
action. Even when provided with Chinese input, these heads continue to strongly encode past-tense
concepts. In Figure 4(a), head 19.4 appears frequently activated for English but not for Chinese,
suggesting that these heads are predominantly engaged in English processing rather than in Chinese.
To validate our findings, we ablate10 the heads 19.4 and 19.5 and analyze their impact on the tasks.
The rank of correct past tense verbs in English remains relatively unchanged. Whereas other non-
relevant past tense verbs move backward slightly to make spaces for the corresponding present tense
verbs, resulting in their ranks getting promoted by an average of 83.21 positions. In the Chinese task,
the rank of the correct verb moves forward by an average of 4.58 positions. Notably, after ablating
these past-tense heads and projecting the final-layer logits to the vocabulary space, present-tense
verbs emerge as the second most probable token (See Figure 12 for details). These results suggest
that in English, past-tense heads actively suppress present-tense verbs to disambiguate between verb
tenses. However, these heads do not play a similar role in the Chinese task.
In Ferrando & Voita (2024), they mention that patching can only emphasize the heads that are
important for the original tasks but not the contrastive baseline. In the past tense task, we locate
past tense heads that are in charge of disambiguating past tense verbs from present tense ones via
path patching. These heads are discovered due to the additional morphological markers between
the original and contrastive sentence. However, how do models know to promote that specific verb
(with or without the marker) without confusing it with others?
To address this question, we compute the total score of each head projecting onto either past tense
or present tense verb groups (see Appendix C.1). The primary heads identified are 21.3, 21.4,
and 21.13. We observe that these heads not only emphasize different morphological variants of the
target verb but also promote tokens that are orthographically similar or semantically related, such as
synonyms and antonyms (see Figure 12 in Appendix). These heads are crucial for both English and
Chinese tasks.
To assess their impact, we perform ablation studies on these heads and observe significant impacts
on model performance. In English, the average rank of past tense verbs drops by 141.95, while
present tense verbs experience a much larger average demotion of 221.39. This disparity suggests
that past tense verbs are less affected, possibly because the identified past tense heads remain active,
suppressing present tense verbs. As shown in Figure 12, the top-promoted words after ablation are
still predominantly general past tense verbs. For Chinese, the model performance also declines, with
verbs in general experiencing an average rank demotion of 201.82. These ablation results indicate
that the copy heads are essential for both English and Chinese tasks, while the past tense heads are
specifically activated in English, where they are crucial for task completion. However, qualitative
inspection also suggests that the semantics of the verb is not entirely decoupled from the tense,
highlighting a need for further work in order to produce more nuanced descriptions of the function
of these heads in this circuit, and in general.

4.6    F EED - FORWARD N ETWORKS

Previous work (Merullo et al., 2023) discusses the role of the feed-forward networks (FFN) in re-
trieving the correct transformation required for the past tense tasks. Specifically, these FFNs are
found in the last few layers of the models where the ranked position of the present-tense verb and
past-tense verb switch. Comparing the English and Chinese tasks, we assume that these FFN lay-
ers play a role in predicting the past-tense verb in English but remain unactivated for the Chinese
task. When we ablate out the FFNs from layer 20-24, the accuracy on the English task drops from
   9
     We use layer.head for referring to specific heads of interest.
  10
     The ablation experiments carried out in the paper are done via zero-ablation, which refers to zeroing out
the contribution of a certain head.


                                                      8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 5: Illustration of the effects of late feed-forward layers ablation (layer 20-23). Left: Zero-rank
rate changes comparison between English and Chinese past tense task. Right: Top predicted tokens
comparison for before and after ablation. We observe that English performance is significantly
impacted after ablation but Chinese is barely influenced. Qualitative results on the right show that
the correction token move backward in English but remain the top prediction in Chinese.


97.44% to 47.44% and the zero-rank rate from 58.06% to 17.74%. However, for the Chinese task,
the zero-rank rate is barely changed (25.08% to 24.19%).11
In the English example, when examining top predicted tokens qualitatively in Figure 5, we see
that the rank of the correct past tense answer visited moved back by 1 position after ablating the
MLP layers. Additionally, it is worth noting that morphological variants (E.g. visit, visits, etc.) or
semantically relevant tokens (E.g. 参观, 访问12 ) move to the top predictions. These are also tokens
that are actively promoted by the copy heads mentioned earlier. In the Chinese example, we see that
the top token as the correct prediction still remain at the same position, unaffected by the FFN layers
removal.


5    R ELATED W ORK AND D ISCUSSION

Mechanistic Interpretability We built on previous work on mechanistic interpretability to reverse
engineer the mechanism of neural network. Circuits are a significant paradigm of model analysis
that has emerged from this field. Originated from the vision model (Olah et al., 2020) and continued
to transformer language model (Meng et al., 2023; Wang et al., 2023; Hanna et al., 2023; Varma
et al., 2023; Merullo et al., 2024; Lieberum et al., 2023; Tigges et al., 2023a), works in mechanistic
interpretability try to characterize the function of individual components in completing certain tasks.
Beyond the work in understanding the role of attention heads (Olsson et al., 2022; Chen et al., 2024;
Singh et al., 2024; Gould et al., 2023; McDougall et al., 2023a), efforts are made in understanding
neurons and feed-forward network in (Vig et al., 2020; Finlayson et al., 2021; Sajjad et al., 2022;
Gurnee et al., 2023; Voita et al., 2023; Merullo et al., 2023). These studies mainly use causal methods
with minimal pairs to locate the components and their functionalities (Vig et al., 2020; Chan et al.,
2022; Geiger et al., 2021; 2023; Meng et al., 2023; Wang et al., 2023; Chan et al., 2023; Cohen et al.,
2023). However, these methods heavily rely on manual inspection, which limits their scalability to
larger models. Therefore other recent works have attempted to automate the causal process (Conmy
et al., 2023; Bills et al., 2023; Syed et al., 2023; Hanna et al., 2024) or use input attribution to trace
the subgraph of important components lifting the burden of defining minimal pairs (Ferrando &
Voita, 2024).

Multilingual Interpretablity With English-centric large language models demonstrating out-
standing generation and reasoning capabilities, more current efforts have been devoted to expanding
such capabilities to multilingual settings (Workshop et al., 2022; Yang et al., 2024; Üstün et al.,
2024; Aryabumi et al., 2024). Many works (Wu & Dredze, 2019; Winata et al., 2022) have lever-
   11
      Note we cannot compute accuracy in Chinese as there is no past-tense alternative verb form against which
to compare.
   12
      Both words can be translated to visit.


                                                      9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


aged transfer learning to boost performances on low-resource languages as an alternative to tackling
data deficiency problems. Meanwhile, language models have also been reported to suffer from the
“curse of multilinguality” (Conneau, 2019; Chang et al., 2023) where languages interfere with each
other given fixed model capacities.
Previous works have attempted to investigate cross-lingual representation alignment in BERT-based
models (Artetxe et al., 2020; Muller et al., 2021; Conneau et al., 2020; Del & Fishel, 2021; 2022;
Hämmerl et al., 2024), observing the “First Align, the Predict” paradigm (i.e. models first con-
verge cross-lingual representation to language neutrality then become language specific again across
the layers). Other works also quantify their effects on transfer learning abilities on downstream
tasks (Malkin et al., 2022; Choenni et al., 2023). More recent works such as Wendler et al.
(2024) observe that multilingual generative models go through language conversion phrases with
the reasoning process mainly conducted in English. Tang et al. (2024) specifically locates these
language-specific neurons and manipulates the output language by activating or deactivating dif-
ferent language-specific neurons. Li et al. (2024) also observe that Multi-Layer Perceptron (MLP)
is associated with how toxic concepts are encoded crosslingually. However, it remains unclear
how models utilize their components when receiving inputs in different languages: when a task is
prompted in different languages, are the underlying circuits shared or does there exist completely
separate paths? While Merullo et al. (2024) has reported the reuse of circuit components across
different tasks in the same language, no prior work has investigated this phenomenon at the cross-
lingual level. Additionally, considering language construction is unlikely to be exactly the same
across languages, how are model components used to reflect these differences? In this paper, with
the help of mechanistic interpretability techniques like path patching and information flow routes,
we provide an initial analysis to quantify to what extent model components are shared when solving
tasks for different languages.
We investigate when and how large language models (LLMs) encode structural similarities between
languages. Specifically, we ask (1) whether linguistic tasks that are structurally similar across
languages are handled by the same LLM circuitry and (2) whether linguistic tasks that employ
language-specific structure are handled by specialized LLM circuitry. Through a series of exper-
iments employing different tasks and models in both English and Chinese, we find that indeed
cross-lingual structural similarity is represented within the LLM using shared circuits which in-
voke the same algorithm independent of language. We find that these shared algorithms emerge
even in monolingual models trained on different languages. We also show that when tasks require
language-specific components–specifically past tense morphology in English–LLMs localize the
corresponding processing such that it plays a causal role in some languages but not in others.
This work builds on previous literature (Artetxe et al., 2020; Muller et al., 2021; Conneau et al.,
2020) that discuss the “First Align, then Predict” paradigm, where parameter sharing between mod-
els allows for better alignment of cross-lingual structures. Our work in generative models provide
supportive evidence by diving deeper into the specific attention and FFN weights that are responsible
for such structural similarities. Taken together, our results provide a first step in using mechanistic
analysis about LLMs’ inner workings in order to ask higher-level questions about how linguistic
structures are reflected in state-of-the-art AI models.
Our results are limited to specific tasks and datasets, future work will be necessary to replicate and
generalize our findings. Even so, our studies yield several interesting and encouraging insights which
can inspire new lines of inquiry. For example, we find that the same circuit emerges across different
models trained on entirely different languages. This raises questions about what type of structure is
shared across otherwise-dissimilar languages, or even shared universally? That is, what regularities
exist in the distribution of both English and Chinese such that they give rise to the same highly
specific functional components organized in the same way? While the details of this discussion are
specific to LLMs, the spirit shares much with long-running linguistic discussions of universality and
of learnability in language (Yang, 2004). Deeper cross-disciplinary collaborations could possibly
exploit LLMs in order to gain fresh perspectives on such questions. Another important direction
concerns practical considerations for developing state-of-the-art technology in languages other than
English. This includes not only building LLMs in other languages (Wu et al., 2024), but also ensur-
ing their safety and robustness (Yong et al., 2023; Deng et al., 2023) across languages. Insights into
specific mechanisms that are shared between languages could guide more principled approaches to
transferring parameters or anticipating failure modes. Future work could explore whether circuit
overlap like what we document here can be exploited towards these goals.


                                                  10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


6   ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
We thank Benjamin Muller, Zhaofeng Wu, Javier Ferrando, Yong Zheng-Xin, Jacob Li, Rui-Jie
Yew, members of the Lunar lab and Health NLP lab at Brown, and the anonymous reviewers for
their valuable discussions and feedback on this work.

R EFERENCES
Mikel Artetxe, Sebastian Ruder, and Dani Yogatama. On the cross-lingual transferability of
 monolingual representations. In Dan Jurafsky, Joyce Chai, Natalie Schluter, and Joel Tetreault
 (eds.), Proceedings of the 58th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Lin-
 guistics, pp. 4623–4637, Online, July 2020. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi:
 10.18653/v1/2020.acl-main.421. URL https://aclanthology.org/2020.acl-main.421.
Viraat Aryabumi, John Dang, Dwarak Talupuru, Saurabh Dash, David Cairuz, Hangyu Lin, Bharat
  Venkitesh, Madeline Smith, Kelly Marchisio, Sebastian Ruder, et al. Aya 23: Open weight re-
  leases to further multilingual progress. arXiv preprint arXiv:2405.15032, 2024.
Nora Belrose, Zach Furman, Logan Smith, Danny Halawi, Igor Ostrovsky, Lev McKinney, Stella
  Biderman, and Jacob Steinhardt. Eliciting latent predictions from transformers with the tuned
  lens, 2023.
Stella Biderman, Hailey Schoelkopf, Quentin Anthony, Herbie Bradley, Kyle O’Brien, Eric Hal-
  lahan, Mohammad Aflah Khan, Shivanshu Purohit, USVSN Sai Prashanth, Edward Raff, Aviya
  Skowron, Lintang Sutawika, and Oskar Van Der Wal. Pythia: a suite for analyzing large lan-
  guage models across training and scaling. In Proceedings of the 40th International Conference
  on Machine Learning, ICML’23. JMLR.org, 2023.
Steven Bills, Nick Cammarata, Dan Mossing, Henk Tillman, Leo Gao, Gabriel Goh, Ilya
  Sutskever, Jan Leike, Jeff Wu, and William Saunders. Language models can explain neurons
  in language models. https://openaipublic.blob.core.windows.net/neuron-explainer/
  paper/index.html, 2023.
Lawrence Chan, Adrià Garriga-Alonso, Nicholas Goldwosky-Dill, Ryan Greenblatt, Jenny
  Nitishinskaya, Ansh Radhakrishnan, Buck Shlegeris, and Nate Thomas.          Causal
  scrubbing, a method for rigorously testing interpretability hypotheses.  AI Align-
  ment Forum, 2022.       https://www.alignmentforum.org/posts/JvZhhzycHu2Yd57RN/
  causal-scrubbing-a-method-for-rigorously-testing.
Lawrence Chan, Adrià Garriga-Alonso, Nicholas Goldowsky-Dill, Ryan Greenblatt, Jenny Ni-
  tishinskaya, Ansh Radhakrishnan, Buck Shlegeris, and Nate Thomas. Causal scrubbing:
  a method for rigorously testing interpretability hypotheses [redwood research].  Align-
  ment Forum, 2023. URL https://www.alignmentforum.org/posts/JvZhhzycHu2Yd57RN/
  causal-scrubbing-a-method-for-rigorously-testing. Accessed: 17th Sep 2023.
Tyler A Chang, Catherine Arnett, Zhuowen Tu, and Benjamin K Bergen. When is multilin-
  guality a curse? language modeling for 250 high-and low-resource languages. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2311.09205, 2023.
Angelica Chen, Ravid Shwartz-Ziv, Kyunghyun Cho, Matthew L Leavitt, and Naomi Saphra. Sud-
  den drops in the loss: Syntax acquisition, phase transitions, and simplicity bias in MLMs.
  In The Twelfth International Conference on Learning Representations, 2024. URL https:
  //openreview.net/forum?id=MO5PiKHELW.
Rochelle Choenni, Dan Garrette, and Ekaterina Shutova. How do languages influence each other?
  studying cross-lingual data sharing during llm fine-tuning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.13286,
  2023.
Rochelle Choenni, Ekaterina Shutova, and Dan Garrette. Examining modularity in multilingual
  lms via language-specialized subnetworks. In Findings of the Association for Computational
  Linguistics: NAACL 2024, pp. 287–301, 2024.


                                               11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Roi Cohen, Eden Biran, Ori Yoran, Amir Globerson, and Mor Geva. Evaluating the ripple effects of
  knowledge editing in language models, 2023.
Arthur Conmy, Augustine N. Mavor-Parker, Aengus Lynch, Stefan Heimersheim, and Adrià
  Garriga-Alonso. Towards automated circuit discovery for mechanistic interpretability. In
  Thirty-seventh Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems, 2023. URL https:
  //openreview.net/forum?id=89ia77nZ8u.
A Conneau. Unsupervised cross-lingual representation learning at scale.             arXiv preprint
 arXiv:1911.02116, 2019.
Alexis Conneau, Shijie Wu, Haoran Li, Luke Zettlemoyer, and Veselin Stoyanov. Emerging cross-
  lingual structure in pretrained language models. In Dan Jurafsky, Joyce Chai, Natalie Schluter,
  and Joel Tetreault (eds.), Proceedings of the 58th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computa-
  tional Linguistics, pp. 6022–6034, Online, July 2020. Association for Computational Linguistics.
  doi: 10.18653/v1/2020.acl-main.536. URL https://aclanthology.org/2020.acl-main.536.
Guy Dar, Mor Geva, Ankit Gupta, and Jonathan Berant. Analyzing transformers in embedding
  space, 2023.
Maksym Del and Mark Fishel. Similarity of sentence representations in multilingual lms: Resolving
 conflicting literature and a case study of baltic languages. Balt. J. Mod. Comput., 10, 2021. URL
 https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:249921326.
Maksym Del and Mark Fishel. Cross-lingual similarity of multilingual representations revisited.
 In Yulan He, Heng Ji, Sujian Li, Yang Liu, and Chua-Hui Chang (eds.), Proceedings of the 2nd
 Conference of the Asia-Pacific Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics and the
 12th International Joint Conference on Natural Language Processing (Volume 1: Long Papers),
 pp. 185–195, Online only, November 2022. Association for Computational Linguistics. URL
 https://aclanthology.org/2022.aacl-main.15.
Yue Deng, Wenxuan Zhang, Sinno Jialin Pan, and Lidong Bing. Multilingual jailbreak challenges
  in large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.06474, 2023.
Javier Ferrando and Elena Voita. Information flow routes: Automatically interpreting language
  models at scale. arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.00824, 2024.
Matthew Finlayson, Aaron Mueller, Sebastian Gehrmann, Stuart Shieber, Tal Linzen, and Yonatan
 Belinkov. Causal analysis of syntactic agreement mechanisms in neural language models. In
 Chengqing Zong, Fei Xia, Wenjie Li, and Roberto Navigli (eds.), Proceedings of the 59th An-
 nual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics and the 11th International Joint
 Conference on Natural Language Processing (Volume 1: Long Papers), pp. 1828–1843, Online,
 August 2021. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2021.acl-long.144.
 URL https://aclanthology.org/2021.acl-long.144.
David Freedman, Robert Pisani, and Roger Purves. Statistics (international student edition). Pisani,
  R. Purves, 4th edn. WW Norton & Company, New York, 2007.
Atticus Geiger, Hanson Lu, Thomas Icard, and Christopher Potts. Causal abstractions
  of neural networks.   In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, vol-
  ume 34, pp. 9574–9586, 2021.     URL https://papers.nips.cc/paper/2021/hash/
  4f5c422f4d49a5a807eda27434231040-Abstract.html.
Atticus Geiger, Christopher Potts, and Thomas Icard. Causal abstraction for faithful model interpre-
  tation. Ms., Stanford University, 2023. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2301.04709.
Nicholas Goldowsky-Dill, Chris MacLeod, Lucas Sato, and Aryaman Arora. Localizing model
  behavior with path patching. arXiv preprint arXiv:2304.05969, 2023.
Rhys Gould, Euan Ong, George Ogden, and Arthur Conmy. Successor heads: Recurring, inter-
  pretable attention heads in the wild, 2023.
Wes Gurnee, Neel Nanda, Matthew Pauly, Katherine Harvey, Dmitrii Troitskii, and Dimitris Bertsi-
 mas. Finding neurons in a haystack: Case studies with sparse probing, 2023.


                                                12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Katharina Hämmerl, Jindřich Libovický, and Alexander Fraser. Understanding cross-lingual
  Alignment—A survey. In Lun-Wei Ku, Andre Martins, and Vivek Srikumar (eds.), Findings of
  the Association for Computational Linguistics: ACL 2024, pp. 10922–10943, Bangkok, Thailand,
  August 2024. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2024.findings-acl.
  649. URL https://aclanthology.org/2024.findings-acl.649.
Michael Hanna, Ollie Liu, and Alexandre Variengien. How does GPT-2 compute greater-than?:
 Interpreting mathematical abilities in a pre-trained language model. In Thirty-seventh Conference
 on Neural Information Processing Systems, 2023. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=
 p4PckNQR8k.
Michael Hanna, Sandro Pezzelle, and Yonatan Belinkov. Have faith in faithfulness: Going beyond
 circuit overlap when finding model mechanisms, 2024.
Yair Lakretz, Dieuwke Hupkes, Alessandra Vergallito, Marco Marelli, Marco Baroni, and Stanislas
  Dehaene. Mechanisms for handling nested dependencies in neural-network language models and
  humans. Cognition, 213:104699, 2021.
Xiaochen Li, Zheng-Xin Yong, and Stephen H Bach. Preference tuning for toxicity mitigation
  generalizes across languages. arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.16235, 2024.
Tom Lieberum, Matthew Rahtz, János Kramár, Neel Nanda, Geoffrey Irving, Rohin Shah, and
  Vladimir Mikulik. Does circuit analysis interpretability scale? evidence from multiple choice
  capabilities in chinchilla, 2023.
Dan Malkin, Tomasz Limisiewicz, and Gabriel Stanovsky. A balanced data approach for evaluating
  cross-lingual transfer: Mapping the linguistic blood bank. In Marine Carpuat, Marie-Catherine
  de Marneffe, and Ivan Vladimir Meza Ruiz (eds.), Proceedings of the 2022 Conference of the
  North American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language
  Technologies, pp. 4903–4915, Seattle, United States, July 2022. Association for Computational
  Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2022.naacl-main.361. URL https://aclanthology.org/2022.
  naacl-main.361.
Callum McDougall, Arthur Conmy, Cody Rushing, Thomas McGrath, and Neel Nanda. Copy sup-
  pression: Comprehensively understanding an attention head, 2023a.
Callum McDougall, Arthur Conmy, Cody Rushing, Thomas McGrath, and Neel Nanda. Copy sup-
  pression: Comprehensively understanding an attention head, 2023b. URL https://arxiv.org/
  abs/2310.04625.
Kevin Meng, David Bau, Alex Andonian, and Yonatan Belinkov. Locating and editing factual
  associations in gpt, 2023.
Jack Merullo, Carsten Eickhoff, and Ellie Pavlick. Language models implement simple word2vec-
  style vector arithmetic. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.16130, 2023.
Jack Merullo, Carsten Eickhoff, and Ellie Pavlick. Circuit component reuse across tasks in trans-
  former language models. In The Twelfth International Conference on Learning Representations,
  2024. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=fpoAYV6Wsk.
Kanishka Misra and Najoung Kim. Generating novel experimental hypotheses from language mod-
  els: A case study on cross-dative generalization. arXiv preprint arXiv:2408.05086, 2024.
Benjamin Muller, Yanai Elazar, Benoı̂t Sagot, and Djamé Seddah. First align, then predict:
  Understanding the cross-lingual ability of multilingual BERT. In Paola Merlo, Jorg Tiede-
  mann, and Reut Tsarfaty (eds.), Proceedings of the 16th Conference of the European Chapter
  of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Main Volume, pp. 2214–2231, Online, April
  2021. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2021.eacl-main.189. URL
  https://aclanthology.org/2021.eacl-main.189.
Neel Nanda and Joseph Bloom.          Transformerlens.    https://github.com/neelnanda-io/
  TransformerLens, 2022.

                                               13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Nostalgebraist. Interpreting gpt: the logit lens, 2020. URL https://www.lesswrong.com/posts/
  AcKRB8wDpdaN6v6ru/interpreting-gpt-the-logit-lens.
Chris Olah, Nick Cammarata, Ludwig Schubert, Gabriel Goh, Michael Petrov, and Shan Carter.
  Zoom in: An introduction to circuits. Distill, 2020. doi: 10.23915/distill.00024.001.
  https://distill.pub/2020/circuits/zoom-in.
Catherine Olsson, Nelson Elhage, Neel Nanda, Nicholas Joseph, Nova DasSarma, Tom Henighan,
  Ben Mann, Amanda Askell, Yuntao Bai, Anna Chen, Tom Conerly, Dawn Drain, Deep Ganguli,
  Zac Hatfield-Dodds, Danny Hernandez, Scott Johnston, Andy Jones, Jackson Kernion, Liane
  Lovitt, Kamal Ndousse, Dario Amodei, Tom Brown, Jack Clark, Jared Kaplan, Sam McCandlish,
  and Chris Olah. In-context learning and induction heads. Transformer Circuits Thread, 2022.
  https://transformer-circuits.pub/2022/in-context-learning-and-induction-heads/index.html.
Telmo Pires, Eva Schlinger, and Dan Garrette. How multilingual is multilingual BERT? In
  Anna Korhonen, David Traum, and Lluı́s Màrquez (eds.), Proceedings of the 57th Annual
  Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics, pp. 4996–5001, Florence, Italy, July
  2019. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/P19-1493. URL https:
  //aclanthology.org/P19-1493.
Alec Radford, Jeffrey Wu, Rewon Child, David Luan, Dario Amodei, Ilya Sutskever, et al. Language
  models are unsupervised multitask learners. OpenAI blog, 1(8):9, 2019.
Hassan Sajjad, Nadir Durrani, and Fahim Dalvi. Neuron-level interpretation of deep nlp models: A
  survey, 2022. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2108.13138.
Aaditya K. Singh, Ted Moskovitz, Felix Hill, Stephanie C. Y. Chan, and Andrew M. Saxe. What
  needs to go right for an induction head? a mechanistic study of in-context learning circuits and
  their formation, 2024.
Aarohi Srivastava, Abhinav Rastogi, Abhishek Rao, Abu Awal Md Shoeb, Abubakar Abid, Adam
  Fisch, Adam R Brown, Adam Santoro, Aditya Gupta, Adrià Garriga-Alonso, et al. Beyond the
  imitation game: Quantifying and extrapolating the capabilities of language models. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2206.04615, 2022.
Aaquib Syed, Can Rager, and Arthur Conmy. Attribution patching outperforms automated circuit
  discovery, 2023.
Tianyi Tang, Wenyang Luo, Haoyang Huang, Dongdong Zhang, Xiaolei Wang, Xin Zhao, Furu
  Wei, and Ji-Rong Wen. Language-specific neurons: The key to multilingual capabilities in large
  language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.16438, 2024.
Curt Tigges, Oskar John Hollinsworth, Atticus Geiger, and Neel Nanda. Linear representations of
  sentiment in large language models, 2023a.
Curt Tigges, Oskar John Hollinsworth, Atticus Geiger, and Neel Nanda. Linear representations of
  sentiment in large language models, 2023b. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2310.15154.
Igor Tufanov, Karen Hambardzumyan, Javier Ferrando, and Elena Voita. Lm transparency tool:
  Interactive tool for analyzing transformer language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2404.07004,
  2024.
Ahmet Üstün, Viraat Aryabumi, Zheng-Xin Yong, Wei-Yin Ko, Daniel D’souza, Gbemileke
  Onilude, Neel Bhandari, Shivalika Singh, Hui-Lee Ooi, Amr Kayid, et al. Aya model: An in-
  struction finetuned open-access multilingual language model. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.07827,
  2024.
Vikrant Varma, Rohin Shah, Zachary Kenton, János Kramár, and Ramana Kumar. Explaining
  grokking through circuit efficiency, 2023. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2309.02390.
Jesse Vig, Sebastian Gehrmann, Yonatan Belinkov, Sharon Qian, Daniel Nevo, Simas Sakenis, Jason
  Huang, Yaron Singer, and Stuart Shieber. Causal mediation analysis for interpreting neural nlp:
  The case of gender bias, 2020.


                                                14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Elena Voita, Javier Ferrando, and Christoforos Nalmpantis. Neurons in large language models:
  Dead, n-gram, positional, 2023.
Kevin Ro Wang, Alexandre Variengien, Arthur Conmy, Buck Shlegeris, and Jacob Steinhardt. Inter-
  pretability in the wild: a circuit for indirect object identification in GPT-2 small. In The Eleventh
  International Conference on Learning Representations, 2023. URL https://openreview.net/
  forum?id=NpsVSN6o4ul.
Chris Wendler, Veniamin Veselovsky, Giovanni Monea, and Robert West. Do llamas work in en-
  glish? on the latent language of multilingual transformers. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.10588,
  2024.
Genta Winata, Shijie Wu, Mayank Kulkarni, Thamar Solorio, and Daniel Preoţiuc-Pietro. Cross-
  lingual few-shot learning on unseen languages. In Proceedings of the 2nd Conference of the
  Asia-Pacific Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics and the 12th International
  Joint Conference on Natural Language Processing (Volume 1: Long Papers), pp. 777–791, 2022.
BigScience Workshop, Teven Le Scao, Angela Fan, Christopher Akiki, Ellie Pavlick, Suzana Ilić,
  Daniel Hesslow, Roman Castagné, Alexandra Sasha Luccioni, François Yvon, et al. Bloom:
  A 176b-parameter open-access multilingual language model. arXiv preprint arXiv:2211.05100,
  2022.
Shijie Wu and Mark Dredze. Beto, bentz, becas: The surprising cross-lingual effectiveness of bert.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:1904.09077, 2019.
Zhengxuan Wu, Aryaman Arora, Zheng Wang, Atticus Geiger, Dan Jurafsky, Christopher D Man-
  ning, and Christopher Potts. Reft: Representation finetuning for language models. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2404.03592, 2024.
An Yang, Baosong Yang, Binyuan Hui, Bo Zheng, Bowen Yu, Chang Zhou, Chengpeng Li,
  Chengyuan Li, Dayiheng Liu, Fei Huang, et al. Qwen2 technical report. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2407.10671, 2024.
Charles D Yang. Universal grammar, statistics or both? Trends in cognitive sciences, 8(10):451–456,
  2004.
Zheng-Xin Yong, Cristina Menghini, and Stephen H Bach. Low-resource languages jailbreak gpt-4.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.02446, 2023.
Qinan Yu, Jack Merullo, and Ellie Pavlick. Characterizing mechanisms for factual recall in language
  models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.15910, 2023.
Zhengyan Zhang, Xu Han, Hao Zhou, Ke Pei, Yuxian Gu, Deming Ye, Yujia Qin, Yusheng Su,
  Haozhe Ji, Jian Guan, et al. Cpm: A large-scale generativ e chinese pre-tned language model.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2012.00413, 2020.


                                                  15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A     TASK B ENCHMARK P ERFORMANCES

In this section, we present the accuracy and zero-rank rate of both the IOI tasks and Past Tense
tasks discussed in § 3 and § 4. In Table 1, we see that all monolingual models and multilingual
models perform well on the IOI tasks. For the past tense task, BLOOM obtains good performance
in English but not in Chinese. In comparison, Qwen performs slightly worse in English but much
better in Chinese. As a result, we focus on Qwen for our language-specific analysis.

                       Model           Lang.        Accuracy          Zero-Rank Rate
                                               IOI Task
                                                 normal   flipped     normal   flipped
               GPT2-small              EN          99.5        99.5     97.5       95.5
               CPM-Generate-distill    ZH          84.5        86.5     57.5       73.0
               BLOOM-560M              EN         100.0       100.0     96.0       91.0
               BLOOM-560M              ZH          95.0       100.0     93.0       99.5
                                            Past Tense Task
                                                 normal   flipped     normal   flipped
               BLOOM-560M              EN          90.3        51.6     80.7       37.1
               BLOOM-560M              ZH             -           -     12.9        1.6
               Qwen2-0.5B-instruct     EN          96.8        69.4     58.1       24.2
               Qwen2-0.5B-instruct     ZH             -           -     25.9       21.0

Table 1: Model performances for the IOI and past tense tasks. Note that we are unable to compute
accuracy for the past tense task in Chinese (marked by -) due to the absence of minimal pairs.



B     PATCHING D ETAILS OF THE IOI TASK

B.1   M ULTILINGUAL M ODELS

To extract the IOI circuits on the BLOOM model, we use the transformer-lens library (Nanda &
Bloom, 2022) and follow the practices of Wang et al. (2023). Figure 6 shows the main steps to
discover specific function heads for both English and Chinese tasks on BLOOM. Throughout each
of the steps, we notice the important heads discovered between English and Chinese are highly
similar, leading to largely overlapping circuits. Figure 7 validates the functions of the Duplicate
Token Heads, Previous Token Heads and Induction Heads found by showing their attention scores
on sequences of random tokens. Please refer to more detailed definitions and experiment designs on
these metrics in Wang et al. (2023). Additionally, we provide IOI circuits identified in Qwen2-0.5B-
instruct by carrying out the same procedure as above (shown in Figure 8).

B.2   M ONOLINGUAL M ODELS

For path patching on CPM, we add the CPM models to the transformer-lens library and follow the
same steps as the multilingual model described above. Figure 9 presents the comparison between
English and Chinese inputs when we patch to the residual stream on GPT2 and CPM respectively.
Notice that here the heatmap patterns are quite different because they are trained on completely
different data despite the same architecture (with the same number of layers and heads). Then we
perform patching to individual heads and follow Wang et al. (2023) to find out their functionalities.
Figure 9 Right shows the attention patterns of the name mover heads and copy suppression heads.
We see that mover heads 8.9 and 9.10 show copying behaviors toward the IO tokens and 11.7
shows copying behavior toward both IO and S tokens. The copy suppression head 11.2 on the other
hand suppresses the copying action of the S token. Figure 10 shows our validation experiments on
the functions of Induction heads, Duplicate Token Heads and S-inhibition heads. Specifically for
the S-inhibition head 7.0, when we ablate the head, the original name movers stop preferring the IO
tokens but start to promote both IO and S tokens.


                                                  16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 6: Path Patching steps for extracting IOI circuits on BLOOM-560M. Left: English Input.
Right: Chinese Input.


C     PATCHING D ETAILS OF T HE PAST T ENSE TASK

C.1   PATH PATCHING

For the Past Tense task, we conduct path patching with the English templates since there are no
minimal pairs available for Chinese. As shown in Figure 11 Left, two heads on layer 19 are the most


                                                17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 7: Metrics for Duplicate Token Head, Previous Token Head, and Induction Head on English
Inputs (Top) and Chinse Inputs (Bottom).


prominent. We later use head attribution and see that they are past tense heads that pay attention
to general past-tense concepts and suppress present-tense verbs (shown in Figure 12). In Figure 11
Right, we project all the head outputs to the vocabulary space and see how much each head writes
to the direction of either past tense verbs, present tense verbs in English, or verbs in Chinese. Again
we notice that the patterns are similar and a few heads on Layer 21 writes strongly to both past
tense and present tense verbs. These heads also show up in the path patching results but do not
influence the final logits as strongly as the past tense heads. By examining the top-promoted tokens
by these heads, we see that these heads promote orthographically similar or semantically adjacent
tokens. These could contain verb forms with various morphological markers as well as synonyms
and antonyms (See Figure 12). More detailed discussions can be seen in § 4.5.

C.2   A BLATION E XPERIMENTS

Figure 12 shows rank changes on the verbs and contains qualitative examples when each type of the
function-specific heads are zero-ablated. In general, we notice that past tense heads are specifically
activated for English tasks only and therefore the rank of past tense verbs moves forward when these
heads are ablated. However, the prediction does not get impacted when we ablate these heads for
the Chinese task. Copy heads, on the other hand, are important for both English and Chinese tasks.


                                                  18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                    When           当

      IO            Mary           玛丽

                    and            和

     S1             John           约翰                                         Previous Token Head
                                                                                 1.2 1.5 3.1 4.0 5.5 13.11
  S1 +1             went           去

                     to
                                                     Duplicate Token Head                                     Induction Head
                     the           商店                                                                        9.6 9.9 9.12 11.10 11.11

                                                     1.0 4.11 5.0 5.4 7.7 9.6 11.10

                                                                                                                   11.13 16.3
                                                        11.11 11.13 12.2 13.5 ...
                    store

                      ,            ,
                                                                                                             S-Inhibition Head            Name Mover Head
     S2             John           约翰                                                                         13.8 14.8 14.10 15.7
          16.0 20.11 21.5

                                                                                                              16.5 17.6 21.0 22.8            21.6 21.11 21.12
                    gave           把

                     a             小吃
                                                                                                                                         Negative Name Mover
                    snack                                                                                                                    20.7 22.6 23.12

  END                to            给了


Figure 8: Illustration of IOI circuits of English and Chinese on Qwen2-0.5B-instruct model. Blue-
framed rectangles or texts are the components used in English IOI and orange-framed ones are for
Chinese IOI.

                                        Logit Diff                                                            Name Mover                                    Name Mover
                                        Variation

                                                50%
English - GPT2


                                                25%
            Layer


                                                 0%

                                               -25%

                                               -50%



                                                                                                                                                               Copy
                                                                                                              Name Mover                                    Suppression
Chinese - CPM
            Layer


                            Head


Figure 9: Left: Path patching comparison between GPT2 on English task and CPM on Chinese task.
Right: Attention probability vs. head projection output into the IO and S space.


Past-tense, present-tense verbs in English and Chinese verbs are all demoted significantly when copy
heads are ablated, indicating these heads are shared components implementing the same functions
for both English and Chinese circuits.


                                                                                             19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                          Induction Head Score
                                                                                    Token 3   Token 11


                             Head 5.5
   Induction
    Heads


                               Input: Paul Daniel Paul Daniel Paul Daniel Paul Daniel


                                     Head 1.8                                 Head 4.2


    Duplicate
   Token Head


   S-Inhibition
      Head


Figure 10: Top: Induction head scores on random tokens and its attention pattern. Middle: Duplicate
token attention patterns on ABAB random strings. Bottom: S-inhibition head ablation effects on
name movers.


                                                     20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 11: Left: Path Patching on English Past Tense Task. Right: Verb Promotion Heatmaps for
English and Chinese Past Tense Task.


                Figure 12: Effects of Past Tense Heads and Copy Head Ablation.


                                               21
