Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


O N THE L EARN - TO -O PTIMIZE C APABILITIES OF
T RANSFORMERS IN I N -C ONTEXT S PARSE R ECOVERY
 Renpu Liu1вҲ—, Ruida Zhou2вҲ—, Cong Shen1 , Jing Yang1вҖ 
 1
  University of Virginia, 2 University of California, Los Angeles
 {pzw7bx, cong, yangjing}@virginia.edu
 ruida@g.ucla.edu



                                                   A BSTRACT

              An intriguing property of the Transformer is its ability to perform in-context learn-
              ing (ICL), where the Transformer can solve different inference tasks without pa-
              rameter updating based on the contextual information provided by the correspond-
              ing input-output demonstration pairs. It has been theoretically proved that ICL
              is enabled by the capability of Transformers to perform gradient-descent algo-
              rithms (Von Oswald et al., 2023a; Bai et al., 2024). This work takes a step further
              and shows that Transformers can perform learning-to-optimize (L2O) algorithms.
              Specifically, for the ICL sparse recovery (formulated as LASSO) tasks, we show
              that a K-layer Transformer can perform an L2O algorithm with a provable conver-
              gence rate linear in K. This provides a new perspective explaining the superior
              ICL capability of Transformers, even with only a few layers, which cannot be
              achieved by the standard gradient-descent algorithms. Moreover, unlike the con-
              ventional L2O algorithms that require the measurement matrix involved in training
              to match that in testing, the trained Transformer is able to solve sparse recovery
              problems generated with different measurement matrices. Besides, Transformers
              as an L2O algorithm can leverage structural information embedded in the train-
              ing tasks to accelerate its convergence during ICL, and generalize across differ-
              ent lengths of demonstration pairs, where conventional L2O algorithms typically
              struggle or fail. Such theoretical findings are supported by our experimental re-
              sults.


1        I NTRODUCTION

Since its introduction in Vaswani et al. (2017), Transformers have become the backbone in various
fields such as natural language processing (Radford, 2018; Devlin, 2018), computer vision (Doso-
vitskiy, 2020) and reinforcement learning (Chen et al., 2021), significantly influencing subsequent
research and applications. A notable capability of Transformers is their good performance for in-
context learning (ICL) (Brown et al., 2020), i.e., without further parameter updating, Transformers
can perform new inference tasks based on the contextual information embedded in example input-
output pairs contained in the prompt. Such ICL capability facilitates state-of-the-art few-shot perfor-
mances across a multitude of tasks, such as reasoning and language understanding tasks in natural
language processing (Chowdhery et al., 2023), in-context dialog generation (Thoppilan et al., 2022)
and in-context linear regression (Garg et al., 2022; Fu et al., 2023).
Given the significance of transformersвҖҷ ICL capabilities, extensive research efforts have been di-
rected toward understanding the mechanisms behind their ICL performance. In this context, the ICL
capability of a pre-trained Transformer is understood as the TransformerвҖҷs implicit implementation
of learning algorithms during the forward pass. Von Oswald et al. (2023a), Dai et al. (2022), and Bai
et al. (2024) suggest that these learning algorithms closely approximate gradient-descent-based op-
timizers, thus making the Transformer a universal solver for various ICL tasks. Specifically, these
works demonstrate that Transformers can approximate gradient descent steps implicitly through
     вҲ—
         These authors contributed equally to this work.
     вҖ 
         Corresponding author.


                                                           1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


some specific constructions of their parameters, enabling them to adapt to new data points during
inference without explicit re-training.
However, it is well known that gradient-descent-based algorithms are not efficient in solving com-
plicated optimization problems and thus may not be sufficient to explain the superior performance
of Transformers on a plethora of ICL tasks. A recent work (Ahn et al., 2024) suggests that instead
of gradient descent, Transformers actually perform pre-conditioned gradient descent during ICL. In
other words, it learns a pre-conditioner during pre-training and then utilizes it during ICL to expe-
dite the optimization process. Von Oswald et al. (2023b) recently demonstrates that the forward pass
of a trained transformer can implement meta-optimization algorithms, i.e., it can implicitly define
internal objective functions and then optimize these objectives to generate predictions. Similarly,
Zhang et al. (2023) show that a mesa-optimizer embedding the covariance matrix of input data can
efficiently solve linear regression tasks. Such interpretation of the ICL mechanism shares the same
essence as Learning-to-Optimize (L2O) algorithms, and motivates the following hypothesis:


 Transformer does not simply implement a universal optimization algorithm during ICL. Rather, it
   extracts useful information from the given dataset during pre-training and then utilizes such
       information to generate an optimization algorithm that best suits the given ICL task.


In this paper, we examine this hypothesis through the lens of in-context sparse recovery. Sparse
recovery is a classical signal processing problem that is of significant practical interest across various
domains, such as compressive sensing in medical imaging (Shen et al., 2017) and spectrum sensing
(Elad, 2010). Recent works show that Transformers are able to implement gradient descent-based
algorithms with sublinear convergence rates for in-context sparse recovery (Bai et al., 2024; Chen
et al., 2024b). However, empirical findings indicate that Transformers can solve in-context sparse
recovery more efficiently than gradient descent-based approaches (Bai et al., 2024). Meanwhile,
there exists a plethora of L2O algorithms that solve the classical sparse recovery problem efficiently
with linear convergence guarantees (Gregor and LeCun, 2010; Chen et al., 2018; Liu and Chen,
2019). Therefore, examining the L2O capabilities of Transformers in solving the in-context sparse
recovery task becomes a promising direction and may serve as a perfect example to validate our
hypothesis. Our main contributions are as follows.

вҖў First, we demonstrate that Transformers can implement an L2O algorithm for in-context sparse
  recovery, and theoretically prove that a K-layer Transformer as an L2O algorithm can recover
  the underlying sparse vector in-context at a convergence rate linear in K. The linear convergence
  results in this work significantly improve the state-of-the-art convergence results for in-context
  sparse recovery and validate our previous hypothesis.

вҖў Second, we show that the Transformer as an L2O algorithm can actually outperform traditional
  L2O algorithms for sparse recovery in several aspects: 1) It does not require the measurement ma-
  trices involved in training to be the same, which is in stark contrast to traditional L2O algorithms
  (Gregor and LeCun, 2010; Chen et al., 2018; Liu and Chen, 2019) for sparse recovery, and allows
  more flexibility to solve various in-context sparse recovery tasks. 2) It allows different numbers of
  measurements (i.e., prompt length) used for in-context sparse recovery, with guaranteed recovery
  performance as long as the number of measurements is sufficiently large. 3) It can extract struc-
  tural properties of the underlying sparse vectors from the training data and utilize them to expedite
  its ICL convergence.

вҖў We compare the ICL performances of Transformers with traditional iterative algorithms and L2O
  algorithms for sparse recovery empirically. Our experimental results indicate that Transform-
  ers substantially outperform traditional gradient-descent-based iterative algorithms, and achieve
  comparable performances compared with L2O algorithms that are trained and tested using data
  generated with the same measurement matrix. This supports our claim that Transformers can
  implement L2O algorithms during ICL. Besides, Transformers also demonstrate remarkable gen-
  eralization capability when the measurement matrix varies, and achieve accelerated convergence
  when additional structure is imposed on the underlying sparse vectors, supporting our theoretical
  findings.


                                                    2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


2   R ELATED W ORKS

ICL Mechanism for Transformers. Brown et al. (2020) first show that GPT-3, a Transformer-
based LLM, can perform new tasks from input-output pairs without parameter updates, suggesting
its ICL ability. This intriguing phenomenon of Transformers has attracted many attentions, leading
to various interpretations and hypotheses about its underlying mechanism. For example, Han et al.
(2023) empirically hypothesize that Transformers perform kernel regression with internal represen-
tations when facing in-context examples, and Fu et al. (2023) empirically show that Transformers
learn to implement an algorithm similar to iterative NewtonвҖҷs method for ICL tasks.
To better understand the ICL mechanism in large Transformers, existing works aim to demonstrate
the TransformerвҖҷs capability for ICL by construction, e.g., showing that Transformers can perform
gradient-based algorithms to solve ICL tasks by iteratively performing gradient descent layer by
layer. In this category, AkyuМҲrek et al. (2022) show that by construction, Transformers can imple-
ment gradient descent-based algorithms for linear regression problems. Von Oswald et al. (2023a)
construct explicit weights for a Transformer, claiming it can perform gradient descent on linear
and non-linear regression tasks. Bai et al. (2024) provide constructions such that Transformers can
make selections between different gradient-based algorithms. Ahn et al. (2024) reason the ICL ca-
pability of Transformers to their ability to implement a pre-conditioned gradient descent for linear
regression tasks, where the pre-condition matrix is learned from pre-training. Recently, Von Oswald
et al. (2023b) demonstrates that the forward pass of a trained transformer can implement meta-
optimization algorithms, i.e., it can implicitly define internal objective functions and then optimize
these objectives to generate predictions. Similarly, Zhang et al. (2023) show that a mesa-optimizer
embedding the covariance matrix of input data can efficiently solve linear regression tasks. Our
work belongs to this category, where we construct a Transformer structure that can implement an
L2O algorithm to effectively solve the in-context sparse recovery problem.

L2O Algorithms for Sparse Recovery. The L2O framework, as summarized in the review pa-
per (Chen et al., 2022), is an optimization paradigm that develops an optimization method (i.e., a
solver) by training across a set of similar problems (tasks) sampled from a task distribution. While
the training process is often offline and time-consuming, the objective of L2O is to improve the op-
timization efficiency and accuracy when the method is deployed online and any new task sampled
from the same distribution is encountered.
As a general optimization framework, L2O has demonstrated its advantage over classical static op-
timization frameworks in various optimization problems and applications. In this work, we focus
on the L2O algorithms relevant to sparse recovery here and leave more discussions on general L2O
in Appendix A. Sparse recovery, typically formulated as a least absolute shrinkage and selection
operator (LASSO), has many important applications like magnetic resonance imaging (Meng et al.,
2023) and stock market forecasting (Roy et al., 2015), thus motivates the design of efficient algo-
rithms. E.g., the iterative soft-thresholding algorithm (ISTA) (Daubechies et al., 2004) is proposed
to solve LASSO and improves over the standard gradient descent algorithm. Motivated by the ISTA
structure, Gregor and LeCun (2010) introduce the Learned ISTA (LISTA), a feedforward neural net-
work that incorporates trainable matrices into ISTA updates. Chen et al. (2018) and Liu and Chen
(2019) further propose LISTA-Partial Weight Coupling (LISTA-CP) and Analytic LISTA (ALISTA)
with fewer trainable parameters, making them easier to train. They also provide theoretical analyses
demonstrating a linear convergence rate.
We note that for these existing LISTA-type algorithms, both the training and testing tasks (instances)
are randomly generated by fixing the measurement matrix but varying the underlying sparse vectors.
In general, they cannot handle cases where the training instances are generated with varying mea-
surement matrices, or the measurement matrices during training and testing do not match.


3   P RELIMINARIES

Notations. For matrix X, we use [X]p:q,r:s to denote the submatrix that contains rows p to q and
columns r to s, and we use [X]:,i and [X]j,: to denote the i-th column and j-th row of X respectively.
In some places, we also use [X]i to denote its i-th column for convenience. We use вҲҘXвҲҘF to denote
its Frobenius norm. For vector x, we use вҲҘxвҲҘ1 , вҲҘxвҲҘ and вҲҘxвҲҘвҲһ to denote its в„“1 , в„“2 and в„“вҲһ norms,


                                                  3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


respectively. We denote by 1d and 0d the d-dimensional all-1 and all-0 column vectors, respectively.
1aГ—b and 0aГ—b denote the all-1 and all-0 matrices of size a Г— b, respectively.

3.1   T RANSFORMER A RCHITECTURE

In this work, we consider the decoder-based Transformer architecture (Vaswani et al., 2017), where
each attention layer is masked by a decoder-based attention mask and followed by a multi-layer
perception (MLP) layer.
Definition 3.1 (Masked attention layer). Denote an M -head masked attention layer parameterized
by {(Vm , Qm , Km )mвҲҲ[M ] } as Attn{(Vm ,Qm ,Km )} (В·), where Vm , Qm , Km вҲҲ RDГ—D , вҲҖm вҲҲ [M ].
Then, given an input sequence H вҲҲ RDГ—(N +1) , the output sequence of the attention layer is
                                             M
                                             X
          Attn{(Vm ,Qm ,Km )} (H) = H +          (Vm H) Г— mask Пғ (Km H)вҠӨ (Qm H) ,
                                            m=1

where mask(M) satisfies [mask(M)]i,j = 1j Mi,j if i вүӨ j and [mask(M)]i,j = 0 otherwise. Пғ(В·)
denotes the activation function.
                                                  вҖІ                  вҖІ                             вҖІ
Definition 3.2 (MLP layer). Given W1 вҲҲ RD Г—D , W2 вҲҲ RDГ—D and a bias vector b вҲҲ RD , an
MLP layer following the decoder attention layer, denoted as MLP{W1 ,W2 ,b} , maps each token in
the input sequence (i.e, each column hi in H вҲҲ RDГ—N ) to another token as
                          MLP{W1 ,W2 ,b} (hi ) = hi + W2 Пғ(W1 hi + b),
where Пғ is the non-linear activation function.

In this work, we set the activation function in Definition 3.1 and Definition 3.2 as the element-wise
ReLU function. Next, we define the one-layer decoder-based Transformer structure.
Definition 3.3 (Transformer layer). A one-layer decoder-based Transformer is parameterized by
Оҳ := {W1 , W2 , b, (Vm , Qm , Km )mвҲҲ[M ] }, denoted as TFОҳ . Therefore, give input sequence
H вҲҲ RdГ—N , the output sequence is:

                      TFОҳ (H) = MLP{W1 ,W2 ,b} Attn{(Vm ,Qm ,Km )} (H) .

3.2   I N - CONTEXT L EARNING BY T RANSFORMERS

For an in-context learning (ICL) task, a trained Transformer is given an ICL instance I =
(D, xN +1 ), where D = {(xi , yi )}iвҲҲ[N ] and xN +1 is a query. Here, xi вҲҲ Rd is an in-context
example, and yi is the corresponding label for xi . We assume yi = fОІ (xi ) + Пөi , where Пөi is an
added random noise, and fОІ is a deterministic function parameterized by ОІ. Unlike conventional
supervised learning, for each ICL instance, ОІ вҲј PОІ , i.e., it is randomly sampled from a distribution
PОІ .
To perform ICL in a Transformer, we first embed the ICL instance into an input sequence H вҲҲ
      вҖІ
RDГ—N . The Transformer then generates an output sequence TF(H) with the same size as H, based
on which a prediction ybN +1 is generated through a read-out function F , i.e., ybN +1 = F (TF(H)).
The objective of ICL is then to ensure that ybN +1 closely approximates the target value yN +1 =
fОІ (xN +1 ) + ПөN +1 for any ICL instance.
When a Transformer is pre-trained for ICL, it first samples a large set of ICL instances. For each
instance, the Transformer generates a prediction ybN +1 and calculates the prediction loss by compar-
ing it with yN +1 using a proper loss function. The training loss is the aggregation of all prediction
losses for every ICL instance used in pre-training, and the Transformer is trained to minimize this
training loss.
Previous studies about the mechanism of how Transformers performs in-context learning have at-
tracted a lot of attention recently. To start with, it is believed that the ICL capability is due to the
TransformerвҖҷs implicit implementation of learning algorithms in the forward pass. Von Oswald et al.
(2023a), Dai et al. (2022), and Bai et al. (2024) suggest that these learning algorithms closely approx-
imate gradient-descent-based optimizers, thus making the Transformer a universal solver for various


                                                      4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


ICL tasks. A recent work (Ahn et al., 2024) suggests that instead of gradient descent, Transformers
actually perform pre-conditioned gradient descent for in-context least square linear regression. In
general, these results corroborate the claim that the mechanism of the Transformer in-context learn-
ing is a L2O algorithm. We study this perspective and further provide the evidence supporting this
claim by considering a more complicated in-context problem: in-context sparse recovery.

4     T RANSFORMER AS A LISTA- TYPE A LGORITHM FOR I N - CONTEXT S PARSE
      R ECOVERY
In this section, we demonstrate that a decoder-based Transformer can implement a novel LISTA-type
L2O algorithm, specifically LISTA-VM, as detailed in Theorem 4.1, for in-context sparse recovery.
We begin by formally defining the in-context sparse recovery problem.

4.1   I N - CONTEXT S PARSE R ECOVERY

Sparse recovery is a fundamental problem in fields such as compressed sensing, signal denoising,
and statistical model selection. The core concept of sparse recovery is that a high-dimensional
sparse signal can be inferred from very few linear observations if certain conditions are satisfied.
Specifically, it aims to identify an S-sparse vector ОІ вҲ— вҲҲ Rd from its noisy linear observations
y = XОІ вҲ— + Пө, where X вҲҲ RN Г—d is a measurement matrix, Пө вҲҲ RN is an isometric Gaussian noise
vector with mean vector 0N and covariance matrix IN Г—N . Typically, we assume d вү« N , which
is the so-called under-determined case. One common assumption for the measurement matrix X
(Pitaval et al., 2015; Ge et al., 2017; Zhu et al., 2021) is that each row of the matrix is indepen-
dently sampled from an isometric sub-Gaussian distribution with zero mean and covariance matrix
diag(Пғ12 В· В· В· , Пғd2 ), denoted as Px . which guarantees the critical restricted isometry property under
mild conditions on the sparsity level (Candes and Tao, 2007). In this work, we also assume ОІ вҲ— is
randomly sampled from a distribution PОІ , which admits an S-sparse vector with random support.
A popular approach to tackling sparse recovery is the least absolute shrinkage and selection operator
(LASSO), which aims to find the optimal sparse vector ОІ вҲҲ Rd that minimizes the following loss:
                                            1
                                  L(ОІ) = вҲҘy вҲ’ XОІвҲҘ22 + ОұвҲҘОІвҲҘ1 .
                                            2
Here Оұ is a coefficient controlling the sparsity penalty. We denote the transpose of the i-th row in X
by xi , i.e., xi = [XвҠӨ ]:,i .
In this work, we study how Transformers solve the sparse recovery problem in context. For the
pre-training process, a set of in-context sparse recovery instances {(Xj , yj , xjN +1 , yN j      Ntrain
                                                                                              +1 )}j=1 is
generated according to the relationship ynj = (xjn )вҠӨ ОІ j + Пөjn for j вҲҲ [Ntrain ] and n вҲҲ [N + 1], where
ОІ j вҲј PОІ , xjn вҲј Px , and Пөjn вҲј PПө , respectively. Given the set of training instances, a pre-trained
Transformer is obtained by minimizing a certain loss function.
After pre-training, during the inference process for ICL, a sparse recovery instance (X, y, xN +1 ) is
sampled randomly according to the same distributions as in the pre-training, and the Transformer
then aims to predict yN +1 using the input (X, y, xN +1 ) without any further parameter updating.

4.2   C LASSICAL A LGORITHMS

Gradient descent is known to struggle in solving the LASSO problem due to its inefficiency in
effectively handling the sparsity constraint (Chen et al., 2018). This inefficiency has led to the
development of more specialized algorithms that can better address the unique challenges posed
by the LASSO formulation. A popular approach to solving the LASSO problem is the Iterative
Shrinkage Thresholding Algorithm (ISTA). Starting with a fixed initial point ОІ (1) , the update rule
in the k-th iteration is given by

                               (k+1)          (k)   1 вҠӨ       (k)
                             ОІ       = SОұ/L ОІ вҲ’ X (XОІ вҲ’ y) .
                                                    L
Here, SОұ/L is the soft-thresholding function defined as [SОұ/L (x)]i = sign([x]i ) max{0, |[x]i | вҲ’
Оұ/L}, and L is typically chosen as the largest eigenvalue of XвҠӨ X (Chen et al., 2018; Liu and Chen,
2019).


                                                   5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Generally, for any ground-truth sparse vector ОІ вҲ— and any given X, ISTA converges at a sublinear
rate (Beck and Teboulle, 2009). The sublinear convergence rate of ISTA is considered inefficient,
which has led to the development of various LISTA-type L2O algorithms, such as LISTA (Gre-
gor and LeCun, 2010), LISTA-CP (Chen et al., 2018), and ALISTA (Liu and Chen, 2019). These
algorithms learn the weights in the matrices in ISTA rather than fixing them.
Among them, LISTA-CP is one state-of-the-art (SOTA) method that has been well-studied. The
update rule in the k-th iteration of LISTA-CP can be expressed as

                           ОІ (k+1) = SОё(k) ОІ (k) вҲ’ (D(k) )вҠӨ (XОІ (k) вҲ’ y) ,            (4.1)

where {Оё(k) , D(k) } are learnable parameters. Compared with ISTA with fixed parameters, LISTA-
CP obtains {Оё(k) , D(k) } through pre-training. Specifically, with a fixed measurement matrix X, it
randomly samples n S-sparse vectors {ОІj }nj=1 вҲј PОІ and generates {yj }nj=1 , which is then utilized
to optimize {Оё(k) , D(k) } by minimizing the total predicting loss for {ОІj }j . Chen et al. (2018) show
that, for the same measurement matrix X, given any random instance (ОІ вҲ— , y), a pre-trained LISTA-
CP will converge to the ground-truth ОІ вҲ— linearly in K under certain necessary conditions on X.

4.3   T RANSFORMER C AN P ROVABLY P ERFORM LISTA- TYPE A LGORITHMS

Noting that LISTA-type algorithms can efficiently solve sparse recovery problems, in this section,
we argue that a trained Transformer can implement a LISTA-type algorithm and efficiently solve a
sparse recovery problem in context. To distinguish the algorithm implemented by the Transformer
with the classical LISTA-type algorithms, we term it as LISTA with Varying Measurements (LISTA-
VM). Towards this end, we provide an explicit construction of a K-layer decoder-based Transformer
as follows. A K-layer Transformer is the concatenation of K blocks, where each block comprises a
self-attention layer followed by an MLP layer. The input to the first self-attention layer, denoted as
H(1) , is an embedding of the given in-context sparse recovery instance I = (X, y, xN +1 ).
Embedding. Given an in-context sparse recovery instance I = (X, y, xN +1 ) we embed the in-
stance into an input sequence H(1) вҲҲ R(2d+2)Г—(2N +1) as follows:
                                пЈ®                                          пЈ№
                                  x1    x1 В· В· В·     xN      xN    xN +1
                                пЈҜ 0     y1 В· В· В·      0      yN       0 пЈә
                     H(1) (I) = пЈҜ
                                пЈ°ОІ (1) ОІ (1) В· В· В· ОІ (1)       (1)   (1)
                                                                           пЈә,         (4.2)
                                   1     2          2N вҲ’1    ОІ 2N  ОІ 2N +1
                                                                           пЈ»
                                  1      0   В·В·В·      1       0       1
          (1)
where {ОІi }iвҲҲ[2N +1] вҲҲ Rd are implicit parameter vectors initialized as 0d , and xi is the i-th col-
umn of the transposed measurement matrix, i.e, [XвҠӨ ]:,i . We note that a similar embedding structure
is adopted in Bai et al. (2024).
Self-attention layer. The self-attention layer takes as input a sequence of embeddings and outputs
a sequence of embeddings of the same length. Let the K-layer decoder-based Transformer feature
four attention heads uniquely indexed as +1, вҲ’1, +2, and вҲ’2. We construct these heads according
to the structure specified in Appendix C.1. This construction ensures that the self-attention layer
performs the ОІ updating inside the soft-thresholding function in Equation (4.1). Furthermore, with
our construction, the learnable matrix D(k) in LISTA-CP becomes context-dependent instead of
fixed. In the update rule implemented by the self-attention layer, this matrix becomes D(k) =
   1         (k) вҠӨ
2N +1 X(M       ) , where M(k) вҲҲ RdГ—d is fixed.
MLP layer. For the MLP layer following the k-th self-attention layer, it functions as a feedforward
neural network that takes the output of the self-attention layer as its input, and outputs a transformed
sequence of the embeddings. Recall that hi is the i-th column in an embedding sequence H. We pa-
rameterize (W1 , W2 , b) in the k-th MLP layer to let it function as a partial soft-threshold function:
                                                      [hi ]1:d+1
                                              "                       #
                                MLP(hi ) = SОё(k) ([hi ]d+2:2d+1 ) ,                                 (4.3)
                                                      [hi ]2d+2
where SОё(k) is the soft-threshold function. Essentially, the soft-threshold function is effectively
implemented by the MLP layer utilizing the ReLU activation. This can be realized by combining


                                                   6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


вҲ’ReLU(x), ReLU(вҲ’x), ReLU(x вҲ’ Оё), вҲ’ReLU(вҲ’x + Оё), and x. The implementation details of
the MLP layer can be found in Appendix C.1.
Read-out function. Given the output sequence of the Transformer TFОҳ (H(1) ), to obtain the esti-
mation ybN +1 , it is necessary to read out from the output sequence. In this work, we consider two
types of read-out functions:
Definition 4.1 (Linear read-out). Flinear is defined as the class of linear readout functions such that
                             Flinear = {F (В·) | F (h) = vвҠӨ h, v вҲҲ RD }.
Definition 4.2 (Query read-out). Fquery is defined as the class of explicit quadratic readout functions
such that
                 Fquery = {F (В· ; X)            e = hвҠӨ VX
                                  e | F (h, i; X)            e i+1 , V вҲҲ RDГ—d },
                                                              вҢҠ   2   вҢӢ,:

                                         e = [XвҠӨ xN +1 ]вҠӨ .
where i вҲҲ [N + 1] is an index number and X

Given a readout function Fv вҲҲ Flinear parameterized by v or FV вҲҲ Fquery parameterized by V, the
estimation ybi obtained by the K-layer Transformer is ybi = Fv (hK+1       bi = FV (hK+1
                                                                 2i+1 ) or y         2i+1 , 2i вҲ’ 1)
respectively.
Before we formally present our main results, we introduce the following assumptions.
Assumption 1. For x вҲј Px and ОІ вҲ— вҲј PОІ , we assume вҲҘxвҲҘ вүӨ bx and вҲҘОІ вҲ— вҲҘ1 вүӨ bОІ almost surely.
Besides, we consider the noiseless scenario where Пө = 0.

We note that the boundedness assumption over x and ОІ вҲ— ensures the robustness of the Transformer
and prevents it from blowing up under ill conditions. A similar assumption is adopted in Bai et al.
(2024). The noiseless assumption is for ease of analysis and is common in the analysis of Trans-
formers (Ahn et al., 2024; Fu et al., 2023; Bai et al., 2024). We note that the following Theorem 4.1
can be straightforwardly extended to the noisy case when the noise is bounded.
                                                                                    (k+1)
We denote the input sequence to the k-th self-attention layer as H(k) , and use ОІ2n+1 to represent
the vector [H(k+1) ]d+1:2d+1,2n+1 . Then, we state the following theorem.
Theorem 4.1 (Equivalence between ICL and LISTA-VM). With the Transformer structure de-
scribed above, under Assumption 1, there exists a set of parameters in the Transformer so that
for any k вҲҲ [1 : K], n вҲҲ [N ], we have
               (k+1)

                                (k)        1                               (k)

             ОІ2n+1 = SОё(k) ОІ2n+1 вҲ’              M(k) [X]вҠӨ 1:n,: ([X]1:n,: ОІ2n+1 вҲ’ y1:n ) ,   (4.4)
                                        2n + 1
where M(k) вҲҲ RdГ—d is embedded in the k-th Transformer layer.

The proof of Theorem 4.1 is detailed in Appendix C.2.
Remark 1. As mentioned above, matrix D(k) in the update rule of LISTA-CP in Equation (4.1) is
learned during pre-training and remains fixed across different in-context sparse recovery instances.
As a result, LISTA-CP requires the measurement matrix X to stay the same during pre-training and
                                      (k)    1
inference. In contrast, if we denote Dn = 2n+1  [X]1:n,: (M(k) )вҠӨ , then within the update rule of the
                                                                                                    (k)
LISTA-VM algorithm implemented by the Transformer, as detailed in Equation (4.4), the matrix Dn
depends on a fixed matrix M(k) after pre-training as well as on the measurement matrix X during
                                                               (k)
inference. As a result, the Transformer can adaptively update Dn for instances with different XвҖҷs,
enabling more flexibility and improved performance for the ICL tasks.

5   P ERFORMANCE OF T RANSFORMERS FOR I N - CONTEXT S PARSE R ECOVERY
In this section, we demonstrate the effectiveness of the constructed Transformer in implementing
the LISTA-VM algorithm and solving in-context sparse recovery problems. We first show that the
LISTA-VM algorithm implemented by the Transformer recovers the underlying sparse vector in
context at a convergence rate linear in K. We then demonstrate that the Transformer can accurately
predict yN +1 at the same time.


                                                  7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


5.1   S PARSE V ECTOR E STIMATION

Theorem 5.1 (Convergence
             q
                         of
                         q
                            ICL). Let Оҙ вҲҲ (0, 1), N0 = 8(4S вҲ’ 2)2 log d+logc SвҲ’log Оҙ , Оұn = вҲ’ log 1 вҲ’
2                 log dвҲ’log Оҙ     log SвҲ’log Оҙ

3
  Оі + Оі(2S вҲ’ 1)        nc
                              +        nc
                                          , where c is a positive constant and Оі is a positive constant
satisfies Оі вүӨ 23 . For a K-layer Transformer model with the structure described in Section 4.3, under
Assumption 1, there exists a set of parameters such that for any randomly generated sparse recovery
instance and any n вҲҲ [N0 : N ], with probability at least 1 вҲ’ Оҙ, we have
                                          (K+1)
                                       ОІ2n+1 вҲ’ ОІ вҲ— вүӨ bОІ eвҲ’Оұn K .

Main challenge and key ideas of the proof. Similar to the proofs in Chen et al. (2018) and Liu and
Chen (2019), the core step in proving convergence is to ensure that D(k) exhibits small coherence
with X, i.e., (D(k) )вҠӨ X вүҲ IdГ—d . In Chen et al. (2018) and Liu and Chen (2019), such a D(k) is
obtained by minimizing the generalized mutual coherence to a fixed X. However, this results in poor
generalization across different XвҖҷs. In our proof, we consider X as a random matrix and leverage
its sub-Gaussian properties to prove that if D(k) = X(M(k) )вҠӨ , where M(k) is associated with the
covariance of X, then D(k) will have small coherence with X with high probability. We defer the
detailed proof of Theorem 5.1 to Appendix D.1.
Remark 2 (Linear convergence rate). The linear convergence rate demonstrated in Theorem 5.1
is due to the incorporation of curvature information into the update rule. Specifically, the learned
matrices M(k) serve as approximations of the inverse Hessian. By leveraging the statistical proper-
ties of the problem, these matrices effectively accelerate convergence, enabling the Transformer to
mimic second-order optimization methods. This allows the Transformer to overcome the traditional
limitations of first-order methods, which are typically restricted to a sublinear O(1/K) convergence
rate unless additional assumptions are introduced (Nesterov, 2005; Nemirovskij and Yudin, 1983).
Remark 3 (Generalization across measurement matrix X). Theorem 5.1 shows that for any X sat-
isfying Assumption 1, the Transformer can estimate the ground-truth sparse vector ОІ вҲ— in-context
at a convergence rate linear in K. This is in stark contrast to traditional LISTA-CP type of algo-
rithms, which only work for fixed X. Such generalization is enabled by the input-dependent matrices
                                        (K+1)
{D(k) }k . Besides, we also note that ОІ2n+1 only depends on x1 , . . . , xn . This implies that even if
the measurement matrix X is of dimension n Г— d instead of N Г— d, when n вҲҲ [N0 , N ], the Trans-
former can still recover ОІ вҲ— accurately. Such results demonstrate the robustness of Transformers to
variations in in-context sparse recovery tasks.
Remark 4 (Effective utilization of the hidden patterns in ICL tasks). We note that the Transformer
can be slightly modified to exploit certain hidden structures in the in-context sparse recovery tasks.
Specifically, if the support of ОІ lies in a subset S вҠӮ [1 : d] with S < |S| вүӨ d, then by slightly modify-
ing the parameters of the Transformer to ensure [ОІ (k) ]i = 0 for all i вҲҲ / S, the ICL performance can
be improved by replacing all d involved in Theorem 5.1 by |S|. We defer the corresponding result
and analysis to Appendix D.2.

5.2   L ABEL P REDICTION

In Section 5.1, we have demonstrated that Transformers can successfully recover the ground-truth
sparse vector ОІ вҲ— with linear convergence by implementing a LISTA-type algorithm. In this section,
we bridge the gap between this theoretical claim and the explicit objective of in-context sparse recov-
ery, which is to predict ybN +1 given an in-context instance (X, y, xN +1 ). This gap might seem trivial
at first glance, as given xN +1 and an accurate estimate of ОІ, the label ybN +1 can be obtained through
a simple linear operation. However, we will show that, for a decoder-based Transformer, generating
ybN +1 using the predicted sparse vector ОІ, which is implicitly embedded within the forward-pass
sequences, critically depends on the structure of the read-out function.
Theorem 5.2. Under the same setting as in Section 4.3, for any n вҲҲ [N0 + 1 : N + 1], with
probability at least 1 вҲ’ nОҙ вҲ’ Оҙ вҖІ , we have
                                                K                KвҲ’1
                                            2       c4 K      2
                        вҲҘyn вҲ’ ybn вҲҘ вүӨ bx 1 вҲ’ Оі    + вҲҡ      1вҲ’ Оі
                                            3          n      3


                                                    8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


for a linear read-out function, and with probability at least 1 вҲ’ Оҙ, we have вҲҘyn вҲ’ ybn вҲҘ вүӨ c5 eвҲ’Оұn K
for a query read-out function, where c4 , c5 are constants.
We defer the proof of Theorem 5.2 to Appendix E.
Remark 5. Theorem 5.2 indicates    that adopting a linear read-out function results in a prediction
error of order O eвҲ’K + вҲҡKn eвҲ’K , which still exhibits linear convergence with respect to K. When
a query-based read-out function is employed,   the convergence rate improves to O(eвҲ’K ). However,
there exists a gap of order O вҲҡKn eвҲ’K , which diminishes as n becomes large. Empirically, we


observe the superiority of using a query-based read-out function in our experimental results, as
detailed in Section 6, and we also observe that the gap decreases as n grows.

6   E XPERIMENTAL R ESULTS
Problem setup. In all experiments, we adhere to the following steps to generate in-context sparse
recovery instances. First, we sample a ground truth sparse vector ОІ вҲ— from a d = 20 dimensional
standard normal distribution, and we fix the sparsity of ОІ вҲ— to be 3 by randomly setting 17 entries in
ОІ вҲ— to zero. Next, we independently sample N = 10 vectors form a d dimensional standard normal
distribution and then contract the measurement matrix X вҲҲ R10Г—20 (each sampled d dimensional
random vector is a row in X). We also sample an additional xN +1 from the d-dimensional standard
Gaussian distribution. We follow the noiseless setting in Bai et al. (2024) for sparse recovery, i.e.,
y = XОІ вҲ— .
Baselines. The baselines for our experiments include traditional iterative algorithms such as ISTA
and FISTA (Beck and Teboulle, 2009). We also evaluate three classical LISTA-type L2O algorithms:
LISTA, LISTA-CP, ALISTA (Gregor and LeCun, 2010; Chen et al., 2018; Liu and Chen, 2019). For
all of these algorithms, we set the number of iterations K = 12. We generate a single fixed measure-
ment matrix X. For each training epoch, we create I = 50, 000 instances from 50, 000 randomly
generated sparse vectors. During inference, we evaluate the pre-trained LISTA-type models under
two settings: (1) when the measurement matrix remains identical to that used during pre-training,
reported as вҖңFixed XвҖқ, and (2) when the measurement matrix is varying through random sampling,
reported as вҖңVarying XвҖқ.
We also evaluate the LISTA-VM algorithm introduced in Theorem 4.1, where we set the number
of iterations K = 12 as well. For each training epoch, we randomly sample 100 measurement ma-
trices, each generating 500 instances from 500 randomly generated sparse vectors, which results in
a total of 50, 000 instances. For comparison, we also meta-train LISTA and LISTA-CP using the
same training method as LISTA-VM. We do not perform meta-training for ALISTA, as the training
process of ALISTA involves solving a non-convex optimization problem for each different measure-
ment matrix X, which makes meta-training for ALISTA unrealistic. For all baseline algorithms, we
                                          PI
minimize the sparse vector prediction loss i=1 вҲҘОІbi вҲ’ ОІi вҲҘ2 using gradient descent for each epoch.
We run all baseline experiments for 340 epochs.
Transformer structure. We consider two Transformer models, i.e., a small Transformer model
(denoted as Small TF) and GPT-2. Small TF has 12 layers, each containing a self-attention layer
followed by an MLP layer. Each self-attention layer has 4 attention heads. We set the embedding
dimension to D = 42, and the embedding structure according to Equation (4.2). For GPT-2, we
employ 12 layers, and set the embedding dimension to 256 and the number of attention heads per
layer to 8. We note that the Small TF model shares the same 4-head configuration and ReLU
activation function as described in Theorem 4.1, while the configuration of GPT-2 is commonly
used in practical applications. In order to train Small TF and GPT-2, we randomly generate 64
instances per epoch and train the algorithms for 106 epochs. The training process minimizes the
                      PN +1
label prediction loss j=1 (yj вҲ’ ybj )2 . We run the experiments for Small TF and GPT-2 on an
NVIDIA RTX A5000 GPU with 24G memory. The training time for Small TF is approximately 8
hours, while the training time for GPT-2 is around 12 hours.
Results. We test the prediction performance of the baseline algorithms and Transformers on a sparse
recovery instance (X, y, xN +1 ), and plot the label prediction loss in Figure 1.
We first do not impose any support constraint on ОІ. We start with the general setting where the
testing instance is randomly generated (Varying X). As shown in Figure 1a, GPT-2 outperforms

                                                  9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


     ISTA                                                                    ISTA                                                                                                     Linear Readout
                                                                                                                                                  3.0                                 Quad Readout
    FISTA                                                                   FISTA                                                                                                     Quad Readout
                                                                                                                                                  2.5
    LISTA                                                                   LISTA

LISTA-CP                                                                 LISTA-CP
                                                                                                                                                  2.0


                                                                                                                                          yn yn
  ALISTA                                                                   ALISTA                                                                 1.5
LISTA-VM                                                                 LISTA-VM                                                                 1.0
                                                                      LISTA-VM-SS
                                                  Varying X
Small TF
                                                  Fixed X
                                                                          Small TF                                    Varying X                   0.5
                                                                                                                      Fixed X
    GPT-2                                         Meta trained              GPT-2                                     Meta trained
                                                                                                                                                  0.0
        0.2   0.3   0.5       1          2                       10                  0.05   0.2     0.5     1     2                  10                 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 101112131415161718192021
                          Label prediction loss                                             Label prediction loss                                                            n

    (a) Without support constraints                                          (b) With support constraints                                   (c) Without support constraints

Figure 1: Experimental results for sparse recovery. (a) S = 3. (b) S = 3, and the support is restricted to be
within the first 10 entries. (c) Prediction with different read-outs functions.


Small TF, followed by LISTA-VM, which outperforms iterative algorithms FISTA and ISTA, while
the classical LISTA-type algorithms LISTA, LISTA-CP, and ALISTA perform the worst. Such re-
sults highlight the efficiency of LISTA-VM, Small TF and GPT-2 in solving ICL sparse recovery
problems, corroborating our theoretical result in Theorem 5.1. Meanwhile, classical LISTA-type
algorithms cannot handle mismatches between the measurement matrices in pre-training and test-
ing, leading to poor prediction performance. When X during testing is fixed to be the same as
that in pre-training, all LISTA-type algorithms achieve performances comparable with Small TF.
For meta-trained LISTA and LISTA-CP, the corresponding prediction loss (denoted by red marks in
Figure 1a) are still much higher than that under LISTA-VM. This indicates that meta-training can-
not help those classical LISTA-type algorithms achieve performances comparable with LISTA-VM,
further corroborating the strong generalization capability induced by the constructed Transformer.
Next, we impose an additional constraint on the support of the sparse vectors. For in-context sparse
recovery instances used in both pre-training and testing, we set the support of the sparse vector ОІ
to the first 10 entries, i.e., S = {1, 2, В· В· В· , 10}. As observed in Figure 1b, Small TF and GPT-
2 significantly improve their performances in Figure 1a, while other baseline algorithms do not
exhibit significant performance improvements. In Figure 1b, we present the experimental results for
a support-selected version of LISTA-VM, referred to as LISTA-VM-SS. This algorithm is a simple
variation of LISTA-VM, where we incorporate prior knowledge of the support by setting all columns
in X whose indices are not in the prior support set to be zero vectors. As we claim in Remark 4
and Corollary D.1, a Transformer could perform this LISTA-VM-SS by utilizing prior knowledge
of the support. Our results show that the LISTA-VM-SS achieves an in-context prediction error
of approximately 0.07, which is almost 10Г— better than the standard version of LISTA-VM and is
comparable to the prediction error of Small TF. This empirical finding corroborates Remark 4.
Finally, we examine the label prediction loss under Small TF with three types of read-out functions,
i.e., linear read-out function (Linear Readout), query read-out function (Query Readout), and an-
other quadratic read-out function with parameters selected according to the proof of Theorem 5.2
(Query ReadoutвҖ  ). In Figure 1c, we observe that the label prediction error is lower with the query
read-out functions than with the linear read-out function. When n becomes large, the gap between
the linear read-out function and the other two types of query read-out functions becomes insignif-
icant, which is consistent with our theoretical result in Theorem 5.2. Meanwhile, those two query
read-out functions behave very similarly.

7       C ONCLUSION
In this work, we demonstrated that TransformersвҖҷ known ICL capabilities could be understood as
performing L2O algorithms. Specifically, we showed that for in-context sparse recovery tasks,
Transformers can execute the LISTA-VM algorithm with a provable linear convergence rate. Our
results highlight that, unlike existing LISTA-type algorithms, which are limited to solving individ-
ual sparse recovery problems with fixed measurement matrices, Transformers can address a general
class of sparse recovery problems with varying measurement matrices during inference without re-
quiring parameter updates. Experimentally, we demonstrated that Transformers can leverage prior
knowledge from training tasks and generalize effectively across different lengths of demonstration
pairs, where traditional L2O methods typically fail.


                                                                                             10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The work of R. Liu and J. Yang was supported in part by the U.S. National Science Foundation un-
der the grants ECCS-2133170 and ECCS-2318759. The work of R. Zhou was supported in part by
NSF grants 2139304, 2146838 and the Army Research Laboratory grant under Cooperative Agree-
ment W911NF-17-2-0196. The work of C. Shen was supported in part by the U.S. National Sci-
ence Foundation under the grants CNS-2002902, ECCS-2029978, ECCS-2143559, ECCS-2033671,
CPS-2313110, and ECCS-2332060.

R EFERENCES
Ahn, K., Cheng, X., Daneshmand, H., and Sra, S. (2024). Transformers learn to implement pre-
  conditioned gradient descent for in-context learning. Advances in Neural Information Processing
  Systems, 36.
AkyuМҲrek, E., Schuurmans, D., Andreas, J., Ma, T., and Zhou, D. (2022). What learning algorithm is
  in-context learning? investigations with linear models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2211.15661.
Andrychowicz, M., Denil, M., Gomez, S., Hoffman, M. W., Pfau, D., Schaul, T., Shillingford, B.,
  and de Freitas, N. (2016). Learning to learn by gradient descent by gradient descent.
Bai, Y., Chen, F., Wang, H., Xiong, C., and Mei, S. (2024). Transformers as statisticians: Provable
  in-context learning with in-context algorithm selection. Advances in neural information process-
  ing systems, 36.
Beck, A. and Teboulle, M. (2009). A fast iterative shrinkage-thresholding algorithm for linear
  inverse problems. SIAM journal on imaging sciences, 2(1):183вҖ“202.
Brown, T., Mann, B., Ryder, N., Subbiah, M., Kaplan, J. D., Dhariwal, P., Neelakantan, A., Shyam,
  P., Sastry, G., Askell, A., et al. (2020). Language models are few-shot learners. Advances in
  neural information processing systems, 33:1877вҖ“1901.
Candes, E. and Tao, T. (2007). The Dantzig selector: Statistical estimation when p is much larger
  than n. The Annals of Statistics, 35(6):2313 вҖ“ 2351.
Chen, L., Lu, K., Rajeswaran, A., Lee, K., Grover, A., Laskin, M., Abbeel, P., Srinivas, A., and Mor-
  datch, I. (2021). Decision transformer: Reinforcement learning via sequence modeling. Advances
  in neural information processing systems, 34:15084вҖ“15097.
Chen, S. and Li, Y. (2024).      Provably learning a multi-head attention layer.     arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2402.04084.
Chen, S., Sheen, H., Wang, T., and Yang, Z. (2024a). Training dynamics of multi-head soft-
  max attention for in-context learning: Emergence, convergence, and optimality. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2402.19442.
Chen, T., Chen, X., Chen, W., Heaton, H., Liu, J., Wang, Z., and Yin, W. (2022). Learning to
  optimize: A primer and a benchmark. Journal of Machine Learning Research, 23(189):1вҖ“59.
Chen, X., Liu, J., Wang, Z., and Yin, W. (2018). Theoretical linear convergence of unfolded ista and
  its practical weights and thresholds. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 31.
Chen, X., Zhao, L., and Zou, D. (2024b). How transformers utilize multi-head attention in in-context
  learning? a case study on sparse linear regression. arXiv preprint arXiv:2408.04532.
Cheng, X., Chen, Y., and Sra, S. (2023). Transformers implement functional gradient descent to
  learn non-linear functions in context. arXiv preprint arXiv:2312.06528.
Chowdhery, A., Narang, S., Devlin, J., Bosma, M., Mishra, G., Roberts, A., Barham, P., Chung,
  H. W., Sutton, C., Gehrmann, S., et al. (2023). Palm: Scaling language modeling with pathways.
  Journal of Machine Learning Research, 24(240):1вҖ“113.
Cui, Y., Ren, J., He, P., Tang, J., and Xing, Y. (2024). Superiority of multi-head attention in in-
  context linear regression. arXiv preprint arXiv:2401.17426.


                                                 11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Dai, D., Sun, Y., Dong, L., Hao, Y., Ma, S., Sui, Z., and Wei, F. (2022). Why can gpt learn in-
  context? language models implicitly perform gradient descent as meta-optimizers. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2212.10559.
Daubechies, I., Defrise, M., and De Mol, C. (2004). An iterative thresholding algorithm for linear
  inverse problems with a sparsity constraint. Communications on Pure and Applied Mathematics:
  A Journal Issued by the Courant Institute of Mathematical Sciences, 57(11):1413вҖ“1457.
Deora, P., Ghaderi, R., Taheri, H., and Thrampoulidis, C. (2023). On the optimization and general-
  ization of multi-head attention. arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.12680.
Devlin, J. (2018). Bert: Pre-training of deep bidirectional transformers for language understanding.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:1810.04805.
Dosovitskiy, A. (2020). An image is worth 16x16 words: Transformers for image recognition at
  scale. arXiv preprint arXiv:2010.11929.
Elad, M. (2010). Sparse and redundant representations: from theory to applications in signal and
  image processing. Springer Science & Business Media.
Finn, C., Abbeel, P., and Levine, S. (2017). Model-agnostic meta-learning for fast adaptation of
  deep networks. In International conference on machine learning, pages 1126вҖ“1135. PMLR.
Fu, D., Chen, T.-Q., Jia, R., and Sharan, V. (2023). Transformers learn higher-order optimization
  methods for in-context learning: A study with linear models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.17086.
Garg, S., Tsipras, D., Liang, P. S., and Valiant, G. (2022). What can transformers learn in-context?
  a case study of simple function classes. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
  35:30583вҖ“30598.
Ge, R., Jin, C., and Zheng, Y. (2017). No spurious local minima in nonconvex low rank problems: A
  unified geometric analysis. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pages 1233вҖ“1242.
  PMLR.
Gregor, K. and LeCun, Y. (2010). Learning fast approximations of sparse coding. In Proceedings of
  the 27th international conference on international conference on machine learning, pages 399вҖ“
  406.
Han, C., Wang, Z., Zhao, H., and Ji, H. (2023). Explaining emergent in-context learning as kernel
  regression. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.12766.
Hospedales, T., Antoniou, A., Micaelli, P., and Storkey, A. (2021). Meta-learning in neural networks:
  A survey. IEEE transactions on pattern analysis and machine intelligence, 44(9):5149вҖ“5169.
Hruby, P., Duff, T., Leykin, A., and Pajdla, T. (2022). Learning to solve hard minimal problems.
  In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pages
  5532вҖ“5542.
Huang, R., Liang, Y., and Yang, J. (2024). Non-asymptotic convergence of training transformers for
  next-token prediction. arXiv preprint arXiv:2409.17335.
Huang, Y., Cheng, Y., and Liang, Y. (2023). In-context convergence of transformers. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2310.05249.
Kim, J. and Suzuki, T. (2024). Transformers learn nonlinear features in context: Nonconvex mean-
  field dynamics on the attention landscape. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.01258.
Li, H., Wang, M., Liu, S., and Chen, P.-Y. (2023). A theoretical understanding of shallow vision
  transformers: Learning, generalization, and sample complexity. arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.06015.
Li, H., Wang, M., Lu, S., Cui, X., and Chen, P.-Y. (2024a). Training nonlinear transformers for
  efficient in-context learning: A theoretical learning and generalization analysis. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2402.15607.
Li, K. and Malik, J. (2016). Learning to optimize. arXiv preprint arXiv:1606.01885.

                                                 12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Li, Y., Huang, Y., Ildiz, M. E., Rawat, A. S., and Oymak, S. (2024b). Mechanics of next token
  prediction with self-attention. In International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics,
  pages 685вҖ“693. PMLR.

Liu, J. and Chen, X. (2019). Alista: Analytic weights are as good as learned weights in lista. In
  International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR).

Mahankali, A., Hashimoto, T. B., and Ma, T. (2023). One step of gradient descent is provably the op-
 timal in-context learner with one layer of linear self-attention. arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.03576.

Meng, Y., Yang, Y., Hu, M., Zhang, Z., and Zhou, X. (2023). Artificial intelligence-based radiomics
 in bone tumors: Technical advances and clinical application. In Seminars in Cancer Biology.
 Elsevier.

Nemirovskij, A. S. and Yudin, D. B. (1983). Problem complexity and method efficiency in opti-
  mization.

Nesterov, Y. (2005). Smooth minimization of non-smooth functions. Mathematical programming,
  103:127вҖ“152.

Nichani, E., Damian, A., and Lee, J. D. (2024). How transformers learn causal structure with
  gradient descent. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.14735.

Pitaval, R.-A., Dai, W., and Tirkkonen, O. (2015). Convergence of gradient descent for low-rank
   matrix approximation. IEEE Transactions on Information Theory, 61(8):4451вҖ“4457.

Radford, A. (2018). Improving language understanding by generative pre-training.

Roy, S. S., Mittal, D., Basu, A., and Abraham, A. (2015). Stock market forecasting using lasso
  linear regression model. In Afro-European Conference for Industrial Advancement: Proceedings
  of the First International Afro-European Conference for Industrial Advancement AECIA 2014,
  pages 371вҖ“381. Springer.

Shen, D., Wu, G., and Suk, H.-I. (2017). Deep learning in medical image analysis. Annual review
  of biomedical engineering, 19(1):221вҖ“248.

Sucker, M., Fadili, J., and Ochs, P. (2024). Learning-to-optimize with pac-bayesian guarantees:
  Theoretical considerations and practical implementation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2404.03290.

Tarzanagh, D. A., Li, Y., Thrampoulidis, C., and Oymak, S. (2023a). Transformers as support vector
  machines. arXiv preprint arXiv:2308.16898.

Tarzanagh, D. A., Li, Y., Zhang, X., and Oymak, S. (2023b). Max-margin token selection in attention
  mechanism. In Thirty-seventh Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems.

Thoppilan, R., De Freitas, D., Hall, J., Shazeer, N., Kulshreshtha, A., Cheng, H.-T., Jin, A., Bos, T.,
  Baker, L., Du, Y., et al. (2022). Lamda: Language models for dialog applications. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2201.08239.

Tian, Y., Wang, Y., Chen, B., and Du, S. S. (2023a). Scan and snap: Understanding training dynam-
  ics and token composition in 1-layer transformer. Advances in Neural Information Processing
  Systems, 36:71911вҖ“71947.

Tian, Y., Wang, Y., Zhang, Z., Chen, B., and Du, S. (2023b). Joma: Demystifying multilayer
  transformers via joint dynamics of mlp and attention. arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.00535.

Vasudeva, B., Deora, P., and Thrampoulidis, C. (2024). Implicit bias and fast convergence rates for
  self-attention. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.05738.

Vaswani, A., Shazeer, N., Parmar, N., Uszkoreit, J., Jones, L., Gomez, A. N., Kaiser, ЕҒ., and Polo-
  sukhin, I. (2017). Attention is all you need. Advances in neural information processing systems,
  30.


                                                  13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Von Oswald, J., Niklasson, E., Randazzo, E., Sacramento, J., Mordvintsev, A., Zhmoginov, A., and
  Vladymyrov, M. (2023a). Transformers learn in-context by gradient descent. In International
  Conference on Machine Learning, pages 35151вҖ“35174. PMLR.
Von Oswald, J., Niklasson, E., Schlegel, M., Kobayashi, S., Zucchet, N., Scherrer, N., Miller, N.,
  Sandler, M., Vladymyrov, M., Pascanu, R., et al. (2023b). Uncovering mesa-optimization algo-
  rithms in transformers. arXiv preprint arXiv:2309.05858.
Yao, Q., Wang, M., Chen, Y., Dai, W., Li, Y.-F., Tu, W.-W., Yang, Q., and Yu, Y. (2018). Taking
  human out of learning applications: A survey on automated machine learning. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1810.13306.
Zhang, R., Frei, S., and Bartlett, P. L. (2023). Trained transformers learn linear models in-context.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.09927.
Zhu, Z., Li, Q., Tang, G., and Wakin, M. B. (2021). The global optimization geometry of low-rank
  matrix optimization. IEEE Transactions on Information Theory, 67(2):1308вҖ“1331.


                                                 14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                          Supplementary Materials
C ONTENTS

1   Introduction                                                                                      1

2   Related Works                                                                                     3

3   Preliminaries                                                                                     3
    3.1   Transformer Architecture . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      4
    3.2   In-context Learning by Transformers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       4

4   Transformer as a LISTA-type Algorithm for In-context Sparse Recovery                             5
    4.1   In-context Sparse Recovery . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      5
    4.2   Classical Algorithms . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      5
    4.3   Transformer Can Provably Perform LISTA-type Algorithms . . . . . . . . . . . .              6

5   Performance of Transformers for In-context Sparse Recovery                                       7
    5.1   Sparse Vector Estimation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      8
    5.2   Label Prediction   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    8

6   Experimental Results                                                                              9

7   Conclusion                                                                                       10

A Additional Related Works                                                                           16

B Table of Notations                                                                                 17

C Deferred Proofs in Section 4.3                                                                     17
    C.1 Transformer Structure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      17
    C.2 Proof of Theorem 4.1 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       18

D Deferred Proofs in Section 5.1                                                                     21
    D.1 Proof of Theorem 5.1 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       21
    D.2 Proof of Remark 4 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .        27

E Deferred Proofs in Section 5.2                                                                     29
    E.1 Proof of Theorem 5.2 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       29

F Additional Experiment Results                                                                      35


                                                  15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A    A DDITIONAL R ELATED W ORKS
General L2O Techniques. L2O leverages machine learning to develop optimization algorithms,
aiming to improve existing methods and innovate new ones. As highlighted by Sucker et al. (2024)
and Chen et al. (2022), L2O intersects with meta-learning (also known as вҖңlearning-to-learnвҖқ) and
automated machine learning (AutoML).
Unlike meta-learning, which focuses on enabling models to quickly adapt to new tasks with min-
imal data by leveraging prior knowledge from diverse tasks (Finn et al., 2017; Hospedales et al.,
2021), L2O aims to improve the optimization process itself by developing adaptive algorithms tai-
lored to specific tasks, leading to faster convergence and enhanced performance in model train-
ing (Andrychowicz et al., 2016; Li and Malik, 2016). Thus, while meta-learning enhances task
adaptability, L2O refines the efficiency of the optimization process. In contrast, AutoML focuses
on model selection, optimization algorithm selection, and hyperparameter tuning (Yao et al., 2018);
L2O distinguishes itself by its ability to generate new optimization techniques through learned mod-
els.
L2O has demonstrated significant potential across various optimization fields and applications. For
instance, Andrychowicz et al. (2016) introduced a method where optimization algorithms are learned
using recurrent neural networks trained to optimize specific classes of functions. Li and Malik
(2016) proposed learning optimization algorithms through reinforcement learning, utilizing guided
policy search to develop optimization strategies. Furthermore, Hruby et al. (2022) applied L2O
to address the вҖңminimal problemвҖқ, a common challenge in computer vision characterized by the
presence of many spurious solutions. They trained a multilayer perceptron model to predict initial
problem solutions, significantly reducing computation time.

Training Dynamics of Transformers. There exist some works aiming to theoretically understand
the ICL mechanism in Transformer through their training dynamics. Ahn et al. (2024); Mahankali
et al. (2023); Zhang et al. (2023); Huang et al. (2023) investigate the dynamics of Transformers
with a single attention layer and a single head for in-context linear regression tasks. Cui et al.
(2024) prove that Transformers with multi-head attention layers outperform those with single-head
attention. Cheng et al. (2023) show that local optimal solutions in Transformers can perform gradient
descent in-context for non-linear functions. Kim and Suzuki (2024) study the non-convex mean-
field dynamics of Transformers, and Nichani et al. (2024) characterize the convergence rate for the
training loss in learning a causal graph. Additionally, Chen et al. (2024a) investigate the gradient
flow in training multi-head single-layer Transformers for multi-task linear regression. Chen and Li
(2024) propose a supervised training algorithm for multi-head Transformers.
The training dynamics of Transformers for binary classification (Tarzanagh et al., 2023b;a; Vasudeva
et al., 2024; Li et al., 2023; Deora et al., 2023; Li et al., 2024a) and next-token prediction (NTP)
(Tian et al., 2023a;b; Li et al., 2024b; Huang et al., 2024) have also been studied recently.


                                                 16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


B     TABLE OF N OTATIONS

        Notation      Definition
            X         Measurement Matrix
            ОІвҲ—        Ground-truth sparse vector
             Пө        Noise Vector
            Y         Y = XОІ вҲ— + Пө
            d         Number of columns of X
            N         Number of Measurement Vectors, i.e., number of rows of X
            S         Sparsity of ОІ вҲ— , i.e., вҲҘОІ вҲ— вҲҘ0 = S
            S         Support set of ОІ вҲ—
            D         Dimension in the Self-attention Layer
            M         Number of Heads in the Self-attention Layer
            DвҖІ        Hidden Dimension in the MLP Layer
            K         Number of Layers in Transformer
             (k)
          Qi          Query Matrix of the k-th Layer of TransformerвҖҷs i-th Head
             (k)
          Ki          Key Matrix of the k-th Layer of TransformerвҖҷs i-th Head
             (k)
          Vi          Value Matrix of the k-th Layer of TransformerвҖҷs i-th Head
          H(k)        Input Sequence of the k-th Layer of Transformer
            (k)
           hi         [H(k) ]:,i
         sign(x)      Sign Function: sign(x) = |x|/x if x Мё= 0, sign(x) = 0 if x = 0
          SОё (x)      Soft Thresholding Function: SОё (x) = sign(x) max{0, |x| вҲ’ Оё}
      Пғ : Rd вҶ’ Rd     ReLU Function:[Пғ(x)]i = xi if xi вүҘ 0, [Пғ(x)]i = 0 if xi < 0
           В¬E         Complement of an event E


C     D EFERRED P ROOFS IN S ECTION 4.3

C.1   T RANSFORMER S TRUCTURE

Attention layer. Consider a model consisting of K Transformer layers, where each layer is
equipped with four attention heads. These heads are uniquely indexed as +1, вҲ’1, +2, and вҲ’2
to distinguish their specific roles within the layer.
            пЈ®                                    пЈ№          пЈ®                       пЈ№
              0(d+1)Г—(d+1) 0(d+1)Г—d 0d+1                       0dГ—(2d+1)      0d
      (k)                          Q,(k)               (k)                    Q,(k)
   QВұ1 = пЈ° 0dГ—(d+1)             MВұ1          0d пЈ» , QВұ2 = пЈ° 01Г—(2d+1)       mВұ2 пЈ»
                01Г—(d+1)          01Г—d      вҲ’B               0(d+1)Г—(2d+1) 0d+1
            пЈ®                                    пЈ№          пЈ®                             пЈ№
              0(d+1)Г—d 0(d+1)Г—(d+1) 0d+1                       0dГ—d      0d       0dГ—d+1
      (k)                                              (k)
   KВұ1 = пЈ° IdГ—d              0dГ—(d+1)        0d пЈ» , KВұ2 = пЈ° 01Г—d         1      01Г—(d+1) пЈ»
                01Г—d         01Г—(d+1)         1              0(d+1)Г—d 0d+1 0(d+1)Г—(d+1)
            пЈ®                            пЈ№                  пЈ®                      пЈ№
              0(d+1)Г—d 0(d+1)Г—(d+2)                          0(d+1)Г—d 0(d+1)Г—d+2
      (k)                                              (k)
   VВұ1 = пЈ° MV,(k) Вұ1         0dГ—(d+2) пЈ» ,             VВұ2 = пЈ° MV,(k)
                                                                Вұ2       0dГ—(d+2) пЈ» ,    (C.1)
                01Г—d         01Г—(d+2)                          01Г—d      01Г—(d+2)
         Q,(k)    Q,(k)    V,(k)    V,(k)   V,(k)        V,(k)                              Q,(k)
where M+1 , MвҲ’1 , M+1 , MвҲ’1 , M+2 , and MвҲ’2                      are all d Г— d matrices, and m+2 ,
 Q,(k)
mвҲ’2 are scalars.

MLP layer.    For the MLP layer following the k-th self-attention layer, we set
                                                                            05d+5
                                                                        пЈ®           пЈ№
                       W1,sub             вҲ’I(2d+2)Г—(2d+2)
                    пЈ®         пЈ№         пЈ®                   пЈ№
                                                                        пЈҜвҲ’Оё(k) В· 1d пЈә
                    пЈҜвҲ’W1,sub пЈә      вҠӨ   пЈҜ I(2d+2)Г—(2d+2) пЈә (k) пЈҜ
             W1 = пЈ°             , W   =                        , b   =  пЈҜ 0d+2 пЈә .           (C.2)
                                                                                    пЈә
                       W1,sub пЈ»     2   пЈ°I                  пЈ»
                                            (2d+2)Г—(2d+2)               пЈ° Оё(k) В· 1 пЈ»
                      вҲ’W1,sub             вҲ’I(2d+2)Г—(2d+2)                         d
                                                                              0


                                               17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


where the submatrix W1,sub is defined as W1,sub = diag(0(d+1)Г—(d+1) , IdГ—d , 0). Therefore, the
output of the MLP layer is
                                                [hi ]1:d+1
                                         "                    #
                             MLP(hi ) = SОё(k) ([hi ]d+2:2d+1 ) .                         (C.3)
                                                [hi ]2d+2

where SОё(k) is the soft-thresholding function parameterized by Оё(k) .

C.2   P ROOF OF T HEOREM 4.1

We start by stating an equivalent form of Theorem 4.1 below, where we specific M(k) in Theo-
rem 4.1 to be Оі (k) MV .
Theorem C.1 (Equivalent form Theorem 4.1). Suppose Assumption 1 holds. For a Transformer
with K layers as described in Section 4.3, set the input sequence as:
                        пЈ® вҠӨ
                         [X ]:,1 [XвҠӨ ]:,1 В· В· В· [XвҠӨ ]:,N [XвҠӨ ]:,N xN +1
                                                                              пЈ№
                        пЈҜ 0           y1       В·В·В·      0         yN     0 пЈә
               H(1) = пЈҜ пЈ° ОІ (1)        (1)             (1)         (1)  (1)
                                                                              пЈә.    (C.4)
                             1       ОІ2        В· В· В· ОІ2N вҲ’1      ОІ2N   ОІ2N +1 пЈ»
                             1         0       В·В·В·      1          0     1
                                                                                         (K+1)
Denote H(k+1) as the output of the K-th layer of the Transformer and define ОІ2n+1 =
  (k+1)
Hd+2:2d+1,2n+1 . There exists a set of parameters within the Transformer such that for all k вҲҲ
[1, K], we have:

                  (k+1)            (k)                         (k)
                 ОІ2n+1 = SОё(k) ОІ2n+1 вҲ’ Оі (k) (Dn )вҠӨ ([X]1:n,: ОІ2n+1 вҲ’ y1:n ) ,
             1
where Dn = 2n+1 [X]1:n,: (MV )вҠӨ and MV вҲҲ RdГ—d is embedded in the k-th Transformer lsyer.

Proving the theorem is equivalent to demonstrating the existence of a Transformer for which the
following proposition holds for any k вүҘ 2:
Proposition 1. Suppose Assumption 1 holds. For a K layers Transformer with structure described
in Section 4.3, the input sequence of the k-th layer of the Transformer satisfies:
                          пЈ® вҠӨ
                            [X ]:,1 [XвҠӨ ]:,1 В· В· В· [XвҠӨ ]:,N [XвҠӨ ]:,N xN +1
                                                                                   пЈ№
                          пЈҜ 0           y1      В·В·В·       0        yN          0 пЈә
                 H(k) = пЈҜ     (k)        (k)             (k)        (k)      (k)
                                                                                   пЈә,
                          пЈ° ОІ
                              1        ОІ2       В· В· В· ОІ2N вҲ’1       ОІ2N     ОІ2N +1 пЈ»
                              1          0      В·В·В·       1         0          1

                        (k)                  (kвҲ’1)                             (k)
 where it holds that ОІ2n+1 = SОё(kвҲ’1) ОІ2n+1 вҲ’ Оі (kвҲ’1) (Dn )вҠӨ ([X]1:n,: ОІ2n+1 вҲ’ y1:n ) , Dn =
  1             V вҠӨ      (kвҲ’1)     k
2n+1 [X]1:n,: (M ) and |ОІ2n+1 | вүӨ CОІ for Constant CОІ .


Proof of Proposition 1. We prove Proposition 1 is true for all k вүҘ 2 by induction. First, H(k) for
k = 2 satisfies the condition automatically; therefore, Proposition 1 is true when k = 2. Then, we
demonstrate that if Proposition 1 is true for k вҲ’ 1, it remains valid for k. For odd values of i, the
token-wise outputs of the k-th attention layer corresponding to the first and second heads satisfy:
                                                                                        0d+1
             пЈ®              пЈ№                 пЈ®              пЈ№                 пЈ®                    пЈ№
                   0d+1                            0d+1
  (k) (k)                          (k) (k)                          (k) (k)        V,(k)
QВұ1 hi = пЈ°MВұ1     Q,(k) (k) пЈ»
                       ОІi     ; KВұ1 hi = пЈ°[XвҠӨ ]:,вҢҠ i+1   2 вҢӢ
                                                             пЈ» ; VВұ1   hi = пЈ°MВұ1 [XвҠӨ ]:,вҢҠ i+1 вҢӢ пЈ» .
                                                                                                 2
                   вҲ’B                                1                                   0
The token-wise outputs of the third and fourth heads for odd i satisfy
                                                                              0d+1
                  пЈ®         пЈ№                                          пЈ®             пЈ№
                      0d
        (k) (k)       Q,(k) пЈ»       (k) (k)                (k) (k)       V,(k)
      QВұ2 hi = пЈ°mВұ2           ; KВұ2 hi = 02d+2 ; VВұ2 hi = пЈ°MВұ2 [XвҠӨ ]:,вҢҠ i+1 вҢӢ пЈ» .
                                                                                   2
                    0d+1                                                       0


                                                 18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Besides, for any i that is an even number, the token-wise outputs of the k-th attention layer corre-
sponding to the first and second heads satisfy:
                                                                                       0d+1
             пЈ®               пЈ№                пЈ®            пЈ№                 пЈ®                      пЈ№
                   0d+1                           0d+1
  (k) (k)        Q,(k)   (k)       (k) (k)        вҠӨ               (k) (k)         V,(k)
                                                           пЈ» ; VВұ1 hi = пЈ°MВұ1 [XвҠӨ ] i+1 пЈ» .
QВұ1 hi = пЈ°MВұ1 ОІi пЈ» ; KВұ1 hi = пЈ°[X ]:,вҢҠ i+1             2 вҢӢ                                  :,вҢҠ 2 вҢӢ
                     0                              0                                   0

The token-wise outputs of the third and fourth heads for even i satisfy
                                                                             0d+1
                                           пЈ®     пЈ№                   пЈ®              пЈ№
                                              0d
         (k) (k)                (k) (k)                   (k) (k)       V,(k)
       QВұ2 hi = 02d+2 ; KВұ2 hi = пЈ° y 2i пЈ» ; VВұ2 hi = пЈ°MВұ2 [XвҠӨ ]:,вҢҠ i+1 вҢӢ пЈ» .
                                                                                  2
                                            0d+1                              0
Therefore, for hi with an odd index and head with index u вҲҲ {1, вҲ’1}, we have
         D                    E
                                          (k)
       Пғ Q(k) u  hk
                  i , K(k) k
                       u  h j    В· Vu(k) hj
                                                                      0d+1
                                                               пЈ®                  пЈ№

                                             вҲ’ 1{j%2=1} (j)B В· пЈ°Mu [XвҠӨ ]:,вҢҠ j+1 вҢӢ пЈ» .
                (k)                                              V,(k)
       = Пғ (ОІi )вҠӨ (MQ        вҠӨ    вҠӨ
                          u ) [X ]:,вҢҠ j+1                                                                            (C.5)
                                         2 вҢӢ                                 2
                                                                       0
Also, for hi with an odd index and head with index u вҲҲ {2, вҲ’2}, we have
                                                                             0d+1
                                                                      пЈ®                  пЈ№
      D                  E
                            В· Vu(k) hj = 1{j%2=0} В· Пғ mQ,(k)
                                     (k)                                V,(k)
   Пғ Q(k)     k    (k) k
          u hi , Ku hj                                   u    В· y j В· пЈ°Mu [XвҠӨ ]:,вҢҠ j+1 вҢӢ пЈ» .
                                                                  2                 2
                                                                              0
                                                                                          (C.6)
We specify the parameters of the self-attention layer as
                                      Q,(k)                            V,(k)
                                 M1           = вҲ’IdГ—d ,          M1            = Оі (k) MV ,
                                      Q,(k)                          V,(k)
                                 MвҲ’1          = IdГ—d ,         MвҲ’1           = вҲ’Оі (k) MV ,
                                      q,(k)                  V,(k)
                                 m2           = 1,       M2          = Оі (k) MV ,
                                      q,(k)                    V,(k)
                                 mвҲ’2          = вҲ’1,          MвҲ’2       = вҲ’Оі (k) MV .
Then, for head index u вҲҲ {1, вҲ’1} we have
                (k)                                            (k)
           (ОІi )вҠӨ (MQ  вҠӨ  вҠӨ                      вҠӨ  вҠӨ
                    u ) [X ]:,вҢҠ j+1 вҢӢ вҲ’ B вүӨ (ОІi ) [X ]:,вҢҠ j+1 вҢӢ вҲ’ B
                                         2                                            2
                                                              (k)              вҠӨ
                                                         вүӨ   ОІi 1        [X ]:,вҢҠ j+1 вҢӢ вҲһ вҲ’ B                         (C.7)
                                                                                          2
                                                              (k)
                                                         вүӨ   ОІi вҲ’ ОІ вҲ— 1              [XвҠӨ ]:,вҢҠ j+1 вҢӢ вҲһ + bОІ bx вҲ’ B,
                                                                                              2

where Equation (C.7) is given by HoМҲlderвҖҷs Inequality. Therefore, combining this with the assumption
вҲҘxвҲҘвҲһ вүӨ bx and вҲҘОІ вҲ— вҲҘ1 вүӨ bОІ , we obtain
                        (k)                                                    (k)
                      (ОІi )вҠӨ (MQ  вҠӨ  вҠӨ
                               u ) [X ]:,вҢҠ j+1 вҢӢ вҲ’ B вүӨ bx ОІi                         вҲ’ ОІ вҲ— 1 + bОІ bx вҲ’ B.            (C.8)
                                                     2

                                                                                                  (k)
Recall that for odd i, we assume that Proposition 1 is true for k вҲ’ 1, then ОІi satisfies

                (k)             (kвҲ’1)                                    (k)
              ОІi = SОё(kвҲ’1) ОІi          вҲ’ Оі (kвҲ’1) (Dn )вҠӨ ([X]1:вҢҠ i+1 вҢӢ,: ОІi вҲ’ y1:вҢҠ i+1 вҢӢ )
                                                                                      2                 2

      (kвҲ’1)
and |ОІ2n+1 | вүӨ CОІk . Then, we obtain
  (k)
|ОІi |
        (kвҲ’1)                         1                                (kвҲ’1)                        1
вүӨ |ОІi           | + |Оі (kвҲ’1) |вҲҘMV вҲҘ     [X]вҠӨ
                                           1:вҢҠ i+1
                                                      [X]1:вҢҠ i+1 вҢӢ,: |ОІi     | + bОІ |Оі (kвҲ’1) |вҲҘMV вҲҘ [X]1:вҢҠ i+1 вҢӢ,:
                                      i         2 вҢӢ,:         2                                     i       2


                            вҢҠ i+1
                               2 вҢӢ k                        вҢҠ i+1 вҢӢ
вүӨ CОІk + b2x d|Оі (kвҲ’1) |вҲҘMV вҲҘ      CОІ + bОІ bx |Оі (kвҲ’1) |вҲҘMV вҲҘ 2
                               i                               i
вүӨ CОІk + b2x d|Оі (kвҲ’1) |вҲҘMV вҲҘCОІk + bОІ bx |Оі (kвҲ’1) |вҲҘMV вҲҘ.                                                             (C.9)


                                                               19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Equation (C.9) arises from the fact that вҢҠ i+1
                                            2 вҢӢ/i вүӨ 1. Denoting Оіmax = maxk вҲҘОі
                                                                               (k)
                                                                                   вҲҘ and letting
           2            V                    V
CОІ = 1 + bx dОіmax вҲҘM вҲҘ + bОІ bx Оіmax вҲҘM вҲҘ, we have
                   (k)
                 |ОІi | вүӨ CОІk + b2x d|Оі (kвҲ’1) |вҲҘMV вҲҘCОІk + bОІ bx |Оі (kвҲ’1) |вҲҘMV вҲҘ вүӨ CОІk+1 .

Therefore, we have
                                             (k)
                                                               вҲҡ
                                      bx ОІi        вҲ’ ОІ вҲ— 1 вүӨ bx d(bОІ + CОІk ).
                               вҲҡ                                   (k)
Then, by setting B вүҘ bОІ bx + bx d(bОІ + CОІK ), we obtain that B > (ОІi )вҠӨ [XвҠӨ ]:,вҢҠ j+1 вҢӢ for all
                                                                                  2
k вүӨ K and any odd i. Then, combining with Equation (C.8) we have

                               (k)
                           Пғ (ОІi )вҠӨ (MQ   вҠӨ   вҠӨ
                                       u ) [X ]:,вҢҠ j+1 вҢӢ вҲ’ B = 0.   2


Further, from Equation (C.5), for i is odd number and j вҲҲ [1, 3, В· В· В· , i] we have
                            D                     E
                                                              (k)
                          Пғ Q(k)  u   hk
                                       i , K(k) k
                                            u  hj    В· Vu(k) hj = 02d+2 .

Besides, for i being an odd number and j вҲҲ [2, 4, В· В· В· , i вҲ’ 1], we have

                                                                                               0d+1
                                                                                       пЈ®                   пЈ№
      D                    E
                                         (k)             (k)                              V,(k)
 Пғ        Q(k) k   (k) k
           u hi , Ku hj         В· Vu(k) hj       = Пғ (ОІi )вҠӨ (MQ  вҠӨ  вҠӨ
                                                              u ) [X ]:,вҢҠ i+1 вҢӢ       В· пЈ°Mu [XвҠӨ ]:,вҢҠ j+1 вҢӢ пЈ» .
                                                                              2                       2
                                                                                                2

Thus, when hi is of odd index, summing over all j вүӨ i and u вҲҲ {1, вҲ’1}, we obtain:
                                         i   D               E
                                                                         (k)
                                X        X
                                           Пғ Q(k) k    (k) k
                                               u hi , Ku hj     В· Vu(k) hj
                           uвҲҲ{вҲ’1,+1} j=1
                                             iвҲ’1  D                 E
                                                                                (k)
                                   X         X
                           =                    Пғ Q(k)
                                                    u  hk
                                                        i , K (k) k
                                                              u  hj    В· Vu(k) hj
                               uвҲҲ{вҲ’1,+1} j=2
                                                                пЈ®                 пЈ№
                               iвҲ’1                                    0d+1
                                     (k)
                               X
                           =     вҲ’(ОІi )вҠӨ [XвҠӨ ]:,вҢҠ j+1 вҢӢ В· пЈ°Оі (k) MV [XвҠӨ ]:,вҢҠ j+1
                                                                              2 вҢӢ
                                                                                  пЈ»
                                                     2
                             j=2                                         0
                                             0d+1
                             пЈ®                                          пЈ№
                                                                    (k)
                           = пЈ°вҲ’Оі (k) MV [XвҠӨ ]:,1: iвҲ’1 [X]1: iвҲ’1 ,: ОІi пЈ» .                               (C.10)
                                                   2         2
                                                0

Next, we consider heads with indexes m вҲҲ {2, вҲ’2}. From Equation (C.6) we obtain
                                         i   D               E
                                                                         (k)
                                X        X
                                           Пғ Q(k) k    (k) k
                                               u hi , Ku hj     В· Vu(k) hj
                           uвҲҲ{вҲ’2,+2} j=1
                                                 iвҲ’1  D                E
                                                                                   (k)
                                     X           X
                           =                        Пғ Q(k)
                                                        u  hk
                                                            i , K(k) k
                                                                 u  hj    В· Vu(k) hj
                                uвҲҲ{вҲ’2,+2} j=2
                                             пЈ®              пЈ№
                                iвҲ’1
                                X              0d+1
                           =     y j В· пЈ°Оі (k) MV [XвҠӨ ]:, 2j пЈ»
                                   2
                             j=2                02
                             пЈ®                               пЈ№
                                           0d+1
                           = пЈ°Оі (k) MV [XвҠӨ ]:,1: iвҲ’1
                                                  2
                                                     y1: iвҲ’1 пЈ» .
                                                           2
                                                                                                        (C.11)
                                            02


                                                           20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Combining Equation (C.10) and Equation (C.11), we obtain the following equation for hi with an
odd index:
                       пЈ«                                                              пЈ¶
                                                 i
           (k+1)            (k)     1    X      X     D               E
                                                                                  (k)
         hi      = MLPпЈӯhi +                         Пғ Q(k) k    (k) k
                                                        u hi , Ku hj     В· Vu(k) hj пЈё
                                    i
                                      uвҲҲ{Вұ1,Вұ2} j=1
                   пЈ® вҠӨ            пЈ№
                    [X ]:,вҢҠ i+1 вҢӢ
                             2
                   пЈҜ    0         пЈә
                 =пЈ°пЈҜ
                       k+1
                                  пЈә,
                      ОІi          пЈ»
                        1
where
                             Оі (k) V вҠӨ

                      (k)                                        (k)                 вҠӨ
      ОІik+1 = SОё(k) ОІi вҲ’                                                (k)    V
                                   M [X ]:,1: iвҲ’1 [X]1: iвҲ’1 ,: ОІi + Оі M [X ]:,1: iвҲ’1 y1: iвҲ’1
                                i                2       2                                  2      2

                               (k)

                      (k)    Оі
                                                                   (k)

           = SОё(k) ОІi вҲ’            MV [XвҠӨ ]:,1: iвҲ’1 [X]1: iвҲ’1 ,: ОІi вҲ’ y1: iвҲ’1       .                (C.12)
                                i                2         2                 2


Similarly, we obtain the following equation for hi with an even index:
                        пЈ«                                                                         пЈ¶
                                                     i
          (k+1)              (k+1)    1    X        X     D                      E
                                                                                              (k)
        hi      = MLPпЈӯhi            +                  Пғ Q(k)         k   (k) k
                                                                 u hi , Ku hj        В· Vu(k) hj пЈё
                                      i
                                        uвҲҲ{Вұ1,Вұ2} j=1
                   пЈ® вҠӨ            пЈ№
                    [X ]:,вҢҠ i+1 вҢӢ
                              2
                   пЈҜ      0       пЈә
                =пЈ° пЈҜ              пЈә.                                                                 (C.13)
                        ОІik+1 пЈ»
                          0
                                         (k+1)
Note that an explicit formulation of ОІi     is not required when i is even. Next, combining Equa-
tion (C.12) and Equation (C.13) gives
                          пЈ® вҠӨ
                           [X ]:,1 [XвҠӨ ]:,1 В· В· В· [XвҠӨ ]:,N [XвҠӨ ]:,N xN +1
                                                                                  пЈ№
                          пЈҜ 0            y1     В·В·В·      0        yN         0 пЈә
               H(k+1) = пЈҜ    (k+1)      (k+1)          (k+1)      (k+1)     (k+1)
                                                                                  пЈә.
                          пЈ°ОІ
                             1        ОІ2        В· В· В· ОІ2N вҲ’1    ОІ2N        ОІ2N +1 пЈ»
                               1         0      В·В·В·      1         0         1
The proof for Proposition 1 is thus complete.

D     D EFERRED P ROOFS IN S ECTION 5.1
D.1     P ROOF OF T HEOREM 5.1

In Section 4.1, we assume that each row of the measurement matrix X is independently sampled
from an isometric sub-Gaussian distribution with zero mean and covariance diag(Пғ12 , В· В· В· , Пғd2 ).
Without loss of generality, let Пғ1 вүҘ Пғ2 вүҘ В· В· В· вүҘ Пғd . We start the proof of Theorem 5.1 by in-
troducing the auxiliary lemmas: Lemma 1, Lemma 2, and Lemma 3.
Lemma 1. Assume ОІ (k) and ОІ (k+1) satisfy:

                           ОІ (k+1) = SОё(k) ОІ (k) вҲ’ ОіDвҠӨ (XОІ (k) вҲ’ y) .                      (D.1)

Define Пғmin = miniвҲҲS DвҠӨ            , Пғmax = maxiМё=j DвҠӨ
                          :,i X:,i                   :,i X     and let Оё(k) = ОіПғmax c1 eвҲ’c2 (kвҲ’2) ,
                                                           :,j
where c1 = вҲҘОІ вҲ— вҲҘ1 and c2 = log Оі(2SвҲ’1)Пғmax1 +|1вҲ’ОіПғmin | . Then, if вҲҘОІ (k) вҲ’ ОІ вҲ— вҲҘ1 вүӨ c1 eвҲ’c2 (kвҲ’2)
and D, Оі, Оё(k) satisfy the following conditions:
                                 Оі(2S вҲ’ 1)Пғmax + |1 вҲ’ ОіПғmin | вүӨ 1,
                                                                                                     (D.2)
                                     0 вүӨ ОіDвҠӨ
                                           :,i X:,i вүӨ 1     вҲҖi вҲҲ [d],
then ОІ (k+1) satisfies
                                   вҲҘОІ (k+1) вҲ’ ОІ вҲ— вҲҘ1 вүӨ c1 eвҲ’c2 (kвҲ’1) .


                                                    21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Proof of Lemma 1. Note that we are considering the noiseless model: y = XОІ вҲ— . We begin by
rewriting Equation (D.1):

                        ОІ (k+1) = SОё(k) ОІ (k) вҲ’ Оі (k) DвҠӨ (XОІ (k) вҲ’ y)

                                = SОё(k) ОІ (k) вҲ’ Оі (k) DвҠӨ X(ОІ (k) вҲ’ ОІ вҲ— ) .

Consider entries of ОІ (K+1) in the support of ОІ вҲ— :

                  (k+1)            (k)                     (k)
                ОІS      = SОё(k) ОІS вҲ’ Оі (k) (D:,S )вҠӨ X:,S (ОІS вҲ’ ОІSвҲ— )
                                      (k)                                (k)                    (k+1)
                               вҲҲ ОІS вҲ’ Оі (k) (D:,S )вҠӨ X:,S (ОІS вҲ’ ОІSвҲ— ) вҲ’ Оё(k) вҲӮв„“1 (ОІS                    ),
where вҲӮв„“1 (ОІ) is the sub-gradient of |ОІ|:

                                                             {sign([ОІ]i )}     if [ОІ]i Мё= 0,
                                       [вҲӮв„“1 (ОІ)]i =
                                                             [вҲ’1, 1]           if [ОІ]i = 0.
Then, for any i вҲҲ S, we have
                       (k+1)          (k)                                (k)                    (k+1)
                     ОІi        вҲҲ ОІi         вҲ’ Оі (k) (D:,i )вҠӨ X:,S (ОІS вҲ’ ОІSвҲ— ) вҲ’ Оё(k) вҲӮв„“1 (ОІS            ).

              (k)                                (k)
Note that ОІi        вҲ’ Оі (k) (D:,i )вҠӨ X:,S (ОІS вҲ’ ОІSвҲ— ) can be rewritten as
          (k)                                 (k)
         ОІi вҲ’ Оі (k) (D:,i )вҠӨ X:,S (ОІS вҲ’ ОІSвҲ— )
            (k)                                (k)                               (k)
                          X
         = ОІi вҲ’ Оі (k)          (D:,i )вҠӨ X:,j (ОІj вҲ’ ОІjвҲ— ) вҲ’ Оі (k) (D:,i )вҠӨ X:,i (ОІi вҲ’ ОІiвҲ— )
                            jвҲҲS,jМё=i
                                                          (k)                                      (k)
                            X
         = ОІiвҲ— вҲ’ Оі (k)                (D:,i )вҠӨ X:,j (ОІj         вҲ’ ОІjвҲ— ) + 1 вҲ’ Оі (k) (D:,i )вҠӨ X:,i (ОІi вҲ’ ОІiвҲ— ).
                          jвҲҲS,jМё=i

Therefore,
 (k+1)                                                       (k)                                      (k)                     (k+1)
                               X
ОІi       вҲ’ ОІiвҲ— вҲҲ вҲ’Оі (k)                (D:,i )вҠӨ X:,j (ОІj           вҲ’ ОІjвҲ— ) + 1 вҲ’ Оі (k) (D:,i )вҠӨ X:,i (ОІi вҲ’ ОІiвҲ— ) вҲ’ Оё(k) вҲӮв„“1 (ОІi     ).
                            jвҲҲS,jМё=i

Based on the definition of вҲӮв„“1 , we derive the following inequality:
  (k+1)                                        (k)                                   (k)
                        X
|ОІi     вҲ’ ОІiвҲ— | вүӨ Оі (k)        (D:,i )вҠӨ X:,j |ОІj вҲ’ ОІjвҲ— | + 1 вҲ’ Оі (k) (D:,i )вҠӨ X:,i |ОІi вҲ’ ОІiвҲ— | + Оё(k) .
                           jвҲҲS,jМё=i

Recall that 0 < Оі (k) (D:,i )вҠӨ X:,i < 1, we obtain that
          (k+1)                                (k)                          (k)
                                       X
        |ОІi     вҲ’ ОІiвҲ— | вүӨ Оі (k) Пғmax         |ОІj вҲ’ ОІjвҲ— | + 1 вҲ’ Оі (k) Пғmin |ОІi вҲ’ ОІiвҲ— | + Оё(k) .
                                               jвҲҲS,jМё=i
                                                                                                 (k+1)
From Lemma 2, we have support(ОІ (k+1) ) вҲҲ S, thus, вҲҘОІ (k+1) вҲ’ ОІ вҲ— вҲҘ1 = вҲҘОІS    вҲ’ ОІSвҲ— вҲҘ1 . Then,
                        пЈ«                                                                 пЈ¶
                                           (k)                            (k)
                      X             X
  вҲҘОІ (k+1) вҲ’ ОІ вҲ— вҲҘ1 вүӨ   пЈӯОі (k) Пғmax      |ОІj вҲ’ ОІjвҲ— | + 1 вҲ’ Оі (k) Пғmin |ОІi вҲ’ ОІiвҲ— | + Оё(k) пЈё
                           iвҲҲS                      jвҲҲS,jМё=i
                                                                (k)                              (k)
                                                       X
                          вүӨОі   (k)
                                     (S вҲ’ 1)Пғmax             |ОІi      вҲ’ ОІiвҲ— | + 1 вҲ’ Оі (k) Пғmin ОІi      вҲ’ ОІiвҲ—       + SОё(k)
                                                                                                               1
                                                       iвҲҲS

                                                               (k)
                                (k)
                  = Оі (S вҲ’ 1)Пғmax + 1 вҲ’ Оі (k) Пғmin            ОІi вҲ’ ОІiвҲ— + SОё(k)
                                                                          1

                       (k)                       (k)             вҲ’c2 (kвҲ’1)
                  вүӨ Оі (2S вҲ’ 1)Пғmax + 1 вҲ’ Оі Пғmin c1 e                       .

                                     1
Combining with c2 = log Оі (k) Пғ (2SвҲ’1)+                  , we obtain
                               max     |1вҲ’Оі (k) Пғmin |
                                                вҲҘОІ (k+1) вҲ’ ОІ вҲ— вҲҘ1 вүӨ c1 eвҲ’c2 k .
Therefore the proof is complete.


                                                                   22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Lemma 2. Suppose all conditions mentioned in Theorem 5.1 hold. For k вҲҲ N, if
                                                                    (k)
                          support(ОІ (k) ) вҲҲ S            and вҲҘОІS вҲ’ ОІSвҲ— вҲҘ вүӨ c1 eвҲ’c2 (kвҲ’1) ,
then it holds that
                                                     support(ОІ (k+1) ) вҲҲ S.

                                                                                (k)
Proof of Lemma 2. For a fixed k, if support(ОІ (k) ) вҲҲ S and вҲҘОІS вҲ’ ОІSвҲ— вҲҘ вүӨ c1 eвҲ’c2 (kвҲ’1) , then we
have

                      (k+1)            (k)
                    ОІSC     = SОё(k) ОІSC вҲ’ Оі (k) (D:,SC )вҠӨ X:,S (ОІSk вҲ’ ОІSвҲ— )

                            = SОё(k) вҲ’ Оі (k) (D:,SC )вҠӨ X:,S (ОІSk вҲ’ ОІSвҲ— ) ,

where SC = [dвҖІ ]\S. Then, for all i вҲҲ SC , we obtain

                       (k+1)
                                                X
                      ОІi      = SОё(k) вҲ’ Оі (k)       (D:,i )вҠӨ X:,j (ОІjk вҲ’ ОІjвҲ— ) .
                                                              jвҲҲS

Note that
                                  X
                         вҲ’Оі (k)         (D:,i )вҠӨ X:,j (ОІjk вҲ’ ОІjвҲ— ) вүӨ Оі (k) Пғmax вҲҘОІ (k) вҲ’ ОІ вҲ— вҲҘ1
                                  jвҲҲS

                                                                      вүӨ Оі (k) Пғmax c1 eвҲ’c2 (kвҲ’1) ,

Given Оё(k) as defined in Theorem 1, we obtain:

                                                                (k)
                                               X
                                   вҲ’Оі (k)       (D:,i )вҠӨ X:,j (ОІj вҲ’ ОІjвҲ— ) вүӨ Оё(k) .
                                               jвҲҲS

                                         (k)
Consequently, it follows that ОІi               = 0 for all i вҲҲ SC .
Lemma 3. Suppose Assumption 1 holds and let D = 2N1+1 X(MV )вҠӨ . Then, there exists an MV
such that the following inequalities hold with probability at least 1 вҲ’ 3Оҙ:
                                                           r                  !
                                   вҠӨ            N              log S вҲ’ log Оҙ
                       min (D:,i ) X:,i вүҘ             1вҲ’                       ,
                        iвҲҲS                  N +2                   Nc
                                                           r                  !
                                                N              log S вҲ’  log Оҙ
                       max (D:,i )вҠӨ X:,i вүӨ            1+                        ,
                        iвҲҲS                   N +2                  Nc
                                                     r
                                           вҠӨ            log d вҲ’ log Оҙ
                              max (D:,i ) X:,j вүӨ                       .
                               iМё=j                           Nc

Proof of Lemma 3. Recall that Пғ1 вүҘ Пғ2 вүҘ В· В· В· вүҘ Пғd . Let MV = Пғ22 IdГ—d . To prove the lemma, we
                                                                                      d
first introduce a lower bound for miniвҲҲS DвҠӨ
                                          :,i X:,i . Note that

                                                              N                 N
                           1                         2     1 X 2          2    X   1 2
    (D:,i )вҠӨ X:,i =             MV (X:,i )вҠӨ X:,i =       В· 2     Xj,i вүҘ               X .
                         2N + 1                    2N + 1 Пғd j=1        2N + 1 j=1 Пғi2 j,i

Note that X2j,i is a sub-exponential random variable. Then, from the tail bound for sub-exponential
random variables, there exists a constant c such that
                         n1 XN
                                1               o
                               ( X2j,i ) вүҘ 1 вҲ’ s вүҘ 1 вҲ’ exp вҲ’ N c min s2 , s .

                     P
                          N j=1 Пғi


                                                              23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Consider 0 < s вүӨ 1, we have

                                  n1 XN
                                         1               o
                                        ( X2j,i ) вүҘ 1 вҲ’ s вүҘ 1 вҲ’ exp вҲ’ N cs2 ,

                              P
                                   N j=1 Пғi

it follows that

                                        n1          N
                                               1 X 2              o
                                    P         min     X    вүҘ 1 вҲ’ s
                                         N iвҲҲS Пғd2 j=1 j,i
                                      n1      N
                                             X    1 2           o
                                    вүҘP   min        X    вүҘ 1 вҲ’ s
                                       N iвҲҲS j=1 Пғi2 j,i
                                         (          N
                                                                   )
                                           [n 1 X       1 2       o
                                    =1вҲ’P                  X <1вҲ’s
                                                N      Пғi2 j,i
                                                    iвҲҲS   jвҲҲ[1]

                                          X n1            N
                                                      1 2 X          o
                                    вүҘ1вҲ’       P        2 Xj,i < 1 вҲ’ s
                                                N j=1 Пғi
                                          iвҲҲS

                                    вүҘ 1 вҲ’ S exp вҲ’ N cs2 .


          q
              log SвҲ’log Оҙ
Let s =           Nc      . Then, with probability at least 1 вҲ’ Оҙ, we have

                                              N                   r
                                    1     1 X 2                        log S вҲ’ log Оҙ
                                      min 2     X вүҘ1вҲ’                                .
                                    N iвҲҲS Пғd j=1 j,i                        Nc


Therefore, with probability at least 1 вҲ’ Оҙ, it holds that

                                            N                                            r                   !
                      вҠӨ        2        1 X 2       N                                        log S вҲ’ log Оҙ
          min (D:,i ) X:,i =        min 2     X вүҘ                                 1вҲ’                             .
          iвҲҲS                2N + 1 iвҲҲS Пғd j=1 j,i N +2                                           Nc


Similarly, we have the following inequality holding with probability at least 1 вҲ’ Оҙ:
                                                                       r                   !
                                              N
                                              вҠӨ                            log S вҲ’ log Оҙ
                          max (D:,i ) X:,i вүӨ                      1+                           .
                          iвҲҲS                N +2                               Nc

Next, we will provide a high probability upper bound for maxiМё=j (D:,i )вҠӨ X:,j . Observe that when
i Мё= j, we have

                                                                                  N
                                           1                         2    X 1
                  (D:,i )вҠӨ X:,j =               MQ (X:,i )вҠӨ X:,j =              Xk,i Xk,j ,
                                         2N + 1                    2N + 1   Пғd2
                                                                                 k=1


where Xk,i Xk,j is a centered sub-exponential random variable. Then, from the tail bound for sub-
exponential random variables, there exist constants c and 0 < s вүӨ 1 such that
                              (      N
                                                          )
                                   1 X 1
                                       ( 2 Xk,i Xk,j ) вүӨ s вүҘ 1 вҲ’ exp вҲ’ N cs2 .

                          P
                                   N    Пғd
                                        k=1



                                                           24
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Then, we have
                             (                    N
                                                                        )
                                           2     X     1
                           P max                     ( Xk,i Xk,j ) вүӨ s
                              iМё=j 2 + 2N              Пғd
                                                 k=1
                              (                 N
                                                                      )
                                           1 X 1
                           вүҘ P max                 ( Xk,i Xk,j ) вүӨ s
                                   iМё=j N           Пғd
                                               k=1
                                     (                  N
                                                                              )
                                          [ n 1 X            1               o
                           =1вҲ’P                            ( Xk,i Xk,j ) > s
                                                    N       Пғd
                                        i,j:iМё=j       k=1
                                              (      N
                                                                           )
                                     X            1 X 1
                           вүҘ1вҲ’             P             ( Xk,i Xk,j ) > s
                                                 N        Пғd
                                  i,j:iМё=j          k=1
                                          (        N
                                                                         )
                                  X            1 X 1
                           вүҘ1вҲ’          P             ( Xk,i Xk,j ) > s
                                   i,j
                                               N       Пғd
                                                  k=1

                           вүҘ 1 вҲ’ d2 exp вҲ’ N cs2 .

          q
              log dвҲ’log Оҙ
Let s =           Nc      , thus with probability at least 1 вҲ’ Оҙ, we obtain
                                                           r
                                                вҠӨ              log d вҲ’ log Оҙ
                                  max (D:,i ) X:,i вүӨ                         .
                                   iМё=j                             Nc
Then, the proof is complete.

To prove Theorem 5.1, we first state an equivalent theorem here:
Theorem D.1 (Equivalent form of Theorem 5.1). Suppose Assumption 1 holds. Let Оҙ вҲҲ (0, 1).
For a K-layer Transformer model with the structure described in Section 4.3, there exists a set of
parameters in the Transformer such that for any n вҲҲ [N0 , N ], with probability at least 1 вҲ’ 3Оҙ, we
have
                                            (K+1)
                                          вҲҘОІ2n+1 вҲ’ ОІ вҲ— вҲҘ вүӨ c1 eвҲ’Оұn K ,
          (K+1)
where ОІ2n+1 = [H(K+1) ]d+1:2d+1,2n+1 and
                                                     r                        r                   !
                            2                            log d вҲ’ log Оҙ            log S вҲ’ log Оҙ
              Оұn = вҲ’ log 1 вҲ’ Оі + Оі(2S вҲ’ 1)                             +Оі                             ,   (D.3)
                            3                                 nc                       nc

c1 = вҲҘОІ вҲ— вҲҘ1 and N0 = 8(4S вҲ’ 2)2 log d+logc SвҲ’log Оҙ . Here, c is a positive constant and Оі can be any
positive constant less than 1.6.
                                        1
To prove Theorem D.1, first, for Dn = 2n+1 [X]1:n,: (MV )вҠӨ defined in Equation (4.4), we define
an event:
                  (                                        r                !
                                   вҠӨ            n             log S вҲ’ log Оҙ
              A = min ([Dn ]:,i ) X1:n,i вүҘ            1вҲ’                      ,
                     iвҲҲS                      n+2                   nc
                                                           r                 !
                                    вҠӨ            n             log S вҲ’ log Оҙ
                    max ([Dn ]:,i ) X1:n,i вүӨ           1+                      ,
                     iвҲҲS                      n+2                   nc
                                              r                 )
                                    вҠӨ            log d вҲ’ log Оҙ
                    max ([Dn ]:,i ) X1:n,i вүӨ                     .                        (D.4)
                     iМё=j                             nc
Next, we introduce a proposition as following.
Proposition 2. Suppose Assumption 1 and event A defined in Equation (D.4) hold. For a K-layer
Transformer model with the structure described in Section 4.3, and let the input sequence satisfy
Equation (C.4). Then, there exists a set of parameters such that if n вҲҲ [N0 , N ], we have
                                            (K+1)
                                          вҲҘОІ2n+1 вҲ’ ОІ вҲ— вҲҘ вүӨ c1 eвҲ’Оұn K ,


                                                      25
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


             (K+1)
where ОІ2n+1 = [H(K+1) ]d+1:2d+1,2n+1 , c1 = вҲҘОІ вҲ— вҲҘ1 , and N0 = 8(4S вҲ’ 2)2 log d+logc SвҲ’log Оҙ . Оұn
is given in Equation (D.3). Here, c is a positive constant and Оі can be any positive constant less
than 1.6.
                                                                                    (1)
Proof of Proposition 2. We prove it by induction. First, for k = 1, we initialize ОІ2n+1 = 0d , thus
  (1)
вҲҘОІ2n+1 вҲ’ ОІ вҲ— вҲҘ1 = вҲҘОІ вҲ— вҲҘ1 . Note that c1 = eОұ вҲҘОІ вҲ— вҲҘ1 , so Proposition 2 holds for k = 1.
Next, we assume Proposition 2 holds for k. From the proof of Theorem 5.1, the input sequence of
the (k + 1)-th Transformer layer is of the following structure:
                         пЈ® вҠӨ
                           [X ]:,1 [XвҠӨ ]:,1 В· В· В· [XвҠӨ ]:,N [XвҠӨ ]:,N xN +1
                                                                              пЈ№
                         пЈҜ 0             y1     В·В·В·      0       yN       0 пЈә
               H(k+1) = пЈҜпЈ° ОІ (k+1) ОІ (k+1) В· В· В· ОІ (k+1)         (k+1)  (k+1) пЈ» ,
                                                                              пЈә
                             1          2               2N вҲ’1   ОІ2N    ОІ2N +1
                               1          0     В·В·В·      1        0       1
where

                 (k+1)            (k)                          (k)
               ОІ2n+1 = SОё(k) ОІ2n+1 вҲ’ Оі (k) (Dn )вҠӨ ([X]1:n,: ОІ2n+1 вҲ’ y1:n ) ,

From Lemma 1, let Оі (k) = Оі, then for c1 = вҲҘОІ вҲ— вҲҘ1 , c2 = log Оі(2SвҲ’1)Пғmax1 +|1вҲ’ОіПғmin | , we have
   (k)
вҲҘОІ2n+1 вҲ’ ОІ вҲ— вҲҘ вүӨ c1 eвҲ’c2 (kвҲ’1) if the following conditions hold:
                                Оі(2S вҲ’ 1)Пғmax + |1 вҲ’ ОіПғmin | вүӨ 1,                            (D.5)
                                             вҠӨ
                              0 вүӨ Оі([Dn ]:,i ) X1:n,i вүӨ 1,    вҲҖi вҲҲ [d].                      (D.6)
First, let
                                                          log d + log S вҲ’ log Оҙ
                     n вүҘ N0    where N0 = 8(4S вҲ’ 2)2                            .            (D.7)
                                                                    c
By rearranging Inequality D.7, we have
                                           r
                      вҲҡ        вҲҡ              log d + log S вҲ’ log Оҙ
                        n вүҘ 2 2(4S вҲ’ 2)
                                                         c
                                          r
                              вҲҡ              log d + log S вҲ’ 2 log Оҙ
                          вүҘ 2(4S вҲ’ 2)
                                                        c
                                        r                   r                !
                                           log d вҲ’ log Оҙ       log S вҲ’ log Оҙ
                          вүҘ (4S вҲ’ 2)                      +
                                                  c                   c
                                     r                     r
                                         log d вҲ’ log Оҙ       log S вҲ’ log Оҙ
                          вүҘ (4S вҲ’ 2)                    +                  .                 (D.8)
                                               c                    c
Inequality D.8 is equivalent to
                                    r                     r                !
                      1               log d вҲ’ log Оҙ     1 log S вҲ’ log Оҙ         1
                     вҲҡ     (2S вҲ’ 1)                  +                        вүӨ
                       n                     c          2          c            2
                                r                           r                 !
                                  log d вҲ’ log Оҙ     1           log S вҲ’ log Оҙ
                 =вҮ’ (2S вҲ’ 1)                      вүӨ     1вҲ’
                                        nc          2                 nc
                                r                                 r                !
                                  log d вҲ’ log Оҙ        n             log S вҲ’ log Оҙ
                 =вҮ’ (2S вҲ’ 1)                      вүӨ          1вҲ’                     .        (D.9)
                                        nc          n+2                   nc
Combining Inequality D.9 with Equation (D.4) we have
                                                 r
                                                   log d вҲ’ log Оҙ
                       Пғmax (2S вҲ’ 1) вүӨ (2S вҲ’ 1)
                                                         nc
                                                    r                !
                                          n            log S вҲ’ log Оҙ
                                      вүӨ         1вҲ’
                                        n+2                 nc
                                         вүӨ Пғmin .                                           (D.10)


                                                 26
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Next, recall that MV = Пғ22 IdГ—d and ([Dn ]:,i )вҠӨ X1:n,i = 2n+1
                                                            1
                                                               (X1:n,i )вҠӨ MV X1:n,i . Therefore, for
                               d
any i вҲҲ [d], we have Оі([Dn ]:,i )вҠӨ X1:n,i вүҘ 0 if Оі вүҘ 0. Note that if Оі satisfies the following condition:

                                          1               1
                          Оі вүӨ min            ,                              .                     (D.11)
                                         Пғmin max{([Dn ]:,i )вҠӨ X1:n,i }
Then, Inequality D.6 will hold and 1 вҲ’ ОіПғmin вүҘ 0. Besides, we have
                          Оі(2S вҲ’ 1)Пғmax + |1 вҲ’ ОіПғmin | вүӨ ОіПғmin + |1 вҲ’ ОіПғmin |                                (D.12)
                                                       = ОіПғmin + 1 вҲ’ ОіПғmin                                   (D.13)
                                                       = 1,
where Inequality D.12 is derived from Inequality D.10, and Equation (D.13) is obtained using Equa-
tion (D.11). Consequently, Inequalities D.5 and D.6 hold if event A occurs. Furthermore, under the
condition that event A occurs, by setting
                                                                  1
                                           ОівүӨ                    q                   ,                       (D.14)
                                                   n                  log SвҲ’log Оҙ
                                                  n+2       1+             nc

we have Оі satisfies Equation (D.11). Note that we assume n вүҘ N0 . Thus, we have
                               1                                 1                        2
                              q                   вүҘ         q                  вүҘ         q          вүҘ 1.6.
                                                                 log SвҲ’log Оҙ                 1
                n
                         1+        log SвҲ’log Оҙ         1+            N0 c
                                                                                    1+    8(4SвҲ’2)
               n+2                      nc

Therefore, any choice of Оі such that Оі вүӨ 1.6 will ensure that Inequality (D.14) is satisfied. Next,
noting that event A holds and Оі satisfies Equation (D.11), we obtain
         (k)
      вҲҘОІ2n+1 вҲ’ ОІ вҲ— вҲҘ
                                              kвҲ’1
       вүӨ вҲҘОІ вҲ— вҲҘ1 Оі(2S вҲ’ 1)Пғmax + |1 вҲ’ ОіПғmin |
                          r                                 r               !!kвҲ’1
            вҲ—               log d вҲ’ log Оҙ          n          log S вҲ’ log Оҙ
       вүӨ вҲҘОІ вҲҘ1 Оі(2S вҲ’ 1)                  +1вҲ’Оі         1вҲ’
                                 nc               n+2               nc
                          r                                     r                !kвҲ’1
            вҲ—               log d вҲ’ log Оҙ          n        n      log S вҲ’ log Оҙ
       вүӨ вҲҘОІ вҲҘ1 Оі(2S вҲ’ 1)                  +1вҲ’Оі        +Оі
                                 nc               n+2     n+2           nc
                          r                           r               !kвҲ’1
                            log d вҲ’ log Оҙ       2       log S вҲ’ log Оҙ
       вүӨ вҲҘОІ вҲ— вҲҘ1 Оі(2S вҲ’ 1)                +1вҲ’ Оі+Оі
                                 nc             3            nc
       = c1 eвҲ’Оұn (kвҲ’1) .
Therefore, the proof is complete.

Note that Lemma 3 demonstrates that event A occurs with a probability of at least 1 вҲ’ 2Оҙ. Therefore,
the proof of Theorem D.1 is completed by combining Lemma 3 with Proposition 2.

D.2   P ROOF OF R EMARK 4

Note that in Appendix D.2, we assume there is a constraint on the support of ОІ вҲ— : its support set lies
within a subset S вҠӮ [1 : d], with S < |S| вүӨ d, where S denotes the sparsity of ОІ вҲ— .We establish the
corollary by demonstrating the following corollary:
Corollary D.1 (Equivalent statement of Remark 4.). Suppose Assumption 1 holds and S вүӨ |S| вүӨ d.
For a K-layer Transformer model with the structure described in Section 4.3, and let the input
sequence satisfy Equation (C.4). Then, there exists a set of parameters such that if n вүҘ N0S , with
probability at least 1 вҲ’ Оҙ, we have
                                                 (K)                           S
                                            вҲҘОІ2n+1 вҲ’ ОІ вҲ— вҲҘ вүӨ c1 eвҲ’Оұn K ,


                                                             27
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


        (K)
where ОІ2n+1 = [H(K+1) ]d+1:2d+1,2N +1 and
                                        r                    r               !
        S               2                 log |S| вҲ’ log Оҙ      log S вҲ’ log Оҙ
       Оұn = вҲ’ log 1 вҲ’ Оі + Оі(2S вҲ’ 1)                       +Оі                   ,               (D.15)
                        3                       nc                  nc

c1 = вҲҘОІ вҲ— вҲҘ1 , and N0p = 8(4S вҲ’ 2)2 log |S|+log
                                              c
                                                SвҲ’log Оҙ
                                                        . Here, c is a positive constant, and Оі can be
any positive constant less than 1.6.

Proof of Corollary D.1. W.l.o.g., assume S = {1, 2, . . . , |S|}. First, we modify the MLP layers
based on Equation (C.2). We maintain the structure of W2 as described in Equation (C.2), and
reconstruct W1 and b(k) . We define the following submatrices:
                            0(d+1)Г—(d+1)     0(d+1)Г—|S| 0(d+1)Г—(dвҲ’|S|)        0d+1
                          пЈ®                                                          пЈ№
                          пЈҜ 0                  I|S|Г—|S|        0|S|Г—(dвҲ’|S|)    0|S| пЈә
             W1,sub(1) = пЈ° |S|Г—(d+1)                                                   ,
                            0(dвҲ’|S|)Г—(d+1) 0(dвҲ’|S|)Г—|S| I(dвҲ’|S|)Г—(dвҲ’|S|) 0(dвҲ’|S|) пЈ»
                               01Г—(d+1)         01Г—|S|         01Г—(dвҲ’|S|)       0
                            0(d+1)Г—(d+1)     0(d+1)Г—|S| 0(d+1)Г—(dвҲ’|S|)        0d+1
                          пЈ®                                                          пЈ№
                          пЈҜ 0                 вҲ’I|S|Г—|S|        0|S|Г—(dвҲ’|S|)    0|S| пЈә
             W1,sub(2) = пЈ° |S|Г—(d+1)                                                   ,
                            0(dвҲ’|S|)Г—(d+1) 0(dвҲ’|S|)Г—|S| I(dвҲ’|S|)Г—(dвҲ’|S|) 0(dвҲ’|S|) пЈ»
                               01Г—(d+1)         01Г—|S|         01Г—(dвҲ’|S|)       0
                          0(d+1)Г—(d+1)     0(d+1)Г—|S|       0(d+1)Г—(dвҲ’|S|)    0d+1
                        пЈ®                                                            пЈ№
                        пЈҜ 0                  I|S|Г—|S|         0|S|Г—(dвҲ’|S|)     0|S| пЈә
            W1,sub(3) = пЈ° |S|Г—(d+1)                                                    ,
                          0(dвҲ’|S|)Г—(d+1) 0(dвҲ’|S|)Г—|S| вҲ’I(dвҲ’|S|)Г—(dвҲ’|S|) 0(dвҲ’|S|) пЈ»
                             01Г—(d+1)        01Г—|S|           01Г—(dвҲ’|S|)        0
                            0(d+1)Г—(d+1)     0(d+1)Г—|S| 0(d+1)Г—(dвҲ’|S|)        0d+1
                          пЈ®                                                          пЈ№
                          пЈҜ 0                 вҲ’I|S|Г—|S|        0|S|Г—(dвҲ’|S|)    0|S| пЈә
             W1,sub(4) = пЈ° |S|Г—(d+1)                                                   .
                            0(dвҲ’|S|)Г—(d+1) 0(dвҲ’|S|)Г—|S| I(dвҲ’|S|)Г—(dвҲ’|S|) 0(dвҲ’|S|) пЈ»
                               01Г—(d+1)         01Г—|S|         01Г—(dвҲ’|S|)       0


To simplify notations, let
                                                         05d+5
                                                     пЈ®             пЈ№
                                   W1,sub(1)
                                  пЈ®          пЈ№
                                                     пЈҜвҲ’Оё(k) В· 1|S| пЈә
                                  пЈҜW1,sub(2) пЈә (k) пЈҜ 0
                             W1 = пЈ°            , b = пЈҜ 2d+2вҲ’|S| пЈә .
                                                                   пЈә
                                   W1,sub(3) пЈ»       пЈ° Оё(k) В· 1 пЈ»
                                   W1,sub(4)                   |S|
                                                       01+dвҲ’|S|
The output of the modified MLP layer is
                                                   [hi ]1:d+1
                                            пЈ®                       пЈ№
                                          пЈҜS (k) ([hi ]d+2:d+|S|+1 )пЈә
                               MLP(hi ) = пЈ° Оё                       пЈ».
                                                    0dвҲ’|S|
                                                   [hi ]2d+2
Next, we also modify the parameters in the self-attention layers. For convenience, we introduce a
projection matrix IS = diag(I|S|Г—|S| , 0(dвҲ’|S|)Г—(dвҲ’|S|) ). The reconstructed self-attention layers are
described below:
           пЈ®                                   пЈ№              пЈ®                          пЈ№
            0(d+1)Г—(d+1) 0(d+1)Г—d 0d+1                            0dГ—(2d+1)        0d
     (k)                        Q,(k)                   (k)                        Q,(k)
   QВұ1 = пЈ° 0dГ—(d+1)        IS MВұ1          0d пЈ» , QВұ2 = пЈ° 01Г—(2d+1)              mВұ2 пЈ»
              01Г—(d+1)        01Г—d        вҲ’B                    0(d+1)Г—(2d+1) 0d+1
           пЈ®                                  пЈ№               пЈ®                                  пЈ№
            0(d+1)Г—d 0(d+1)Г—(d+1) 0d+1                            0dГ—d      0d         0dГ—d+1
     (k)                                                (k)
   KВұ1 = пЈ° IS            0dГ—(d+1)         0d пЈ» , KВұ2 = пЈ° 01Г—d                1        01Г—(d+1) пЈ»
              01Г—d       01Г—(d+1)          1                    0(d+1)Г—d 0d+1 0(d+1)Г—(d+1)
           пЈ®                           пЈ№                      пЈ®                          пЈ№
             0(d+1)Г—d 0(d+1)Г—(d+2)                              0(d+1)Г—d 0(d+1)Г—d+2
     (k)                                                (k)
   VВұ1 = пЈ°IS MV,(k)
                  Вұ1      0dГ—(d+2) пЈ» ,               VВұ2 = пЈ°IS MV,(k)
                                                                    Вұ2       0dГ—(d+2) пЈ» .
               02Г—d       02Г—(d+2)                                02Г—d       02Г—(d+2)


                                                 28
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Therefore, when the input sequence is
                       пЈ® вҠӨ
                         [X ]:,1 [XвҠӨ ]:,1                  [XвҠӨ ]:,N   [XвҠӨ ]:,N
                                                                                         пЈ№
                                                    В·В·В·                           xN +1
                             0        y1            В·В·В·       0         yN          0 пЈә
               H(k) = пЈҜ
                       пЈҜ
                                                                                         пЈә,
                       пЈ° ОІ (k)       ОІ
                                       (k)
                                                    В·В·В·
                                                             (k)
                                                            ОІ2N вҲ’1
                                                                         (k)
                                                                        ОІ2N
                                                                                   (k)
                                                                                  ОІ2N +1 пЈ»
                             1        2
                             1        0             В·В·В·       1          0          1
and the corresponding output of the self-attention layer satisfies
                                   H(k+1) = diag(IS , 1, IS , 1)H(k+1) .
Then, it is equivalent to consider the input sequence as
            пЈ® вҠӨ
              [X ]1:|S|,1 [XвҠӨ ]1:|S|,2 В· В· В· [XвҠӨ ]1:|S|,N         [XвҠӨ ]1:|S|,N
                                                                                                 пЈ№
                                                                                   [xN +1 ]1:|S|
            пЈҜ (k)0
            пЈҜ                   y1       В·В·В·        0                 yN                 0       пЈә
                                                                                                 пЈә.
            пЈ° [ОІ ]1:|S| [ОІ (k) ]1:|S| В· В· В· [ОІ (k) ]1:|S|            (k)
                                                                   [ОІ2N ]1:|S|
                                                                                     (k)
                                                                                  [ОІ2N +1 ]1:|S| пЈ»
                1             2                  2N вҲ’1
                  1             0        В·В·В·        1                  0                 1
Consequently, by applying Theorem 5.1 to this sub-problem, we derive the corresponding corollary.


E     D EFERRED P ROOFS IN S ECTION 5.2
E.1    P ROOF OF T HEOREM 5.2

Note that in Theorem 5.2, we have two results: first, the label prediction loss for the linear read-out
function, and second, the label prediction loss for the quadratic read-out function.
We start by introducing the following lemma, which provides an upper bound on вҲҘОІj(k) вҲҘ for every j
and k вүҘ 2.
Lemma 4. If ОІ (k) satisfies Equation (C.12) and вҲҘОІ (k) вҲҘ вүӨ Cx , then we have вҲҘОІ (k+1) вҲҘ вүӨ Cx ,
              dbx bОІ (N +1)
where Cx = Пғmin    (XвҠӨ X)
                            .

Proof of Lemma 4. From Equation (C.12), we derive that
                         Оі (k) V вҠӨ

    k+1            (k)                                     (k)
   ОІi    = SОё(k) ОІi вҲ’         M [X ]:,1: iвҲ’1 [X]1: iвҲ’1 ,: ОІi вҲ’ Y1: iвҲ’1
                           i               2            2           2


                       Оі (k) V вҠӨ                               Оі (k) V вҠӨ

                                                          (k)
         = SОё(k)    IвҲ’       M [X ]:,1: iвҲ’1 [X]1: iвҲ’1 ,: ОІi вҲ’       M [X ]:,1: iвҲ’1 Y1: iвҲ’1 .
                         i               2         2             i              2       2


Since вҲҘSОё(k) (x)вҲҘ вүӨ вҲҘxвҲҘ, it follows that
                        Оі (k) V вҠӨ                                     Оі (k) V вҠӨ

      k+1                                                       (k)
   вҲҘОІi вҲҘ вүӨ          IвҲ’        M [X ]:,1: iвҲ’1 [X]1: iвҲ’1 ,: ОІi вҲ’             M [X ]:,1: iвҲ’1 Y1: iвҲ’1
                          i                2         2                  i                 2        2

                         (k)                                                   (k)

                       Оі
                                                                    (k)      Оі
            вүӨ 1вҲ’            2 Пғmin [XвҠӨ ]:,1: iвҲ’1 [X]1: iвҲ’1 ,:     вҲҘОІi вҲҘ +           вҲҘ[XвҠӨ ]:,1: iвҲ’1 Y1: iвҲ’1 вҲҘ
            (i)       i В· Пғd                  2         2                   i В· Пғd2             2       2


                             Оі (k)                                  Оі (k)

                                                           (k)
                                      Пғmin XвҠӨ X вҲҘОІi вҲҘ + 2 dbx bОІ .

             вүӨ 1вҲ’                   2
            (ii)       (N + 1) В· Пғd                                  Пғd

The satisfaction of Inequality (i) is achieved by setting MV = Пғ22 IdГ—d , while Inequality (ii) is
                                                                      d
verified through the application of the Cauchy interlacing theorem. Consequently, by integrating the
                   dbx bОІ (N +1)
expression Cx = Пғmin    (XвҠӨ X)
                                 with the aforementioned inequality, we obtain

                                 Оі (k)                 dbx bОІ (N + 1) Оі (k)

            k+1                                  вҠӨ
         вҲҘОІi вҲҘ вүӨ 1 вҲ’                      Пғmin X X                       + 2 dbx bОІ вүӨ Cx ,
                            (N + 1) В· Пғd2                 Пғmin (XвҠӨ X)       Пғd
Thus, the proof is complete.


                                                      29
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Next, we prove the following theorem to demonstrate the prediction loss for the linear read-out
function.
Theorem E.1. Suppose Assumption 1 holds. Consider a Transformer with K + 1 layers, where the
first K layers have the structure described in Section 4.3, and the input sequence is as defined in
Equation (C.4). Then, if n вүҘ N0 , there exists a set of parameters in the Transformer such that the
following inequality holds with probability at least 1 вҲ’ Оҙ вҖІ вҲ’ nОҙ:
                                                   K                   KвҲ’1
                                              2          c4 K      2
                      вҲҘyn вҲ’ ybn вҲҘ вүӨ bx 1 вҲ’ Оі           + вҲҡ      1вҲ’ Оі         ,
                                              3              n     3
where
                                             log d + log S вҲ’ log Оҙ
                             N0 = 8(4S вҲ’ 2)2                       ,
                                                       c
                            вҲҡ     r
                           2 2bx О· log d + log S вҲ’ log Оҙ    2B вҖІ     2Cx bx
                       c4 = вҲҡ                             + вҲҡ + вҲҡ ,
                              p               c                p        p
where c is a positive constant, О· is defined in Equation (E.7), Оҙ вҖІ B вҖІ , p are constants defined in
Appendix E.1.

We are now prepared to demonstrate Theorem E.1.

Proof. For this layer, we assign one attention head to follow the structure described below. Consider
the case where i = 2n вҲ’ 1 and n вү« N0 , and denote [XвҠӨ ]:,n as xn . For the first attention head, its
structure is as follows:

                                                      пЈ®   пЈ№
                    0d
                       пЈ№
                       пЈ®                              0d
                                                                                              0d
                                                                                         "           #
                   пЈҜ1пЈә                            пЈҜ вҲ’B вҖІ пЈә
     Qlast
      1 hi
           (K+1)
                 = пЈ° пЈ»,
                    xn
                                   Klast
                                    1    h
                                          (K+1)
                                          i     = пЈҜ (K+1) пЈә ,
                                                  пЈ°ОІ      пЈ»
                                                                               (K+1)
                                                                       V1last hi     =   1{i%2=1} .
                                                    i                                        0d+1
                     0                                0
Therefore, we obtain
                                   (K+1) вҠӨ            (K+1)            (K+1)
                         (Qlast
                           1 hi         ) (Klast
                                            1 hj               ) = xвҠӨ
                                                                    n ОІj         вҲ’ BвҖІ.
                 (K+1)                                                                       (K+1)
Let p = P{xвҠӨ  n ОІj      вүҘ B вҖІ }, which is the probability that the inner product xвҠӨ
                                                                                  n ОІj       exceeds
                вҖІ
the threshold B . This probability is the same for any n due to the symmetry of the distribution. We
                                                                                            (K+1)
introduce a random variable oj вҲҲ {0, 1} to represent the following: we set oj = 0 if xвҠӨ n ОІj       <
                        (K+1)
B вҖІ and oj = 1 if xвҠӨ
                   n ОІj     вүҘ B вҖІ . We define the following events:
                 n X          o                 n       p       X            p   o
           E1 =         oj = 0 ,      E2 (Пө) = pn вҲ’ вҲ’ Пө вүӨ           oj вүӨ pn вҲ’ + Пө .
                                                        2                    2
                   jвүӨN0                                                    jвүӨn

Assume E1 вҲ© E2 (Пө) holds. Then, we obtain
                              i
                           1 XD last (K+1) last (K+1) E                (K+1)
                                  Q1 hi      , K1 hj         В· V1last hj
                           i j=1
                                                              0d
                                 i
                                                        "             #
                              1 X   вҠӨ (K+1)
                                                вҲ’ B В· 1{i%2=1}

                                                   вҖІ
                           =        Пғ xn ОІj
                              i j=1                          0d+1
                                                                      0d
                                                               "           #
                                 1
                                                      вҲ’ B В· 1{i%2=1} .
                                      X
                                             вҠӨ (K+1)      вҖІ
                           =                x ОІ
                              2n вҲ’ 1 j:o =1 n j                     0d+1 .
                                        j

Let the last MLP layer satisfies
                                                           пЈ®    пЈ№
                                             "
                                                 0d
                                                      #  0d
                                     MLP        = пЈ° p2 yb + B вҖІ пЈ» ,
                                                 yb
                                         0d+1 .       0d+1 ,


                                                      30
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


it follows that
                             пЈ«                                                                   пЈ¶
                                   i
                                 1 XD              (K+1)          (K+1)
                                                                          E
                                                                                         (K+1) пЈё
                    MLPпЈӯ                 Qlast
                                          1 hi              , Klast
                                                               1 hj           В· V1last hj
                                 i j=1
                         пЈ®                                                           пЈ№
                                                       0d     P
                                                  вҠӨ (K+1)   2( o )
                          2
                                                          вҲ’ 2npвҲ’pj B вҖІ + B вҖІ пЈ» .
                                    P
                    = пЈ° 2npвҲ’p            j:oj =1 xn ОІj
                                                      0d+1 .
                                                       P
                                  вҠӨ       (K+1)      2( o )
               2
                                                   вҲ’ 2npвҲ’pj B вҖІ + B вҖІ , therefore
                     P
Denote ybn = 2npвҲ’p       j:oj =1 xn ОІj

                                                                      P
                                            2     X         (K+1)   2( oj ) вҖІ
            |yn вҲ’ ybn | = xвҠӨ вҲ—
                           nОІ вҲ’                        xвҠӨ ОІ       +         B вҲ’ BвҖІ
                                         2np вҲ’ p j:o =1 n j         2np вҲ’ p
                                                        j

                                                                          P
                                                2     X         (K+1)   2( oj ) вҖІ
                     вүӨ вҲҘxn вҲҘ ОІ вҲ— вҲ’                         xвҠӨ ОІ       +         B вҲ’ BвҖІ
                                             2np вҲ’ p j:o =1 n j         2np вҲ’ p
                                                             j



                                             2     X (K+1)      2Пө
                     вүӨ bx ОІ вҲ— вҲ’                          ОІj +         |B вҖІ |.                            (E.1)
                                          2np вҲ’ p j:o =1      2np вҲ’ p
                                                        j


We randomly select a set {oвҖІj : j вүҘ 2N0 вҲ’ 1} such that |{oвҖІj }| вүӨ Пө, satisfying the following
conditions:
                           r
вҖў If |{oj : oj = 1}| вүҘ pn вҲ’ , then
                           2
                                                                      r
                                         {oj : oj = 1} \ {oвҖІj } = pn вҲ’ ;
                                                                      2
                           r
вҖў If |{oj : oj = 1}| < pn вҲ’ , then
                           2
                                                                      r
                                         {oj : oj = 1} вҲӘ {oвҖІj } = pn вҲ’ .
                                                                      2

We define the set O as follows:
                        пЈұ                                                  r
                        пЈІ{oj : oj = 1} \ {oвҖІj }, if |{oj : oj = 1}| вүҘ pn вҲ’ ,
                        пЈҙ
                                                                           2
                   O=
                        пЈі{oj : oj = 1} вҲӘ {oвҖІj }, if |{oj : oj = 1}| < pn вҲ’ r .
                        пЈҙ
                                                                           2
Therefore, we have

                            2     X         (K+1)
                  ОІвҲ— вҲ’                 xвҠӨ ОІ
                         2np вҲ’ p j:o =1 n j
                                         j



                                1   X (K+1)      1                              X            (K+1)
                  вүӨ ОІвҲ— вҲ’          p   ОІj    +                                            xвҠӨ
                                                                                          n ОІj
                             np вҲ’ 2           np вҲ’ p2
                                         j:oj вҲҲO                          j:oj вҲҲ{oвҖІj }


                                1   X (K+1)   C x bx Пө
                  вүӨ ОІвҲ— вҲ’          p   ОІj    +          ,                                                 (E.2)
                             np вҲ’ 2           np вҲ’ p2
                                         j:oj вҲҲO

where Equation (E.2) follows from Lemma 4. Observe that

                            1   X (K+1)      1   X                                          (K+1)
                  ОІвҲ— вҲ’        p   ОІj    вүӨ      p                                  ОІ вҲ— вҲ’ ОІj           .
                         np вҲ’ 2           np вҲ’ 2
                                    j:oj вҲҲO                           j:oj вҲҲO



                                                            31
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Then, from Theorem 5.1, the following inequality holds with probability at least 1 вҲ’ 3nОҙ:
                      (K+1)                        (K+1)
        X                           X                            X
              вҲҘОІ вҲ— вҲ’ ОІ2i+1 вҲҘ вүӨ            вҲҘОІ вҲ— вҲ’ ОІ2i+1 вҲҘ1 вүӨ              вҲҘОІ вҲ— вҲҘ1 eвҲ’Оұi K ,               (E.3)
       i:o2i+1 вҲҲO                   i:o2i+1 вҲҲO                         i:o2i+1 вҲҲO

where
                                           r                  r               !
                             2               log d вҲ’ log Оҙ      log S вҲ’ log Оҙ
               Оұi = вҲ’ log 1 вҲ’ Оі + Оі(2S вҲ’ 1)                +Оі                  .
                             3                     ic                 ic

From CauchyвҖ“Schwarz Inequality we have:
            r                  r                            r
              log d вҲ’ log Оҙ      log S вҲ’ log Оҙ                log d + log S вҲ’ log Оҙ
   Оі(2S вҲ’ 1)                +Оі                 вүӨ 2Оі(2S вҲ’ 1)                         .                   (E.4)
                    ic                 ic                               ic
Combining Inequalities E.3 and E.4 gives
                                                                            r                           !K
   X                 (K+1)
                                           X            2                       log d + log S вҲ’ log Оҙ
             вҲҘОІ вҲ— вҲ’ ОІ2i+1 вҲҘ вүӨ вҲҘОІ вҲ— вҲҘ1                1 вҲ’ Оі + 2Оі(2S вҲ’ 1)                                      .
                                                        3                                 ic
i:o2i+1 вҲҲO                              i:o2i+1 вҲҲO

Note that, by induction, it is straightforward to prove that the following inequality holds if 1 вҲ’ 23 Оі вүӨ
1:
                                            r                         !K
                         2                     log d + log S вҲ’ log Оҙ
                   1 вҲ’ Оі + 2Оі(2S вҲ’ 1)
                         3                               ic
                                  K                    KвҲ’1 r
                             2                     2            log d + log S вҲ’ log Оҙ
                  вүӨ 1вҲ’ Оі             + О·i K 1 вҲ’ Оі                                     ,             (E.5)
                             3                     3                      ic
when О·i satisfies
                                              1 вҲ’ 23 Оі

                            О·i вүҘ                    q                  ,                                (E.6)
                                 1 вҲ’ 23 Оі вҲ’ (K вҲ’ 1) log d+log  SвҲ’log Оҙ

                                                            ic

which can be satisfied by simply setting
                                                1 вҲ’ 32 Оі

                          О·i = О· =                    q                 .                               (E.7)
                                   1 вҲ’ 23 Оі вҲ’ (K вҲ’ 1) log d+log SвҲ’log Оҙ

                                                             N0 c

Therefore, Inequality (E.6) holds for any i вүҘ N0 . Based on Inequality (E.5), we have
                                  r                        !K
  X            2                     log d + log S вҲ’ log Оҙ
           1 вҲ’ Оі + 2Оі(2S вҲ’ 1)
               3                               ic
i:o2i+1 вҲҲO
       N0 +npвҲ’ p
               2
                                           r                           !K
          X            2                       log d + log S вҲ’ log Оҙ
   вүӨ                1 вҲ’ Оі + 2Оі(2S вҲ’ 1)
                       3                                 ic
        i=N0 +1
       N0 +npвҲ’ p
               2            K                     KвҲ’1 N0 +npвҲ’ p r
          X           2

                                        2                X 2           log d + log S вҲ’ log Оҙ
   вүӨ                1вҲ’ Оі        + О·K 1 вҲ’ Оі
                      3                 3                                        ic
        i=N0 +1                                           i=N0 +1
                    K             KвҲ’1 r                       N0 +npвҲ’ p
                                        log d + log S вҲ’ log Оҙ X 2 1

          p     2             2
   вүӨ (np вҲ’ ) 1 вҲ’ Оі    + О·K 1 вҲ’ Оі                                        вҲҡ
          2     3             3                   c                       i
                                                                i=N0 +1
                    K             KвҲ’1 r                         r
          p     2             2         log d + log S вҲ’ log Оҙ               p p
   вүӨ (np вҲ’ ) 1 вҲ’ Оі    + О·K 1 вҲ’ Оі                              2    N0 + np вҲ’ вҲ’ N0 .
          2     3             3                   c                         2
                                                                             (E.8)


                                                     32
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


By combining Inequalities (E.3) and (E.7), we obtain
                        (K+1)
        X
               вҲҘОІ вҲ— вҲ’ ОІ2i+1 вҲҘ
          i:o2i+1 вҲҲO
                           K             KвҲ’1 r
                 p     2             2         log d + log S вҲ’ log Оҙ
          вүӨ (np вҲ’ ) 1 вҲ’ Оі    + О·K 1 вҲ’ Оі
                 2     3             3                   c
                           K      r               KвҲ’1 r
                 p     2                p     2            log d + log S вҲ’ log Оҙ
          вүӨ (np вҲ’ ) 1 вҲ’ Оі    + 2О·K np вҲ’    1вҲ’ Оі                                  .
                 2     3                2     3                      c
Therefore,
             n                                    K   вҲҡ            KвҲ’1 r
   1         X
                         вҲ—      (K+1)         2      2 2О·K     2         log d + log S вҲ’ log Оҙ
                    вҲҘОІ       вҲ’ ОІ2i+1 вҲҘ вүӨ    1вҲ’ Оі    + вҲҡ      1вҲ’ Оі                              .
np вҲ’ p2                                       3         np     3                   c
          i=N0 +1
                                                                                                (E.9)
Combining Equation (E.1), Equation (E.2) and Equation (E.9) we obtain
 вҲҘyn вҲ’ ybn вҲҘ
                K    вҲҡ                  KвҲ’1 r
             2      2 2bx О·K         2        log d + log S вҲ’ log Оҙ   2Пө вҖІ      2Cx bx Пө
  вүӨ bx 1 вҲ’ Оі      + вҲҡ            1вҲ’ Оі                               +    |B | +          .
             3          np           3                  c             np          np
          вҲҡ
Set Пө = K np(1 вҲ’ 2Оі/3)K , we obtain
                                           K                   KвҲ’1
                                        2       c4 K       2
                   вҲҘyn вҲ’ ybn вҲҘ вүӨ bx 1 вҲ’ Оі    + вҲҡ       1вҲ’ Оі         ,
                                        3          n       3
where
                          вҲҡ      r
                         2 2bx О· log d + log S вҲ’ log Оҙ        2|B вҖІ | 2Cx bx
                   c4 = вҲҡ                                  + вҲҡ + вҲҡ .
                             p                   c               p       p
                                                                      вҲҡ
Then, the theorem follows by denoting Оҙ вҖІ as Оҙ вҖІ = P{В¬E1 } + P{В¬E2 (K np(1 вҲ’ 2Оі/2)K ).



Finally, we establish the result concerning the label prediction loss presented in Theorem 5.2 through
the following corollary:
Corollary E.1. Suppose Assumption 1 holds. For a Transformer with K layers, where all layer
structures are described in Section 4.3, and the input sequence is set as in Equation (C.4), there
exists a set of parameters in the Transformer and an explicitly quadratic readout function F such
that, if n вүҘ N0 , the following inequality holds with probability at least 1 вҲ’ Оҙ:
                                           вҲҘyn+1 вҲ’ ybn+1 вҲҘ вүӨ c6 eвҲ’Оұn K ,
               вҲҡ
where c6 =         dbx c1 , and c1 and Оұn are defined in Theorem 5.1.

Proof of Corollary E.1. We set the V matrix in the read out function FV as
                                               0(d+1)Г—d
                                             "          #
                                       V=        IdГ—d     .
                                                 01Г—d
                                                      (K+1)
From Proposition 1, when i is an odd index, hi           is of the following structure:
                                                    пЈ® вҠӨ          пЈ№
                                                     [X ]:, i+1
                                                              2
                                             (K+1)  пЈҜ     0      пЈә
                                            hi      пЈ° ОІ (K+1) пЈ» .
                                                   =пЈҜ            пЈә
                                                       i
                                                          1


                                                        33
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Therefore, the output after the read-out function is
                                                (K+1)                      (K+1)
                                ybi+1 = FV (hi          ) = [X] i+1 ,: ОІi          .
                                   2                               2

                         вҲҡ
Note that [X] i+1 ,: вүӨ        dbx , we have
                2


                                                           (K+1)
                                                                           вҲҡ              (K+1)
               y i+1 вҲ’ ybi+1     вүӨ [X] i+1 ,:    ОІ вҲ— вҲ’ ОІi              вүӨ       dbx ОІ вҲ— вҲ’ ОІi       .
                    2     2              2


Combining with Theorem 5.1, the proof is thus complete.

Therefore, by combining Corollary E.1 and Theorem E.1, we arrive at the conclusion of Theo-
rem 5.2.


                                                    34
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


F                                     A DDITIONAL E XPERIMENT R ESULTS
In Section 6, we demonstrate that classical LISTA-type algorithms, such as LISTA, perform poorly
when applied to varying measurement matrices after being trained on a fixed measurement matrix
X. In this section, we further show that unlike LISTA-VM, these classical LISTA-type algorithms
fail to handle in-context sparse recovery problems, even when trained on varying measurements.
The training setup is identical to how we train LISTA-VM. Specifically, we set the number of iter-
ations to K = 12. During each epoch, we randomly sample 100 measurement matrices, each gen-
erating 500 instances from 500 randomly generated sparse vectors, resulting in a total of 50,000 in-
                                                                                 PN
stances per epoch. For each epoch, we minimize the sparse vector prediction loss j=1 вҲҘОІbj вҲ’ ОІj вҲҘ2
using gradient descent. We train the model for a total of 340 epochs and conduct in-context testing
at the end of every epoch.
In the results shown in Figure 2, we observe that the prediction error on varying X for meta-trained
LISTA and LISTA-CP remains around 3. As illustrated in the figure, there is no observable trend
indicating improvement in the error throughout the training process.


                                     3.4
                                               Prediction Error for Meta-Trained LISTA                                                                                         3.5
                                                                                                                                                                                             Prediction Error for Meta-Trained LISTA-CP
                                                                                                           Original                                                                                                            Original
                                                                                                           Smoothed (Window Size 5)                                                                                            Smoothed (Window Size 5)
                                                                                                                                                                               3.4
                                     3.3
    Prediction Error for Varying x


                                                                                                                                              Prediction Error for Varying x
                                                                                                                                                                               3.3
                                     3.2
                                                                                                                                                                               3.2
                                     3.1
                                                                                                                                                                               3.1

                                     3.0
                                                                                                                                                                               3.0

                                     2.9                                                                                                                                       2.9
                                           0   50     100     150     200                                  250        300        350                                                  0         50        100    150     200   250        300        350
                                                                Epoch                                                                                                                                              Epoch

                                                            (a) LISTA                                                                                                                                       (b) LISAT-CP

                                                Figure 2: Experimental results for meta-trained classic LISTA-type algorithms.
For comparison, in Figure 3, we also provide the results of the prediction error on varying X for
meta-trained LISTA-VM. The final prediction error is around 0.68, which is significantly more
promising compared to classic LISTA-type algorithms.


                                                                                                                            Prediction Error for LISTA-VM
                                                                                                                                                                                     Original
                                                                                                                                                                                     Smoothed (Window Size 5)
                                                                                                     1.2

                                                                                                     1.1
                                                                    Prediction Error for Varying x


                                                                                                     1.0

                                                                                                     0.9

                                                                                                     0.8

                                                                                                     0.7

                                                                                                     0.6

                                                                                                           0         50        100     150     200                                   250        300        350
                                                                                                                                         Epoch


                                                            Figure 3: Experimental results for meta-trained LISTA-VM


                                                                                                                                        35
