Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


R EFACTOR B ENCH : E VALUATING S TATEFUL R EASON -
ING IN L ANGUAGE AGENTS T HROUGH C ODE

 Dhruv Gautam1∗ Spandan Garg2 Jinu Jang2                    Neel Sundaresan2
 Roshanak Zilouchian Moghaddam2
 1
   UC Berkeley 2 Microsoft



                                               A BSTRACT

             Recent advances in language model (LM) agents and function calling have en-
             abled autonomous, feedback-driven systems to solve problems across various dig-
             ital domains. To better understand the unique limitations of LM agents, we intro-
             duce RefactorBench, a benchmark consisting of 100 large handcrafted multi-file
             refactoring tasks in popular open-source repositories. Solving tasks within Refac-
             torBench requires thorough exploration of dependencies across multiple files and
             strong adherence to relevant instructions. Every task is defined by 3 natural lan-
             guage instructions of varying specificity and is mutually exclusive, allowing for
             the creation of longer combined tasks on the same repository. Baselines on Refac-
             torBench reveal that current LM agents struggle with simple compositional tasks,
             solving only 22% of tasks with base instructions, in contrast to a human developer
             with short time constraints solving 87%. Through trajectory analysis, we identify
             various unique failure modes of LM agents, and further explore the failure mode
             of tracking past actions. By adapting a baseline agent to condition on representa-
             tions of state, we achieve a 43.9% improvement in solving RefactorBench tasks.
             We further extend our state-aware approach to encompass entire digital environ-
             ments and outline potential directions for future research. RefactorBench aims to
             support the study of LM agents by providing a set of real-world, multi-hop tasks
             within the realm of code.1


1       I NTRODUCTION

“Repetition is the root of all software evil” — Martin Fowler
Large language models (LLMs) have been quickly acquiring new capabilities (Bubeck et al., 2023),
leading towards adoption of AI-powered systems in various formats and domains. The increasing
usage of LLM powered tools like Github Copilot have greatly improved the capability of develop-
ers in software development tasks (Peng et al., 2023). More recently, an emphasis on multi-step
execution through LLM feedback loops has unlocked the ability to solve harder problems within a
variety of fields (Reed et al., 2022; Sumers et al., 2024; Yao & Narasimhan, 2023), including parts
of software engineering.
This new paradigm of solving larger software tasks has led to the construction of a variety of new
automated software engineering (ASE) systems, most being structured as LM agents (Wang et al.,
2024c; Cognition.ai, 2024; AWS Q Developer, 2024; Gauthier, 2024; Aide.dev, 2024; Örwall, 2024;
Yang et al., 2024; Tufano et al., 2024; Wang et al., 2024d; Chen et al., 2024a; Zhang et al., 2024b;
Arora et al., 2024; Xia et al., 2024; Zhang et al., 2024a). Evaluations for such systems are currently
largely comprised from real world data on Github (Jimenez et al., 2024; LaBash et al., 2024). While
being the strongest open-source signal for software engineering tasks at scale, Github is inherently
noisy through its snapshot nature, also requiring strong filtration and validation testing for reliable
evaluations (Chowdhury et al., 2024; Bowman & Dahl, 2021). We find that the filtration causes
skewed task styles, creating a necessity for new data to diversify coding benchmarks.
    ∗
        Work done during internship at Microsoft. Correspondence to dhruvgautam@berkeley.edu
    1
        Data available at: https://github.com/microsoft/RefactorBench


                                                      1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 1: RefactorBench task instances are multi-file refactors verified by custom AST unit testing.
Tasks are split over popular open-source Python repositories and reference solutions are withheld to
prevent overfitting to the task.


To address these challenges, we present RefactorBench, a benchmark designed to evaluate the
largely undocumented task of multi-file code refactoring in large codebases. Unlike isolated
function-level edits, multi-file refactoring requires comprehensive reasoning and composition of
multiple smaller changes. Our benchmark, RefactorBench, also allows for controlled analysis into
instruction-following through multiple instruction sets with specified and unspecified objectives. As
LLMs have been extremely proficient in function level editing over model generations (Jiang et al.,
2024), we find it important to evaluate the abilities of general LM agents given that they can reliably
perform core subtasks, which we verify in RefactorBench’s thorough filtering process. With unique
abstract syntax tree (AST) based unit testing, the evaluation suite checks for a comprehensive variety
of subtasks necessitated by the core refactor without dependence on exact line match.
Through evaluations of a baseline agent on RefactorBench, we find overfitting and poor perfor-
mance, solving a maximum of 35% of tasks with our easiest instruction set. We also see a variety
of unique failure modes, many centering around LM agents struggling to track and reason about
previous actions. Similarly, extensive work in policy learning has commonly faced issues in long
horizon execution (Piterbarg et al., 2023; Chen et al., 2024b; Hejna et al., 2023). By editing agent
interfaces, we explore introducing conditioning over state updates, a common tactic in neural agent
design, to our real world language agents and see 71% increases in subtask completion rates.
Overall, our contributions in this work are threefold:

      1. We introduce RefactorBench, a benchmark of code refactoring tasks that necessitate edits
         in multiple files and reasoning based on previous actions taken.
      2. We evaluate multiple open-source systems on RefactorBench and analyze three novel fail-
         ure modes isolated through differing baseline runs.
      3. We construct state-aware interfaces and show improvement in the reasoning capabilities of
         a modified baseline agent.

2     BACKGROUND

2.1   R ELATED WORK

Benchmarks SWE-bench, a benchmark consisting of GitHub issues, is the community standard
for evaluating open-ended problem-solving in code environments (Jimenez et al., 2024). Our work,
comparably, focuses on handcrafted and underrepresented multi-file refactoring tasks, isolating
unique language agent behaviors. Unlike existing function-level code benchmarks (Chen et al.,
2021; Austin et al., 2021), which also include refactors, we concentrate on the challenges posed
by multi-file edits. Through a lazy and descriptive instruction set to accompany base instructions,
we also build on previous works that scale evaluations of LLMs’ instruction-following capabili-
ties with lazier instructions (Cassano et al., 2024). Recent works have also focused on evaluating


                                                  2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


repository-level code completion systems (Liu et al., 2024a; Agarwal et al., 2024; Bairi et al., 2023),
but our work differs by evaluating larger actions than exact line match, using generalist evaluations
through AST testing. New works have also started to benchmark LLMs across the life cycles of var-
ious engineering tasks (Li et al., 2024; Huang et al., 2024; Xie et al., 2024c), and recent LM agent
benchmarks have also started to evaluate for planning, reasoning, and decision-making abilities in
multi-turn generation settings (Liu et al., 2023b; Xie et al., 2024b). We combine these two threads
by evaluating on engineering tasks that necessitate multi-turn actions. Moreover, newer benchmarks
have shown that emulating differing environments can help identify unique failure modes (Ruan
et al., 2024; Yao et al., 2024). Similarly, in RefactorBench, we find that multi-file dependencies in
code provide a strong test bed for previously unseen failure modes in LM agents.

Compositional Tasks and Memory Some benchmarks have identified modeling long-term de-
pendencies as a difficult task for core LMs (Tay et al., 2021; Xie et al., 2024b; Wang et al., 2023b;
Lee et al., 2024a). To combat this issue, many works have targeted changes in model architecture and
training (Gu et al., 2022; Liu et al., 2023a; Gu & Dao, 2024; Xiong et al., 2024). Other works have
tackled this style of problem through augmenting LM agents to have external memory in order to
learn longer term skills after large sequences of actions (Sarch et al., 2023; Shinn et al., 2023; Wang
et al., 2023a; Sumers et al., 2024). Differing from long term memory in language agents, we largely
focus on enabling concurrent reasoning and state-aware behaviors in language agents. Comparable
to this focus, many works in embodied control and small neural agents have previously explored
training and conditioning over observations about current state in multi-turn situations (Chen et al.,
2024b; Wang et al., 2024a; Piterbarg et al., 2024; Li et al., 2022; Moreno et al., 2021). We explore
extending these concepts to real-world LM agents to improve their performance.

2.2   D EFINITIONS

We generalize varied perspectives in previous literature to construct our definition of a language/LM
agent and related terms: a core LM receives an user instruction u and executes actions an using a
set of tools tm , receiving partial observations ωn . This follows a structure most similar to a partially
observable Markov decision process (POMDP) (Kaelbling et al., 1998), where the trajectory is τN =
(a1 , ω1 , . . . , aN , ωN ). This largely matches the formalization of LM agents articulated in ToolEmu
(Ruan et al., 2024). We also define and use the words state or stateful in the context of LM agents
as the nature of being dependent on the accumulation of actions a and observations ω, though not
necessarily all generated from the LM. Importantly, stateful reasoning focuses on making decisions
based on the current state, which is partially observable and can change dynamically. Previous
works in building LM agents have recognized the importance of designing interfaces that allow the
core LMs to make better decisions for a variety of tasks (Yang et al., 2024; Liu et al., 2024b; Wang
et al., 2024d; Lu et al., 2024; Shang et al., 2024). We reference the design choices behind tm and
it’s impact on ωn , an as interface design.

3     R EFACTOR B ENCH

RefactorBench is benchmark of handcrafted multi-file refactoring tasks. The goal for each task is
to generate a patch that changes the repository to follow the rules of a specified refactor. In this
section, we describe our end-to-end process of constructing the refactoring tasks and highlight some
important features of RefactorBench.

3.1   TASK CONSTRUCTION

To design a benchmark capturing the common practice of code refactoring, we focus on including
a diversity of styles of tasks, using Fowler et al. (2018) as a reference point for different styles
of refactors. As the test beds for all tasks, we first select 9 popular Python repositories that have
differing overall file structures (Table 1). We then run the below four step process on each repository:
Step 1: Localization and Filtering. We leverage LLMs to identify potential refactoring opportuni-
ties in repositories. We iteratively prompt gpt-4o (OpenAI, 2024) with complete files from a target
repository, along with examples of various refactor types from Fowler et al. (2018), requesting line
numbers and suggestions for potential refactors. We then filter through the returned sites manually


                                                    3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


to verify if corresponding suggestions can be made and if the changes would affect multiple files.
This process yields a list of refactoring suggestions and their corresponding edit locations in each
repository.
Step 2: Construction of Reference Solutions. To generate a prospective reference solution for
each refactor, a group of experienced Python programmers handcraft unique, related edits to the
refactoring suggestions generated in the previous step. These edits are made based on the design
principle (Fowler et al., 2018), while concurrently using gpt-4o to verify that each core refactor is
tractable by the language model. Tractability verification is done through prompting gpt-4o with
the file to edit, the design principle, and a summary of the change needed to be made. We define this
process in depth in Section 3.2.
Step 3: Development of Testing Files. Once the tractability of the subtasks are verified, the de-
velopers then create relevant unit tests for each overarching task. At minimum, for every core edit
verified in Step 2, a new unit test is generated that parses through the respective file’s AST and
verifies that changes have the correct broad code structure and syntax necessitated by that sub-
task, removing dependence on exact-match testing (Appendix D). This iterative approach creates a
breadth of tests that comprises a necessary minimum for the total refactor. At test time, a LM agent’s
generated solution is applied to the codebase and the associated tests crafted for the task instance
are then executed. A generated patch is considered successful, if all of the relevant AST tests pass.
Step 4: Generation of Relevant Task Instructions. After reference solution and AST test creation,
the developers write a short, but comprehensive task summary to help in the instruction design
phase, what we refer to as the base instruction. In order to evaluate different degrees of instruction
following with specified and unspecified objectives, we generate two other instruction sets: lazy
instruction and descriptive instruction. These instruction sets are generated through a few-shot
learning prompt with the respective base instruction and the related unit tests (Appendix A.1).
The above four step process yielded 100 large overarching multi-file refactoring tasks and corre-
sponding tests in 9 different Python repositories. Throughout this work, we report the success on a
run based on passing all tests for a task. Table 1 and Figure 2 show a breakdown by repository and
other statistics related to the tasks.

                                                       Table 1: Statistics on RefactorBench tasks,
                                                       repositories, and AST-based unit tests.

                                                                                                     Mean    Max
                                                        Lazy Instruction     Length (Words)           16.0     38
                                                        Base Instruction     Length (Words)           20.6     44
                                                        Desc. Instruction    Length (Words)           68.8    116
                                                                             # Files                2327.6   6815
                                                        Codebase
                                                                             # Lines                 304K    1.8M
                                                        Reference Solution   # Files edited            4.3     31
                                                                             # Length (Functions)      6.5     27
                                                        AST Tests
Figure 2: Distribution of RefactorBench tasks                                # Length (Lines)        131.1    378
across 9 open source Python repositories.


3.2   I MPORTANT FEATURES

Multi-File By filtering out single-file refactors as part of our task construction process, all tasks in
RefactorBench involve multi-file edits. Our tasks edit between 2 to 31 files, with 4 files edited in our
reference solutions on average. This feature, by definition, detracts the ability of single-shot LLMs
of solving the tasks, and forces feedback-based editing systems to reason over multiple files.
Varying Instruction Sets RefactorBench offers three sets of instructions with varying degree of de-
scriptiveness. With multiple instruction sets, we are able to test for a breadth of types of instruction-
following and provide a way to effectively scale the difficulty of RefactorBench. The lazy instruc-
tions match the styles of real users, where objectives are often unspecific. We also include the base
instruction which describes the task completely in a succinct manner. And through the descriptive
instruction, we are able to evaluate on an exhaustive instruction where systems are given insights on
what they will be tested on, a theoretical upper bound on performance.


                                                   4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Subtask AST Testing In RefactorBench, unit tests for each task are designed to cover various
subtasks the LM agent needs to accomplish. During the test construction process, we separate the
unit tests to break apart the behavior of subtasks within tasks. This makes understanding the failures
within patches an interpretable and quick process. For instance, one can evaluate which files the
agent makes edits in, giving more comprehensive understanding of the order of tasks and proximity
to a correct solution. RefactorBench’s unit tests comprise of 2 to 27 subtests, with an average of 6.51
tests per task. See Appendix D for an example test file and Appendix E for multiple test outputs seen
through the lens of this subtask testing format on RefactorBench.
Tractability Through verification steps during task construction, we also make sure that all the core
edits are feasible by frontier models at the time of writing. Due to this, our refactors have stronger
signal on evaluating the reasoning behaviors between function calls of LLM feedback loops rather
than the broad open-ended task of generating passing code changes. Similarly, previous work has
also recognized the importance of focusing agent benchmarks to interpretable subtasks (Côté et al.,
2019; Xie et al., 2024b; Shridhar et al., 2021; Chowdhury et al., 2024). Overall, this tractability
requirement allows for a more dedicated focus on evaluating the stateful reasoning abilities of LM
agents.


4       E XPERIMENTS

In this section, we explain our approaches to evaluate language agents on RefactorBench. All main
studies are done on SWE-agent, which is the highest performing open-source agent framework on
the full SWE-bench split at the time of writing. SWE-agent also structurally follows our earlier
definition of a POMDP-based LM agent (Yang et al., 2024; Jimenez et al., 2024), while other agents
sample from multiple agents (Wang et al., 2024d), weakening ablation studies. Often, due to costs
and rate limits on model endpoints impacting efficient ablation studies, we opt to use gpt-4 in
experiments, but find that our results scale similarly across models.

      Update: These baselines are outdated compared to current SWE-agent implementations.
      We share more updated baselines in Section 7.3.


4.1       P RELIMINARIES

Current systems have overfit to solving reproducible bugs. As a prior, we observed poor per-
formance for some LM agents when running them on simpler tasks in RefactorBench. Upon inves-
tigating internal code of a few open-source LM agents, we find that their internal prompting and
in-context examples steer towards solving Github issues. This task specific prompting causes these
language agents to treat refactoring problems as bug-fixes. For instance, many systems will attempt
to create a bug reproduction script for a simple renaming task. We causate this initial finding as a
result of having a lack of benchmarks: it is hard to robustify LM agent systems without ways to eval-
uate on diverse styles of tasks (Kapoor et al., 2024; Dehghani et al., 2021). For the rest of this work,
to better understand the frontier of capabilities within current systems, we alter internal prompts to
focus on the task of refactoring. We therefore consider these baselines as an upper bound on perfor-
mance, and hope for future systems to be designed in accordance to and evaluate over diverse styles
of problems. We discuss directions for future systems and generalist performance in Section 7.

4.2       BASELINES

Using a containerized framework that emulates a user file system with the target repository, we run
a baseline of SWE-agent on all RefactorBench tasks with a per instance cost limit of $10.002 . We
report the percentage of completely successful task instances on each run. On the lazy, base, and de-
scriptive instruction sets, SWE-agent with gpt-4 solves 12%, 18%, and 27% respectively. To verify
generalization across models, we also run the descriptive baseline with claude-3.5-sonnet,
which solves 35% of the test cases completely. To contextualize this performance, we have a profi-
cient human developer attempt all the tasks within the benchmark, with a limit of 5 minutes per task
    2
        This cost is due to large token counts being necessitated with multi-file reasoning.


                                                           5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                               Table 2: Baseline task performance
                                                               relative to instruction type. Through
                                                               the varied categories, we find that lan-
                                                               guage agents are sensitive to unspeci-
                                                               fied objectives (Lazy) and improve in
                                                               performance greatly when given infor-
                                                               mation on which files to make edits in
                                                               (Descriptive).
                                                                 Instruction Type    Resolution Rate
                                                                 Lazy                     12.0%
Figure 3: Baselines of a prompt adjusted SWE-agent               Base                     22.0%
with gpt-4 and a human developer given IDE access                Descriptive              27.0%
and a time limit of 5 minutes.


using the base instructions, and they solve 87% of the test cases. The average length of a successful
trajectory using gpt-4 is about 45.8 actions and the overall average length is about 58.5 actions.
Additionally, we sample 3 random solved RefactorBench instances in repositories that have 3 or
more solved, and combine their descriptive prompts to run as singular instances. We find that SWE-
agent, although able to solve the singular tasks, is unable to solve any of these longer pseudotasks.
We further discuss related results and tackle long horizon planning in later sections of this work.


5   A NALYSIS

From manual review of trajectories on RefactorBench, we find repeating general behaviors language
agents perform. Many prior works have outlined some strengths and failures of current LM agents
in different scenarios (Yang et al., 2024; Wang et al., 2024d; Xie et al., 2024b). As such, we focus
on three novel failure modes isolated through our baseline experiments. After large-scale human
review of trajectories and developing an understanding of failures, to confirm their prevalence on
a larger scale, we use gpt-4 with reference solution diffs to analyze unresolved trajectories and
the respective test outputs as following one of the failure modes in this section. Through this, we
classify about 58% of failed trajectories are corresponding to one of these failure modes, and in held
out validation, a human reviewer agreed with the classifications about 74% of the time.
Agents fail to find relevant locations and make applicable changes. Through our task construc-
tion, our descriptive instructions provide information on all files that need to be edited. However, we
still observe through about 44% of the tests checking for some change, agents initialized with the
descriptive instruction did not edit the target files, although being prompted to. These results differ
from previous results that firmly found that most LM agent coding systems create patches at the
correct location, and mainly fail through incorrect implementations (Chen et al., 2024a; Yang et al.,
2024). Moreover, none of the tasks that require changes in more than 6 files are solved in any of
our baselines. These results complement previous work evaluating planning capabilities of LLMs,
where increases in constraints correlate with decreases in performance (Xie et al., 2024b; Huang
et al., 2022). We hypothesize that the increase in files serves as a proxy constraint and LM agents
fail in both efficient exploration and composing previous actions. We formalize the related problems
of action tracking and stateful reasoning in-depth and tackle it through state updates in Section 6.
Agents fail due to interactions that necessitate erroneous intermediate states. Our classifica-
tions also show that 78.4% of trajectories error in a code editing step. Through analyzing these tra-
jectories, we commonly encounter cases where making a change that temporarily introduces errors
is a necessary step to solve the task. This is often because subsequent modifications, either within
the same file or across multiple files, are concurrently required to resolve these issues. Consequently,
the practice of automatically enforcing strict linting rules and rejecting edits based on errors proves
to be an impractical approach for scaling real world agents, even though most open-source systems
have previously found in-edit linting to significantly boost performance for bug fixing (Örwall, 2024;
Yang et al., 2024; Wang et al., 2024d). This identified scenario demonstrates that LM agents often


                                                   6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


imitate human forms of interaction, and removing innate capabilities through guardrails can backfire
in unintended manners. We further discuss unobstructed LM agent interaction in Section 7.1.
Agents fail due to context flooding and losing sight of objectives. We find that agents struggle
in decision making after having commands that are rejected due to formatting issues or unexpected
output (Figure 8). In recent work defining in-context reward hacking (ICRH) (Pan et al., 2024),
LLMs, through feedback loops in small synthetic tasks, have been shown to model proxy objectives
when optimizing over some larger objective. We find, in our real world task of refactoring, that the
negative effects from ICRH are also accentuated by extensive context space being taken up by the
handling of constraint violations, deprioritizing the initial objective in a form of few-shot learning
(Brown et al., 2020). Specifically, a common linting error edit in our tasks shows the model an
average of about 1,466 tokens 3 : comprising of two blocks of code, error handling prompts, and
the flagged errors. We find that this lengthy repetition for error handling function calling weakens
trajectory structure. For instance, in some trajectories, we see the agent run end after an intensive
function level feedback loop is resolved, a form of prioritizing the new objective. Language mod-
els losing sight of initial goals has recently been tackled within single-shot code generation tasks
through attention dilution (Tian & Zhang, 2024), but we find this new issue is more prevalent in
LM agent trajectories, and is exacerbated through the context-expensive feedback loops. We further
discuss ways to approach robust trajectory reasoning in Section 7.1.


6       T OWARDS STATE - AWARE LANGUAGE AGENTS

In our analysis, we found a general issue with LM agents struggling to plan edits in the right lo-
cations. We hypothesize that an innate limitation of the POMDP setup of LM agents is that after
sufficiently many timesteps n, due to partial observability, the LM’s understanding of the current
state at such action an becomes weaker, through divergence from the initial state before a1 . In this
section, we first explore this claim through a synthetic setup and then attempt conditioning over
state updates to improve on the failure mode. We later generalize our approach to entire digital
environments and discuss the implications of state-awareness for agent interaction.
Computation of state almost linearly decreases with respect to number of actions taken. Sim-
ilar to previous work in testing entity tracking in language models (Kim & Schuster, 2023), we
test the existence of the earlier divergence hypothesis in a synthetic setup through prompting a LM
with 15 categories of preferences, emulating a web agent. We iteratively give an increasing list of
n updates to the preferences (i.e. Dogs to Dislikes) and prompt the LM to output the updated list
of preferences. Based on 125 randomly initialized runs, we find that failures in cumulative state
construction linearly scale with the amount of actions taken (Figure 4). We show the exact setup for
reproducibility in Appendix E.


Figure 4: GPT-4 Turbo accuracy in end                 Figure 5: Comparison of a prompt adjusted SWE-
state construction drops consistently over in-        agent and a state-aware SWE-agent implementa-
creased iterations of actions. Prompts and            tion, both using gpt-4. Sample implementation
examples are available in Appendix E.                 code available in Appendix G.


    3
        Using the o200k base tokenizer on task instances within the ansible/ansible repository


                                                     7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 6: Example flow of a language agent at some timestep N interacting with a state update policy
to generate the natural language state summary appended to the agent trajectory. The new updated
trajectory is passed to the core LM to generate the next function call and execute it.



6.1      S TATE - AWARE INTERFACES

In our baseline runs, we find that agent trajectories extend long (60+), necessitating actions across
multiple files. However, real world implementations of LM agents often restrict the amount of previ-
ous information Count(ω) in τN to a controlled number of steps4 to avoid flooding context windows.
Being able to model long term changes with limited context has been a problem space in neural
policy learning (Piterbarg et al., 2023). To tackle this, a recent SOTA approach in NetHack, a long
horizon video game requiring continual learning (Hambro et al., 2022), used unix diff on previous
observations in order to keep base models on track (Piterbarg et al., 2024). Their results confirm the
importance of continuous and efficient modeling of state changes in environments, but also demon-
strate that diff history exploits structure that is present apriori in observations. Other works using
LMs to plan for embodied systems have found computation of state observations alongside baseline
observations important for long-horizon task planning (Chen et al., 2024b). We combine the idea of
efficient modeling of state observations with previous proven results with feedback-based interface
design (Yang et al., 2024; Shang et al., 2024), to motivate our approach: state-aware interfaces.
Our implementation for a state-aware interface for interacting with code focuses on succinctly rep-
resenting the divergence from initialization state, which is represented through previous edit ac-
tions. As such, before every function call, we have a cached and updated section with informa-
tion related to all previous edits, prompting the model with an understanding of the accumula-
tion of its own changes (Appendix G). Formally, we add a recurring externally computed state
variable σ to our POMDP, where σN is the state at timestep N, and our trajectory now follows
τN = (a1 , ω1 , σ1 , . . . , aN , ωN , σN ).
Agents with state updates have stronger performance in RefactorBench tasks. We modify
SWE-agent with gpt-4o to track and display representations of state (Appendix G). This change
boosts the agent’s overall performance on RefactorBench: an average of 43.9% relative increase
over the instruction sets compared to baseline agents (Figure 5). We also find a strong upwards
trend in subtask completion: an average of 71% increase over the instruction sets. As our abstract
syntax tree testing isolates unique subtasks in different files and functions, we find that passing more
subtasks is correlated with stronger stateful reasoning, the intended goal of the state-aware interface.



   4
       Five step observational window in the case of SWE-agent.


                                                       8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


6.2   S TATE UPDATE POLICIES

Having precomputation from the state update allows the LM to ignore computing the reconstruction
subtask when generating the next function call. We extend state-updates to generalize to entire
digital environments, not just an agent, through the construction of a state update policy.
We define our state update policy πstate as a function that manages and provides the cumulative
state information to the agent within an environment. Formally, let σN represent the current state at
timestep N derived from all prior interactions. The state update policy πstate can be expressed as a
conditional function:
                                  πstate : (τN , σN −1 , ..., σ0 ) → σN ,

where τN = (a1 , ω1 , σ1 , . . . , aN −1 , ωN −1 , σN −1 , aN , ωN ) is the trajectory up to the generation of
σN , including all actions ai , observations ωi , and prior states σi .
State update policies can lead to deviations from typical sequential agent reasoning. We find
states expressed in natural language to be a natural approach to facilitate concurrent interactions
between language agents in open digital environments. Through our initial implementation of a
state update policy, we are also able to model simple external changes from a concurrent state-aware
user (Figure 6). In a simple example, we concurrently make a change with an external agent to
rename a function that the LM agent has already edited to complete it’s refactoring task. Through
the state update policy, we are able to propagate this edit information and agent is able to decide to
later view the new edit for more context (Appendix H). However, as all the tasks in RefactorBench
are mutually exclusive, we do not further evaluate on modeling conflicting objectives between agents
at a larger scale, but expand on similar directions for future work in Section 7.1.

7     D ISCUSSION

We introduce RefactorBench, a benchmark that isolates unique failure modes of LM agents through
code. Through our experiments, we find that most agents struggle at composing simple actions, and
a diverse set of task evaluations is necessary for understanding and designing generalist language
agent systems. We also show improvement on baselines through natural language representations
of state and hope that further studies within stateful reasoning in differing scenarios can aid in the a
larger understanding of the limitations of language agents.

7.1   F UTURE D IRECTIONS

Although there are many avenues to take for improving LM agents, we generalize our analysis from
our evaluations on RefactorBench tasks into two main categories.
Reasoning Through the synthetic state construction experiment, we formalize that language models
innately lose state understanding with respect to actions taken. As such, alongside our introduction
of state update policies, we hypothesize that constructing smarter ways to generalize context rather
than having the LM condition over the full trajectory is an important direction for tackling this
problem. Various recent works on gist-based memory systems within agents, collaboration through
optimizable graphs, exploration methods, skill learning, and mitigating partial observability seem
promising (Zhuge et al., 2024; Nayak et al., 2024; Lee et al., 2024b; Wang et al., 2023a; Bruce et al.,
2023; Xie et al., 2024a; Allen et al., 2024), but no works have tackled concrete methods to scale
concurrent state-awareness for simple agent tasks. Many new approaches to improve agent perfor-
mance have also been shown to scale up inference compute and score higher on various agent related
benchmarks (Zhang et al., 2024a; Kapoor et al., 2024; Brown et al., 2024; Wang et al., 2024b). As
real world refactoring results are not immediately verifiable, we find this style of repeated sampling
to be insufficient without robust critic models. We encourage future works to scale inference time
compute in language agents with open-ended tasks like those in RefactorBench.
Interaction In regards to interaction with the real world, we find that LM agents edit code in
inefficient manners and have low success rates per single edit. Many agents have switched to diff-
based editing (Örwall, 2024; Gauthier, 2024), which has empirically shown to be a more scalable
solution. However, these systems do not get around the issues that come with temporary error
states (Section 5) and format restrictions. The natural approach of full-file edits has its own distinct


                                                      9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


issues: such as generalizing for files longer than token limits, inference speed, token cost, and
context flooding. Future approaches could attempt to intertwine full-file rewrites with speculative
decoding (Cursor, 2024) and custom trajectory truncation schemes to limit context window flooding.
Overall, even outside of code generation, we predict this interaction problem for language agents
to be of importance in varying digital domains, and we expect interaction to be a large focus in
generalist agent interface constructions, especially in multi-agent scenarios. Our state update policy
demonstrates a primitive case of agents being aware of other actions, and we hope for future works
to generalize the environment-specific policy approach (Figure 6) in a variety of digital tasks.

7.2   L IMITATIONS

RefactorBench’s task instances are all in Python, and we hope to expand the benchmark to various
languages that are statically and dynamically typed, allowing for evaluations on more styles of refac-
tors. We also focus on highly used open-source Python repositories, and language models may have
a better understanding of the repositories due to their prevalence in training data. RefactorBench
also has a limited amount of task instances due to the intensive process to create a singular end-to-
end task and the necessity for quick evaluations (evaluations still takes hours with RefactorBench).
In our evaluations, we also raise the cost limit much past limits in previous works in software en-
gineering agents, due to the inability for agents to solve multi-file tasks quickly and cheaply. We
also find, similar to previous works, that agent runs are not deterministic and can solve differing
tasks in different runs. RefactorBench is a step forward in evaluating LM agents in robust manners
through complex task construction, but like all benchmarks, is still plagued by the possible issues
of over-fit data distributions (i.e. only refactors) (Kapoor et al., 2024). To prevent this repetitive
issue, we do not release gold reference solutions (only the testing files) and we recommend eval-
uating software engineering agents on multiple styles of tasks: function editing tasks, bug fixes in
SWE-bench, refactors in RefactorBench, etc. to truly define robustness in a general coding agent.
Creating a general multi-faceted evaluation suite for language models and agents interacting with
code is a compelling direction for future work.

7.3   U PDATED BASELINES

We evaluate the updated base SWE-agent 1.0 on RefactorBench using gpt-4o. We largely find
that our previous results hold, with SWE-agent solving 21% of base instances and 31% of descrip-
tive instances. However, we find that the speed and cost in which SWE-agent completes tasks
significantly decreases to $1.69 per successful instance, showcasing new improvements in agents
localizing changes to make. We are excited to see the community test their autonomous systems
on RefactorBench, especially with reasoning models. Similar to recent results on SWE-bench, we
have seen preliminary results of reasoning agents solving more RefactorBench tasks compared to
non-reasoning model agents.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We thank the entire Data&AI Group at Microsoft for feedback and valuable discussions throughout
the work. Dhruv Gautam thanks Michele Tufano, Alexander Pan, and Joe Guan for feedback of
an earlier draft of the paper and for many formative research discussions about language models,
reasoning, and code generation.

R EFERENCES
Anisha Agarwal, Aaron Chan, Shubham Chandel, Jinu Jang, Shaun Miller, Roshanak Zilouchian
  Moghaddam, Yevhen Mohylevskyy, Neel Sundaresan, and Michele Tufano. Copilot evaluation
  harness: Evaluating llm-guided software programming, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/
  abs/2402.14261.
Aide.dev.  Sota on swe bench lite,              2024.       URL https://aide.dev/blog/
  sota-on-swe-bench-lite.
Cameron Allen, Aaron Kirtland, Ruo Yu Tao, Sam Lobel, Daniel Scott, Nicholas Petrocelli,
  Omer Gottesman, Ronald Parr, Michael L. Littman, and George Konidaris. Mitigating par-


                                                 10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


  tial observability in sequential decision processes via the lambda discrepancy, 2024.       URL
  https://arxiv.org/abs/2407.07333.
Daman Arora, Atharv Sonwane, Nalin Wadhwa, Abhav Mehrotra, Saiteja Utpala, Ramakrishna
  Bairi, Aditya Kanade, and Nagarajan Natarajan. Masai: Modular architecture for software-
  engineering ai agents, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2406.11638.
Jacob Austin, Augustus Odena, Maxwell Nye, Maarten Bosma, Henryk Michalewski, David Dohan,
  Ellen Jiang, Carrie Cai, Michael Terry, Quoc Le, and Charles Sutton. Program synthesis with large
  language models, 2021. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2108.07732.
AWS Q Developer.      Aws developer center, 2024.      URL https://aws.amazon.com/q/
 developer/.
Ramakrishna Bairi, Atharv Sonwane, Aditya Kanade, Vageesh D C, Arun Iyer, Suresh Parthasarathy,
  Sriram Rajamani, B. Ashok, and Shashank Shet. Codeplan: Repository-level coding using llms
  and planning, 2023. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2309.12499.
Samuel R. Bowman and George E. Dahl. What will it take to fix benchmarking in natural language
  understanding?, 2021. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2104.02145.
Bradley Brown, Jordan Juravsky, Ryan Ehrlich, Ronald Clark, Quoc V. Le, Christopher Ré, and
  Azalia Mirhoseini. Large language monkeys: Scaling inference compute with repeated sampling,
  2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2407.21787.
Tom B. Brown, Benjamin Mann, Nick Ryder, Melanie Subbiah, Jared Kaplan, Prafulla Dhari-
  wal, Arvind Neelakantan, Pranav Shyam, Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, Sandhini Agarwal,
  Ariel Herbert-Voss, Gretchen Krueger, Tom Henighan, Rewon Child, Aditya Ramesh, Daniel M.
  Ziegler, Jeffrey Wu, Clemens Winter, Christopher Hesse, Mark Chen, Eric Sigler, Mateusz
  Litwin, Scott Gray, Benjamin Chess, Jack Clark, Christopher Berner, Sam McCandlish, Alec
  Radford, Ilya Sutskever, and Dario Amodei. Language models are few-shot learners, 2020. URL
  https://arxiv.org/abs/2005.14165.
Jake Bruce, Ankit Anand, Bogdan Mazoure, and Rob Fergus. Learning about progress from experts.
  In The Eleventh International Conference on Learning Representations, 2023. URL https:
  //openreview.net/forum?id=sKc6fgce1zs.
Sébastien Bubeck, Varun Chandrasekaran, Ronen Eldan, Johannes Gehrke, Eric Horvitz, Ece
   Kamar, Peter Lee, Yin Tat Lee, Yuanzhi Li, Scott Lundberg, Harsha Nori, Hamid Palangi,
   Marco Tulio Ribeiro, and Yi Zhang. Sparks of artificial general intelligence: Early experiments
   with gpt-4, 2023. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2303.12712.
Federico Cassano, Luisa Li, Akul Sethi, Noah Shinn, Abby Brennan-Jones, Anton Lozhkov, Car-
  olyn Jane Anderson, and Arjun Guha. Can it edit? evaluating the ability of large language models
  to follow code editing instructions. In Conference on Language Modeling (COLM), 2024.
Dong Chen, Shaoxin Lin, Muhan Zeng, Daoguang Zan, Jian-Gang Wang, Anton Cheshkov, Jun Sun,
  Hao Yu, Guoliang Dong, Artem Aliev, Jie Wang, Xiao Cheng, Guangtai Liang, Yuchi Ma, Pan
  Bian, Tao Xie, and Qianxiang Wang. Coder: Issue resolving with multi-agent and task graphs,
  2024a. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2406.01304.
Mark Chen, Jerry Tworek, Heewoo Jun, Qiming Yuan, Henrique Ponde de Oliveira Pinto, Jared
 Kaplan, Harri Edwards, Yuri Burda, Nicholas Joseph, Greg Brockman, Alex Ray, Raul Puri,
 Gretchen Krueger, Michael Petrov, Heidy Khlaaf, Girish Sastry, Pamela Mishkin, Brooke Chan,
 Scott Gray, Nick Ryder, Mikhail Pavlov, Alethea Power, Lukasz Kaiser, Mohammad Bavarian,
 Clemens Winter, Philippe Tillet, Felipe Petroski Such, Dave Cummings, Matthias Plappert, Fo-
 tios Chantzis, Elizabeth Barnes, Ariel Herbert-Voss, William Hebgen Guss, Alex Nichol, Alex
 Paino, Nikolas Tezak, Jie Tang, Igor Babuschkin, Suchir Balaji, Shantanu Jain, William Saunders,
 Christopher Hesse, Andrew N. Carr, Jan Leike, Josh Achiam, Vedant Misra, Evan Morikawa, Alec
 Radford, Matthew Knight, Miles Brundage, Mira Murati, Katie Mayer, Peter Welinder, Bob Mc-
 Grew, Dario Amodei, Sam McCandlish, Ilya Sutskever, and Wojciech Zaremba. Evaluating large
 language models trained on code, 2021. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2107.03374.


                                                11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Siwei Chen, Anxing Xiao, and David Hsu. Llm-state: Open world state representation for long-
  horizon task planning with large language model, 2024b. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/
  2311.17406.
Neil Chowdhury, James Aung, Chan Jun Shern, Oliver Jaffe, Dane Sherburn, Giulio Starace, Evan
  Mays, Rachel Dias, Marwan Aljubeh, Mia Glaese, Carlos E. Jimenez, John Yang, Kevin Liu,
  and Aleksander Madry. Introducing swe-bench verified. https://openai.com/blog/
  introducing-swe-bench-verified, August 2024.
Cognition.ai. Introducing devin, 2024.         URL https://www.cognition.ai/blog/
  introducing-devin.
Cursor. Editing files at 1000 tokens per second.        https://www.cursor.com/blog/
  instant-apply, 2024.
Marc-Alexandre Côté, Ákos Kádár, Xingdi Yuan, Ben Kybartas, Tavian Barnes, Emery Fine, James
 Moore, Ruo Yu Tao, Matthew Hausknecht, Layla El Asri, Mahmoud Adada, Wendy Tay, and
 Adam Trischler. Textworld: A learning environment for text-based games, 2019. URL https:
 //arxiv.org/abs/1806.11532.
Mostafa Dehghani, Yi Tay, Alexey A. Gritsenko, Zhe Zhao, Neil Houlsby, Fernando Diaz, Donald
 Metzler, and Oriol Vinyals. The benchmark lottery, 2021. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/
 2107.07002.
Martin Fowler, Kent Beck, John Brant, William Opdyke, and Don Roberts. Refactoring: Improving
 the Design of Existing Code. Addison-Wesley Professional, 2nd edition, 2018.
Paul Gauthier. Aider: Ai-powered coding assistant, 2024. URL https://github.com/
  paul-gauthier/aider.
Albert Gu and Tri Dao. Mamba: Linear-time sequence modeling with selective state spaces, 2024.
  URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2312.00752.
Albert Gu, Karan Goel, and Christopher Ré. Efficiently modeling long sequences with structured
  state spaces, 2022. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2111.00396.
Eric Hambro, Sharada Mohanty, Dmitrii Babaev, Minwoo Byeon, Dipam Chakraborty, Edward
  Grefenstette, Minqi Jiang, Daejin Jo, Anssi Kanervisto, Jongmin Kim, Sungwoong Kim, Robert
  Kirk, Vitaly Kurin, Heinrich Küttler, Taehwon Kwon, Donghoon Lee, Vegard Mella, Nan-
  tas Nardelli, Ivan Nazarov, Nikita Ovsov, Jack Parker-Holder, Roberta Raileanu, Karolis Ra-
  manauskas, Tim Rocktäschel, Danielle Rothermel, Mikayel Samvelyan, Dmitry Sorokin, Maciej
  Sypetkowski, and Michał Sypetkowski. Insights from the neurips 2021 nethack challenge, 2022.
  URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2203.11889.
Joey Hejna, Pieter Abbeel, and Lerrel Pinto. Improving long-horizon imitation through instruction
  prediction, 2023. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2306.12554.
Qian Huang, Jian Vora, Percy Liang, and Jure Leskovec. Mlagentbench: Evaluating language
  agents on machine learning experimentation, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/
  2310.03302.
Wenlong Huang, Pieter Abbeel, Deepak Pathak, and Igor Mordatch. Language models as
 zero-shot planners: Extracting actionable knowledge for embodied agents. arXiv preprint
 arXiv:2201.07207, 2022.
Juyong Jiang, Fan Wang, Jiasi Shen, Sungju Kim, and Sunghun Kim. A survey on large language
  models for code generation, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2406.00515.
Carlos E Jimenez, John Yang, Alexander Wettig, Shunyu Yao, Kexin Pei, Ofir Press, and Karthik R
  Narasimhan. SWE-bench: Can language models resolve real-world github issues? In The Twelfth
  International Conference on Learning Representations, 2024. URL https://openreview.
  net/forum?id=VTF8yNQM66.


                                               12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Leslie Pack Kaelbling, Michael L Littman, and Anthony R Cassandra. Planning and acting in
  partially observable stochastic domains. Artificial Intelligence, 101(1-2):99–134, 1998.
Sayash Kapoor, Benedikt Stroebl, Zachary S. Siegel, Nitya Nadgir, and Arvind Narayanan. Ai
  agents that matter, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2407.01502.
Najoung Kim and Sebastian Schuster. Entity tracking in language models, 2023. URL https:
  //arxiv.org/abs/2305.02363.
Beck LaBash, August Rosedale, Alex Reents, Lucas Negritto, and Colin Wiel. Res-q: Evaluat-
  ing code-editing large language model systems at the repository scale, 2024. URL https:
  //arxiv.org/abs/2406.16801.
Jinhyuk Lee, Anthony Chen, Zhuyun Dai, Dheeru Dua, Devendra Singh Sachan, Michael Boratko,
   Yi Luan, Sébastien M. R. Arnold, Vincent Perot, Siddharth Dalmia, Hexiang Hu, Xudong Lin,
   Panupong Pasupat, Aida Amini, Jeremy R. Cole, Sebastian Riedel, Iftekhar Naim, Ming-Wei
   Chang, and Kelvin Guu. Can long-context language models subsume retrieval, rag, sql, and
   more?, 2024a. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2406.13121.
Kuang-Huei Lee, Xinyun Chen, Hiroki Furuta, John Canny, and Ian Fischer. A human-inspired
  reading agent with gist memory of very long contexts, 2024b. URL https://arxiv.org/
  abs/2402.09727.
Belinda Z. Li, Maxwell Nye, and Jacob Andreas. Language modeling with latent situations, 2022.
  URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2212.10012.
Bowen Li, Wenhan Wu, Ziwei Tang, Lin Shi, John Yang, Jinyang Li, Shunyu Yao, Chen Qian,
  Binyuan Hui, Qicheng Zhang, Zhiyin Yu, He Du, Ping Yang, Dahua Lin, Chao Peng, and Kai
  Chen. Devbench: A comprehensive benchmark for software development, 2024. URL https:
  //arxiv.org/abs/2403.08604.
Hao Liu, Matei Zaharia, and Pieter Abbeel. Ring attention with blockwise transformers for near-
  infinite context, 2023a. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2310.01889.
Tianyang Liu, Canwen Xu, and Julian McAuley. Repobench: Benchmarking repository-level code
  auto-completion systems, 2024a. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2306.03091.
Xiangyan Liu, Bo Lan, Zhiyuan Hu, Yang Liu, Zhicheng Zhang, Wenmeng Zhou, Fei Wang, and
  Michael Shieh. Codexgraph: Bridging large language models and code repositories via code
  graph databases, 2024b. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2408.03910.
Xiao Liu, Hao Yu, Hanchen Zhang, Yifan Xu, Xuanyu Lei, Hanyu Lai, Yu Gu, Hangliang Ding,
  Kaiwen Men, Kejuan Yang, Shudan Zhang, Xiang Deng, Aohan Zeng, Zhengxiao Du, Chenhui
  Zhang, Sheng Shen, Tianjun Zhang, Yu Su, Huan Sun, Minlie Huang, Yuxiao Dong, and Jie
  Tang. Agentbench: Evaluating llms as agents, 2023b. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/
  2308.03688.
Yadong Lu, Jianwei Yang, Yelong Shen, and Ahmed Awadallah. Omniparser for pure vision based
  gui agent, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2408.00203.
Pol Moreno, Edward Hughes, Kevin R. McKee, Bernardo Avila Pires, and Théophane Weber. Neural
  recursive belief states in multi-agent reinforcement learning, 2021. URL https://arxiv.
  org/abs/2102.02274.
Siddharth Nayak, Adelmo Morrison Orozco, Marina Ten Have, Vittal Thirumalai, Jackson Zhang,
  Darren Chen, Aditya Kapoor, Eric Robinson, Karthik Gopalakrishnan, James Harrison, Brian
  Ichter, Anuj Mahajan, and Hamsa Balakrishnan. Long-horizon planning for multi-agent robots in
  partially observable environments, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2407.10031.
OpenAI. Gpt-4o system card. https://openai.com/index/gpt-4o-system-card/,
  2024.
Alexander Pan, Erik Jones, Meena Jagadeesan, and Jacob Steinhardt. Feedback loops drive in-
  context reward hacking in llms. arXiv, 2024.


                                               13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Sida Peng, Eirini Kalliamvakou, Peter Cihon, and Mert Demirer. The impact of ai on developer
  productivity: Evidence from github copilot, 2023. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2302.
  06590.
Ulyana Piterbarg, Lerrel Pinto, and Rob Fergus. Nethack is hard to hack, 2023. URL https:
  //arxiv.org/abs/2305.19240.
Ulyana Piterbarg, Lerrel Pinto, and Rob Fergus. diff history for neural language agents, 2024. URL
  https://arxiv.org/abs/2312.07540.
Scott Reed, Konrad Zolna, Emilio Parisotto, Sergio Gomez Colmenarejo, Alexander Novikov,
  Gabriel Barth-Maron, Mai Gimenez, Yury Sulsky, Jackie Kay, Jost Tobias Springenberg, Tom
  Eccles, Jake Bruce, Ali Razavi, Ashley Edwards, Nicolas Heess, Yutian Chen, Raia Had-
  sell, Oriol Vinyals, Mahyar Bordbar, and Nando de Freitas. A generalist agent, 2022. URL
  https://arxiv.org/abs/2205.06175.
Yangjun Ruan, Honghua Dong, Andrew Wang, Silviu Pitis, Yongchao Zhou, Jimmy Ba, Yann
  Dubois, Chris J Maddison, and Tatsunori Hashimoto. Identifying the risks of lm agents with
  an lm-emulated sandbox. In The Twelfth International Conference on Learning Representations,
  2024.
Gabriel Sarch, Yue Wu, Michael J. Tarr, and Katerina Fragkiadaki. Open-ended instructable em-
  bodied agents with memory-augmented large language models, 2023. URL https://arxiv.
  org/abs/2310.15127.
Chuyi Shang, Amos You, Sanjay Subramanian, Trevor Darrell, and Roei Herzig. Traveler: A multi-
  lmm agent framework for video question-answering, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/
  abs/2404.01476.
Noah Shinn, Federico Cassano, Ashwin Gopinath, Karthik Narasimhan, and Shunyu Yao. Reflexion:
  Language agents with verbal reinforcement learning. Advances in Neural Information Processing
  Systems, 36, 2023.
Mohit Shridhar, Xingdi Yuan, Marc-Alexandre Côté, Yonatan Bisk, Adam Trischler, and Matthew
 Hausknecht. ALFWorld: Aligning Text and Embodied Environments for Interactive Learning. In
 Proceedings of the International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR), 2021. URL
 https://arxiv.org/abs/2010.03768.
Theodore R. Sumers, Shunyu Yao, Karthik Narasimhan, and Thomas L. Griffiths. Cognitive archi-
  tectures for language agents, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2309.02427.
Yi Tay, Mostafa Dehghani, Samira Abnar, Yikang Shen, Dara Bahri, Philip Pham, Jinfeng Rao,
  Liu Yang, Sebastian Ruder, and Donald Metzler. Long range arena : A benchmark for efficient
  transformers. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2021. URL https:
  //openreview.net/forum?id=qVyeW-grC2k.
Yuan Tian and Tianyi Zhang. Selective prompt anchoring for code generation, 2024. URL https:
  //arxiv.org/abs/2408.09121.
Michele Tufano, Anisha Agarwal, Jinu Jang, Roshanak Zilouchian Moghaddam, and Neel Sundare-
 san. Autodev: Automated ai-driven development, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/
 2403.08299.
Boyuan Wang, Yun Qu, Yuhang Jiang, Jianzhun Shao, Chang Liu, Wenming Yang, and Xiangyang
  Ji. Llm-empowered state representation for reinforcement learning, 2024a. URL https://
  arxiv.org/abs/2407.13237.
Evan Wang, Federico Cassano, Catherine Wu, Yunfeng Bai, Will Song, Vaskar Nath, Ziwen Han,
  Sean Hendryx, Summer Yue, and Hugh Zhang. Planning in natural language improves llm search
  for code generation, 2024b. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2409.03733.
Guanzhi Wang, Yuqi Xie, Yunfan Jiang, Ajay Mandlekar, Chaowei Xiao, Yuke Zhu, Linxi Fan,
  and Anima Anandkumar. Voyager: An open-ended embodied agent with large language models,
  2023a. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2305.16291.

                                               14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Lei Wang, Chen Ma, Xueyang Feng, Zeyu Zhang, Hao Yang, Jingsen Zhang, Zhiyuan Chen, Ji-
  akai Tang, Xu Chen, Yankai Lin, Wayne Xin Zhao, Zhewei Wei, and Jirong Wen. A survey on
  large language model based autonomous agents. Frontiers of Computer Science, 18(6), March
  2024c. ISSN 2095-2236. doi: 10.1007/s11704-024-40231-1. URL http://dx.doi.org/
  10.1007/s11704-024-40231-1.
Xingyao Wang, Boxuan Li, Yufan Song, Frank F. Xu, Xiangru Tang, Mingchen Zhuge, Jiayi Pan,
  Yueqi Song, Bowen Li, Jaskirat Singh, Hoang H. Tran, Fuqiang Li, Ren Ma, Mingzhang Zheng,
  Bill Qian, Yanjun Shao, Niklas Muennighoff, Yizhe Zhang, Binyuan Hui, Junyang Lin, Robert
  Brennan, Hao Peng, Heng Ji, and Graham Neubig. Opendevin: An open platform for ai software
  developers as generalist agents, 2024d. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2407.16741.
Zihao Wang, Shaofei Cai, Anji Liu, Yonggang Jin, Jinbing Hou, Bowei Zhang, Haowei Lin,
  Zhaofeng He, Zilong Zheng, Yaodong Yang, Xiaojian Ma, and Yitao Liang. Jarvis-1: Open-
  world multi-task agents with memory-augmented multimodal language models, 2023b. URL
  https://arxiv.org/abs/2311.05997.
Chunqiu Steven Xia, Yinlin Deng, Soren Dunn, and Lingming Zhang. Agentless: Demystifying llm-
  based software engineering agents, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2407.01489.
Annie Xie, Logan Mondal Bhamidipaty, Evan Zheran Liu, Joey Hong, Sergey Levine, and Chelsea
  Finn. Learning to explore in POMDPs with informational rewards. In Ruslan Salakhutdinov, Zico
  Kolter, Katherine Heller, Adrian Weller, Nuria Oliver, Jonathan Scarlett, and Felix Berkenkamp
  (eds.), Proceedings of the 41st International Conference on Machine Learning, volume 235 of
  Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pp. 54414–54429. PMLR, 21–27 Jul 2024a. URL
  https://proceedings.mlr.press/v235/xie24a.html.
Jian Xie, Kai Zhang, Jiangjie Chen, Tinghui Zhu, Renze Lou, Yuandong Tian, Yanghua Xiao, and
   Yu Su. Travelplanner: A benchmark for real-world planning with language agents, 2024b. URL
   https://arxiv.org/abs/2402.01622.
Tianbao Xie, Danyang Zhang, Jixuan Chen, Xiaochuan Li, Siheng Zhao, Ruisheng Cao, Toh Jing
  Hua, Zhoujun Cheng, Dongchan Shin, Fangyu Lei, Yitao Liu, Yiheng Xu, Shuyan Zhou, Silvio
  Savarese, Caiming Xiong, Victor Zhong, and Tao Yu. Osworld: Benchmarking multimodal agents
  for open-ended tasks in real computer environments, 2024c. URL https://arxiv.org/
  abs/2404.07972.
Zheyang Xiong, Vasilis Papageorgiou, Kangwook Lee, and Dimitris Papailiopoulos. From artificial
  needles to real haystacks: Improving retrieval capabilities in llms by finetuning on synthetic data,
  2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2406.19292.
John Yang, Carlos E. Jimenez, Alexander Wettig, Kilian Lieret, Shunyu Yao, Karthik Narasimhan,
  and Ofir Press. Swe-agent: Agent-computer interfaces enable automated software engineering,
  2024.
Shunyu Yao and Karthik Narasimhan. Language agents in the digital world: Opportunities and
  risks. princeton-nlp.github.io, Jul 2023. URL https://princeton-nlp.github.io/
  language-agent-impact/.
Shunyu Yao, Noah Shinn, Pedram Razavi, and Karthik Narasimhan. τ -bench: A benchmark for
  tool-agent-user interaction in real-world domains, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/
  2406.12045.
Kexun Zhang, Weiran Yao, Zuxin Liu, Yihao Feng, Zhiwei Liu, Rithesh Murthy, Tian Lan, Lei
  Li, Renze Lou, Jiacheng Xu, Bo Pang, Yingbo Zhou, Shelby Heinecke, Silvio Savarese, Huan
  Wang, and Caiming Xiong. Diversity empowers intelligence: Integrating expertise of software
  engineering agents, 2024a. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2408.07060.
Yuntong Zhang, Haifeng Ruan, Zhiyu Fan, and Abhik Roychoudhury. Autocoderover: Autonomous
  program improvement, 2024b. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2404.05427.
Mingchen Zhuge, Wenyi Wang, Louis Kirsch, Francesco Faccio, Dmitrii Khizbullin, and Jürgen
 Schmidhuber. Language agents as optimizable graphs, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/
 abs/2402.16823.


                                                 15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Albert Örwall. Moatless tools. https://github.com/aorwall/moatless-tools, 2024.


                                               16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A     TASK C ONSTRUCTION P ROMPTS
A.1   P ROMPT FOR L AZY I NSTRUCTION

We prompt gpt-4-turbo with the handcrafted base instruction based on all the edits and this
prompt to get our lazy instruction.
Please convert the following instruction to be less specific. Do not
change the behavior of the task, but give a short, less descriptive
version of the task in human-like prose. Your final instruction should be
 a partial sentence and should not instruct to run any tests. It should
just describe the changes to the repository. Do not output ANYTHING ELSE
BUT THE NEW INSTRUCTION. Here is the original instruction:

{base_instruction}

Here are examples of lazy instructions:

{few_shot_lazy}

Remember to only output the NEW LAZY INSTRUCTION CORRESPONDING TO THE
BASE TASK.


A.2   P ROMPT FOR D ESCRIPTIVE I NSTRUCTION

We prompt gpt-4-turbo with the handcrafted base instruction based on all the edits, the corre-
sponding testing file, and this prompt to get our descriptive instruction.
Please convert the following instruction to be more specific and have
specific filenames for edits (not paths). Do not change the behavior of
the task, but give a longer, more descriptive version of the task in
human-like specifications. Reason over the AST tests provided to give
more information on which files could be relevant, but do not give exact
implementation details or anything related to what generalizations the
tests are looking for. Your final instruction should be around 2-3 full
sentences and should not say to run any tests or anything like that. It
should just describe the changes to the repository. Do not output
ANYTHING ELSE BUT THE NEW INSTRUCTION. Here is the original instruction
and its related test file:

{base_instruction}

Test File Starts Here:

{inst_test_file}

End of Test File.

Here are examples of descriptive instructions:

{few_shot_desc}

Remember to only output the NEW DESCRIPTIVE INSTRUCTION CORRESPONDING TO
THE BASE TASK.


                                               17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


B     AGENT P ROMPT C HANGES
B.1   U PDATED SWE- AGENT S YSTEM P ROMPT

As described in Section 4, we alter the SWE-agent prompt to stop the agent from creating bug
reproduction scripts for refactors and focus on the style of task at hand. We also remove pytest and
other testing functionality in order to prevent timeout issues with the large codebases.
SETTING: You are an autonomous programmer specializing in refactoring,
and you're working directly in the command line with a special interface.
The special interface consists of a file editor that shows you WINDOW
lines of a file at a time.
In addition to typical bash commands, you can also use the following
commands to help you navigate and edit files.

COMMANDS:
command\_docs

Please note that THE EDIT COMMAND REQUIRES PROPER INDENTATION.
If you'd like to add the line ' print(x)' you must fully write that out,
with all those spaces before the code! Indentation is important and code
that is not indented correctly will fail and require fixing before it can
 be run.

RESPONSE FORMAT:
Your shell prompt is formatted as follows:
(Open file: <path>) <cwd>

You need to format your output using two fields: discussion and command.
Your output should always include \_one\_ discussion and \_one\_ command
field EXACTLY as in the following example:

DISCUSSION
First I'll start by using ls to see what files are in the current
directory. Then maybe we can look at some relevant files to see what they
 look like.
\begin{verbatim}
ls -a
\end{verbatim}

You should only include a *SINGLE* command in the command section and
then wait for a response from the shell before continuing with more
discussion and commands. Everything you include in the DISCUSSION section
 will be saved for future reference.
If you'd like to issue two commands at once, PLEASE DO NOT DO THAT!
Please instead first submit just the first command, and then after
receiving a response you'll be able to issue the second command.
You're free to use any other bash commands you want (e.g. find, grep, cat
, ls, cd) in addition to the special commands listed above.
However, the environment does NOT support interactive session commands (e
.g. python, vim), so please do not invoke them.

instance\_template: |-
We're currently solving the following issue within our repository. Here's
 the issue text:
ISSUE:

INSTRUCTIONS:
Now, you're going to solve this refactoring issue on your own. Your
terminal session has started and you're in the repository's root
directory. You can use any bash commands or the special interface to help
 you. Edit all the files you need to and run any checks or tests that you
 want.
Remember, YOU CAN ONLY ENTER ONE COMMAND AT A TIME. You should always
wait for feedback after every command.


                                                18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


When you're satisfied with all of the changes you've made, you can submit
 your changes to the code base by simply running the submit command.
Note however that you cannot use any interactive session commands (e.g.
python, vim) in this environment, but you can write scripts and run them.
 E.g. you can write a python script and then run it with `python <script\
_name>.py`.

NOTE ABOUT THE EDIT COMMAND: Indentation really matters! When editing a
file, make sure to insert appropriate indentation before each line!

IMPORTANT TIPS:
1. Always start by checking your working directory, cd'ing to the task
repo, and then trying to find where to do the refactor using the search
tools. Do not go into other directories like root or sys. Just go to the
task repo and make edits in there.

2. If you run a command and it doesn't work, try running a different
command. A command that did not work once will not work the second time
unless you modify it!

3. If you open a file and need to get to an area around a specific line
that is not in the first 100 lines, say line 583, don't just use the
scroll\_down command multiple times. Instead, use the goto 583 command.
It's much quicker.

4. Always make sure to look at the currently open file and the current
working directory (which appears right after the currently open file).
The currently open file might be in a different directory than the
working directory! Note that some commands, such as 'create', open files,
 so they might change the current open file.

5. When editing files, it is easy to accidentally specify a wrong line
number or to write code with incorrect indentation. Always check the code
 after you issue an edit to make sure that it reflects what you wanted to
 accomplish. If it didn't, issue another command to fix it.

6. It may be necessary to install the repository from source before you
can run code. Please think about how to install the environment from the
repository directory if you need to do so.

7. Do not run the repo tests, just focus on comprehensively finishing the
 multi-file refactor to the best of your abilities.

8. If you make a change that could have dependencies, always reason and
search where imports need to be updated and update them accordingly.

9. Do not run huge grep commands that could print out and flood the
context with too many items. If not sure, just check how many items the
command will run to begin with.

(Open file: open\_file) \\
(Current directory: working\_dir) \\


                                               19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


C    E XAMPLE C ONDENSED S UCCESSFUL T RAJECTORY
We show a portion of a successful trajectory for the refactoring task: rename-send-from-directory in
the flask repository. Full examples are available in our repository.
Base Instruction: Rename the helper function send from directory to send from directory helper
but keep the overall flask usage as send from directory.
    State-aware SWE-agent Run
    {
      "action": "ls -F\n",
      "observation": "flask_refactor/\nbin@\nboot/\ndev/\netc/\nhome/\nlib@
      \nmedia/\nmnt/\nopt/\nproc/\nroot/\nrun/\nsbin@\nsrv/\nsys/\ntmp/\
      nusr/\nvar/",
      "response": "DISCUSSION\nFirst, I'll list the files in the current
      directory to get an overview of the project structure. This will help
       me locate the 'helpers' module and the 'flask' folder where the
      changes need to be made.\n```\nls -F\n```",
      "state": "{\"working_dir\": \"flask_refactor\", \"open_file\": \"n/a
      \", \"recent_edits\": []}",
      "thought": "DISCUSSION\nFirst, I'll list the files in the current
      directory to get an overview of the project structure. This will help
       me locate the 'helpers' module and the 'flask' folder where the
      changes need to be made.\n"
    },
    ...
    ... (Makes changes in multiple files)
    ...
    {
      "role": "assistant",
      "content": "DISCUSSION\nWe need to update the import statement for `
      send_from_directory` to import `send_from_directory_helper` as `
      send_from_directory`. Let's make the necessary edit.\n```\nedit 9:9\
      nfrom flask.helpers import send_from_directory_helper as
      send_from_directory\nend_of_edit\n```",
      "thought": "DISCUSSION\nWe need to update the import statement for `
      send_from_directory` to import `send_from_directory_helper` as `
      send_from_directory`. Let's make the necessary edit.\n",
      "action": "edit 9:9\nfrom flask.helpers import
      send_from_directory_helper as send_from_directory\nend_of_edit\n",
    },
    {
      "role": "user",
      "content": "[Truncated File Output]
      (Current State: ['Edited helpers.py at lines 514:514', 'Edited
      __init__.py at lines 24:24', 'Edited app.py at lines 42:42', 'Edited
      blueprints.py at lines 9:9', 'Edited test_helpers.py at lines 9:9\\n
      '])
      (Open file: /flask_refactor/tests/test_helpers.py)
      (Current directory: flask_refactor)
      bash-$",
    },
    {
      "role": "assistant",
      "content": "DISCUSSION\nThe import statement in `test_helpers.py` has
       been updated. We have now made all the necessary changes to the
      relevant files. Let's submit the changes to the code base.\n```\
      nsubmit\n```",
      "thought": "DISCUSSION\nThe import statement in `test_helpers.py` has
       been updated. We have now made all the necessary changes to the
      relevant files. Let's submit the changes to the code base.\n",
      "action": "submit\n",
    }


                                                20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


D    E XAMPLE T EST F ILE

Here is the parameterize-gunzip.py test file for the parameterize-gunzip task:
Base instruction: Encapsulate the parameters in gunzip into a new class called GunzipParams
and update all references within the repository to create a GunzipParams object.
import unittest
import os
import ast

class TestScrapyMigration(unittest.TestCase):

    def test_gunzipparams_class_exists(self):
       # Path to the file where the class should be defined
       file_path = '../scrapy/utils/gz.py'

        # Check if the file exists
        self.assertTrue(os.path.exists(file_path), f"{file_path} does not
        exist")

        # Check if the GunzipParams class is defined in gz.py
        with open(file_path, 'r') as file:
           tree = ast.parse(file.read())

        class_found = False
        for node in ast.walk(tree):
           if isinstance(node, ast.ClassDef) and node.name == 'GunzipParams
           ':
              class_found = True
              break

        self.assertTrue(class_found, "Class 'GunzipParams' not found in gz.
        py")

    def test_gunzipparams_has_data_and_max_size(self):
       # Path to the file where the class should be defined
       file_path = '../scrapy/utils/gz.py'

        # Check if the file exists
        self.assertTrue(os.path.exists(file_path), f"{file_path} does not
        exist")

        # Check if the GunzipParams class has self.data and self.max_size
        attributes
        with open(file_path, 'r') as file:
           tree = ast.parse(file.read())

        class_node = None
        for node in ast.walk(tree):
           if isinstance(node, ast.ClassDef) and node.name == 'GunzipParams
           ':
              class_node = node
              break

        self.assertIsNotNone(class_node, "Class 'GunzipParams' not found in
         gz.py")

        data_found = False
        max_size_found = False
        for node in ast.walk(class_node):
           if isinstance(node, ast.Assign):
              for target in node.targets:
                 if isinstance(target, ast.Attribute) and target.attr == '
                 data':


                                                 21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                      data_found = True
                   if isinstance(target, ast.Attribute) and target.attr == '
                   max_size':
                      max_size_found = True

       self.assertTrue(data_found, "Attribute 'self.data' not found in
       GunzipParams class")
       self.assertTrue(max_size_found, "Attribute 'self.max_size' not
       found in GunzipParams class")

   def test_gunzip_function_signature(self):
      # Path to the file where the function should be defined
      file_path = '../scrapy/utils/gz.py'

       # Check if the file exists
       self.assertTrue(os.path.exists(file_path), f"{file_path} does not
       exist")

       # Check if the gunzip function has the correct signature
       with open(file_path, 'r') as file:
          tree = ast.parse(file.read())

       function_found = False
       for node in ast.walk(tree):
          if isinstance(node, ast.FunctionDef) and node.name == 'gunzip':
             # Check function parameters
             args = node.args
             if len(args.args) == 1 and isinstance(args.args[0].annotation
             , ast.Name) and args.args[0].annotation.id == 'GunzipParams':
                # Check return type
                if isinstance(node.returns, ast.Name) and node.returns.id
                == 'bytes':
                   function_found = True
                   break

       self.assertTrue(function_found, "Function 'gunzip' with signature '
       def gunzip(params: GunzipParams) -> bytes' not found in gz.py")

   def test_gunzip_in_sitemapspider(self):
      # Path to the file where SitemapSpider should be defined
      file_path = '../scrapy/spiders/sitemap.py'

       # Check if the file exists
       self.assertTrue(os.path.exists(file_path), f"{file_path} does not
       exist")

       # Check if the SitemapSpider class has a method _get_sitemap_body
       that uses gunzip with GunzipParams
       with open(file_path, 'r') as file:
          tree = ast.parse(file.read())

       sitemapspider_class = None
       for node in ast.walk(tree):
          if isinstance(node, ast.ClassDef) and node.name == '
          SitemapSpider':
             sitemapspider_class = node
             break

       self.assertIsNotNone(sitemapspider_class, "Class 'SitemapSpider'
       not found in sitemap.py")

       method_found = False
       gunzip_params_used = False
       for node in ast.walk(sitemapspider_class):



                                               22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


           if isinstance(node, ast.FunctionDef) and node.name == '
           _get_sitemap_body':
              method_found = True
              for inner_node in ast.walk(node):
                 if isinstance(inner_node, ast.Call) and isinstance(
                 inner_node.func, ast.Name) and inner_node.func.id == '
                 gunzip':
                    if len(inner_node.args) == 1:
                       arg = inner_node.args[0]
                       # Check if the argument passed to gunzip is an
                       instance of GunzipParams
                       if isinstance(arg, ast.Name) or (isinstance(arg, ast
                       .Attribute) and arg.attr == 'GunzipParams'):
                          gunzip_params_used = True
                          break

       self.assertTrue(method_found, "Method '_get_sitemap_body' not found
        in SitemapSpider class")
       self.assertTrue(gunzip_params_used, "gunzip function inside '
       _get_sitemap_body' does not use a 'GunzipParams' object as a
       parameter")

   def test_imports_in_sitemap(self):
      # Path to the file where the imports should be defined
      file_path = '../scrapy/spiders/sitemap.py'

       # Check if the file exists
       self.assertTrue(os.path.exists(file_path), f"{file_path} does not
       exist")

       # Check if the correct import statement is present
       with open(file_path, 'r') as file:
          tree = ast.parse(file.read())

       imports_found = {
          "GunzipParams": False,
          "gunzip": False,
          "gzip_magic_number": False
       }

       for node in ast.walk(tree):
          if isinstance(node, ast.ImportFrom) and node.module == 'scrapy.
          utils.gz':
             for alias in node.names:
                if alias.name in imports_found:
                   imports_found[alias.name] = True

       for import_name, found in imports_found.items():
          self.assertTrue(found, f"Import '{import_name}' not found in
          sitemap.py")

   def test_imports_in_test_utils_gz(self):
      # Path to the test file where the imports should be defined
      test_file_path = '../tests/test_utils_gz.py'

       # Check if the test file exists
       self.assertTrue(os.path.exists(test_file_path), f"{test_file_path}
       does not exist")

       # Check if the correct import statement is present
       with open(test_file_path, 'r') as file:
          tree = ast.parse(file.read())

       imports_found = {
          "GunzipParams": False,


                                               23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


           "gunzip": False,
           "gzip_magic_number": False
       }

       for node in ast.walk(tree):
          if isinstance(node, ast.ImportFrom) and node.module == 'scrapy.
          utils.gz':
             for alias in node.names:
                if alias.name in imports_found:
                   imports_found[alias.name] = True

       for import_name, found in imports_found.items():
          self.assertTrue(found, f"Import '{import_name}' not found in
          test_utils_gz.py")

   def test_gunzipparams_used_in_test_utils_gz(self):
      # Path to the test file where gunzip should be used with
      GunzipParams
      test_file_path = '../tests/test_utils_gz.py'

       # Check if the test file exists
       self.assertTrue(os.path.exists(test_file_path), f"{test_file_path}
       does not exist")

       # Check if the gunzip function is used with GunzipParams in the
       test file
       with open(test_file_path, 'r') as file:
          tree = ast.parse(file.read())

       gunzip_params_used = False
       for node in ast.walk(tree):
          if isinstance(node, ast.Call) and isinstance(node.func, ast.Name
          ) and node.func.id == 'gunzip':
             if len(node.args) == 1:
                arg = node.args[0]
                # Check if the argument passed to gunzip is an instance of
                 GunzipParams
                if isinstance(arg, ast.Name) or (isinstance(arg, ast.
                Attribute) and arg.attr == 'GunzipParams'):
                   gunzip_params_used = True
                   break

       self.assertTrue(gunzip_params_used, "gunzip function in '
       test_utils_gz.py' does not use a 'GunzipParams' object as a
       parameter")

   def test_imports_in_test_downloadermiddleware_httpcompression(self):
      # Path to the test file where the imports should be defined
      test_file_path = '../tests/
      test_downloadermiddleware_httpcompression.py'

       # Check if the test file exists
       self.assertTrue(os.path.exists(test_file_path), f"{test_file_path}
       does not exist")

       # Check if the correct import statement is present
       with open(test_file_path, 'r') as file:
          tree = ast.parse(file.read())

       imports_found = {
          "GunzipParams": False,
          "gunzip": False
       }

       for node in ast.walk(tree):


                                               24
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


           if isinstance(node, ast.ImportFrom) and node.module == 'scrapy.
           utils.gz':
              for alias in node.names:
                 if alias.name in imports_found:
                    imports_found[alias.name] = True

       for import_name, found in imports_found.items():
          self.assertTrue(found, f"Import '{import_name}' not found in
          test_downloadermiddleware_httpcompression.py")

   def test_gunzipparams_used_in_httpcompression_middleware(self):
      # Path to the middleware file where gunzip should be used with
      GunzipParams
      middleware_file_path = '../scrapy/downloadermiddlewares/
      httpcompression.py'

       # Check if the middleware file exists
       self.assertTrue(os.path.exists(middleware_file_path), f"{
       middleware_file_path} does not exist")

       # Check if the gunzip function is used with GunzipParams in the
       middleware file
       with open(middleware_file_path, 'r') as file:
          tree = ast.parse(file.read())

       gunzip_params_used = False
       for node in ast.walk(tree):
          if isinstance(node, ast.Call) and isinstance(node.func, ast.Name
          ) and node.func.id == 'gunzip':
             if len(node.args) == 1:
                arg = node.args[0]
                # Check if the argument passed to gunzip is an instance of
                 GunzipParams
                if isinstance(arg, ast.Name) or (isinstance(arg, ast.
                Attribute) and arg.attr == 'GunzipParams'):
                   gunzip_params_used = True
                   break

       self.assertTrue(gunzip_params_used, "gunzip function in '
       httpcompression.py' does not use a 'GunzipParams' object as a
       parameter")


if __name__ == '__main__':
   unittest.main()


                                               25
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


E   E XAMPLE T EST O UTPUTS
Here are the results of running a subset of the custom AST unit tests. The outputs showcase the
subtask testing formats and the specificity in unit test function names.
   Patch Evaluation Results
================================================================================

Test file: tests/django_refactor/adapt_method_mode.py
Test results: Passed
================================================================================

Test file: tests/salt_refactor/cant-create-test.py
Error: test_ex_cantcreat_isnt_used (cant-create-test.TestSaltExitCodes.
test_ex_cantcreat_isnt_used) ... FAIL
test_ex_cantcreate_in_exitcodes (cant-create-test.TestSaltExitCodes.
test_ex_cantcreate_in_exitcodes) ... ok
test_ex_cantcreate_in_ssh_py_shim (cant-create-test.TestSaltExitCodes.
test_ex_cantcreate_in_ssh_py_shim) ... FAIL
test_ex_cantcreate_is_used (cant-create-test.TestSaltExitCodes.
test_ex_cantcreate_is_used) ... FAIL
test_exitcodes_does_not_have_ex_cantcreat (cant-create-test.
TestSaltExitCodes.test_exitcodes_does_not_have_ex_cantcreat) ... ok
test_ssh_py_shim_does_not_have_ex_cantcreat (cant-create-test.
TestSaltExitCodes.test_ssh_py_shim_does_not_have_ex_cantcreat) ... FAIL
test_ssh_py_shim_does_not_import_exitcodes (cant-create-test.
TestSaltExitCodes.test_ssh_py_shim_does_not_import_exitcodes) ... ok
test_ssh_py_shim_uses_local_ex_cantcreate (cant-create-test.
TestSaltExitCodes.test_ssh_py_shim_uses_local_ex_cantcreate) ... FAIL

======================================================================
FAIL: test_ex_cantcreat_isnt_used (cant-create-test.TestSaltExitCodes.
test_ex_cantcreat_isnt_used)
----------------------------------------------------------------------
Traceback (most recent call last):
  File "/refactor_repos/salt_refactor/task_test/cant-create-test.py", line
   155, in test_ex_cantcreat_isnt_used
   self.assertFalse(ex_cantcreat_found, "salt.defaults.exitcodes.
   EX_CANTCREAT was found in salt/client/ssh/__init__.py, but it should
   not be used.")
AssertionError: True is not false : salt.defaults.exitcodes.EX_CANTCREAT
was found in salt/client/ssh/__init__.py, but it should not be used.
======================================================================
FAIL: test_ex_cantcreate_in_ssh_py_shim (cant-create-test.
TestSaltExitCodes.test_ex_cantcreate_in_ssh_py_shim)
----------------------------------------------------------------------
Traceback (most recent call last):
  File "/refactor_repos/salt_refactor/task_test/cant-create-test.py", line
   39, in test_ex_cantcreate_in_ssh_py_shim
   self.assertTrue(ex_cantcreate_found, f"'EX_CANTCREATE' not found in {
   file_path}")
AssertionError: False is not true : 'EX_CANTCREATE' not found in ../salt/
client/ssh/ssh_py_shim.py
======================================================================
FAIL: test_ex_cantcreate_is_used (cant-create-test.TestSaltExitCodes.
test_ex_cantcreate_is_used)
----------------------------------------------------------------------
Traceback (most recent call last):
  File "/refactor_repos/salt_refactor/task_test/cant-create-test.py", line
   131, in test_ex_cantcreate_is_used
   self.assertTrue(ex_cantcreate_found, "salt.defaults.exitcodes.
   EX_CANTCREATE was not found in salt/client/ssh/__init__.py")
AssertionError: False is not true : salt.defaults.exitcodes.EX_CANTCREATE
 was not found in salt/client/ssh/__init__.py
======================================================================


                                               26
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


FAIL: test_ssh_py_shim_does_not_have_ex_cantcreat (cant-create-test.
TestSaltExitCodes.test_ssh_py_shim_does_not_have_ex_cantcreat)
----------------------------------------------------------------------
Traceback (most recent call last):
  File "/refactor_repos/salt_refactor/task_test/cant-create-test.py", line
   107, in test_ssh_py_shim_does_not_have_ex_cantcreat
   self.assertFalse(ex_cantcreat_found, f"'EX_CANTCREAT' (misspelled)
   found in {file_path}")
AssertionError: True is not false : 'EX_CANTCREAT' (misspelled) found in
../salt/client/ssh/ssh_py_shim.py
======================================================================
FAIL: test_ssh_py_shim_uses_local_ex_cantcreate (cant-create-test.
TestSaltExitCodes.test_ssh_py_shim_uses_local_ex_cantcreate)
----------------------------------------------------------------------
Traceback (most recent call last):
  File "/refactor_repos/salt_refactor/task_test/cant-create-test.py", line
   55, in test_ssh_py_shim_uses_local_ex_cantcreate
   self.assertTrue(ex_cantcreate_used, f"'EX_CANTCREATE' not used in {
   file_path}")
AssertionError: False is not true : 'EX_CANTCREATE' not used in ../salt/
client/ssh/ssh_py_shim.py

----------------------------------------------------------------------
Ran 8 tests in 0.046s
FAILED (failures=5)

================================================================================

Test file: tests/fastapi_refactor/value-is-a-sequence-test.py
Error: test_compat_file_exists (value-is-a-sequence-test.
TestFastAPICompatUtils.test_compat_file_exists) ... ok
test_import_value_is_a_sequence_in_utils (value-is-a-sequence-test.
TestFastAPICompatUtils.test_import_value_is_a_sequence_in_utils) ... FAIL
test_value_is_a_sequence_function_exists (value-is-a-sequence-test.
TestFastAPICompatUtils.test_value_is_a_sequence_function_exists) ... ok
test_value_is_sequence_function_does_not_exist (value-is-a-sequence-test.
TestFastAPICompatUtils.test_value_is_sequence_function_does_not_exist)
... ok
test_value_is_sequence_function_does_not_exist_in_utils (value-is-a-
sequence-test.TestFastAPICompatUtils.
test_value_is_sequence_function_does_not_exist_in_utils) ... ok

======================================================================
FAIL: test_import_value_is_a_sequence_in_utils (value-is-a-sequence-test.
TestFastAPICompatUtils.test_import_value_is_a_sequence_in_utils)
----------------------------------------------------------------------
Traceback (most recent call last):
  File "/refactor_repos/fastapi_refactor/task_test/value-is-a-sequence-
  test.py", line 75, in test_import_value_is_a_sequence_in_utils
   self.assertTrue(import_found, "'value_is_a_sequence' not imported from
    'fastapi._compat' in dependencies/utils.py")
AssertionError: False is not true : 'value_is_a_sequence' not imported
from 'fastapi._compat' in dependencies/utils.py

----------------------------------------------------------------------
Ran 5 tests in 0.026s
FAILED (failures=1)

================================================================================

Test file: tests/scrapy_refactor/add-log-parameter-xmliter.py
Test results: Passed
================================================================================


                                               27
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


F   S TATE R ECONSTRUCTION E XPERIMENT
We prompt gpt-4-turbo with randomly initialized and randomly changed lists of preferences.
We generate preferences through this script and simply iteratively prompt with subportions of the
json.
import json
import random

def generate_random_preferences(categories, products):
   return {
      category: {
         product: random.choice(["Likes", "Dislikes", "NA"]) for product
         in products[category]
      } for category in categories
   }

def generate_trajectory(initial_prefs, num_actions, categories, products)
:
   actions = ["SetPreference"]
   trajectories = []
   preferences = {cat: dict(initial_prefs[cat]) for cat in initial_prefs}
    # Deep copy to prevent mutation

    trajectory = {"actions": [], "states": {}}
    for i in range(1, num_actions + 1):
       category = random.choice(categories)
       product = random.choice(products[category])
       action_type = random.choice(actions)
       old_preference = preferences[category][product] # Track old
       preference
       new_preference = random.choice(["Likes", "Dislikes", "NA"])
       while new_preference == old_preference: # Ensure the new preference
        is different
          new_preference = random.choice(["Likes", "Dislikes", "NA"])

       details = {
          "action": action_type,
          "category": category,
          "product": product,
          #"old_preference": old_preference,
          "new_preference": new_preference
       }
       preferences[category][product] = new_preference # Update to new
       preference
       trajectory["actions"].append(details)

       # Snapshot of system state after each action
       trajectory["states"][f"Action{i}"] = {cat: dict(preferences[cat])
       for cat in preferences}

    trajectories.append(trajectory)
    return trajectories

def main():
   categories = ["Electronics", "Books", "Clothing", "Garden", "Games"]
   products = {
      "Electronics": ["Laptop", "Smartphone", "Headphones"],
      "Books": ["Novel", "Biography", "Science Fiction"],
      "Clothing": ["Jeans", "T-Shirt", "Jacket"],
      "Garden": ["Shovel", "Lawn Mower", "Gloves"],
      "Games": ["Board Game", "Video Game", "Puzzle"]
   }
   num_initial_states = 50
   trajectories_per_state = 5


                                               28
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


    actions_per_trajectory = 50 # Example, number of actions per
    trajectory

    all_data = []

    for _ in range(num_initial_states):
       initial_prefs = generate_random_preferences(categories, products)
       trajectories = []
       for _ in range(trajectories_per_state):
          trajectory = generate_trajectory(initial_prefs,
          actions_per_trajectory, categories, products)
          trajectories.extend(trajectory) # Add the generated trajectory
          to the list
       all_data.append({
          "initial_preferences": initial_prefs,
          "trajectories": trajectories
       })

    with open('complex_actions_states.json', 'w') as f:
       json.dump(all_data, f, indent=4)

if __name__ == "__main__":
   main()

Given these randomly generated actions in json, we prompt gpt-4-turbo for 125 random ini-
tializations iteratively over 0-50 actions of the generated actions. Figure 7 shows the prompt and
expected output. We are not strict with format rules, and allow minor mistakes, however, our parser
requires the larger category separations.


                                      Toy Agent Reconstruction Task
 Here are your initial preferences on 5 different categories.
 Preferences:
 { ’Electronics’: { ’Laptop’: ’Likes’, ’Smartphone’: ’Likes’, ’Headphones’: ’Dislikes’ }, ’Books’: { ’Novel’:
 ’Dislikes’, ’Biography’: ’NA’, ’Science Fiction’: ’Dislikes’ }, ’Clothing’: { ’Jeans’: ’Likes’, ’T-Shirt’:
 ’Likes’, ’Jacket’: ’Likes’ }, ’Garden’: { ’Shovel’: ’Likes’, ’Lawn Mower’: ’NA’, ’Gloves’: ’NA’ }, ’Games’:
 { ’Board Game’: ’Likes’, ’Video Game’: ’Likes’, ’Puzzle’: ’Likes’ } }
 Here are the actions in order after that initial state:
 Action 1: Electronics - Laptop to ’NA’.
 ...
 Action N: Clothing - T-Shirt to ’NA’.
 This is the end of the changes. What is the state of preferences on all categories after the actions? Format
 your response EXACTLY how I formatted the input initial preferences state. Preferences:

 Desired answer: { ’Electronics’: { ’Laptop’: ’NA’, ’Smartphone’: ’Likes’, ’Headphones’: ’Dislikes’ },
 ’Books’: { ’Novel’: ’Dislikes’, ’Biography’: ’NA’, ’Science Fiction’: ’Dislikes’ }, ’Clothing’: { ’Jeans’:
 ’Likes’, ’T-Shirt’: ’NA’, ’Jacket’: ’Likes’ }, ’Garden’: { ’Shovel’: ’Likes’, ’Lawn Mower’: ’Dislikes’,
 ’Gloves’: ’NA’ }, ’Games’: { ’Board Game’: ’Likes’, ’Video Game’: ’Dislikes’, ’Puzzle’: ’Likes’ } }


          Figure 7: Example of a singular instance of the synthetic state construction task.


                                                    29
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


G    S IMPLE S INGLE AGENT S TATE -AWARE I MPLEMENTATION
As an self-contained example, we have a simple implementation of a state-aware interface contained
within a singular agent instance. This state command tracks all it’s previous edit commands and
concatenates them in a separate section. In practice and for results in the paper, we augment the state
cache to relay more information about related edits by integrating parts of previous observations as
well.
state_command:
  name: state
  code: |
   state() {
     local working_dir="$PWD"
     local open_file_info="${CURRENT_FILE:-n/a}"
     local recent_edits_json='[]'

        if [ -n "$RECENT_EDITS" ]; then
           # Split $RECENT_EDITS into an array of edits
           IFS=' | ' read -r -a edits_array <<< "$RECENT_EDITS"
           declare -A seen_edits

             # Filter out duplicate filename-line_number pairs
             filtered_edits=()
             for edit in "${edits_array[@]}"; do
                filename=$(echo "$edit" | cut -d':' -f1)
                line_number=$(echo "$edit" | cut -d':' -f2)

                # Check if this filename:line_number pair has been seen before
                if [ -z "${seen_edits["$filename:$line_number"]}" ]; then
                   filtered_edits+=("$edit")
                   seen_edits["$filename:$line_number"]=1
                fi
             done

             # Convert the filtered edits into a JSON array
             recent_edits_json=$(printf '%s\n' "${filtered_edits[@]}" | jq -R -
             s -c 'split("\n")')
        fi

        state_json=$(jq -n --arg wd "$working_dir" --arg of "$(realpath "
        $open_file_info")" --argjson re "$recent_edits_json" \
           '{"working_dir": $wd, "open_file": $of, "recent_edits": $re}')

        echo "$state_json"
    }

We also, to communicate all the recent edits, append the outputs of this state command in every step
template through:
  next_step_template: |-
     {observation}
     (Current State: {recent_edits})
     (Open file: {open_file})
     (Current directory: {working_dir})
     bash-$


                                                  30
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


H    E XAMPLE S TATE -AWARE O BJECTIVE U PDATE
In this example excerpt from a trajectory, we are able to see our state-aware agent reason about
an external edit (propagated through the state-aware policy) made to the local repository it was
generating a concurrent patch for.
    {
        "role": "assistant",

      "thought":
      "DISCUSSION\nWe have found the `get_encoding_from_headers` function
      calls at lines 622 and 623 in the `test_utils.py` file. Let's
      navigate to line 622 and update the function calls to pass `log=False
      `.\n",
      "action": "goto 622\n",
      "agent": "primary"
    },
    {
      "role": "user",
      "content":

         "[File Contents Printed, Truncated for Brevity]

         (External Edits: [’Since your previous action, another user edited
         adapters.py at lines 359:359
         n’])

         (Your Recent Edits: ['Edited utils.py at lines 542:542', 'Edited
         adapters.py at lines 378:378', 'Edited adapters.py at lines
         618:618\\n'])

         (Open file: /requests_refactor/tests/test_utils.py)

        (Current directory: requests_refactor)
        bash-$",
      "agent": "primary"
    },
    {
      "role": "assistant",
      "thought": "DISCUSSION\nLet's edit the function call at line 623 to
      pass `log=False`. Then, let’s view the external edit in
      adapters.py.",

        "action":
        "
        edit 623:623
        assert get_encoding_from_headers(value, log=False) == expected
        end_of_edit
        ",
    }


                                               31
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


I   C ONTEXT F LOODING F IGURE


Figure 8: Visual example of a language agent having a failed function call loop showcasing the
context flooding and deprioritized objective failure mode.


                                               32
