Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


DYNAMIC M ODELING OF PATIENTS , M ODALITIES AND
TASKS VIA M ULTI - MODAL M ULTI - TASK M IXTURE OF
E XPERTS
 Chenwei Wu∗, Zitao Shuai∗, Zhengxu Tang∗, Luning Wang & Liyue Shen †
 Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Michigan, liyues@umich.edu



                                              A BSTRACT

          Multi-modal multi-task learning holds significant promise in tackling complex
          diagnostic tasks and many significant medical imaging problems. It fulfills the
          needs in real-world diagnosis protocol to leverage information from different data
          sources and simultaneously perform mutually informative tasks. However, med-
          ical imaging domains introduce two key challenges: dynamic modality fusion
          and modality-task dependence. The quality and amount of task-related informa-
          tion from different modalities could vary significantly across patient samples, due
          to biological and demographic factors. Traditional fusion methods apply fixed
          combination strategies that fail to capture this dynamic relationship, potentially
          underutilizing modalities that carry stronger diagnostic signals for specific pa-
          tients. Additionally, different clinical tasks may require dynamic feature selection
          and combination from various modalities, a phenomenon we term “modality-task
          dependence.” To address these issues, we propose M4 oE, a novel Multi-modal
          Multi-task Mixture of Experts framework for precise Medical diagnosis. M4 oE
          comprises Modality-Specific (MSoE) modules and a Modality-shared Modality-
          Task MoE (MToE) module. With collaboration from both modules, our model
          dynamically decomposes and learns distinct and shared information from differ-
          ent modalities and achieves dynamic fusion. MToE provides a joint probability
          model of modalities and tasks by using experts as a link and encourages experts
          to learn modality-task dependence via conditional mutual information loss. By
          doing so, M4 oE offers sample and population-level interpretability of modality
          contributions. We evaluate M4 oE on four public multi-modal medical benchmark
          datasets for solving two important medical diagnostic problems including breast
          cancer screening and retinal disease diagnosis. Results demonstrate our method’s
          superiority over state-of-the-art methods under different metrics of classification
          and segmentation tasks like Accuracy, AUROC, AUPRC, and DICE.1


1       I NTRODUCTION

Multi-modal and multi-task learning holds strong potential for tackling many significant and chal-
lenging medical imaging problems (Tu et al., 2024; Khara et al., 2024b; Cai et al., 2024; He et al.,
2021), as it mimics real-world clinical protocols of disease diagnosis, where clinicians leverage all
available data sources and simultaneously perform multiple assessments that are inherently interre-
lated and informative of each other (Stahlschmidt et al., 2022; Acosta et al., 2022). For example,
radiologists combine full-field digital mammography (FFDM) containing high-resolution details
and 2D synthesized (2DS) images indicating high-contrast tissue structures for breast density pre-
diction and cancer risk screening (Brown et al., 2023); Ophthalmologists integrate color fundus
photographs with optical coherence tomography (OCT) that uses near-infrared light and interferom-
etry for diabetic retinopathy diagnosis and pan-retinal leakage detection (Korot et al., 2021). All
these applications request a model that can understand the complementary information from these
    ∗
      These authors contribute equally to this work.
    †
      Corresponding Author
    1
      Our code could be found in M4oE Official Implementation.


                                                    1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 1: Introduction: Traditional multi-modal multi-task modeling vs M4 oE in medical imaging

different input modalities for predicting various tasks, drawing a lot of research attention (Yang,
2024; Zhao et al., 2022).
Modeling the complex cross-modal and cross-task relationships of medical imaging modalities is
a non-trivial challenge. Different modalities can maintain both modality-specific and modality-
shared information: for example, while MRI and PET can both be used for Alzheimer’s disease
analysis, MRI allows for higher soft-tissue contrast and PET for metabolic activity visuals (Pichler
et al., 2008; Zhang et al., 2023). Such information should be inherently dynamic across patient
samples due to different patient subgroups and environmental variances. This is analogous to the
well-known dynamic fusion of infrared and RGB images in the natural domain. In RGB-Infared
fusion, the relative importance of each modality naturally varies with environmental conditions -
RGB provides better information in daylight while Infrared excels in low-light conditions. In breast
cancer screening, parenchymal tissues in younger women often appear similar and confuse with
tumor tissues in FFDM images, whereas it can be visualized more clearly by 2DS, due to reduced
tissue overlaps (Khara et al., 2024a). For older patients, where calcifications are a key sign of early
cancer, FFDMs are more reliable in showing these small spots (Aujero et al., 2017; Brown et al.,
2023). These insights from practical medical applications inspire us to raise the first research ques-
tion: How can we capture the patient-dynamic modality-shared and modality-specific information
in multimodal data fusion?
Existing multi-modal fusion methods for medical images can be mainly categorized into early fu-
sion (Jiang et al., 2019), late fusion (Donnelly et al., 2024; Weisman et al., 2022), and information-
theory-based methods (Zhang et al., 2024; Chen et al., 2023b). However, most of these approaches
are developed based on the assumption that different modalities contain fixed information distribu-
tion across different samples, which rarely holds true in the real world. We conjecture that ignoring
such reality leads to the problem of “Modality Competition,”(Huang et al., 2022) where only a single
modality dominates the joint latent space, suppressing distinct domain-specific features that should
commonly exist in all modalities. This can result in severely compromised predictions when crucial
disease information is only present in an underrepresented modality. We hypothesize that models
should be able to dynamically integrate effective information from the respective modalities while
not losing generalizable information shared in different modalities. That is, dynamically learning
sample-dynamic modality-specific and modality-shared information.
Another challenge comes with the various interrelated target tasks. Different diagnostic tasks require
a task-specific way to select and fuse features from different imaging modalities, depending on the
modality-task relevance. For instance, in a comprehensive breast cancer screening utilizing top and
side views of both FFDM and 2DS images (4 modalities) (Khara et al., 2024a), density assessment
relies more on FFDM due to its ability to provide higher-resolution details, while the disease de-
tection task, particularly for calcified cancers and lesions in dense tissue, benefits significantly from
2DS with better visibility scores (Aujero et al., 2017; Destounis et al., 2020). This implies the sec-
ond important research question: How do we model the dynamic modality dependence on different
tasks? Current multi-task learning methods either aim to learn a shared set of features that generalize
across different tasks (Swamy et al., 2024) or focus on separating task gradients or task modules for
a single modality (Chen et al., 2023c), ignoring the dynamic nature of task-relevant modality-shared
information. We hypothesize that models should be able to dynamically leverage the most relevant
features from each modality to fuse for each specific task while not compromising the diversity of


                                                   2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


shared multi-modal features generalizable across different tasks. In other words, the goal is to learn
the task-specific and task-shared manifolds in the multi-modal latent space.
In short, as illustrated in Figure 11, effective fusion of multi-modalities should be both sample-
dynamic and task-dependent. Motivated by this, in this work, we propose M4 oE, a new Multi-modal
Multi-task Mixture of Experts (MoE) framework for Medical imaging, dynamically linking modal-
ities, samples and tasks via soft mixture of expert (Puigcerver et al., 2023) networks. M4 oE consists
of two main modules: Modality-Specific MoE (MSoE) and Modality-Shared Modality-Task MoE
(MToE). The combination of modality-shared and modality-specific experts offers a promising so-
lution to the modality competition problem, achieving sample dynamic fusion. By leveraging the
input-dependent nature of MoE, our proposed model dynamically learns distinct and shared infor-
mation from different modalities. Besides, MToE explicitly models the modality-task dependence
by learning a joint distribution of modalities, experts, and tasks. By optimizing conditional mutual
information loss, we encourage experts to learn diverse patterns of task-specific modality-shared
information. Our experiments and analysis show that M4 oE can be well generalized to solve dif-
ferent multimodal medical problems in various applications. More importantly, we show that our
proposed MToE module can be flexibly combined with existing multi-modal fusion strategies to
further improve performance.
Our main contributions can be summarized as follows:
1) We propose a novel framework for multi-modal multi-task learning, achieving both sample-
dynamic modality fusion and dynamic modality-task dependence modeling. It provides sample-
level and dataset-level interpretation of modality contribution to different prediction tasks.
2) Our proposed MToE module provides a simple yet effective way to jointly model and interpret
modality, expert, and task dependency. We devise a new conditional mutual information loss to
encourage experts to dynamically learn diverse patterns of task-dependent modality-shared infor-
mation for different target tasks, respectively.
3) Extensive experiments are conducted on four multi-modal medical benchmark datasets to address
two important multi-modal and multi-task medical problems: breast cancer screening and retinal
diagnosis. Results show that M4 oE outperforms the baselines from both medical and natural image
domains, demonstrating the effectiveness and generalization of our approach.

2   R ELATED W ORK

Multi-modal learning in Medical Imaging. Multi-modal learning in medical imaging focuses on
improving prediction and mimics the multi-modal nature of clinical expert decision-making by fus-
ing disparate data sources (Kline et al., 2022). It has wide applications in fields such as breast cancer
screening (two views of FFDM and two views of 2DS) (Yala et al., 2022), retinal diagnoses (Reti-
nal Fundus images and OCTs) (Zou et al., 2024b), and head-neck cancer survival analyses (Meng
et al., 2023) (Computed Tomography(CT), Positron Emission Tomography (PET), and Magnetic
resonance imaging (MRI)). Existing works can be categorized into early fusion, late fusion (usually
attention-based), and intermediate fusion methods. Late fusion focuses on learning a combined or
joint latent space: Donnelly et al. (2024) learns local and global features from multi-modal breast
cancer images via a combination of convolutional and transformer networks; Oyelade et al. (2024)
extracts both low and high-level features using twin-CNNs and uses binary optimization method
to eliminate non-discriminant features in the search space. However, late fusion is prone to lose
modality-specific information (Zhang et al., 2024). Early fusion concatenates different modalities
into a single input and is shown to outperform late and middle fusion for brain tumor segmentation
from MRI/PET/CT data (Marinov et al., 2023). For example, Xue et al. (2021) segments liver le-
sions by combining predictions from low and high-level feature maps in separate PET/CT decoders.
In intermediate fusion, the features, respective to each modality, are joined in intermediate layers
before feeding to the final prediction head (Huang et al., 2022). This type of model allows for more
convenient modeling of modality-specific and shared information. Chen et al. (2019); Yao et al.
(2024b); Wang et al. (2023) disentangles the features shared across modalities and those unique
within each modality to address challenges like modality inconsistency and modality missingness.
Marinov et al. (2023) disentangles unimodal and multi-modal features using modality-specific de-
coders and a multi-modal decoder. Zhang et al. (2024) uses a mutual information disentangled
transformer to decompose modality information into shared and specific latent space to predict can-


                                                   3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


cer risks with multi-modal histopathology data. Apart from prediction tasks, recent works like Yao
et al. (2024a) have also extended similar fusion techniques for individualized chest X-ray generation
via latent diffusion models. However, all these existing methods are either limited to single-task
prediction or do not consider the dynamic dependence of modality-shared information on specific
tasks, trying to learn a shared set of features for different clinical outcomes. Moreover, they all
ignore the dynamic changes of modality quality in reality, which diminishes the patient-conditioned
advantages of each modality, e.g., the high structural contrast from 2DS for patients with denser
breasts and high-resolution details in FFDM for patients with less-dense breasts.
Multi-task learning in Medical Imaging. In medical imaging, multi-task learning (MTL) has wide
applications as it aims to enhance the performance on interrelated tasks by leveraging shared infor-
mation between them, given limited data availability (Malhotra et al., 2022). Existing medical MTL
methods typically utilize hard parameter sharing methods, designing task-shared networks to cap-
ture common patterns and task-specific networks to learn individual task features (Meng et al., 2022;
Ju et al., 2021). However, these methods require strong correlations among tasks (Zhang & Yang,
2018), which are not necessarily satisfied in medical scenarios. Another type of methods consider
soft-parameter sharing, which utilize regularization loss terms to implicitly seperate parameters for
each task (Graham et al., 2023; Zhou et al., 2021). (Shao et al., 2024) have also considered asso-
ciating multi-instance medical image data with multiple tasks using attention-based fusion blocks.
However, these methods assume a fixed association between tasks and input data modalities (Zhang
& Yang, 2018), making them unable to dynamically capture modality-task dependencies, and thus
limiting their applicability in multi-modal, multi-task medical imaging scenarios.


3     M ETHOD

3.1   P RELIMINARY

Problem Formulation. We start with the definition of multi-modal multi-task learning. Suppose
we are given m image modalities M1 , . . . , Mm and p tasks t1 , . . . , tp , where the tasks are related
but distinct. Each modality contains its own unique information, and the combination of different
modalities elicits task-specific shared information. Multi-modal multi-task learning seeks to im-
prove model performance by integrating the information from the m modalities and leveraging the
knowledge across the p tasks. Each task tk can be viewed as a function Tk that maps multi-modal
image pairs I to the label for each task ytk = Tk (I). For each tk , we have a corresponding labeled
dataset Dk , each data point of which has m paired images I = (I1 , ..., Im ) and a task label Ytk (e.g.,
paired 4 images, 2 from FFDM, 2 from 2DS, and a label of risk of breast cancer). For simplicity
of analysis, we assume that each image pair I is associated with a task-specific label Ytk for each
task tk , forming the task dataset Dk as (I, Ytk ). Our approach generalizes to the more real-world
scenario where each Dk consists of different image pairs.
Soft Mixture-of-Expert(MoE). MoE enables dynamic fusion of multi-modal data and creates data-
dependent flows during inference (Cao et al., 2023). Soft MoE (Puigcerver et al., 2023) replaces the
top-K selection in the sparse MoE (Mustafa et al., 2022) with a softmax-based assignment in the
token-expert mapping, allowing for a soft weighted combination of input tokens. Specifically, for a
Soft-MoE layer with n experts, given input tokens X ∈ Rl×d , where l is the number of tokens and
d is their dimension, the Soft MoE assigns a weighted combination of these tokens to each expert
using a dispatch matrix D ∈ Rl×n . Each expert then projects the input tokens into output tokens,
and the final output is obtained as the weighted combination of the output tokens, with the weights
provided by a combine matrix C. The matrix D and C are created based on the input X and a
learned matrix Φ of the MoE layer.
Hypothesis. We propose our hypotheses for medical multi-modal multi-task learning, which will
be verified by our analysis experiments in the Sec. 4.3.
Dynamic modality-shared and specific information: Information between multi-modalities can
be decomposed into modality-specific and modality-shared. This interaction should be dynamic,
e.g., the high structural contrast from 2DS for patients with denser breasts and high-resolution details
in FFDM for patients with less-dense breast. Ignoring this fact will cause multi-modal multi-task
models to focus on optimizing parameters of a specific modality while neglecting the others, aka
’Modality-Competition’.


                                                   4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 2: (a) The framework first embeds different input modalities with feature embedders, then
goes through MSoE to learn and retain the modality-specific features, MToE to model shared modal-
ity information and modality-task dependence, and a final fusion block connected with task heads.
(b) The MToE block creates data-dependent pathways for each multi-modal input, dispatching
modality tokens to experts and combining the expert outputs to generate task-specific features. (c)
Modality-specific MoEs are used to extract and retain input-dependent modality-specific features.
(d). We apply a basic Soft MoE block after M4 oE to fuse all features.

Dynamic modality-task dependence: In multi-modal multi-task learning, the shared information
between different modalities should be modeled differently to a given task instead of using a static
shared set of features, forming a modality-task dependence.

3.2   OVERALL F RAMEWORK

In this section, we will demonstrate our M4 oE framework for multi-modal multi-task learning and
illustrate how it dynamically links the input modalities to different tasks. Our M4 oE design com-
prises modality-specific feature embedders, modality-specific Soft MoEs, and shared Modality-Task
Soft MoEs. We customize the MoEs into Vision Transformer blocks so that it creates a data-
dependent path for each input. This enables more flexible modeling of dynamic modality depen-
dence and dynamic multi-modal fusion in a multi-modal multi-task learning setting. Specifically,
as shown in Fig. 2 a), we first utilize a feature embedder to project input modalities to embeddings
X1 , ..., Xm ∈ Rl×d . To mitigate the modality competition phenomenon, where modality-specific
information is lost for most modalities, for each modality Mi we use modality-specific MoE blocks
to extract and retain input-dependent modality-specific features Zi ∈ Rl×d from Xi . Meanwhile,
we feed X1 , . . . , Xm into our proposed MToE block and obtain the task-dependent fused modality
features, producing task-specific features pool G1 , . . . , Gp . Finally, each task-specific feature pool
from G1 , ..., Gp is fused with modality-specific, task-shared feature pool Z1 , ..., Zm to form task-
specific and shared pool H1 , ..., Hp . For each task Tk , Hk is passed to the task heads after a basic
soft MoE block for final predictions. The overall framework can be seen in Fig. 2.
The modality-specific MoE is a Soft MoE, as described in Sec. 3.1. As shown in Fig. 2 b), each
MSoE gi for modality i contains n experts and a learnable matrix Φi ∈ Rd×n , where d represents the
embedding dimension. Given input tokens X ∈ Rl×d , we compute the dispatch matrix D ∈ Rl×n
by applying softmax along the columns of XΦi , and the combine matrix C ∈ Rl×n by applying
softmax along the rows of XΦi . We pass the linearly weighted input X̃j , where X̃ = DX, to each
expert j and obtain the output Ỹj . Finally, we apply a linear combination of Ỹj based on C to obtain
the final output Y = C Ỹ for the MSoE module.


                                                    5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


As shown in Fig. 2 c), the MToE block connects tasks to input modalities by using experts as a
link. It is distinct from the basic soft MoE in that it takes in mixed inputs from multi-modalities,
directs the mixture of their information through task-specific slots, and differentiates with learnable
task embeddings. The MoE layer of the MToE consists of n experts and a learnable matrix Φtask ∈
Rd×n×p , and each expert processes p input task slots corresponding to different tasks. Given the
input token-type modality features X1 , . . . , Xm ∈ Rl×d , there is a total of M = l × m feature
tokens. And then they are assigned to the task slots of each expert through a convex combination
of X1 , . . . , Xm , using dispatch weights D ∈ RM ×n×p . The dispatch weight is given by applying
a softmax over columns of XΦ, where X ∈ RM ×d is the concatenation of X1 , ..., Xm : Dijk =
   exp((XΦ)ijk )
PM
      exp((XΦ) )
                      , X̃ = DX. Each task slot k of expert j is processed by the expert j’s neural
  i=1          ijk

network fj , to produce the output slots: Ỹ.jk = fj (X̃.jk + T Ek ), where T Ek is the learnable task
embedding of task k that is shared across experts. The final output Y of each task k is obtained by
taking a convex combination of all the output slots Ỹ. This process is similar to the previous one:
               exp((XΦ)ijk )
Cijk = Pn Pp exp((XΦ)        ijk )
                                   , Yk = C..k Ỹ..k , where C, the combine weights, are computed by
           j=1   k=1
applying a softmax over the rows of XΦ. This facilitates the dynamic connection between different
input modalities and tasks and enables probability modeling in Sec. 3.3.

3.3     J OINT P ROBABILITY M ODELING OF M ODALITY, TASK AND E XPERTS

To understand how each modality contributes to different tasks, we define a probability model over
tasks T , experts E, and modalities M . We assume that when our trained network is deployed, it
will receive a random task T and a corresponding multi-modal image pair I based on a global task
distribution P (T )2 . The input-conditioned and dynamic multi-expert structure of MToE makes it
well-suited for jointly modeling T and M , where the ϕ ∈ Rm×n×p matrix and task slots collabora-
tively connect modality M to expert E and subsequently to task T .
In the MToE module, we model the probability P (Ej |Tk ) of selecting expert Ej for task Tk based
on how much importance the routing network assigns expert Ej to task Tk . For example, in sparse
MoEs, if the routing network assigns 30 out of 100 image pairs from task Tk to expert Ej , then
P (Ej |Tk ) = 0.3. In the MToE, rather than making hard assignments, we calculate these probabil-
ities by summing the soft weights from the routing matrix XΦ. Given this matrix,  Pmthe conditional
                                                                                        (XΦ)i,j,k
probability of an input X can then be determined as follows: P (Ej |Tk ) = n Pp (XΦ)
                                                                                P   i=1
                                                                                                i,j,k
                                                                                                      ,
                                                                                 j=1   k=1
where m is the number of modalities, n is the number of experts, and p is the number of tasks.
Similarly, the conditional probability P (Mi |Tk ) can be represented by the frequency of how a
modality   i is selected to contribute to a task j, which can be written as follows: P (Mi |Tk ) =
    n
    P
       (XΦ)i,j,k
Pm j=1
     Pp             , To model how experts are assigned to each modality for different tasks, we
 i=1  k=1 (XΦ)i,j,k
need to model the conditional probability P (M, E|T ). This can be given by dispatch weights as
well. Given the input X and task k, the modality i is assigned to the
                                                                   Pnexpert j with the probability
                                                                     j=1 (XΦ)i,j,k
P (Mi , Ej |Tk ), which can be expressed by: P (Mi , Ej |Tk ) = m
                                                               P   P n   Pp
                                                                              (XΦ)i,j,k
                                                                                        .
                                                                       i=1   j=1   k=1

Based on our hypothesis of modality-task dependence, in the multi-modal multi-task learning set-
ting, the most important experts and the selection of input modality features should depend on the
task. This allows the MToE to assign specific experts to corresponding modalities for each task. To
achieve so, we could maximize the conditional mutual information between experts E and modali-
                               Pm Pn Pp                                  P (M ,E |T )
ties M given T : I(M ; E|T ) = i=1 j=1 k=1 P (Mi , Ej |Tk ) log P (Mi |Tki )Pj(Ejk|Tk ) .

This term can be calculated based on our probabilistic modeling above in the MToE3 .
To understand this objective, we can decompose it as I(M ; E|T ) = H(M |T ) − H(M |E, T ).
Term −H(M |E, T ) refers to the entropy of modality given task and experts, a smaller H(M |E, T )
encourages the MToE to learn a stronger dependency of the modality on both the expert and task, and
to leverage different combinations of modalities for different tasks. H(M |T ) refers to the entropy of
modalities given tasks, where a higher term ensures modality diversity instead of repeatedly relying
   2
   This distribution is typically derived from the dataset, as not all data points have labels for every task.
   3
   In implementation, Φ is with the shape of (m · l) × n × p since each modality has l tokens. For each
modality, we sum up the probability of all of its tokens to marginalize probability for each Modality m.


                                                      6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


on a small subset of modalities.
                        Pp        Given the training objective Ltk of each task tk , the final loss L
can be written as: L = i=1 Ltk − αI(M ; E|T ), where α is the hyper-parameter that adjusts the
strength of conditional mutual information loss.

4     E XPERIMENT

4.1   E XPERIMENT S ETTING

Datasets. To test M4 oE’s generalizability across populations and medical imaging modalities, we
conduct extensive experiments over four public datasets on two use cases. Mammogram screen-
ing: We use EMory BrEast Imaging Dataset (EMBED) (Jeong et al., 2023) collected in the United
States, The 2023 RSNA Screening Mammography Breast Cancer Detection AI Challenge Dataset
(RSNA) collected in Australia (Carr et al.), and VinDr-Mammo Dataset (VinDr) collected in Viet-
nam (Nguyen et al., 2023). EMBED has four modalities (2 view FFDM and 2 view 2DS) and seven
tasks: BI-RADS assessment (3-class), 1-5 years risk scoring (binary), and density classification(4
class). RSNA and VinDr have two modalities (2 view FFDM) and two tasks: density classification
(4-class) and BI-RADS assessment (3-class). Ophthalmology screening: we use the Glaucoma
grAding from Multi-Modality imAges (GAMMA) dataset (Wu et al., 2023) collected in China.
GAMMA has two modalities (color fundus photos and OCT) and two tasks: glaucoma detection
(3-class) and optical cup segmentation.
Evaluation. Accuracy is used for classification tasks, and DICE score is used for segmentation
across 5-fold cross validation. For the M4 oE model reported in Table 1, we use 128 experts for the
MToE module and 32 experts for each of the MSoE modules. We use Adam optimizer with learning
rate of 1e-4 and stepLR scheduler with step size of 5 and gamma of 0.1. The model is trained on a
batch size of 32 and a total of 100 epochs. α is set to 0.05. Our hardware includes 4 NVIDIA A100s
and 4 L40s. Detailed mean, standard deviation, AUROC and AUPRC, are in Appendix.
Baselines. We mainly compare our method with four groups of SOTA methods: 1) Multi-modal
single-task baselines from medical AI. 2) Multi-modal multi-task baselines from medical AI. In 1),
we compare with MIRAI (Yala et al., 2022) and Asymmirai (Donnelly et al., 2024) for mammog-
raphy, Eyemost (Zou et al., 2024b) and Eyestar (Wu et al., 2023) for ophthalmology. In 2), we
compare with the 4 methods under multi-task setting. 3) MoE-related baselines. We compare with
a multi-modal soft mixture of experts (Puigcerver et al., 2023) and the combination of MIRAI and
Asymmirai with our MToE. 4) Multi-modal multi-task baselines adapted from the natural domain,
including FULLER (Huang et al., 2023), AIDE (Yang et al., 2023), MModN (Swamy et al., 2024),
EVIF (Geng et al., 2024). Comparison with Adapted Multimodal Soft MoE (Puigcerver et al., 2023),
AdaMV-MoE (Chen et al., 2023a), and Fuse-MoE (Han et al., 2024) are included in Appendix.

4.2   M AIN RESULTS

Our M4 oE significantly outperforms baseline methods. As shown in Table 1, the single-task
MSoE outperforms all the single-task medical AI baselines, demonstrating our design’s effective-
ness in retaining modality-specific information. As for multi-task settings, M4 oE consistently out-
performs baseline methods across all tasks on all benchmarks. This highlights the effectiveness of
M4 oE in the multi-modal, multi-task learning setting.
Multi-tasks benefit from each other in our M4 oE method, unlike baselines. In Table 1, our
M4 oE trained in a multi-task setting shows superior performance compared to its single-task training
counterpart. This indicates that tasks involved in multi-task learning contribute to shared features.
We show in Sec. 4.3 that this also reduces gradient conflicts that typically hinder the learning of
task-specific features. In contrast, such improvements are not seen in baseline methods. This may
be because these methods fail to capture the dynamic dependence between modalities and tasks.
Our MToE framework can generalize to different multi-modal learning backbones. We have
adapted MToE to Miral and Asymiral baselines for mammography tasks, and have adapted MToE to
Eyemost and Eyestar baselines for retinal tasks. After being combined with our MToE module, the
single-task oriented medical AI baselines obtain significant performance improvement, most on par
with or even exceeding Multi-modal Multi-task baselines from the natural domain. This highlights
MToE’s flexibility and generalizability.


                                                 7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025



Table 1: Multi-modal single-task and multi-task results over four benchmarks from mammography
imaging and retinal imaging. Complete 7-task results on EMBED dataset are in appendix.
  Setting   Method                EMBED                     RSNA                   VinDR       Method          GAMMA
            Mammo.         Risk   Density   Birads   Density       Birads   Density   Birads   Retinal        Glau.   Seg.
  Single    Mirai          84.0   82.3      72.5     76.3          62.3     86.3      66.1     Eyemost        86.0    87.8
  -Task     Asysmirai      79.0   80.2      69.4     74.1          60.1     78.9      62.4     Eyestar        85.4    85.9
            Ours wo MSoE   83.2   82.1      71.9     76.8          62.2     85.4      65.8     Our wo MSoE    86.2    86.2
            Ours           85.5   83.6      74.2     77.5          64.0     87.7      67.5     Ours           87.6    88.9
  Multi     Mirai          83.1   83.2      72.3     76.1          62.5     85.4      65.9     EyeMost        86.5    86.6
  -Task      +MToE         84.6   83.3      73.4     76.8          63.1     85.9      66.4      +MToE         87.2    88.5
            Asymirai       80.0   82.5      69.6     73.9          60.7     79.1      62.2     Eyestar        85.9    84.1
             +MToE         81.9   83.1      70.8     74.2          61.2     81.2      64.2      +MToE         87.5    86.9
            EVIF           84.7   83.4      73.6     77.0          65.9     88.8      70.7     EVIF           88.7    87.0
            Fuller         84.3   83.5      72.5     76.9          65.4     87.1      68.7     Fuller         87.8    86.2
            AIDE           84.1   82.9      73.6     76.8          66.1     88.2      69.8     AIDE           88.5    87.5
            MModN          84.8   83.7      73.9     77.1          66.4     89.0      70.4     MModN          89.2    87.2
            Ours wo MToE   84.0   82.8      73.1     76.7          64.3     86.9      67.3     Ours wo MToE   88.1    87.4
            Ours           85.9   84.1      75.1     77.8          66.7     89.6      71.8     Ours           90.4    89.7


Figure 3: (a). Performance drop caused by modality competition. (b). Modality utilization of multi-
modal soft MoE. (c). Modality utilization of M4 oE. Our method has less modality competition.

4.3   A NALYSIS

Modality Utilization in Non-MoE Fusion, MoE vs M4 oE. To investigate our first hypothesis, we
examine how well traditional (non-MoE) multi-modal models, multi-modal MoE, and our approach
utilize the four different modalities on the EMBED dataset on the cancer risk prediction task. For tra-
ditional method, we first train a multi-modal model where each modality is encoded by a modality-
specific ViT encoder. The representations from each modality are then averaged and then passed
through a dense fusion layer before being fed into the task heads. We also trained four unimodal
models for each modality. As shown in Fig. 3(a), we compared the four modality-specific (from
the multi-modal model) encoders’ performance with that of their unimodal counterpart. The en-
coders from the multi-modal model exhibited a significant performance gap compared to the model
trained solely on that modality, especially for modalities FFDM left-to-right (M2), 2DS up-to-down
(M3), and 2Ds left-to-right (M4). This indicates that M2-M4 is much more poorly optimized in the
multi-modal model compared to M1, i.e. losses the modality competition (Huang et al., 2022).
For the MoE-based method, it is easier to evaluate the modality utilization across experts: For
modality Mi , we first obtain the sum of input-conditioned modality dispatch weights assigned to
Mi ’s token for a data sample and a given expert Ej , then aggregate this value over all experts
and over all data points. In Fig. 3, we observe that when simply using a multi-modal soft MoE
architecture, modality 1 dominates the expert space. In contrast, M4 oE alleviates this issue by
learning a much more diverse modality utilization and achieves higher performance as shown in
Table. 1 (Without MSoE v.s. M4 oE).
Dynamic Modality Dependence. Recall our second hypothesis that the fused features from dif-
ferent modalities should be dynamically dependent on different tasks. Unlike M4 oE, traditional
multi-modal fusion models lack interpretability of modality-task dependence. To ensure a fair com-
parison, we introduce the synergy measure from partial information decomposition (PID) theory,
which quantifies how much new task-specific information emerges when two modalities are fused.
We train synergy estimators using BATCH algorithm following Liang et al. (2024) to calculate pair-
wise synergy between input modalities for a given task. For this experiment, we train models on
the EMBED dataset with density prediction and 1-year risk prediction tasks. We utilize the two
FFDM modalities and two 2DS modalities for training, and this results in 6 pairwise synergies per
task, visualized as matrices in Fig. 4. We observe that the synergy matrix for the baseline MIRAI


                                                               8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 4: Visualization of modality-task dependence. We report modality-pair-wise synergies which
measure how two modalities benefit from each other on contributing to the given prediction task.


         Figure 5: Visualization of modality contribution on patient level and dataset level.

method shows similar value distributions across different tasks, where shared information of two-
view FFDM is prevalent (M1 and M2). While Task 1 (density) and Task 2 (risk) synergy for baseline
do capture different absolute values, the highest synergy pair still only peaks for M1 and M2 (within
two views of FFDM) for both tasks. However, this doesn’t follow our dynamic modality-task depen-
dence intuition. While density information is known to be mostly captured by FFDMs (Destounis
et al., 2020; Zuckerman et al., 2016), prior work (Kleinknecht et al., 2020; Gastounioti et al., 2022)
in mammogram screening suggests that for the cancer risk task, models should leverage useful in-
sights from all four modalities. Our model shows a clear contrast of synergy distributions between
the two tasks, and the cancer risk task’s distribution derives information from more diverse infor-
mation from different modalities. The benefits can be further proven by the improved results after
adding MToE in Table 1 (Without MToE vs M4 oE). For density, our method peaks at M1-M2. For
risk, we peak at not only M1-M2 synergy (within FFDM) but also M1-M4 synergy (between FFDM
and 2DS). We also capture the M2-M3 and M3-M4 synergy much better than the baseline. This in-
dicates a stronger modality-task dependency. This improvement is likely due to our method’s ability
to better learn task-dependent mutual information between different modalities. Further details on
PID theory and BATCH algorithm can be found in Appendix A.
Sample and Population-Level Modality Contribution Interpretability. M4 oE has inherent sam-
ple and population level interpretability of modality contribution to a specific task, because the Φ
matrix determines both how much weight each modality contributes to an expert and how much
weight each expert contributes to a task. We use two tasks from the EMBEDS dataset to illus-
trate this. 1) Sample-level (local) modality contribution for one patient input: Given a task, we
calculate the importance weight of each modality for each expert, and average over all experts by
expert-task assignment weights. 2) Population-level (global) modality contribution: we aggregate
the sample-level contribution over the entire dataset. Fig. 5 provides granular insights on how dif-
ferent modalities contribute to the task predictions of two different patient samples and over the
entire EMBEDS dataset. We observe distinct patterns across patients and clinically sensible global
patterns: FFDM contributes more to density, and all modalities should contribute to risk prediction
(Destounis et al., 2020; Aujero et al., 2017; Zuckerman et al., 2016).
Gradient Conflict Mitigation. Gradient conflict problem is a long-standing issue in multi-task
learning that may harm the model’s ability to learn task-specific information (Chen et al., 2023c;
Zhou et al., 2024). This issue is also present in multi-modal scenarios, as shown in Fig 6. We
observe that M4 oE also helps mitigate this issue. We train a ViT-based multi-task late fusion model
using four modalities in mammography, predicting density and 1-year risk. We collect the gradients
from the last layer of the fusion block during back-propagation for both task losses in each step of
an epoch. As shown in Fig 6, we calculate the cosine similarities between the gradients of the two
tasks and categorize the gradient relationships into three categories: ”conflict” (similarity between
-1 and -0.01), ”neutral” (-0.01 to 0.01), and ”enhance” (0.01 to 1). The baseline model shows a


                                                  9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 6: (a). Gradients from different task heads may conflict, and our method has mitigated this
issue. (b). Compared to basic Soft MoE, our method has a sparser expert-task dependency that may
have helped alleviate the gradient conflict problem.
high proportion of conflicts, indicating significant gradient conflicts in the multi-modal, multi-task
setting. In contrast, our M4 oE model exhibits a much lower proportion of conflicts, demonstrating
that our method effectively mitigates gradient conflicts. This improvement may be attributed to
sparse task-expert dependency, where experts tend to specialize in different tasks. As shown in
Fig. 6, we conduct a reduced experiment (16 experts and 7 tasks) and generate heatmaps of the
expert-task assignment scores from the combine matrix to visualize the expert-task dependencies in
both the baseline MoE model and our M4 oE. Our method shows higher sparsity, enabling dynamic
separation of task-specific parameters and helping to reduce gradient conflicts.

4.4   A BLATION S TUDY

Ablation of Different Model Components. As shown in Table 2, we conduct ablation studies on
each component of the M4 oE framework. Removing either the MSoE or MToE leads to a significant
performance drop. This is because: 1) the MSoE retains and contributes modality-specific features
to the embedding pool and alleviates the modality competition issue. 2) The task-slot and task-
specific embedding guided MToE data flow capture the dependence between modalities and tasks
to find the most suitable modality feature selection and fusion for each task. Additionally, removing
the mutual-information regularization loss while retaining the MToE results in a slight performance
decrease compared to original M4 oE model, as the loss encourages higher modality-task dependence
and more diverse modality feature fusion.
Increasing the number of experts and regularization degree α within a certain range improves
the performance. As shown in Fig. 7, increasing the number of experts in the MToE from 16 to 128
improves the model’s performance. Additionally, raising the value of α, which controls the degree
of mutual information regularization, from 0.01 to 0.2 generally enhances the model’s performance,
but too heavy of a weight makes the predictions slightly worse. Detailed results are in the Appendix.
                                        Table 2: Ablation results on technical components in M4 oE.

                                         MToE     MSoE     MI Reg.                  EMBED
                                                                      1 year risk    Density   Birads
                                                  ✓                   84.0           82.8      73.1
                                      ✓                    ✓          85.1           83.5      73.8
Figure 7: Ablation on expert number n ✓           ✓                   85.2           83.7      73.5
and regularization degree α.          ✓           ✓        ✓          85.9           84.1      75.1


5     C ONCLUSION
In this paper, we propose M4 oE, a Multi-modal Multi-task Mixture of Experts framework for Med-
ical multi-modal multi-task learning. M4 oE enables dynamic, sample-adaptive modality fusion and
modality-task dependence modeling. It jointly models the dependence of modalities, experts, and
tasks and captures dynamic distinct and shared modality information. Extensive experiments show
that M4 oE consistently outperforms baselines across diverse medical imaging benchmarks, offers
interpretability of modality contribution, and can be flexibly combined with different backbones.
Acknowledgements. The authors acknowledge support from Michigan Institute for Computational
Discovery and Engineering Catalyst Grant, and Michigan Institute for Data Science PODS Grant.


                                                 10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


R EFERENCES
Julián N Acosta, Guido J Falcone, Pranav Rajpurkar, and Eric J Topol. Multimodal biomedical ai.
  Nature Medicine, 28(9):1773–1784, 2022.

Mireille P Aujero, Sara C Gavenonis, Ron Benjamin, Zugui Zhang, and Jacqueline S Holt. Clinical
 performance of synthesized two-dimensional mammography combined with tomosynthesis in a
 large screening population. Radiology, 283(1):70–76, 2017.

Nils Bertschinger, Johannes Rauh, Eckehard Olbrich, Jürgen Jost, and Nihat Ay. Quantifying unique
  information. Entropy, 16(4):2161–2183, 2014.

Ann L Brown, Charmi Vijapura, Mitva Patel, Alexis De La Cruz, and Rifat Wahab. Breast cancer
  in dense breasts: detection challenges and supplemental screening opportunities. RadioGraphics,
  43(10):e230024, 2023.

Zhiyuan Cai, Li Lin, Huaqing He, Pujin Cheng, and Xiaoying Tang. Uni4eye++: A general masked
  image modeling multi-modal pre-training framework for ophthalmic image classification and seg-
  mentation. IEEE Transactions on Medical Imaging, 2024.

Bing Cao, Yiming Sun, Pengfei Zhu, and Qinghua Hu. Multi-modal gated mixture of local-to-global
  experts for dynamic image fusion. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on
  Computer Vision, pp. 23555–23564, 2023.

Chris Carr, Felipe Kitamura, J Kalpathy-Cramer, J Mongan, K Andriole, M Vazirabad, M Riopel,
  R Ball, and S Dane. Rsna screening mammography breast cancer detection. 2022.

Cheng Chen, Qi Dou, Yueming Jin, Hao Chen, Jing Qin, and Pheng-Ann Heng. Robust multi-
  modal brain tumor segmentation via feature disentanglement and gated fusion. In Medical Image
  Computing and Computer Assisted Intervention–MICCAI 2019: 22nd International Conference,
  Shenzhen, China, October 13–17, 2019, Proceedings, Part III 22, pp. 447–456. Springer, 2019.

Tianlong Chen, Xuxi Chen, Xianzhi Du, Abdullah Rashwan, Fan Yang, Huizhong Chen, Zhangyang
  Wang, and Yeqing Li. Adamv-moe: Adaptive multi-task vision mixture-of-experts. In Proceed-
  ings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision, pp. 17346–17357, 2023a.

Yuanyuan Chen, Yongsheng Pan, Yong Xia, and Yixuan Yuan. Disentangle first, then distill: A
  unified framework for missing modality imputation and alzheimer’s disease diagnosis. IEEE
  Transactions on Medical Imaging, 2023b.

Zitian Chen, Yikang Shen, Mingyu Ding, Zhenfang Chen, Hengshuang Zhao, Erik G Learned-
  Miller, and Chuang Gan. Mod-squad: Designing mixtures of experts as modular multi-task learn-
  ers. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition,
  pp. 11828–11837, 2023c.

Stamatia V Destounis, Amanda Santacroce, and Andrea Arieno. Update on breast density, risk
  estimation, and supplemental screening. American Journal of Roentgenology, 214(2):296–305,
  2020.

Cuturi M Sinkhorn Distances. Lightspeed computation of optimal transport. Advances in neural
  information processing systems, 26:2292–2300, 2013.

Jon Donnelly, Luke Moffett, Alina Jade Barnett, Hari Trivedi, Fides Schwartz, Joseph Lo, and
  Cynthia Rudin. Asymmirai: Interpretable mammography-based deep learning model for 1–5-
  year breast cancer risk prediction. Radiology, 310(3):e232780, 2024.

Alexey Dosovitskiy. An image is worth 16x16 words: Transformers for image recognition at scale.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2010.11929, 2020.

Aimilia Gastounioti, Shyam Desai, Vinayak S Ahluwalia, Emily F Conant, and Despina Kontos.
  Artificial intelligence in mammographic phenotyping of breast cancer risk: a narrative review.
  Breast Cancer Research, 24(1):14, 2022.


                                               11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Mengyue Geng, Lin Zhu, Lizhi Wang, Wei Zhang, Ruiqin Xiong, and Yonghong Tian. Event-
 based visible and infrared fusion via multi-task collaboration. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF
 Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 26929–26939, 2024.

Simon Graham, Quoc Dang Vu, Mostafa Jahanifar, Shan E Ahmed Raza, Fayyaz Minhas, David
  Snead, and Nasir Rajpoot. One model is all you need: multi-task learning enables simultaneous
  histology image segmentation and classification. Medical Image Analysis, 83:102685, 2023.

Xing Han, Huy Nguyen, Carl Harris, Nhat Ho, and Suchi Saria. Fusemoe: Mixture-of-experts
  transformers for fleximodal fusion. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.03226, 2024.

Xingxin He, Ying Deng, Leyuan Fang, and Qinghua Peng. Multi-modal retinal image classification
  with modality-specific attention network. IEEE transactions on medical imaging, 40(6):1591–
  1602, 2021.

Yu Huang, Junyang Lin, Chang Zhou, Hongxia Yang, and Longbo Huang. Modality competition:
  What makes joint training of multi-modal network fail in deep learning?(provably). In Interna-
  tional conference on machine learning, pp. 9226–9259. PMLR, 2022.

Zhijian Huang, Sihao Lin, Guiyu Liu, Mukun Luo, Chaoqiang Ye, Hang Xu, Xiaojun Chang, and
  Xiaodan Liang. Fuller: Unified multi-modality multi-task 3d perception via multi-level gradient
  calibration. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision, pp.
  3502–3511, 2023.

Jiwoong J Jeong, Brianna L Vey, Ananth Bhimireddy, Thomas Kim, Thiago Santos, Ramon Correa,
  Raman Dutt, Marina Mosunjac, Gabriela Oprea-Ilies, Geoffrey Smith, et al. The emory breast
  imaging dataset (embed): A racially diverse, granular dataset of 3.4 million screening and diag-
  nostic mammographic images. Radiology: Artificial Intelligence, 5(1):e220047, 2023.

Jue Jiang, Yu-Chi Hu, Neelam Tyagi, Pengpeng Zhang, Andreas Rimner, Joseph O Deasy, and
  Harini Veeraraghavan. Cross-modality (ct-mri) prior augmented deep learning for robust lung
  tumor segmentation from small mr datasets. Medical physics, 46(10):4392–4404, 2019.

Lie Ju, Xin Wang, Xin Zhao, Huimin Lu, Dwarikanath Mahapatra, Paul Bonnington, and Zongyuan
  Ge. Synergic adversarial label learning for grading retinal diseases via knowledge distillation
  and multi-task learning. IEEE Journal of Biomedical and Health Informatics, 25(10):3709–3720,
  2021.

Galvin Khara, Hari Trivedi, Mary S Newell, Ravi Patel, Tobias Rijken, Peter Kecskemethy, and
  Ben Glocker. Generalisable deep learning method for mammographic density prediction across
  imaging techniques and self-reported race. Communications Medicine, 4(1):21, 2024a.

Galvin Khara, Hari Trivedi, Mary S Newell, Ravi Patel, Tobias Rijken, Peter Kecskemethy, and
  Ben Glocker. Generalisable deep learning method for mammographic density prediction across
  imaging techniques and self-reported race. Communications Medicine, 4(1):21, 2024b.

Julian Hans Kleinknecht, Anca Ileana Ciurea, and Cristiana Augusta Ciortea. Pros and cons for
  breast cancer screening with tomosynthesis–a review of the literature. Medicine and Pharmacy
  Reports, 93(4):335, 2020.

Adrienne Kline, Hanyin Wang, Yikuan Li, Saya Dennis, Meghan Hutch, Zhenxing Xu, Fei Wang,
  Feixiong Cheng, and Yuan Luo. Multimodal machine learning in precision health: A scoping
  review. npj Digital Medicine, 5(1):171, 2022.

Edward Korot, Zeyu Guan, Daniel Ferraz, Siegfried K Wagner, Gongyu Zhang, Xiaoxuan Liu, Livia
  Faes, Nikolas Pontikos, Samuel G Finlayson, Hagar Khalid, et al. Code-free deep learning for
  multi-modality medical image classification. Nature Machine Intelligence, 3(4):288–298, 2021.

Paul Pu Liang, Yun Cheng, Ruslan Salakhutdinov, and Louis-Philippe Morency. Multimodal fu-
  sion interactions: A study of human and automatic quantification. In Proceedings of the 25th
  International Conference on Multimodal Interaction, pp. 425–435, 2023.


                                               12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Paul Pu Liang, Yun Cheng, Xiang Fan, Chun Kai Ling, Suzanne Nie, Richard Chen, Zihao Deng,
  Nicholas Allen, Randy Auerbach, Faisal Mahmood, et al. Quantifying & modeling multimodal
  interactions: An information decomposition framework. Advances in Neural Information Pro-
  cessing Systems, 36, 2024.

Aakarsh Malhotra, Surbhi Mittal, Puspita Majumdar, Saheb Chhabra, Kartik Thakral, Mayank
  Vatsa, Richa Singh, Santanu Chaudhury, Ashwin Pudrod, and Anjali Agrawal. Multi-task driven
  explainable diagnosis of covid-19 using chest x-ray images. Pattern Recognition, 122:108243,
  2022.

Zdravko Marinov, Simon Reiß, David Kersting, Jens Kleesiek, and Rainer Stiefelhagen. Mirror u-
  net: Marrying multimodal fission with multi-task learning for semantic segmentation in medical
  imaging. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision, pp.
  2283–2293, 2023.

Mingyuan Meng, Bingxin Gu, Lei Bi, Shaoli Song, David Dagan Feng, and Jinman Kim. Deepmts:
 deep multi-task learning for survival prediction in patients with advanced nasopharyngeal car-
 cinoma using pretreatment pet/ct. IEEE Journal of Biomedical and Health Informatics, 26(9):
 4497–4507, 2022.

Mingyuan Meng, Lei Bi, Michael Fulham, Dagan Feng, and Jinman Kim. Merging-diverging hybrid
 transformer networks for survival prediction in head and neck cancer. In International Conference
 on Medical Image Computing and Computer-Assisted Intervention, pp. 400–410. Springer, 2023.

Basil Mustafa, Carlos Riquelme, Joan Puigcerver, Rodolphe Jenatton, and Neil Houlsby. Mul-
  timodal contrastive learning with limoe: the language-image mixture of experts. Advances in
  Neural Information Processing Systems, 35:9564–9576, 2022.

Hieu T Nguyen, Ha Q Nguyen, Hieu H Pham, Khanh Lam, Linh T Le, Minh Dao, and Van Vu.
  Vindr-mammo: A large-scale benchmark dataset for computer-aided diagnosis in full-field digital
  mammography. Scientific Data, 10(1):277, 2023.

Olaide N Oyelade, Eric Aghiomesi Irunokhai, and Hui Wang. A twin convolutional neural network
  with hybrid binary optimizer for multimodal breast cancer digital image classification. Scientific
  Reports, 14(1):692, 2024.

Bernd J Pichler, Martin S Judenhofer, and Christina Pfannenberg. Multimodal imaging approaches:
  pet/ct and pet/mri. Molecular Imaging I, pp. 109–132, 2008.

Joan Puigcerver, Carlos Riquelme, Basil Mustafa, and Neil Houlsby. From sparse to soft mixtures
  of experts. arXiv preprint arXiv:2308.00951, 2023.

Wei Shao, Hang Shi, Jianxin Liu, Yingli Zuo, Liang Sun, TianSong Xia, Wanyuan Chen, Peng Wan,
 JianPeng Sheng, Qi Zhu, et al. Multi-instance multi-task learning for joint clinical outcome and
 genomic profile predictions from the histopathological images. IEEE Transactions on Medical
 Imaging, 2024.

Sören Richard Stahlschmidt, Benjamin Ulfenborg, and Jane Synnergren. Multimodal deep learning
   for biomedical data fusion: a review. Briefings in Bioinformatics, 23(2):bbab569, 2022.

Vinitra Swamy, Malika Satayeva, Jibril Frej, Thierry Bossy, Thijs Vogels, Martin Jaggi, Tanja Käser,
  and Mary-Anne Hartley. Multimodn—multimodal, multi-task, interpretable modular networks.
  Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 36, 2024.

Tao Tu, Shekoofeh Azizi, Danny Driess, Mike Schaekermann, Mohamed Amin, Pi-Chuan Chang,
  Andrew Carroll, Charles Lau, Ryutaro Tanno, Ira Ktena, et al. Towards generalist biomedical ai.
  NEJM AI, 1(3):AIoa2300138, 2024.

Hu Wang, Yuanhong Chen, Congbo Ma, Jodie Avery, Louise Hull, and Gustavo Carneiro. Multi-
  modal learning with missing modality via shared-specific feature modelling. In Proceedings of
  the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 15878–15887, 2023.


                                                 13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Amy Weisman, Ojaswita Lokre, Brayden Schott, Victor Fernandes, Robert Jeraj, Timothy Perk,
 Steve Cho, and Scott Perlman. Automated detection and quantification of neuroendocrine tumors
 on 68ga-dotatate pet/ct images using a u-net ensemble method, 2022.
Junde Wu, Huihui Fang, Fei Li, Huazhu Fu, Fengbin Lin, Jiongcheng Li, Yue Huang, Qinji Yu,
  Sifan Song, Xinxing Xu, et al. Gamma challenge: glaucoma grading from multi-modality images.
  Medical Image Analysis, 90:102938, 2023.
Zhongliang Xue, Ping Li, Liang Zhang, Xiaoyuan Lu, Guangming Zhu, Peiyi Shen, Syed Afaq Ali
  Shah, and Mohammed Bennamoun. Multi-modal co-learning for liver lesion segmentation on
  pet-ct images. IEEE Transactions on Medical Imaging, 40(12):3531–3542, 2021.
Adam Yala, Peter G Mikhael, Fredrik Strand, Gigin Lin, Siddharth Satuluru, Thomas Kim, Imon
  Banerjee, Judy Gichoya, Hari Trivedi, Constance D Lehman, et al. Multi-institutional validation
  of a mammography-based breast cancer risk model. Journal of Clinical Oncology, 40(16):1732–
  1740, 2022.
Dingkang Yang, Shuai Huang, Zhi Xu, Zhenpeng Li, Shunli Wang, Mingcheng Li, Yuzheng Wang,
  Yang Liu, Kun Yang, Zhaoyu Chen, et al. Aide: A vision-driven multi-view, multi-modal, multi-
  tasking dataset for assistive driving perception. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International
  Conference on Computer Vision, pp. 20459–20470, 2023.
Jiancheng Yang. Multi-task learning for medical foundation models. Nature Computational Science,
   pp. 1–2, 2024.
Wenfang Yao, Chen Liu, Kejing Yin, William K Cheung, and Jing Qin. Addressing asynchronic-
 ity in clinical multimodal fusion via individualized chest x-ray generation. arXiv preprint
 arXiv:2410.17918, 2024a.
Wenfang Yao, Kejing Yin, William K Cheung, Jia Liu, and Jing Qin. Drfuse: Learning disentangled
 representation for clinical multi-modal fusion with missing modality and modal inconsistency.
 In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, volume 38, pp. 16416–16424,
 2024b.
Sukwon Yun, Inyoung Choi, Jie Peng, Yangfan Wu, Jingxuan Bao, Qiyiwen Zhang, Jiayi Xin,
  Qi Long, and Tianlong Chen. Flex-moe: Modeling arbitrary modality combination via the flexible
  mixture-of-experts. arXiv preprint arXiv:2410.08245, 2024.
Yilan Zhang, Yingxue Xu, Jianqi Chen, Fengying Xie, and Hao Chen. Prototypical informa-
  tion bottlenecking and disentangling for multimodal cancer survival prediction. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2401.01646, 2024.
Yu Zhang and Qiang Yang. An overview of multi-task learning. National Science Review, 5(1):
  30–43, 2018.
Yuanwang Zhang, Kaicong Sun, Yuxiao Liu, and Dinggang Shen. Transformer-based multimodal
  fusion for early diagnosis of alzheimer’s disease using structural mri and pet. In 2023 IEEE 20th
  International Symposium on Biomedical Imaging (ISBI), pp. 1–5. IEEE, 2023.
Xiongjun Zhao, Xiang Wang, Fenglei Yu, Jiandong Shang, and Shaoliang Peng. Unimed: Mul-
  timodal multitask learning for medical predictions. In 2022 IEEE International Conference on
  Bioinformatics and Biomedicine (BIBM), pp. 1399–1404. IEEE, 2022.
Yue Zhou, Houjin Chen, Yanfeng Li, Qin Liu, Xuanang Xu, Shu Wang, Pew-Thian Yap, and Ding-
  gang Shen. Multi-task learning for segmentation and classification of tumors in 3d automated
  breast ultrasound images. Medical Image Analysis, 70:101918, 2021.
Yuhang Zhou, Zihua Zhao, Siyuan Du, Haolin Li, Jiangchao Yao, Ya Zhang, and Yanfeng Wang.
  Exploring training on heterogeneous data with mixture of low-rank adapters. In Ruslan Salakhut-
  dinov, Zico Kolter, Katherine Heller, Adrian Weller, Nuria Oliver, Jonathan Scarlett, and Felix
  Berkenkamp (eds.), Proceedings of the 41st International Conference on Machine Learning, vol-
  ume 235 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pp. 62294–62306. PMLR, 21–27 Jul
  2024. URL https://proceedings.mlr.press/v235/zhou24w.html.


                                                14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Ke Zou, Tian Lin, Zongbo Han, Meng Wang, Xuedong Yuan, Haoyu Chen, Changqing Zhang, Xiao-
  jing Shen, and Huazhu Fu. Confidence-aware multi-modality learning for eye disease screening.
  Medical Image Analysis, 96:103214, 2024a.
Ke Zou, Tian Lin, Zongbo Han, Meng Wang, Xuedong Yuan, Haoyu Chen, Changqing Zhang, Xiao-
  jing Shen, and Huazhu Fu. Confidence-aware multi-modality learning for eye disease screening.
  Medical Image Analysis, 96:103214, 2024b.
Samantha P Zuckerman, Emily F Conant, Brad M Keller, Andrew DA Maidment, Bruno Baru-
  faldi, Susan P Weinstein, Marie Synnestvedt, and Elizabeth S McDonald. Implementation of
  synthesized two-dimensional mammography in a population-based digital breast tomosynthesis
  screening program. Radiology, 281(3):730–736, 2016.


                                               15
