Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


P RESERVING D IVERSITY IN S UPERVISED F INE -T UNING
OF L ARGE L ANGUAGE M ODELS

 Ziniu Li1,2 , Congliang Chen1,2 , Tian Xu3 , Zeyu Qin4 , Jiancong Xiao5 ,
 Zhi-Quan Luo1,2 , and Ruoyu Sun1,2,6,†
 1
   The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shenzhen
 2
   Shenzhen Research Institute of Big Data
 3
   Nanjing University
 4
   Hong Kong University of Science and Technology
 5
   University of Pennsylvania
 6
   Shenzhen International Center for Industrial and Applied Mathematics
 {ziniuli, congliangchen}@link.cuhk.edu.cn, xut@lamda.nju.edu.cn,
 zeyu.qin@connect.ust.hk, jcxiao@upenn.edu, {luozq,sunruoyu}@cuhk.edu.cn


                                              A BSTRACT
            Large Language Models (LLMs) typically rely on Supervised Fine-Tuning (SFT) to
            specialize in downstream tasks, with the Cross Entropy (CE) loss being the de facto
            choice. However, CE maximizes the likelihood of observed data without accounting
            for alternative possibilities. As such, CE usually leads to reduced diversity in the
            model’s outputs, which hinders further development that requires sampling to
            explore better responses. To address this limitation, this paper introduces a new
            game-theoretic formulation for SFT. In this framework, an auxiliary variable is
            introduced to regulate the learning process. We prove that the proposed game-
            theoretic approach connects to the problem of reverse KL minimization with
            entropy regularization. This regularization prevents over-memorization of training
            data and promotes output diversity. To implement this framework, we develop
            GEM, a new training algorithm that is computationally efficient as CE by leveraging
            some unique properties of LLMs. Empirical studies of pre-trained models from 3B
            to 70B parameters show that GEM achieves comparable downstream performance
            to CE while significantly enhancing output diversity. This increased diversity
            translates to performance gains in test-time compute scaling for chat and code
            generation tasks. Moreover, we observe that preserving output diversity has the
            added benefit of mitigating forgetting, as maintaining diverse outputs encourages
            models to retain pre-trained knowledge throughout the training process.1

1       I NTRODUCTION
Large Language Models (LLMs) (OpenAI, 2023; Dubey et al., 2024) are powerful generative models
that excel across specialized tasks. Despite extensive training, pre-trained LLMs often generate tokens
without truly understanding users’ queries, resulting in irrelevant answers. To enhance performance
on specific tasks, researchers employ instruction tuning (Raffel et al., 2020; Wei et al., 2021; Chung
et al., 2024), also known as Supervised Fine-Tuning (SFT) (Ouyang et al., 2022; Bai et al., 2022);
see Figure 1. This process involves fine-tuning models on high-quality prompt-response pairs, with
the Cross-Entropy (CE) loss being the de facto choice for optimization.
However, is CE the most suitable choice for SFT? To answer this question, we must examine SFT’s
role in the broader context of model development. As the initial post-training stage, SFT teaches
LLMs to follow instructions. Once these models can produce responses that are clear, interpretable,
and verifiable for annotators, they become well-suited for leveraging human feedback in downstream
tasks via techniques like reinforcement learning (Li et al., 2024c). From this perspective, SFT’s
primary objective is to align the output space of pre-trained LLMs with the preferred formats of
downstream tasks. This alignment lays the groundwork for subsequent learning paradigms, including

        †: Corresponding author.
    1
        Code is available at https://github.com/liziniu/GEM.


                                                     1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


(Rafailov et al., 2023), self-improvement with synthetic data (Adler et al., 2024), and test-time scaling
strategies (Snell et al., 2024; Brown et al., 2024; Wu et al., 2024).
Throughout these post-training stages, output diversity emerges as a critical factor that enables
exploration and identification of higher-quality responses. Beyond its benefits for developers, users
also value diversity as it provides multiple options to meet their customized needs.2 Unfortunately,
using CE loss in SFT undermines this goal: while pre-trained LLMs naturally generate diverse
outputs (Brown et al., 2020; Wang et al., 2024a), fine-tuning with CE loss often significantly
reduces diversity (O’Mahony et al., 2024; Kim et al., 2024) (see our own evaluation in Table 2 in
the Appendix). This limitation motivates us to reconsider CE’s application in LLMs.3

                Ques on: Marissa is hiking a 12-mile trail. She took 1 hour to walk the rst 4 miles, then
                another hour to walk the next two miles. If she wants her average speed to be 4 miles per
                hour, what speed (in miles per hour) does she need to walk the remaining distance?
                Answer: ## 6


                      Pre-trained LLM                    SFT via CE                  Our Goal of SFT


       Readability

       Diversity


Figure 1: Illustration of diversity preservation in SFT. While pre-trained LLMs produce diverse
           ti                                                                 fi


outputs, these often lack proper formatting. Standard SFT using CE improves readability but reduces
diversity. We aim to maintain output diversity while enhancing the readability of LLMs’ responses.
In theory, CE maximizes the likelihood of the given label, which proved successful for classification
models (Krizhevsky et al., 2012; He et al., 2016). However, this process inherently overlooks
alternative possibilities, fundamentally misaligning with the nature of open-ended generation tasks in
LLMs, where responses to identical queries can legitimately vary in format, style, or reasoning paths.
While this limitation is less problematic during pre-training with massive datasets, it is particularly
severe in SFT scenarios where training data is comparatively limited in both size and coverage.
Furthermore, we identify an another key feature of LLMs: they are extensively pre-trained, with rich
knowledge encoded in the network. This feature again misaligns with CE during fine-tuning: by
suppressing alternative plausible outputs during training, CE can lead to “knowledge forgetting” or
“alignment tax”, eroding the pre-trained model’s encoded knowledge (Ouyang et al., 2022; Luo et al.,
2023; Li et al., 2024b). This suggests that “diversity reduction” and “knowledge forgetting” are be
deeply interconnected in LLMs. To address these issues, regularization techniques like weight decay
(Touvron et al., 2023; Burns et al., 2023) or noisy perturbations to embeddings (Jain et al., 2023) are
commonly applied alongside CE loss. However, they have their own limitations (see discussion in
Appendix D), highlighting the need for more principled solutions.
Contributions. In this paper, we frame the SFT of LLMs as a distribution matching problem.
Specifically, we conceptualize the learning process as the transfer of probability mass from source
tokens to target tokens within the supervised dataset. To model this, we introduce a game-theoretic
framework that incorporates an auxiliary variable (i.e., a meta-controller), which governs the direction
and magnitude of probability transfer. This framework enables the development of learning strategies
that preserve diversity and mitigate overfitting, as detailed in the main text.
   2
    AI interfaces like ChatGPT address this need by offering features such as regeneration buttons.
   3
    “How to preserve diversity and interestingness” is recognized as an open problem in the talk “ChatGPT and
The Art of Post-training” by Barret Zoph and John Schulman (Zoph & Schulman, 2025). We conjecture this
diversity-diminishing process is irreversible in post-training and focus on addressing this problem in the first
stage (i.e., SFT).


                                                            2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


From a theoretical perspective, we demonstrate that our approach connects to a distribution matching
problem that involves reverse Kullback-Leibler (KL) divergence minimization with maximum entropy
regularization, thereby ensuring the benefits of diversity. Alongside this theoretical insight, we develop
a practical training algorithm, GEM, for the game. GEM leverages some unique properties of LLMs,
offering computational efficiency and scalability comparable to optimizing the CE loss.
We empirically validate the effectiveness of GEM, by fine-tuning pre-trained models ranging from
3B to 70B in size. We have two main findings. First, GEM enhances the model’s ability to generate
more diverse responses, which translates into improved performance in test-time scaling. For
example, when fine-tuning Llama-3.1-8B (Dubey et al., 2024), GEM outperforms CE by achieving
a 5-point improvement in chatting and an 8-point improvement in code generation tasks through
repeated sampling. Importantly, to match the performance of baselines, GEM often requires only
0.5x the sampling budget. Second, by preserving output diversity, GEM also mitigates forgetting,
demonstrating an 83% reduction in alignment tax.
To summarize, our contributions are threefold:
• We introduce a game-theoretic framework for SFT, enabling a controlled design to preserve diversity.
  Specifically, we theoretically prove that it can achieve the distribution matching with reverse KL
  minimization and maximum entropy regularization.
• We develop a new training method GEM that effectively solves the game in practice. This algorithm
  offers computational efficiency advantages over previous methods designed for similar games.
• We empirically validate that preserving diversity in distribution matching enhances test-time scaling
  performance while reducing forgetting and alignment tax.

2    P RELIMINARY
Large Language Models. Let f be the generative distribution modeled by the language model,
where f (y|x) denotes the conditional distribution of response y given the prompt x. Typically, f is
parameterized by a Transformer (Vaswani et al., 2017), with parameters θ. A key feature of f is that
the generation space Y is finite, which enables favorable optimization properties that we will discuss
later. Note that y and x may be sequential, in which case an auto-regressive formulation is employed.
Supervised Fine-Tuning and the Cross-Entropy Method. To specialize in downstream tasks, LLM
relies on SFT after pre-training. This process involves using a supervised dataset with high-quality
prompt-response pairs (x, y), sampled from the prompt distribution ρ and conditional data distribution
p(y|x). The Cross Entropy (CE) loss is the de facto training objective for SFT, designed to maximize
the likelihood of the training data. Formally, this is expressed as:
                            min LCE (θ) = −Ex∼ρ Ey∼p(·|x) [log fθ (y|x)].
                              θ
Here, the prompt distribution ρ is typically not modeled during SFT and can be treated as a constant;
for simplicity, we omit it when the context is clear. A key feature of this approach is that it exclusively
maximizes the likelihood of the observed data, disregarding alternative plausible responses. Please
refer to Figure 10 in the Appendix for the theoretical understanding of CE.

3    C HALLENGES AND P RINCIPLES FOR SFT
Before exploring technical solutions, we establish guiding principles for SFT. We note that SFT is
rarely the final stage of LLM development; subsequent phases such as preference learning (Rafailov
et al., 2023; Azar et al., 2024; Wang et al., 2024b), reinforcement learning (Li et al., 2024c; Shao
et al., 2024), and advanced inference-time strategies (Snell et al., 2024) heavily depend on sampling
and output diversity to explore high-quality solutions. This reliance on diversity underscores a key
challenge: while pre-trained LLMs produce diverse outputs due to their broad knowledge bases,
standard SFT practices—particularly the use of CE loss—often reduces this diversity (O’Mahony
et al., 2024; Wang et al., 2024a). Such reduction can lead to knowledge forgetting, aligning with the
“alignment tax” phenomenon observed in (Bai et al., 2022; Ouyang et al., 2022).
We argue that preserving output diversity during SFT can address these issues. Intuitively, the ability
of a model to generate diverse responses serves as an indicator of the richness of its retained knowledge.
By maintaining diversity, the model is compelled to consider alternative plausible responses, which in
turn necessitates that its internal parameters encode and retain relevant knowledge. To operationalize


                                                    3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025

                                         How to Design Auxiliary Variable?

                                        CE                                                                          GEM

                                 unbounded transfer                                                          adap ve termina on

              1   2   3    4                          1   2   3   4                        1   2    3    4                           1   2   3   4
         all-to-one update                       distribu on collapse                      sparse update                          diversity-keeping



Figure 2: Comparison of learning schemes: CE v.s. GEM (β = 0). The arrows illustrate the
probability movement directions during the learning process, with Token 3 as the target token.

this insight, we propose the following guiding principle for SFT: learning from the data while
preserving diversity.4 In the following sections, we present technical insights and solutions.
                                                                                                                              7
    ti   ti           ti


4        P ROBABILITY T RANSFER T HEORY
In this section, we draw insights into algorithm design by examining the dynamics of CE. We will
introduce a new theory of probability transfer. To illustrate this concept, we study a simplified setting,
where the prompt x ∈ X is fixed and given. We model the distribution fθ (y|x) = softmax(θx )
with θx ∈ RK being the “logit” and K being the vocabulary size. Let y = i ∈ [K] denote the token
class to be learned. We begin by calculating the gradient of the CE loss for the given example:
                           −∇θ LCE (θ) = [−fθ (1|x), −fθ (2|x), . . . , 1 − fθ (i|x), . . . , −fθ (K|x)].                                             (1)
This indicates that, except for the label class i, whose logit increases by 1 − fθ (i|x), all other tokens
experience a logit decrease proportional to their probabilities.
What makes this behavior particularly interesting? We interpret it through a logit flow dynamics
perspective, where logits are redistributed among token classes during training. Let i-th token class
being the “target”, while other tokens being the “sources”. We have the following observation.
Proposition 1. The gradient of CE specifies a logit flow map: each source token j transfers fθ (j|x)
logits to the target token i. Formally,
                                                                      K
                                                                      X
                                         −∇θ LCE (θ) =                       wi←j · ei←j                                                              (2)
                                                                  j=1,j̸=i

                                                  wi←j = fθ (j|x)
                                                  ei←j = [0 · · · |{z}
                                                                   1                       ···           −1        · · · 0]
                                                                                                        |{z}
                                                                           i-th position           j-th position

where wi←j acts as weighting factor, and ei←j is a vector with i-th element being 1 and the j-th
element being −1 and 0 otherwise. Furthermore, the logit flow satisfies a conservation property,
ensuring that logits redistributed from source tokens equal those received by the target token:
                                                                          K
                                                                          X
                               Logits from source tokens =                         fθ (j|x)
                                                                        j=1,j̸=i

                                                                      = 1 − fθ (i|x) = Logits to the target token.
Here, we provide an example for numerical illustration. Consider fθ = [0.4, 0.3, 0.2, 0.1] with label
i = 3. The CE gradient decomposes as:
                      −∇θ LCE (θ) = [−0.4, −0.3, 0.8, −0.1]
                                  = 0.4 × [−1, 0, 0, 1] + 0.3 × [0, −1, 1, 0] + 0.1 × [0, 0, 1, −1].
That is, there are 3 flows: tokens 1, 2, 4 act as sources, transferring logits to the target 3. The theorem
provides insight into CE’s optimization dynamics for a single gradient step. We formalize CE’s
iterative optimization procedure in Figure 3.
We highlight CE’s limitations and present our proposed techniques below.
  4
    While preserving diversity may retain suboptimal responses, we defer this issue to the RL stage, where the
model can refine its outputs through trial-and-error, leveraging feedback from reward mechanisms.


                                                                              4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


           While there exists source token j ̸= i with fθk (j|x) > 0, continue the following steps.
                   • Find any j with fθk (j|x) > 0
                   • Decrease the logit for source token j by learning rate η and weight wi←j :
    (CE)
                                                  θk+1 [j] = θk [j] − η ∗ wi←j
                   • Increase the logit for the target token i in a similar manner:
                                                  θk+1 [i] = θk [i] + η ∗ wi←j

             Figure 3: CE’s optimization procedure in the probability transfer viewpoint.

Limitation 1 of CE: All-to-One Probability Transfer. CE loss implements a logit flow mechanism
where probability mass from all non-target tokens is transferred to the target token (c.f. the first
bullet point in Figure 3). This approach penalizes all non-target tokens regardless of their semantic
relevance or contextual appropriateness. For example, in the sentence “I like coffee”, while “coffee”
is the target, reducing the logit and probability of “tea”—a semantically related and contextually
plausible token—may harm generalization. This limitation is especially critical in LLMs, as they
are extensively pre-trained and encode rich knowledge across many tokens. The all-to-one flow
dynamic disrupts these carefully learned token relationships, potentially reducing output diversity
and contributing to knowledge forgetting.
Proposed Technique 1: Sparse Update. To address this limitation, we propose a sparse update
strategy. Instead of considering all source tokens, we select only pivotal tokens for probability transfer
(c.f. the first bullet in Figure 4). Specifically, we introduce a simple approach: we identify the pivotal
token as the one with the highest model confidence: j ∈ argmax f (·|x). The underlying intuition is
clear: the model only corrects its most confident prediction if it is incorrect (i.e., does not match the
target label). This targeted correction mechanism protects the probability distribution of minority
cases, ensuring they maintain a reasonable chance of being sampled during generation.
However, this technique alone is insufficient. As training progresses and the pivotal token’s probability
diminishes through repeated updates, the flow mechanism naturally shifts to other high-probability
tokens. This cascading effect eventually approaches the dense update behavior of CE as probabilities
of all source tokens are sequentially reduced. This observation highlights the need for a principled
approach to terminate probability transfer at an appropriate stage.
Limitation 2 of CE: Unbounded Probability Transfer. The CE optimization process lacks a natural
termination point for probability transfer (c.f. the first line in Figure 3). The logit flow continues
indefinitely until all source token probabilities approach zero, causing the distribution to collapse
and concentrate entirely on the target token. This represents an undesirable convergence point that
eliminates distribution diversity. Fundamentally, this issue stems from CE’s implicit assumption that
observed data should be assigned maximum likelihood, without preserving reasonable probability for
alternative tokens.
Proposed Technique 2: Adaptive Termination. To prevent distribution collapse, we introduce an
intuitive stopping criterion: halt the probability transfer once the target token i becomes the most
probable token in the distribution (c.f. the first line in Figure 4). Formally, if i ∈ argmax f (·|x), we
stop further update. This supports the assumption that while the observed data should be adjusted to
increase its likelihood, other possibilities should still be considered, so the probability of the observed
data should not be forced to 1. Our stopping rule is designed to ensure that, after learning, greedy
decoding (i.e., selecting the token with the highest probability) can output the correct label, which
achieves the primary training objective. An additional advantage of this rule is that, due to early
termination, it keeps the resultant distribution close to its initial state, thereby mitigating forgetting.5
The two techniques outlined above form the foundation for the initial prototype design of our proposed
algorithm, GEM (Game-theoretic Entropy Maximization); see Figure 2 and Figure 4. The meaning
and rationale behind the name will be explained in detail in Section 5.
    5
      This serves as a form of implicit regularization, encouraging the model to remain close to its pre-trained state.
Unlike heuristic approaches that merely keep the model close to its initial parameters—which inevitably face a
trade-off between performance and closeness—our design identifies a clear constraint: ensuring greedy decoding
can output the information to be learned. Within this constraint, we maximize closeness to the pre-trained model.


                                                          5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


             While the target token i ∈
                                      / argmax fθk (·|x), continue the following steps.
                    • Calculate the model’s best prediction j = argmax f (·|x)
                    • Decrease the logit for source token j by learning rate η and weight wi←j :
    (GEM)
                                               θk+1 [j] = θk [j] − η ∗ wi←j
                    • Increase the logit for the target token i in a similar manner:
                                               θk+1 [i] = θk [i] + η ∗ wi←j

       Figure 4: GEM’s optimization procedure (β = 0) in the probability transfer viewpoint.


While this prototype is conceptually sound and aligns with the guiding principle of SFT, it lacks the
flexibility needed to extend its ideas to neural network training scenarios. To address this limitation,
we have developed a more general mathematical framework that refines the approach, making it both
more elegant and adaptable. We will discuss this framework in detail in the next section.


5     G AME -T HEORETIC F ORMULATION

In this section, we present a mathematical framework for fine-tuning approaches that preserve
diversity. We begin by highlighting a key observation from Section 4: introducing a meta-level
mechanism helps govern the the logit flow, such as determining sparse updates and defining stopping
rules. Mathematically, this corresponds to the usage of an auxiliary variable. This insight motivates
the development of a framework that integrates such an auxiliary variable. We find that a game-
theoretic framework (Goodfellow et al., 2014; Jolicoeur-Martineau, 2019) is well-suited for this
purpose, as it naturally introduces an additional player.
Specifically, our proposed mathematical framework is formally presented as follows:
       min LGEM (f, q) ≜ Ex Eyreal ∼p(·|x) Eygene ∼q(·|x) log f (y gene |x) − log f (y real |x)

                                                                                                    (3)
         f

       max      Q(f, q) ≜ Ex Eygene ∼q(·|x) [log f (y gene |x)] + β · H(q(·|x)).                    (4)
         q

In this framework, the term y real represents the supervised label in the dataset, while y gene corre-
sponds to the model-generated output. For clarity, y real aligns with the target token and y gene aligns
with the source token in the probability transfer framework. The symbol q refers to a distribution
similar to f . Notably, q serves as the auxiliary variable introduced to regulate the process, achieving
the functions of sparse updates and proper termination introduced in Section 4.
A simple explanation of our framework is that we aim to maximize the log-probability f for real
data while minimizing the log-probability probability for model-generated data, as expressed in
Equation (3). Simultaneously, we optimize the auxiliary variable q to enhance its performance by
treating log f as a objective function. However, this overview omits key insights into the underlying
approach. In the following section, we will provide a more detailed explanation of our framework.


5.1   U NDERSTANDING THE G AME

In this section, we explain the game-theoretic framework and connect it to the probability transfer
theory developed in Section 4. For clarity, we adopt the same setting as in Section 4 and calculate the
gradient with respect to θ. For a specific sample where y real = i, the gradient is given by:
                                                        K
                                                        X
                               −∇θ LGEM (fθ , q) =              wi←j · ei←j ,                       (5)
                                                     j=1,j̸=i

                                            wi←j = q(j|x).
The form is similar to the CE flow in Equation (2), except that the weights are now design variables
governed by q, introducing greater flexibility. We will explore the design of q and show that this
framework generalizes both the CE formulation and the GEM prototype discussed in Section 4.


                                                    6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


      model distribution             meta-controller:selecting source tokens for probability transfer
                    f                                                     q



            1   2       3    4         1   2   3   4      1   2   3   4        1   2   3   4        1   2   3   4

                                           β=0                β = 0.5              β=1                  β=5

                                  highest-con dent     emphasizes high-       matches CE’s         approaches
                                  token only           probability tokens     assignment           uniform selec on
                                                                                               8
                fi      ti
                                     Figure 5: Illustration of the meta-controller q.

Our design of q follows an optimization problem in Equation (4):

                                      δj (x) with j = argmax fi (·|x)                          if β = 0
                argmax Q(q, f ) =                                                                                     (6)
                    q                  softmax(1/β ∗ log f (y|x))                              if β > 0
That is, q is a shifted distribution derived from f . This transformation is visualized in Figure 5.
Note that q serves as a “controller” for prioritizing source tokens. It determines both the selection
of source tokens and the strength of their associated flows. When β = 0, q = δj (x) (i.e., the Dirac
distribution) selects the single token with the highest probability in f , which corresponds exactly
to the algorithm prototype in Section 4. When β = 1, q becomes identical to f , reducing to the
CE formulation. For intermediate values β ∈ (0, 1), q represents a soften distribution where high-
probability modes become more prominent, while low-probability regions are further suppressed.
This results in reduced contribution from minority tokens in the probability transfer, thereby protecting
their probabilities. Thus, for small β values, the framework encourages sparse updates and safeguards
tokens that may not appear in the current dataset but were learned during pre-training. When β > 1,
the framework encourages leveraging minority tokens for probability transfer, diminishing diversity
more significantly—an approach not considered in our framework.
A key feature of q is its adaptability. Rather than implementing a uniform controller for all prompts,
q adapts to each distribution’s unique characteristics. This adaptability is particularly well-suited for
LLM training, where prompts come from diverse tasks and distribution shapes vary considerably
across different prompts, similiar to the challenge highlighted in (Song et al., 2023; Li et al., 2024c).

5.2    T HEORETICAL G UARANTEE
Building on our earlier illustrative analysis with a single data point, we now formally present a theory
with the real data distribution p.
Proposition 2. For a data distribution satisfying p(y|x) > 0, with β > 0, the game in Equations (3)
and (4) posses a unique Nash equilibrium point:
                                       ⋆
                                        f = softmax(β ∗ log p)
                                                                                                     (7)
                                        q⋆ = p
Furthermore, f ⋆ corresponds to the optimal solution to the distribution matching problem (with
1/β = (γ + 1)), which minimizes the reverse KL divergence with entropy regularization:
                                 f ⋆ = argmin Ex [DKL (f (·|x), p(·|x)) − γH(f (·|x))] .                              (8)
                                           f

This result provides an intuitive understanding of the distribution matching problem that our frame-
work addresses: it drives the distribution f close to p while encouraging the diversity through entropy
regularization. This is exactly the goal we set in Section 3. We note that our analysis relies on β > 0,
as the equilibrium point is unique in this scenario. For β = 0 and p is the Dirac distribution, we can
still apply the stopping criterion discussed in Section 4. However, the choice of f ⋆ is neither unique
nor analytically tractable, introducing additional complexities that we leave for future work.

5.3    T RAINING A LGORITHM : GEM
In this section, we present a algorithm for training neural networks within our framework. For clarity,
in the main text, we state the token-level version, where f (y|x) denotes the one-step conditional


                                                                  7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


distribution, while the extension to the sequence-level is provided in Appendix B. Specifically, we
parameterize fθ using a Transformer and optimize its parameter θ directly. The overall algorithm
is outlined in Algorithm 1, which incorporates two key features: single-model optimization and
variance-reduced gradient estimation. These features ensure that our algorithm is highly scalable,
requiring nearly the same GPU memory and computational speed as optimizing the standard CE loss.
Single-Model Optimization. Recall that we have a closed-form solution for q (see Equation (4)),
which significantly simplifies the training procedure. Specifically, the update rules are as follows:

                    fθk+1 = fθk − ∇θ LGEM (fθ , qk ) |θ=θk
                    qk+1 = argmaxq Q(fθk+1 , q) = softmax(1/β ∗ log fθk+1 )
Specifically, q can be computed simply by shifting the logits of fθ , eliminating the need to maintain a
separate network for q. This reduces the memory burden of training. In contrast, GANs require an
additional neural network (i.e., the discriminator), which must be trained alongside the main model.
Variance-reduced Gradient Estimation. Building on the above observation, we slightly adapt the
notation to define the loss function. Let θ denote the parameters of the distribution f . Given training
samples (xi , yireal ), the loss is defined as (with slight notation abuse):
                            XX
                                      qk (y gene |xi ) · log fθ (y gene |xi ) − log fθ (yireal |xi ) .

            LGEM (θ) =
                           i   y gene

A notable feature is that it computes the true expectation over qk . This reduces the variance of the
gradient estimator and improves the training stability. This again differs from GANs, where stochastic
gradient estimation introduces randomness from both the data distribution p and the generated
distribution q. We note that these optimization properties arise from the fact that distributions in
LLMs have finite support, while GANs typically operate in continuous domains.

Algorithm 1 GEM
Input: Dataset D = {(xi , yireal )}
 1: for iteration k = 1, . . . , K do
 2:     Set qk = softmax(1/β P P ∗ log fθk )
 3:     Loss LGEM (θ) = i ygene qk (y gene |xi ) · log fθ (y gene |xi ) − log fθ (yireal |xi )
 4:     Update θk+1 = θk − η · ∇θ LGEM (θ) |θ=θk
Output: Generative model fθK+1



6     E XPERIMENTS
In this section, we present experiment results validating the effectiveness of our proposed framework,
demonstrating that GEM matches the downstream performance of CE while offering two distinct
advantages: (1) its diversity preservation enables a wider range of outputs, enhancing test-time scaling
performance, and (2) it mitigates forgetting, effectively reducing the alignment tax. Extended results
are available in Appendix F.
Set-up. We fine-tune the pre-trained Llama-3.1-8B model with the UltraFeedback dataset (Cui
et al., 2024). This dataset contains prompts from instruction datasets like Evol-Instruct and UltraChat,
and responses generated by models such as GPT-4 and Llama-2-7B/13B/70B-Chat. Following (Yu
et al., 2023; Liu et al., 2023; Cui et al., 2024), we set the learning rate to 2 × 10−5 , employing a
cosine learning rate decay schedule, and use a macro batch size of 128. The maximum sequence
length, encompassing both the prompt and response, is set to 2,048 tokens. Models are trained for
three epochs. Detailed experimental settings are described in Appendix E.
We implement GEM with β = 0.7. Our primary baseline is the standard CE loss. Additionally,
we explore a variant of CE incorporating a weight decay of 0.1, which has been commonly used
in previous studies (Ouyang et al., 2022; Bai et al., 2022). We refer to this approach as CE + WD.
The NEFT method (Jain et al., 2023), which perturbs the input embedding with random noise in
fine-tuning to mitigate overfitting, has also been implemented.

6.1   I MPROVING D IVERSITY AND T EST- TIME S CALING


                                                   8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                   ≈2x≈2x
                                       e eciency
                                             ciency                                                      ≈2x≈2x
                                                                                                             e eciency
                                                                                                                   ciency


                        (a) Chat                                                       (b) Code generation
Figure 7: Performance of test-time scaling. The results demonstrate that GEM achieves better perfor-
mance with the same sampling budget and is more efficient in reaching comparable performance.

In this section, we demonstrate that through implicit entropy
  ffi   ffi                                                                       52
maximization, GEM enhances output diversity. This is evi-                                 CE
                                                                                          CE+WD
dent from the entropy values of the generative distribution:                              NEFT
                                                                                  51      GEM
0.42 (CE), 0.41 (CE + WD), 0.43 (NEFT), and 0.76 (GEM).
Consequently, GEM is more likely to sample diverse solu-


                                                                       Win Rate
                                                                                  50
tions and has a higher chance of identifying better solutions
during inference through repeated sampling. This aligns with
                                                                                  49
the recent trend of test-time scaling (Snell et al., 2024; Brown
et al., 2024; Wu et al., 2024). We illustrate this benefit us-
                                                                                  4860
ing two tasks: chat and code generation, while mathematical                                         61                   62
                                                                                            Output Diversity Score (100 - Self-BLEU)
                                                                                                                                       63

reasoning tasks are explored in Appendix F.
                                                                Figure 6: Enhancing output diversity
Chat. We assess the model’s chat ability using the best- boosts the win rate when using BoN.
of-N sampling strategy. We prompt the trained models to
answer 805 questions from the AlpacaEval dataset (Li
et al., 2023). For each question, the model generates 32 responses, from which a reward model selects
the best response. We employ the reward model FsfairX-LLaMA3-RM-v0.16 , which has top
performance on RewardBench (Lambert et al., 2024). The selected response is compared with
GPT-4’s response with the win rate reported in Figure 7 (a).
The evaluation reveals that weight decay does not lead to performance improvements. On the other
hand, NEFT shows strong performance, partly attributed to its longer responses, as highlighted in
(Jain et al., 2023). However, GEM outperforms CE, with a 3.1-point (6.6% relative) increase in win
rate. Additionally, we note that GEM achieves comparable performance to CE while requiring about
2x fewer sampling costs. To further understand this improvement, we evaluate output diversity using
the Self-BLUE metric7 across generated responses, as depicted in Figure 6. GEM not only increases
output diversity but also enables the generation of higher-quality responses.
Code Generation. We consider the HumanEval (Chen et al., 2021) benchmark, in which the model
is asked to generate Python codes for 163 questions, and the executor judges their correctness. The
evaluation metric is the pass rate among generated responses. The results are reported in Figure 7 (b).
In this task, we observe that for pass@100, weight decay slightly improves the performance of
CE, increasing it from 75.5 to 76.6, while NEFT shows no significant improvement, maintaining a
performance of 75.6. In contrast, GEM achieves a 7-point improvement, reaching a performance of
82.5, which represents a 9.3% relative increase. Furthermore, GEM proves to be highly efficient in
test-time scaling, requiring only about half the sampling budget to achieve comparable performance.
We note that in our experiments, the performance using BON or pass rate serves as an estimate of self-
improvement. Specifically, high-quality self-generated samples produced by GEM can be distilled
back into the model, enhancing its zero-shot performance (see (Sessa et al., 2024)). Therefore, we
believe GEM can exhibit a more effective scaling in post-training, a topic we plan to explore in future

    6
        https://huggingface.co/sfairXC/FsfairX-LLaMA3-RM-v0.1
    7
        Self-BLUE measures similarity among responses; so, we use 100 - Self-BLUE as a metric for diversity.


                                                        9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                     Llama3.1-8B


            ARC             GSM8K              HellaSwag           MMLU                                            TruthfulQA   Winogrande

Figure 8: Performance on tasks from the OpenLLM leaderboard. The results indicate that GEM
outperforms CE, demonstrating a lower alignment tax.

work. We also note that in the above evaluation, GEM enhances output diversity without sacrificing
its direct generation performance: in chat, CE (24.5) vs. GEM (24.9), and in code generation, CE
(32.7) vs. GEM (32.6). This contrasts with other techniques, which often increase diversity at the
cost of performance degradation; see Appendix D for further discussion.


6.2    M ITIGATING F ORGETTING AND R EDUCING A LIGNMENT TAX

In this section, we show that GEM also helps mitigate
forgetting and reduce alignment tax. We evaluate the mod-                                                   63.2
els across six tasks: ARC, GSM8K, HellaSwag, MMLU,
                                                                          OpenLLM Leaderboard Performance
TruthfulQA, and WinoGrande, as listed on the OpenLLM
leaderboard. Results are presented in Figure 8.                                                             62.4

We observe that after SFT, performance declines on most           61.6
tasks for the baseline models, with CE showing the most sig-
nificant drops. However, GEM exhibits different behavior:                CE
                                                                  60.8   CE+WD
for tasks such as ARC and HellaSwag, performance does                    NEFT
not decrease. On average across six tasks, GEM shows an                  GEM
                                                                      38        39              40             41       42
80% reduction in alignment tax, with a 0.3-point drop for                 Distance with the pre-trained model ( 2-norm)
GEM compared to a 1.5-point drop for CE. This behavior Figure 9: Staying close to the pre-
aligns with our method, which introduces q to encourage trained model helps mitigate forgetting.
sparse updates of tokens and prevent forgetting. Further
validation can be seen by examining the distance from the pre-trained model. Specifically, we measure
the parameter difference from the initialization using the ℓ2 -norm, as shown in Figure 9. The results
indicate that GEM is closer to the pre-trained model in parameter space, leading to an interesting
conclusion that diversity-preserving updates help reduce the model’s deviations during learning.


7     C ONCLUSION

In this paper, we identify a key limitation of SFT via optimizing the CE loss: its tendency to
encourage over-memorization of training data and the resultant reduction in output diversity, which
could hinder subsequent development that relies on sampling to explore better responses. To address
these limitations, we develop a new game-theoretic formulation. Central to this framework is a
meta-controller that encourages sparse updates and ensures proper termination of the learning process.
We validate the advantages of the proposed framework in test-time scaling and its effectiveness in
mitigating catastrophic forgetting and reducing alignment tax.
We focus on SFT in this paper, but our techniques may also be of interest for developing algorithms
to preserve diversity and mitigate forgetting. In particular, the enhanced diversity achieved by our
approach can be beneficial in several contexts: it enables exploration to improve performance limits
with reinforcement learning (Li, 2025), facilitates self-distillation with best-of-n sampling (Sessa
et al., 2024), and enhances the diversity of synthetic data generation (Adler et al., 2024). Please see
Appendix G for the discussion. We see the potential of our method in these areas and plan to explore
these topics in future work.


                                                           10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


ACKNOWLEDGMENT
Ziniu Li would like to thank Yao Fu for the discussion about diversity during the ICML 2024 poster
session, as well as Yushun Zhang for reading the manuscript and providing valuable feedback.
The work of Ruoyu Sun was supported by NSFC (No. 12326608); Hetao Shenzhen-Hong Kong
Science and Technology Innovation Cooperation Zone Project (No. HZQSWS-KCCYB-2024016);
University Development Fund UDF01001491, the Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shenzhen;
Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory of Mathematical Foundations for Artificial Intelligence
(2023B1212010001). The work of Z.-Q. Luo was supported by the Guangdong Major Project
of Basic and Applied Basic Research (No.2023B0303000001), the Guangdong Provincial Key
Laboratory of Big Data Computing, and the National Key Research and Development Project under
grant 2022YFA1003900. The work of Tian Xu was supported by the Fundamental Research Program
for Young Scholars (PhD Candidates) of the National Science Foundation of China (623B2049).

E THICS S TATEMENT
Our work focuses on designing better algorithms for fine-tuning large language models, aiming to
enhance their effectiveness and broaden their applications. In particular, the entropy regularizer we
introduce for distribution matching encourages more diverse outputs from language models. We do
not foresee any direct negative impacts from this approach.

R EPRODUCIBILITY S TATEMENT
The proof of Proposition 2 is provided in Appendix C. Experiment details for reproducing our
numerical results can be found in Appendix E. Our code is accessible at https://github.com/
liziniu/GEM.

R EFERENCES
Bo Adler, Niket Agarwal, Ashwath Aithal, Dong H Anh, Pallab Bhattacharya, Annika Brundyn,
  Jared Casper, Bryan Catanzaro, Sharon Clay, Jonathan Cohen, et al. Nemotron-4 340b technical
  report. arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.11704, 2024.
Brenna D Argall, Sonia Chernova, Manuela Veloso, and Brett Browning. A survey of robot learning
  from demonstration. Robotics and autonomous systems, 57(5):469–483, 2009.
Mohammad Gheshlaghi Azar, Zhaohan Daniel Guo, Bilal Piot, Remi Munos, Mark Rowland, Michal
 Valko, and Daniele Calandriello. A general theoretical paradigm to understand learning from
 human preferences. In International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics, pp.
 4447–4455. PMLR, 2024.
Yuntao Bai, Andy Jones, Kamal Ndousse, Amanda Askell, Anna Chen, Nova DasSarma, Dawn Drain,
  Stanislav Fort, Deep Ganguli, Tom Henighan, et al. Training a helpful and harmless assistant with
  reinforcement learning from human feedback. arXiv preprint arXiv:2204.05862, 2022.
Emmanuel Bengio, Moksh Jain, Maksym Korablyov, Doina Precup, and Yoshua Bengio. Flow
 network based generative models for non-iterative diverse candidate generation. Advances in
 Neural Information Processing Systems, 34:27381–27394, 2021.
Bradley Brown, Jordan Juravsky, Ryan Ehrlich, Ronald Clark, Quoc V Le, Christopher Ré, and
  Azalia Mirhoseini. Large language monkeys: Scaling inference compute with repeated sampling.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2407.21787, 2024.
Tom Brown, Benjamin Mann, Nick Ryder, Melanie Subbiah, Jared D Kaplan, Prafulla Dhariwal,
  Arvind Neelakantan, Pranav Shyam, Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, et al. Language models are
  few-shot learners. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 33, pp. 1877–1901, 2020.
Collin Burns, Pavel Izmailov, Jan Hendrik Kirchner, Bowen Baker, Leo Gao, Leopold Aschenbrenner,
  Yining Chen, Adrien Ecoffet, Manas Joglekar, Jan Leike, et al. Weak-to-strong generalization:
  Eliciting strong capabilities with weak supervision. arXiv preprint arXiv:2312.09390, 2023.


                                                 11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Mark Chen, Jerry Tworek, Heewoo Jun, Qiming Yuan, Henrique Ponde De Oliveira Pinto, Jared
 Kaplan, Harri Edwards, Yuri Burda, Nicholas Joseph, Greg Brockman, et al. Evaluating large
 language models trained on code. arXiv preprint arXiv:2107.03374, 2021.
Zixiang Chen, Yihe Deng, Huizhuo Yuan, Kaixuan Ji, and Quanquan Gu. Self-play fine-tuning
  converts weak language models to strong language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2401.01335,
  2024.
Hyung Won Chung, Le Hou, Shayne Longpre, Barret Zoph, Yi Tay, William Fedus, Yunxuan Li,
 Xuezhi Wang, Mostafa Dehghani, Siddhartha Brahma, et al. Scaling instruction-finetuned language
  models. Journal of Machine Learning Research, 25(70):1–53, 2024.
Karl Cobbe, Vineet Kosaraju, Mohammad Bavarian, Mark Chen, Heewoo Jun, Lukasz Kaiser,
  Matthias Plappert, Jerry Tworek, Jacob Hilton, Reiichiro Nakano, et al. Training verifiers to solve
  math word problems. arXiv preprint arXiv:2110.14168, 2021.
Ganqu Cui, Lifan Yuan, Ning Ding, Guanming Yao, Bingxiang He, Wei Zhu, Yuan Ni, Guotong Xie,
  Ruobing Xie, Yankai Lin, et al. Ultrafeedback: Boosting language models with scaled ai feedback.
  In Forty-first International Conference on Machine Learning, 2024.
Abhimanyu Dubey, Otkrist Gupta, Ramesh Raskar, and Nikhil Naik. Maximum-entropy fine grained
  classification. Advances in neural information processing systems, 31, 2018.
Abhimanyu Dubey, Abhinav Jauhri, Abhinav Pandey, Abhishek Kadian, Ahmad Al-Dahle, Aiesha
  Letman, Akhil Mathur, Alan Schelten, Amy Yang, Angela Fan, et al. The llama 3 herd of models.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2407.21783, 2024.
Team Gemma, Thomas Mesnard, Cassidy Hardin, Robert Dadashi, Surya Bhupatiraju, Shreya Pathak,
  Laurent Sifre, Morgane Rivière, Mihir Sanjay Kale, Juliette Love, et al. Gemma: Open models
  based on gemini research and technology. arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.08295, 2024.
Ian Goodfellow, Jean Pouget-Abadie, Mehdi Mirza, Bing Xu, David Warde-Farley, Sherjil Ozair,
  Aaron Courville, and Yoshua Bengio. Generative adversarial nets. Advances in neural information
  processing systems, 27, 2014.
Yanzhu Guo, Guokan Shang, Michalis Vazirgiannis, and Chloé Clavel. The curious decline of
  linguistic diversity: Training language models on synthetic text. arXiv preprint arXiv:2311.09807,
  2023.
Kaiming He, Xiangyu Zhang, Shaoqing Ren, and Jian Sun. Deep residual learning for image
  recognition. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition,
  pp. 770–778, 2016.
Jonathan Ho and Stefano Ermon. Generative adversarial imitation learning. In Advances in Neural
  Information Processing Systems 29, pp. 4565–4573, 2016.
Edward J. Hu, Yelong Shen, Phillip Wallis, Zeyuan Allen-Zhu, Yuanzhi Li, Shean Wang, Lu Wang,
  and Weizhu Chen. Lora: Low-rank adaptation of large language models. In Proceedings of the
  10th International Conference on Learning Representations, 2022.
Edward J Hu, Moksh Jain, Eric Elmoznino, Younesse Kaddar, Guillaume Lajoie, Yoshua Bengio,
  and Nikolay Malkin. Amortizing intractable inference in large language models. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2310.04363, 2023.
Neel Jain, Ping-yeh Chiang, Yuxin Wen, John Kirchenbauer, Hong-Min Chu, Gowthami Somepalli,
  Brian R Bartoldson, Bhavya Kailkhura, Avi Schwarzschild, Aniruddha Saha, et al. Neftune: Noisy
  embeddings improve instruction finetuning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.05914, 2023.
Alexia Jolicoeur-Martineau. The relativistic discriminator: a key element missing from standard
  GAN. In Proceedings of the 7th International Conference on Learning Representations, 2019.
Liyiming Ke, Matt Barnes, Wen Sun, Gilwoo Lee, Sanjiban Choudhury, and Siddhartha S. Srinivasa.
  Imitation learning as f-divergence minimization. arXiv, 1905.12888, 2019.


                                                12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Jiyeon Kim, Hyunji Lee, Hyowon Cho, Joel Jang, Hyeonbin Hwang, Seungpil Won, Youbin Ahn,
   Dohaeng Lee, and Minjoon Seo. Knowledge entropy decay during language model pretraining
   hinders new knowledge acquisition. arXiv preprint arXiv:2410.01380, 2024.

Robert Kirk, Ishita Mediratta, Christoforos Nalmpantis, Jelena Luketina, Eric Hambro, Edward
  Grefenstette, and Roberta Raileanu. Understanding the effects of rlhf on llm generalisation and
  diversity. arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.06452, 2023.

Alex Krizhevsky, Ilya Sutskever, and Geoffrey E Hinton. Imagenet classification with deep convolu-
  tional neural networks. Advances in neural information processing systems, 25, 2012.

Nathan Lambert, Valentina Pyatkin, Jacob Morrison, LJ Miranda, Bill Yuchen Lin, Khyathi Chandu,
  Nouha Dziri, Sachin Kumar, Tom Zick, Yejin Choi, et al. Rewardbench: Evaluating reward models
  for language modeling. arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.13787, 2024.

Jiaxiang Li, Siliang Zeng, Hoi-To Wai, Chenliang Li, Alfredo Garcia, and Mingyi Hong. Getting
   more juice out of the sft data: Reward learning from human demonstration improves sft for llm
   alignment. arXiv preprint arXiv:2405.17888, 2024a.

Xuechen Li, Tianyi Zhang, Yann Dubois, Rohan Taori, Ishaan Gulrajani, Carlos Guestrin, Percy
  Liang, and Tatsunori B. Hashimoto. Alpacaeval: An automatic evaluator of instruction-following
  models. https://github.com/tatsu-lab/alpaca_eval, 2023.

Yi-Chen Li, Fuxiang Zhang, Wenjie Qiu, Lei Yuan, Chengxing Jia, Zongzhang Zhang, Yang Yu, and
  Bo An. Q-adapter: Customizing pre-trained llms to new preferences with forgetting mitigation.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2407.03856, 2024b.

Ziniu    Li.         Can better  cold-start strategies improve rl training
  for     llms?                 https://tangible-polo-203.notion.site/
  Can-Better-Cold-Start-Strategies-Improve-RL-Training-for-LLMs-17aa0742a51680828616
  2025. Notion Blog.

Ziniu Li, Tian Xu, Yushun Zhang, Zhihang Lin, Yang Yu, Ruoyu Sun, and Zhi-Quan Luo. Remax: A
  simple, effective, and efficient reinforcement learning method for aligning large language models.
  In Forty-first International Conference on Machine Learning, 2024c.

Wei Liu, Weihao Zeng, Keqing He, Yong Jiang, and Junxian He. What makes good data for
 alignment? a comprehensive study of automatic data selection in instruction tuning. arXiv preprint
 arXiv:2312.15685, 2023.

Yun Luo, Zhen Yang, Fandong Meng, Yafu Li, Jie Zhou, and Yue Zhang. An empirical study of
  catastrophic forgetting in large language models during continual fine-tuning. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2308.08747, 2023.

Laura O’Mahony, Leo Grinsztajn, Hailey Schoelkopf, and Stella Biderman. Attributing mode
  collapse in the fine-tuning of large language models. In ICLR 2024 Workshop on Mathematical
  and Empirical Understanding of Foundation Models, 2024.

OpenAI. Gpt-4 technical report. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.08774, 2023.

Weronika Ormaniec, Felix Dangel, and Sidak Pal Singh. What does it mean to be a transformer?
 insights from a theoretical hessian analysis. arXiv preprint arXiv:2410.10986, 2024.

Takayuki Osa, Joni Pajarinen, Gerhard Neumann, J Andrew Bagnell, Pieter Abbeel, Jan Peters, et al.
  An algorithmic perspective on imitation learning. Foundations and Trends® in Robotics, 7(1-2):
  1–179, 2018.

Long Ouyang, Jeffrey Wu, Xu Jiang, Diogo Almeida, Carroll Wainwright, Pamela Mishkin, Chong
  Zhang, Sandhini Agarwal, Katarina Slama, Alex Ray, et al. Training language models to follow
  instructions with human feedback. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 35, pp.
  27730–27744, 2022.


                                                13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Gabriel Pereyra, George Tucker, Jan Chorowski, Łukasz Kaiser, and Geoffrey Hinton. Regularizing
  neural networks by penalizing confident output distributions. arXiv preprint arXiv:1701.06548,
  2017.
Dean Pomerleau. Efficient training of artificial neural networks for autonomous navigation. Neural
  Computation, 3(1):88–97, 1991.
Team Qwen. Qwen2.5: A party of foundation models, September 2024. URL https://qwenlm.
  github.io/blog/qwen2.5/.
Rafael Rafailov, Archit Sharma, Eric Mitchell, Stefano Ermon, Christopher D Manning, and Chelsea
  Finn. Direct preference optimization: Your language model is secretly a reward model. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2305.18290, 2023.
Colin Raffel, Noam Shazeer, Adam Roberts, Katherine Lee, Sharan Narang, Michael Matena, Yanqi
  Zhou, Wei Li, and Peter J Liu. Exploring the limits of transfer learning with a unified text-to-text
  transformer. Journal of machine learning research, 21(140):1–67, 2020.
Stéphane Ross, Geoffrey J. Gordon, and Drew Bagnell. A reduction of imitation learning and
   structured prediction to no-regret online learning. In Proceedings of the 14th International
   Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics, pp. 627–635, 2011.
Pier Giuseppe Sessa, Robert Dadashi, Léonard Hussenot, Johan Ferret, Nino Vieillard, Alexandre
  Ramé, Bobak Shariari, Sarah Perrin, Abe Friesen, Geoffrey Cideron, et al. Bond: Aligning llms
  with best-of-n distillation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2407.14622, 2024.
Zhihong Shao, Peiyi Wang, Qihao Zhu, Runxin Xu, Junxiao Song, Xiao Bi, Haowei Zhang,
  Mingchuan Zhang, YK Li, Y Wu, et al. Deepseekmath: Pushing the limits of mathematical
  reasoning in open language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.03300, 2024.
Ilia Shumailov, Zakhar Shumaylov, Yiren Zhao, Yarin Gal, Nicolas Papernot, and Ross Ander-
   son. The curse of recursion: Training on generated data makes models forget. arXiv preprint
   arXiv:2305.17493, 2023.
Charlie Snell, Jaehoon Lee, Kelvin Xu, and Aviral Kumar. Scaling llm test-time compute optimally
  can be more effective than scaling model parameters. arXiv preprint arXiv:2408.03314, 2024.
Ziang Song, Tianle Cai, Jason D Lee, and Weijie J Su. Reward collapse in aligning large language
  models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.17608, 2023.
Hao Sun and Mihaela van der Schaar. Inverse-rlignment: Inverse reinforcement learning from
  demonstrations for llm alignment. arXiv preprint arXiv:2405.15624, 2024.
Ruoyu Sun, Tiantian Fang, and Alexander Schwing. Towards a better global loss landscape of gans.
  Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 33:10186–10198, 2020.
Hugo Touvron, Louis Martin, Kevin Stone, Peter Albert, Amjad Almahairi, Yasmine Babaei, Nikolay
  Bashlykov, Soumya Batra, Prajjwal Bhargava, Shruti Bhosale, et al. Llama 2: Open foundation
  and fine-tuned chat models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.09288, 2023.
Ashish Vaswani, Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Jakob Uszkoreit, Llion Jones, Aidan N. Gomez,
  Lukasz Kaiser, and Illia Polosukhin. Attention is all you need. In Advances in Neural Information
  Processing Systems 30, pp. 5998–6008, 2017.
Nino Vieillard, Tadashi Kozuno, Bruno Scherrer, Olivier Pietquin, Rémi Munos, and Matthieu Geist.
  Leverage the average: an analysis of kl regularization in reinforcement learning. In Advances in
  Neural Information Processing Systems 33, pp. 12163–12174, 2020.
Evan Wang, Federico Cassano, Catherine Wu, Yunfeng Bai, Will Song, Vaskar Nath, Ziwen Han,
  Sean Hendryx, Summer Yue, and Hugh Zhang. Planning in natural language improves llm search
  for code generation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2409.03733, 2024a.
Mingzhi Wang, Chengdong Ma, Qizhi Chen, Linjian Meng, Yang Han, Jiancong Xiao, Zhaowei
 Zhang, Jing Huo, Weijie J Su, and Yaodong Yang. Magnetic preference optimization: Achieving
 last-iterate convergence for language model alignment. arXiv preprint arXiv:2410.16714, 2024b.


                                                 14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Xuezhi Wang, Jason Wei, Dale Schuurmans, Quoc V. Le, Ed H. Chi, Sharan Narang, Aakanksha
  Chowdhery, and Denny Zhou. Self-consistency improves chain of thought reasoning in language
  models. In Proceedings of the 11st International Conference on Learning Representations, 2023.
Jason Wei, Maarten Bosma, Vincent Y Zhao, Kelvin Guu, Adams Wei Yu, Brian Lester, Nan Du,
  Andrew M Dai, and Quoc V Le. Finetuned language models are zero-shot learners. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2109.01652, 2021.
Yuxiang Wei, Zhe Wang, Jiawei Liu, Yifeng Ding, and Lingming Zhang. Magicoder: Empowering
  code generation with oss-instruct. In Forty-first International Conference on Machine Learning,
  2024.
Yangzhen Wu, Zhiqing Sun, Shanda Li, Sean Welleck, and Yiming Yang. An empirical analy-
  sis of compute-optimal inference for problem-solving with language models. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2408.00724, 2024.
Jiancong Xiao, Ziniu Li, Xingyu Xie, Emily Getzen, Cong Fang, Qi Long, and Weijie J Su. On the
   algorithmic bias of aligning large language models with rlhf: Preference collapse and matching
   regularization. arXiv preprint arXiv:2405.16455, 2024.
Lechao Xiao. Rethinking conventional wisdom in machine learning: From generalization to scaling.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2409.15156, 2024.
Tian Xu, Ziniu Li, and Yang Yu. Error bounds of imitating policies and environments. In Advances
  in Neural Information Processing Systems 33, pp. 15737–15749, 2020.
Longhui Yu, Weisen Jiang, Han Shi, Jincheng Yu, Zhengying Liu, Yu Zhang, James T Kwok, Zhenguo
  Li, Adrian Weller, and Weiyang Liu. Metamath: Bootstrap your own mathematical questions for
  large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2309.12284, 2023.
Yushun Zhang, Congliang Chen, Tian Ding, Ziniu Li, Ruoyu Sun, and Zhi-Quan Luo. Why trans-
  formers need adam: A hessian perspective. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.16788, 2024.
Brian D Ziebart, Andrew L Maas, J Andrew Bagnell, Anind K Dey, et al. Maximum entropy inverse
  reinforcement learning. In Aaai, volume 8, pp. 1433–1438. Chicago, IL, USA, 2008.
Barret Zoph and John Schulman.   Chatgpt and the art of post-training. Google
  Docs,    2025.        URL    https://docs.google.com/presentation/d/
  11KWCKUORnPpVMSY6vXgBeFSWo7fJcuGQ9yuR6vC1pzE/edit?usp=sharing.


A    R ELATED W ORK
Supervised Fine-Tuning. The phenomenon of alignment tax in fine-tuning LLMs was first docu-
mented by Ouyang et al. (2022) and Bai et al. (2022), who empirically demonstrated that the in-context
learning capabilities of LLMs degrade after Reinforcement Learning from Human Feedback (RLHF).
Subsequently, Kirk et al. (2023) revealed that RLHF fine-tuning also leads to a reduction in output
diversity. These findings highlight the issue of overfitting during the fine-tuning process. Importantly,
we emphasize that these limitations are not exclusive to RLHF but also manifest in SFT alone, as
evidenced by (Ouyang et al., 2022, Figure 29) and O’Mahony et al. (2024). Given that SFT is the
initial step in the post-training pipeline, addressing these limitations at their source is critical to
improving the overall robustness and diversity of fine-tuned models.
Our argument—that CE is not the best fit for SFT—aligns with the findings of a recent study (Xiao,
2024). This research highlights that pre-training with CE operates within a “scaling-centric” regime,
where the generalization loss aligns closely with the training loss, rendering the generalization gap
negligible and making CE a viable choice. However, in the context of SFT, CE loss falls into the
“generalization-centric” regime, where careful consideration of regularization becomes crucial.
Game-Theoretic Formulation in LLMs. Closely related to our work, recent studies (Chen et al.,
2024; Li et al., 2024a) explored improving CE-trained models using techniques like self-play from
game theory. However, our approach differs in two key ways. First, we introduce the maximum


                                                  15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


entropy principle into distribution matching, while their work examines the standard distribution
matching framework. Second, we focus on addressing the limitations of CE loss by designing
methods that directly applies to pre-trained models, whereas their methods are applied post-SFT.
Imitation Learning and Inverse Reinforcement Learning. Our work is closely connected to
Imitation Learning (IL) (Argall et al., 2009; Osa et al., 2018), a framework in which a learner acquires
decision-making strategies by mimicking expert demonstrations. In fact, SFT can be interpreted as a
form of IL with deterministic transitions (Sun & van der Schaar, 2024; Li et al., 2024a). Specifically,
the cross-entropy loss used in SFT corresponds to behavior cloning (BC) in IL (Pomerleau, 1991),
a method that directly replicates expert actions. However, our framework is more closely aligned
with Generative Adversarial Imitation Learning (GAIL) (Ho & Ermon, 2016), which has been shown
to generally outperform behavior cloning (Ke et al., 2019; Xu et al., 2020) by leveraging additional
transition information to better match the expert policy distribution.
Our work shares conceptual similarities with maximum entropy Inverse Reinforcement Learning
(IRL) (Ziebart et al., 2008), which introduces an entropy term to enhance the robustness of reward
function estimation. However, a key distinction lies in objectives: while maximum entropy IRL aims
to recover a reward function (under which the optimal policy is typically deterministic), our goal is to
learn a generative distribution that captures diversity, rather than focusing solely on reward inference.
Entropy Regularization. Dubey et al. (2018) proposed that achieving zero CE loss is not essential
for high accuracy. Instead, they suggested that a conditional probability distribution where the argmax
corresponds to the correct class is sufficient. This concept motivates our use of entropy regularization,
which allows for assigning probabilities to alternative options beyond the observed data. Prior to
our work, Pereyra et al. (2017) also explored entropy regularization in the context of neural network
training. It is important to note that Pereyra et al. (2017) focused on image classification tasks, while
our focus is on text generation where data is sequential in nature and is more challenging. In the
context of LLMs, Hu et al. (2023) explored the maximum entropy regularization by using GFlowNet
(Bengio et al., 2021), but their methods require a reward function rather than supervised data.

A.1    D IFFERENCE WITH SPIN

Closely related to our work, Chen et al. (2024) also presented a game formulation for fine-tuning
LLMs and developed an algorithm called SPIN. However, their work differs fundamentally from
ours. We highlight the key differences to help readers better understand the distinctions between our
work and theirs:

       • Motivation: SPIN aims to further leverage supervised data after optimizing the model with
         the CE loss, as Chen et al. (2024) believe SFT does not fully exploit the supervised data.
         In contrast, we focus on the limitations of SFT, particularly poor diversity and knowledge
         forgetting, and propose preserving output diversity to address these issues.
       • Formulation: Chen et al. (2024) develop a theory proving that the equilibrium point con-
         verges to the distribution matching problem of the data distribution, which is reasonable
         at the population level. However, in practice, data distributions usually have limited size
         and coverage. To address this, we propose incorporating entropy regularization into the
         distribution matching framework.
       • Technical approach: SPIN is inspired by techniques from DPO (Rafailov et al., 2023).
         Specifically, it introduces KL regularization in the algorithm design (rather than in the
         distribution matching formulation). As a result, SPIN is conceptually similar to the online
         version of DPO, where supervised data is treated as the chosen data and model-generated
         data as the rejected data. In contrast, entropy regularization is introduced directly in our
         game formulation, rather than at the algorithm design level. Furthermore, our approach is
         built on the proposed probability transfer theory, and our algorithm leverages an auxiliary
         variable that governs the distribution matching process to preserve output diversity. In
         essence, the two algorithms exhibit entirely different optimization properties and dynamics.
       • Computational Efficiency: Our approach runs at the same speed and memory requirements
         as CE, while SPIN requires more computational resources due to its need for online sampling
         and the introduction of a reference model in its KL-regularized optimization. As a result,
         SPIN runs slower than our method.


                                                  16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


B    I MPLEMENTATION OF GEM
Generalized GEM. We note that we can generalize the formulation in Equations (3) and (4) by
introducing a transformation function h on f ’s objective:


                                                                   log f (y gene |x) − log f (y real |x)

    min       LGEM (f, q) ≜ Ex Eyreal ∼p(·|x) Eygene ∼q(·|x) h                                                (9)
     f

    max        Q(f, q) ≜ Ex Eygene ∼q(·|x) [log f (y gene |x)] + β · H(q(·|x)).                              (10)
      q

In this way, we have
                                              K
                                              X
                      −∇θ LGEM (fθ , q) =              wi←j · ei←j ,                                         (11)
                                            j=1,j̸=i

                                  wi←j = q(j|x)h′ (log f (y gene |x) − log f (y real |x)).

The choice of the function h directly affects the magnitude of wij . If h(z) = z (i.e., a linear
function presented in the main text), we simply have h′ (z) ≡ 1, resulting in uniform weighting
for probability adjustments. This corresponds to the algorithmic design in Section 4. Inspired by
(Jolicoeur-Martineau, 2019; Sun et al., 2020; Rafailov et al., 2023), we also explore the design
h(z) = log sigmoid(−z), then h′ (z) = sigmoid(z). In this case, wi←j becomes adaptive:
it takes a higher value when log f (y gene |x) > log f (y real |x) and a lower value otherwise. This
adaptability ensures that the model focuses more on cases where it struggles to distinguish between
real and generated data.
In our experiments, we actually implement the log sigmoid function for h, as it provides more
adaptivity than the linear function. We note that the linear function also works well in practice, but
the log sigmoid function yields slightly better performance in some tasks.
Extension to Sequential Data. In the main text, we have derived the algorithm for the case y is
non-sequential. We note that optimization in the sequential case could be highly difficult. With a little
abuse of notations, let y = (y1 , . . . , yT ) ≜ y1:T . Now, we can extend the formulation in Equation (3)
to the following:
                                                                       gene
                                                                                    real

             min Ex Ey1:T  real ∼p(·|x) Ey gene ∼q(·|x) h log log f (y
                                            1:T                       1:T |x) − f (y1:T |x)          (12)
                  f
                                                   gene
                max     Ex Ey1:T
                             gene
                                  ∼π(·|x) [log f (y1:T |x)] + β · H(π(·|x))
                  q

Here, we encounter a challenge: the joint distribution of y1:T , as a cascaded categorical distribution,
                                                        gene [·] cannot be easily calculated as before.
is quite complicated. This results in the expectation Ey1:T
To deal with the above challenges, we propose decomposing the multi-step sequential optimization
problem into multiple single-step optimization problems and solve each efficiently. This is inspired
by the data distribution “reset” trick introduced by (Ross et al., 2011) in imitation learning, where
the teacher first demonstrates a few actions, and the student completes the reset. For our problem,
we restrict the distribution matching to the case that the prefix samples up to time step t are drawn
from the data distribution p and solves the optimization problem at the t-th time step as before. Its
mathematical formulation is given below:
                              XT
      max Lseq (f, q) = Ex            real ∼p(·|x) Ey real ∼p(·|x,y real ) Ey gene ∼q(·|x,y real ) [∆]
                                   Ey1:t−1           t             1:t−1     t             1:t−1
                                                                                                         (13)
          f
                                  t=1
              where ∆ = h log f (ytgene |x, y1:t−1
                                             real
                                                   ) − log f (ytreal |x, y1:t−1
                                                                          real

                                                                                ) ,

The main advantage of this formulation is that for each sub-problem, we still have access to the
conditional distribution, allowing the previously discussed computational advantages to remain
applicable. The same idea applies to the training of distribution q, so we still have the closed-form
                      real                                  real
solution that q(·|x, y1:t−1 ) = softmax(1/β · log f (·|x, y1:t−1 )).
We outline the proposed procedure for dealing with sequential data in Algorithm 2 and provide its
PyTorch implementation below. We examine the importance of the “reset” technique in Appendix F.


                                                         17
     Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


     Algorithm 2 GEM for Sequential Data
     Input: Dataset D = {(xi , y1 , . . . , yT )}
      1: Initialize D
                    e=∅
      2: for sample index i do                                                 ▷ “Reset” data distribution
      3:     for timestep index t = 1, . . . , T do
                                   e = xi ⊕ (y1real , . . . yt−1
                                   x                         real
                                                                  ),   ye = ytreal
                                  De←D  e ∪ {(e
                                              x, ye)}
      4: fθ ← Call Algorithm 1 on D
                                  e
     Output: Generative model fθ


 1   def gem_loss(logits, labels, beta=0.7, ignore_index=-100, h="linear"):
 2
 3        shift_logits = logits[..., :-1, :].contiguous()
 4        shift_labels = labels[..., 1:].contiguous()
 5
 6        mask = shift_labels != ignore_index
 7        shift_logits = shift_logits[mask]
 8        shift_labels = shift_labels[mask]
 9
10        with torch.no_grad():
11            logits_on_labels = torch.gather(
12                shift_logits, dim=-1, index=shift_labels.unsqueeze(-1)
13            ).squeeze(-1)
14
15              logits_diff = shift_logits - logits_on_labels.unsqueeze(-1)
16              if h == "linear":
17                  weights = torch.ones_like(logits_diff)
18              elif h == "log_sigmoid":
19                  weights = F.sigmoid(0.01 * logits_diff)
20              else:
21                  raise ValueError(h)
22
23        gene_log_probs = F.log_softmax(shift_logits, dim=-1)
24        q_probs = torch.exp(
25            F.log_softmax(shift_logits / beta, dim=-1)
26        ).detach()
27
28        real_log_probs = torch.gather(
29            gene_log_probs, dim=-1, index=shift_labels.unsqueeze(-1)
30        ).squeeze(-1)
31
32        loss = -torch.sum(
33            q_probs * weights * (real_log_probs.unsqueeze(-1) -
          gene_log_probs), dim=-1
34        ).mean()
35
36        return loss
                                        Listing 1: Pytorch Code of GEM

     To understand the above implementation, we note that we leverage the gradient analysis in Section 5.3:
     first, we calculate the re-weighting term in Lines 9–20. Then, we calculate the difference in log-
     probabilities in Lines 22–33. Note that we use a coefficient of 0.01 to scale the input in the
     log-sigmoid function. This ensures that the function behaves nearly linearly.
     Computational Complexity Analysis: We observe that the computational complexity of GEM is
     nearly equivalent to that of optimizing CE loss. To clarify, the computational cost of CE involves
     two primary steps: a forward pass through the Transformer to compute the distribution fθ , followed
     by calculating the likelihood log fθ (y|x). The forward pass, which entails multiple layers of matrix
     multiplications, is the primary computational bottleneck.


                                                      18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Similarly, GEM requires one forward pass through the Transformer to compute the distributions q
and f , and then calculate the relative difference log fθ (y real |x) − log fθ (y gene |x). As with CE, the
forward pass is the main bottleneck in GEM. Backpropagation is performed in a comparable manner
for both methods, resulting in GEM achieving nearly the same training speed as CE.
In terms of memory consumption, GEM requires storing an additional distribution q, which occupies
the same amount of memory as f . For example, in our setup with a batch size of 4, a sequence length
of 2048, and a vocabulary size of 128k, q requires only about 2 GB of memory. This is negligible
compared with the memory consumed by other training components such as gradients, optimizer
states, and activation caches, which can collectively exceed 100 GB.

C      P ROOF

Proposition 3. For the entropy-regularized KL minimization problem in Equation (8), in the function
space, we have the optimal solution:
                                                1
                                   f ⋆ (y|x) =    p(y|x)1/(γ+1)
                                               Zx
where Zx is a normalization constant y′ p(y ′ |x)1/(γ+1) .
                                       P

The proof is based on the optimality condition of constrained optimization. Its proof can be found
in the previous literature (see, e.g., (Vieillard et al., 2020, Appendix A)). We note that the above
closed-form solution cannot be applied in practice because we do not have access to the density
function of the data distribution p.

Proof of Proposition 2. Proof of the first part. When h is a linear function, we have that
      Lq (f )
    = Ex Eyreal ∼p(·|x) Eygene ∼q(·|x) log f (y real |x) − log f (y gene |x)


    = Ex Eyreal ∼p(·|x) Eygene ∼q(·|x) log f (y real |x) − Ex Eyreal ∼p(·|x) Eygene ∼q(·|x) [log f (y gene |x)]


    = Ex Eyreal ∼p(·|x) log f (y real |x) − Ex Eygene ∼q(·|x) [log f (y gene |x)]


For any x ∈ X , we have that
                                              ∂L      p−q
                                                  =                                         (14)
                                              ∂f        f
When q = p, we have ∂L/∂f = 0, i.e., a stationary point. By examining Equation (7), we have that
f ⋆ = softmax(β ∗ log p) = softmax(β ∗ log q ⋆ ), so q ⋆ is also a stationary point. This proves
that the point in Equation (7) is a stationary point for the Nash game.
To prove that it is the unique stationary point, we use a contraction-based argument. Assume there
exists another equilibrium point in addition to the one in Equation (7). This implies that either q ⋆ ̸= p
or f ⋆ ̸= softmax(1/β log f ). In the former case, the gradient in Equation (14) cannot be zero,
which leads to a contradiction. In the latter case, q ⋆ cannot be the optimal solution to Equation (6),
again resulting in a contradiction. Thus, the original claim regarding uniqueness holds.
Proof of the second part. It is based on Proposition 3. As analyzed in Proposition 3, for β =
1/(γ + 1), the optimal f in Equation (7) corresponds to the the optimal solution of minimizing
reverse KL with entropy regularization.



D      D ISCUSSION

D.1     T EMPERATURE A DJUSTMENT FOR O UTPUT D IVERSITY

Temperature adjustment is a widely used trick for encouraging output diversity. However, this trick
is applied during the inference stage, which differs from our focus on preserving output diversity
during training. Moreover, the mechanisms for increasing diversity are fundamentally different.


                                                       19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


When the temperature of the softmax distribution is increased, the probability mass shifts away
from the mode (the most likely outcomes) toward the tail (less likely outcomes). While this can
enhance diversity, it also carries a significant drawback: in LLMs, the tail of the distribution often
contains many nonsensical or low-quality tokens. As a result, increasing the tail probability can lead
to undesirable or incoherent outputs.
In contrast, GEM employs a different mechanism to protect diversity. By promoting sparse updates
and preserving tail probabilities, GEM ensures that diversity is maintained without disproportionately
amplifying nonsensical or low-quality tokens. This approach provides a more controlled and effective
way to balance diversity and output quality during training.

D.2    T HEORY OF CE


                                                                            Theory of CE
                          CE Loss (Empirical)                                                                CE Loss (Popula on)

                        min −
                          θ          ∑
                                               yi⊤ log fθ(yi | xi)                                    max     x∼ρ y∼p(⋅|x) log fθ(y | x)
                                   (xi,yi)∼D                                                            θ

                 (xi, yi): input-label pair
                                                                                                    ρ: prompt distribu on
                 fθ(y | x): the condi onal predic on distribu on
                                                                                                    p( ⋅ | x): the condi onal data distribu on to learn
                 θ: parameters of neural network

                                                                                                                     Equivalence
            CE can be used to learn a distribu on
                 If the data samples are “abundant”                                                      Forward KL Divergence
                 ✅                   ✅                               ❎                         min    x∼ρ KL(p( ⋅ | x), fθ( ⋅ | x)) + constant
                                                                                                θ
      Classi ca on                   Pre-training                     SFT
      (one label sample is
         𝔼
         𝔼       𝔼
                                     (huge data)                      (data is limited)                     Distribu on Matching
      enough)
            fi   titi   ti
                        ti
                         ti   ti               ti      ti      ti    ti


Figure 10: Theory of CE. The figure illustrates the connection between the empirical (top left) and
population (top right) versions of CE, as well as its relationship to distribution matching (bottom
right). It also highlights the applicable regime of CE (bottom left).

CE is a fundamental loss function in machine learning that serves as a method for learning probability
distributions. As illustrated in Figure 10, CE has both empirical and population formulations,
where the empirical version minimizes the negative log-likelihood of predictions given inputs across
training data, while the population version maximizes the expected log-likelihood across the true data
distribution. In particular, its population formulation is equivalent to minimizing the KL divergence
between the true conditional distribution and the model’s predicted distribution (plus a constant),
making CE essentially a distribution matching technique. CE’s effectiveness depends critically on the
quantity of data available to approximate the underlying distribution.
As discussed in our introduction, CE performs well for classification tasks where even a single labeled
example per class can provide sufficient signal, and for pre-training scenarios with abundant data.
However, it typically underperforms for SFT of LLMs where data is limited and generation tasks are
inherently open-ended.

D.3    CE WITH W EIGHT D ECAY

Weight decay is a widely used technique for mitigating overfitting, particularly effective in training
convolutional neural networks (CNNs). However, we observed that it is not always effective when
applied to training generative models with Transformers. We hypothesize two primary reasons for
this discrepancy:
• Architecture. The structural characteristics of CNNs make them more homogeneous in design,
  resulting in a relatively uniform loss landscape across different parameter blocks within the network.


                                                                                          20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


  In contrast, Transformers exhibit heterogeneous properties, as noted in recent works (Zhang et al.,
  2024; Ormaniec et al., 2024), leading to significantly varied loss landscapes across parameter
  blocks. As a result, a uniform weight decay applied to all parameters in Transformers may be
  suboptimal, since different parameter blocks might require specialized weight decay strategies.
• Task. CNNs in classification tasks are designed to learn a predictor that outputs a unique prediction,
  whereas generative models aim to learn a distribution. For generative models, directly regularizing
  the distribution is preferable. Weight decay, which regularizes parameters indirectly, may not
  effectively serve this purpose.
Based on these observations, we argue that entropy regularization is better suited for training
generative models with Transformers. Unlike weight decay, entropy regularization directly focuses on
the target distribution, and its influence can effectively backpropagate to specific parameters through
adaptive optimizers like Adam, accommodating the heterogeneity of Transformer architectures. A
more deeper exploration of this topic is left for future work.

D.4   CE WITH E NTROPY R EGULARIZER

Inspired by our framework, one may propose an alternative approach for preserving output diversity
is to introduce an entropy regularization with the CE loss. We discuss this approach in this section.
Formally, we have that

                   max Ex Ey∼p(·|x) [log f (y|x)] +γ · Ey∼f (·|x) [− log f (y|x)]                  (15)
                    f      |        {z          }      |           {z           }
                              =−DKL (p,f )+constant               =H(f )

This corresponds to the forward KL with maximum entropy regularization. This corresponds to
the forward KL divergence with maximum entropy regularization. We note that this optimization
problem does not have a closed-form solution. To better understand its behavior, we observe that
this formulation leads to an improper increase in tail probabilities when maximizing the entropy,
as illustrated in Figure 11. In the context of LLMs, this increase often translates into nonsensical
tokens in the vocabulary, leading to undesirable generation outputs. A concrete example is provided
in Table 1, in which we directly sample sentences.

Table 1: Examples of generated sentences for models trained with the UltraFeedback dataset.
The symbol “[...]” indicates good sentences that have been omitted to save space. This example
shows that CE with entropy regularization can generate nonsensical tokens (shown in red) due to the
increase in tail probabilities.
 Prompt          Whats the largest star in our galaxy?
 CE              Hello! Atlantis is a legendary city that was said to have existed in ancient Greece.
                 According to the story, it was a highly advanced and prosperous city that was
                 located on an island in the ocean. [...]
 CE+Entropy      Hello! Atlantis Documentary is a 2019 American documentaryéhoFLICT film
                 directed by Já oblı́k and produced by Werner Herzog. The film explores the history
                 and legacy of Atlantis, 2 an ancient Greek city-state that was said to have calendar
                 knowledge and advanced technology, through interviews with scholars and histori-
                 ans.ython
 GEM-LS          Hello there! As a helpful, respectful, and honest assistant, I’d be happy to help
                 you explore the fascinating topic of Atlantis! Atlantis is an ancient Greek myth
                 that tells the story of a legendary realm said to have existed in the Atlantic Ocean,
                 west of the Pillars of Hercules. [...]

The core issue of CE with an entropy regularizer arises because the gradient of the entropy
regularizer can dominate for tokens with low probabilities. Specifically, we have that
                          ∂ − DKL (p, f )        p    ∂H
                                            =− ,          = −(1 + log f ).
                                 ∂f             f      ∂f
where the division is element-wise. Consequently, for tokens with low probabilities in both f and p,
i.e., f (x) ≈ 0 and p(x) ≈ 0, the gradient from the forward KL divergence, −p(x)/f (x), could be of


                                                  21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


constant order. In contrast, the gradient from the entropy regularizer, (−1 + log f (x)) → −∞ as
f (x) → 0. This imbalance disproportionately increases the tail probabilities, leading to undesirable
effects.
In contrast, the proposed method, GEM, does not have this issue. This is because both distribution
matching and entropy regularization in GEM are defined jointly over the generative distribution f ,
rather than being applied separately to the data distribution p and generative distribution f . As shown
in the proof of Proposition 2, the gradient of GEM is given by:
                                    ∂−L         −p + q        p    q
                                             =          =− + ,
                                      ∂f            f         f    f
where the first term, −p/f , is identical to that of CE with entropy regularization, but the second term
q/f , is unique to GEM. Since q = softmax(1/β ∗ log f ), q is a more squeezed distribution than f .
Consequently, for f (x) ≈ 0, we have q(x)/f (x) < 1. This ensures that the gradient is not dominated
in the low-probability (tail) region, preventing improper increases in tail probabilities. Thus, GEM
achieves a more balanced optimization.

D.5    R ELATION WITH GAN

We clarify that while our framework shares a similar structure with GANs (Goodfellow et al., 2014;
Jolicoeur-Martineau, 2019), it has a totally different meaning. Specifically, GANs were originally
designed for image generation tasks, where a discriminator network is additionally introduced to
measure the distance between distributions of real and generated images. We do not follow this
storyline. Unlike in GANs, where measuring distances between image distributions is challenging,
computing distances between token distributions in language models is simple due to the discrete
nature of token distributions. As we have explained, the introduction of the variable q in our framework
is to control the direction and magnitude of probability transfer during distribution matching—an
objective that is distinct from the goal of GANs.
We note that Proposition 3 also has an important computational implication. While the distribution
matching problem in Equation (8) is theoretically well-defined, it is computationally intractable in
practice. In contrast, our game-theoretic formulation provides a feasible alternative. To understand
why, consider the decomposition of the reverse KL divergence:
                          X               f (y|x) X                          X
 DKL (f (·|x), p(·|x)) =      f (y|x) log        =     f (y|x) log f (y|x) −     f (y|x) log p(y|x).
                            y
                                          p(y|x)    y                         y

                                      P samples drawn from p rather than direct knowledge of
In practice, we only have access to finite
log p(y|x). Consequently, the term y f (y|x) log p(y|x) cannot be easily estimated from finite
samples, rendering the formulation in Equation (8) impractical. This difficulty contrasts with the
CE formulation, which corresponds to a forward KL divergence that can be easily estimated from
finite samples. We note that a similar situation arises in GANs (Goodfellow et al., 2014), where the
game-theoretic approach effectively solves the Jensen-Shannon divergence minimization problem,
even though the Jensen-Shannon divergence itself cannot be directly estimated from data samples.


                                                  22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                     ❎                ❎❎                     ❎


Figure 11: Distributions of next-token probabilities for trained models with the UltraFeedback
dataset, presented from top to bottom: CE, CE+Entropy, GEM-LS. The prompt is “Give me a
single-digit number”. The top 300 probabilities are shown with a subsampling rate of 20 for clear
visualization. A red dotted line indicates the probability threshold of 10−4 . The figure demonstrates
that the CE+Entropy model has a longer tail with higher probabilities assigned to some nonsensical
tokens, marked with crosses.


                                                 23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


E      E XPERIMENT D ETAILS

All experiments are conducted using A800-80GB GPUs with the DeepSpeed distributed training
framework, utilizing ZeRO-2 and gradient checkpointing without offloading. We use flash-attention-2
with deterministic backward for reproducibility. The experiments are based on the pretrained Llama-
3-8B model, using Adam as the optimizer with a global batch size of 128. Following (Yu et al.,
2023; Liu et al., 2023; Cui et al., 2024), the learning rate is set to 2 × 10−5 , with a warm-up ratio of
0.03 and cosine learning rate decay. Training is performed over 3 epochs. All supervised datasets
are formatted into the chat format using the Llama-3.1-8B-Instruct’s tokenizer. When generation of
responses is required for evaluation, we use the vLLM to accelerate inference.

E.1     U LTRA F EEDBACK

We use the dataset filtered by HuggingfaceH4 team, which is available at https://huggingface.
co/datasets/HuggingFaceH4/ultrafeedback_binarized. The dataset contains
61,135 training samples and 1,000 test samples. For training, we set the maximum sequence length
to 2,048, dropping longer sequences and padding shorter ones. To achieve a global batch size of 128,
we use a per-device batch size of 4, a gradient accumulation step of 4, and 4 GPUs. The training
times takes about 24 GPU hours for all methods. For the CE method, we have tuned hyperparameters
for weight decay and entropy regularization, selecting values from {0.1, 0.01, 0.001}. In both cases,
a value of 0.1 provided the best overall results. For NEFT, we use a noise scale hyperparameter of 5,
as recommended by (Jain et al., 2023).
Evaluation metrics, including perplexity, and entropy, are based on these 1,000 test samples. For
entropy calculation, we compute the conditional entropy, whose expectation can be calculated exactly,
and average over the sequence.
For the chatting task, we use the 805 test questions from the AlpacaEval dataset and employ the
reward model FsfairX-LLaMA3-RM-v0.1. The maximum generation sequence length is set to
2048. For each question, 32 samples are generated with the configuration temperature=0.6,
top k=50, top p=0.9. To calculate the win rate, we use the Bradley-Terry model:
                                                     exp(r(x, y))
                          P(y ≻ y ′ | x) =                                 .
                                            exp(r(x, y)) + exp(r(x, y ′ ))
We use GPT-4 generated responses as a baseline for calculating the win rate, specifically the
gpt4 1106 preview8 version.
For the code generation task, there are 164 test questions for HumanEval. We use the prompt from
(Wei et al., 2024):

      You are an exceptionally intelligent coding assistant that consistently delivers accurate and
      reliable responses to user instructions.
      @@ Instruction
      {instruction}

For each question, 200 responses are generated with the configuration temperature=0.6,
top k=50, top p=0.9 to estimate the pass rate. The evaluation scripts are from https://
github.com/ise-uiuc/magicoder/blob/main/experiments/text2code.py.

F      A DDITIONAL R ESULTS

F.1     D IVERSITY R EDUCTION OF SFT VIA CE

We provide empirical evidence that while SFT using CE loss improves the instruction-following
ability of models for downstream tasks, it significantly reduces the output diversity of pre-trained
models. To demonstrate this, we conduct experiments using the pre-trained LLM, Llama-3.1-8B,
  8
    https://github.com/tatsu-lab/alpaca_eval/blob/main/results/gpt4_1106_
preview/model_outputs.json


                                                   24
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


employing few-shot learning to teach the model to follow instructions and answer questions. We
compare the output diversity of the pre-trained LLM with that of the same model fine-tuned using
CE loss. Specifically, we prompt both models to answer 100 questions from the AlpacaEval dataset
(Li et al., 2023), generating 32 responses for each question. Following (Kirk et al., 2023), we then
measure output diversity using the following metrics: 1) N-gram diversity: the proportion of distinct
n-grams in a single response (intra-diversity); 2) Self-BLEU diversity: calculated as 100 minus
the Self-BLEU score (inter-diversity), where one response is treated as a reference among multiple
generated responses; 3) Sentence-BERT diversity: the cosine dissimilarity between pairs of responses
in the embedding space. All criteria range from 0 to 100 (with Sentence-BERT diversity scaled by
multiplying by 100), and higher values indicate greater diversity.
The results, presented in Table 2, show that fine-tuning with CE loss reduces output diversity compared
to the pre-trained LLM. For completeness, we also report the output diversity of GEM in this setting.
GEM demonstrates better output diversity than the CE-tuned model and performs comparably to the
pre-trained LLM—in fact, it shows a slight improvement. We believe this marginal improvement is
partially attributable to the few-shot prompting strategy, which slightly restricts the output space of
the pre-trained LLM.

Table 2: Output diversity of pre-trained, CE fine-tuned, and GEM fine-tuned LLMs. Higher values
indicate greater diversity.

                              N-gram Diversity    Self-BLEU Diversity     Sentence-BERT Diversity
 Pre-trained LLM (5-shot)          23.3                  73.6                       14.2
            CE                     22.5                  71.1                       13.9
           GEM                     25.8                  75.4                       15.4


F.2     S ENSITIVITY OF H YPER - PARAMETERS

In this main text, our theory suggests that the hyper-parameter β controls the strength of entropy
regularization, with β → 0 corresponding to no regulation and β → 1 corresponding to strong
entropy regularization. We believe such guidance is sufficient for practitioners. Additionally, we
provide sensitivity studies on the chat task in Table 3. We observe that as β → 1, the performance of
GEM converges to that of CE, and as β → 0, GEM benefits from diversity preservation.

Table 3: Performance on Chat task of Llama-3.1-8B when trained with the UltraFeedback
dataset.

                                           Random Sampling       BON@32
                            CE                  24.5               47.3
                        GEM (β = 1.0)           24.7               47.5
                        GEM (β = 0.9)           24.7               48.3
                        GEM (β = 0.8)           24.8               49.4
                        GEM (β = 0.7)           24.9               50.4
                        GEM (β = 0.6)           24.3               50.1


F.3     M ATH R EASONING TASKS

In this section, we demonstrate that GEM is also effective in mathematical reasoning tasks. We
evaluate the model trained with the UltraFeedback dataset on the GSM8K (Cobbe et al., 2021)
task. We use the following prompt to generate responses:

      Your task is to answer the question below. Give step-by-step reasoning before you answer,
      and when you’re ready to answer, please use the format “The answer is: ...”.
      Question: {question}

We consider three metrics: greedy decoding, majority voting (Wang et al., 2023), and pass rate. For
the latter two metrics, we report the performance across 16 samples with a temperature of 0.6 and


                                                  25
      Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


      top-p of 0.9. The results are shown in Table 4. We find that GEM mitigates overfitting, as evidenced
      by improved performance in greedy decoding. Additionally, by preserving output diversity, GEM
      enhances performance in majority voting and pass rate.

      Table 4: Performance on GSM8K (Cobbe et al., 2021) of Llama-3.1-8B when trained with the
      UltraFeedback dataset. For majority voting and pass rate, we use 16 samples.

                                                Greedy Decoding                       Majority Voting          Pass Rate
                                 CE                  49.7                                  67.3                  88.8
                               CE +WD                50.0                                  65.9                  89.5
                                NEFT                 48.4                                  66.3                  89.1
                                GEM                  51.3                                  69.5                  91.1


      F.4     S CALABILITY

      In this section, we demonstrate the scalability of our method across models of varying sizes, ranging
      from 3B to 70B parameters, including Qwen-2.5-3B and Qwen-2.5-7B (Qwen, 2024), Gemma-2-9B
      (Gemma et al., 2024), and Llama-3.1-70B (Dubey et al., 2024). For all models except Llama-3.1-
      70B, we apply LoRA (Hu et al., 2022) with a rank of 16 due to computational constraints, while
      maintaining the same settings and hyperparameters used in our experiments with Llama-3.1-8B. The
      results presented in Figure 12 show that the benefits observed with Llama-3.1-8B
                                                                               Qwen2.5-7B
                                                                                           extend to other
      models as well, confirming
                            Qwen2.5-3Bthe broader effectiveness of GEM.


             Cha ng             HumanEval       OpenLLM Leaderboard                         Cha ng                  HumanEval          OpenLLM Leaderboard
            (BON@32)           (Pass@100)       (Averaged over 6 tasks)                    (BON@32)                (Pass@100)
                                                                                                        llama3.1-70b-lora              (Averaged over 6 tasks)
                              Gemma-2-9B


tti
                        (a) Qwen-2.5-3B                                    tti

                                                                                                           (b) Qwen-2.5-7B


          Cha ng              HumanEval         OpenLLM Leaderboard                     Cha ng             HumanEval            OpenLLM Leaderboard
         (BON@32)             (Pass@100)        (Averaged over 6 tasks)                (BON@16)            (Pass@50)            (Averaged over 6 tasks)


                        (c) Gemma-2-9B                               tti
                                                                                                  (d) Llama-3.1-70B (LoRA)
tti


      Figure 12: Performance across different architectures and model sizes. The results show that GEM
      consistently outperforms CE.


      F.5     I MPORTANCE OF DATA R ESET

      In this section, we extend the technical challenge in Section 5 regarding how to solve the problem in
      Equation (12). To recap, the problem is that
                                                                                         gene
                                                                        real

                    max Ex Ey1:Treal ∼p(·|x) Ey gene ∼q(·|x) h log f (y
                                               1:T                     1:T |x) − log f (y1:T |x)
                       f

                       s.t.     q = argmax Ex Ey1:T ∼π(·|x) [log f (y1:T |x)] + 1/β · H(π(·|x))
                                            π
      A key challenge is that the expectation Egene
                                               y1:T [·] cannot be calculated as easily as before. Worse still,
      Monte Carlo estimation as used in (Chen et al., 2024; Li et al., 2024a), by drawing samples from
      the distribution, does not provide an accurate gradient estimate. A fundamental difficulty in this
      stochastic approximation arises from the distribution shift between the SFT data and the pre-trained


                                                                                 26
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


distribution. To better understand this, refer to examples provided in Table 5. We observe that SFT
data typically has finite-length sequences, while the pre-trained distribution produces samples that
are repetitive and can even be infinite in length.
This causes issues: assuming the probability of any token is lower-bounded by a small number
                                    gene
c ∈ (0, 1), this means that log f (y1:T  |x) approaches to −∞ when T goes to infinite for pre-training
distribution data. While this might seem acceptable as the gradient would reduce the probability of
such samples, the challenge is that the sample size is vast: for the Llama-3-8B model, the vocabulary
size is 128k, and with a typical sequence length of 2048, the sample space size is 1280002048 . This
makes it difficult for the model to find effective directions for improvement. To validate this claim,
we directly implemented the idea of stochastic approximation and found that training failed after
80 optimization steps (with 10k samples)9 , and the model could not generate good responses; see
Table 5. In fact, techniques in (Chen et al., 2024; Li et al., 2024a) are usually applied to models
after SFT, where the distribution shift between the model and data is smaller. This technical remark
is also discussed in the online forum https://github.com/uclaml/SPIN/issues/26#
issuecomment-2062926716.

G    F UTURE W ORK
Below, we explore GEM’s potential applications.
Better Cold-Start for Online RL Training. SFT typically serves as a cold start for online RL
training. To fully harness the potential of RL, exploration across diverse generated responses is critical.
However, CE often reduces diversity, making it less effective in this context. Generalized Experience
Replay (GEM) helps maintain diversity when learning from cold-start data, ultimately enhancing RL
training performance. This idea is explored in a recent blog post https://www.notion.so/Can-Better-
Cold-Start-Strategies-Improve-RL-Training-for-LLMs-17aa0742a51680828616c867ed53bc6b.
Preference Collapse in RLHF. SFT-trained models can be refined through Reinforcement Learning
from Human Feedback (RLHF) to better align with human values (Ouyang et al., 2022; Bai et al.,
2022). In this context, Xiao et al. (2024) studied the impact of SFT models on preference learning in
RLHF, demonstrating that if an SFT model collapses (i.e., becomes biased toward certain outputs
with near-certain probability), it can further lead to preference collapse in alignment. Their findings
underscore the importance of addressing collapse during the SFT stage.
Synthetic Data Generation. SFT-trained models are often used as synthetic data generators for self-
improvement (see, e.g., (Adler et al., 2024; Dubey et al., 2024)). In this context, maintaining output
diversity is essential. By generating a wide range of diverse outputs, models can explore various
potential solutions, reducing the risk of overfitting and uncovering better-performing strategies. Our
experiments about best-of-n against a reward model Section 6 is inline of this topic.
Mode Collapse. When models are repeatedly fine-tuned on text generated by their predecessors,
linguistic diversity gradually erodes. This recursive process amplifies existing errors and biases, with
each successive generation inheriting the limitations of its predecessors. This phenomenon, known
as mode collapse, has been extensively documented in prior studies (Guo et al., 2023; Shumailov
et al., 2023). By introducing entropy regularizer, we expect to help mitigate mode collapse in the
self-improvement.


   9
     This method is computationally slow due to sampling responses. In fact, these computational resources of
80 steps are actually more than those required for GEM for 1 epoch tuning of 60k samples.


                                                     27
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Table 5: Examples of generated sentences from pre-trained models. The symbol “[...]” indicates
sentences have been omitted to save space for the ground truth label, and the repetitive sentences for
the pretrained model. Examples illustrate the distribution shift between SFT data and the pre-trained
distribution. In SFT data, ground truth labels have a finite length (marked by an explicit <EOS> in
the example), whereas the pre-trained distribution often generates repetitive sentences without a clear
endpoint.

 Prompt                       I would like to know more about Clyde Hill Washington...what can
                              you tell me?
 Ground Truth Label           Clyde Hill is a small, affluent city located in King County, Washington,
                              United States. It is situated on the eastern shore of Lake Washington,
                              north of Bellevue, and east of Kirkland. It is known for its stunning
                              views of the lake and the Cascade Mountains.
                              Clyde Hill was incorporated in the year 1953 and is home to ap-
                              proximately 2,800 residents. The city has a mix of residential and
                              commercial areas, with large estates and luxurious mansions, making
                              it one of the wealthiest ZIP codes in the United States. The median
                              household income is around $200,000, and the median home value is
                              roughly $1.6 million.
                              [...]
                              Overall, Clyde Hill, Washington, offers a unique and luxurious
                              lifestyle to its residents. The combination of picturesque scenery,
                              luxury living, and excellent amenities makes it a truly special place.
                              <EOS>
 Pretrained Model             I would like to know more about Clyde Hill Washington...what can
                              you tell me?
                              I would like to know more about Clyde Hill Washington...what can
                              you tell me?
                              I would like to know more about Clyde Hill Washington...what can
                              you tell me?
                              I would like to know more about Clyde Hill Washington...what can
                              you tell me?
                              [...]
 GEM without reset trick      Thank you for reaching out with your queries on Clyde Hill Washing-
                              ton! As of 2021, the estimated median home value in Clyde Hill, Wash-
                              ington, is $3,750,000. [...] Thank you for trusting me with your queries
                              and I hope I was able to help. Stay in touch and talk to you soon!
                              Hexatrigesimalerusform(( ))stdexcepts každ [%://´);?¿¡/stdexcept
 GEM                          Clyde Hill is a small, affluent neighborhood located in the eastern part
                              of Washington, D.C., bordering the Potomac River. It is known for its
                              stunning views of the Washington Monument, the National Mall, and
                              the Potomac River. The area is home to a mix of embassies, diplomatic
                              missions, and luxury residential buildings.
                              Clyde Hill is also home to the historic Clyde Hill House, which was
                              built in 1929 and served as the official residence of the U.S. Am-
                              bassador to France from 1933 to 1946. The house is now a private
                              residence and is not open to the public.
                              [...]
                              Overall, Clyde Hill is a unique and beautiful neighborhood that offers
                              a glimpse into the history and elegance of Washington, D.C. <EOS>


                                                  28
