Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


T OWARDS AUTOMATED K NOWLEDGE I NTEGRATION
F ROM H UMAN -I NTERPRETABLE R EPRESENTATIONS
 Katarzyna Kobalczyk                                  Mihaela van der Schaar
 University of Cambridge                              University of Cambridge
 knk25@cam.ac.uk                                      mv472@cam.ac.uk



                                            A BSTRACT
         A significant challenge in machine learning, particularly in noisy and low-data
         environments, lies in effectively incorporating inductive biases to enhance data
         efficiency and robustness. Despite the success of informed machine learning
         methods, designing algorithms with explicit inductive biases remains largely a
         manual process. In this work, we explore how prior knowledge represented in
         its native formats, e.g. in natural language, can be integrated into machine learn-
         ing models in an automated manner. Inspired by the learning to learn principles
         of meta-learning, we consider the approach of learning to integrate knowledge
         via conditional meta-learning, a paradigm we refer to as informed meta-learning.
         We introduce and motivate theoretically the principles of informed meta-learning
         enabling automated and controllable inductive bias selection. To illustrate our
         claims, we implement an instantiation of informed meta-learning–the Informed
         Neural Process, and empirically demonstrate the potential benefits and limitations
         of informed meta-learning in improving data efficiency and generalisation.


1   I NTRODUCTION
The importance of informed ML and challenges of conventional methods. The major chal-
lenge of machine learning (ML), especially in small data regimes, lies in the selection of an ap-
propriate inductive bias. The hypothesis space of a model must be large enough to encompass a
solution to the problem at hand, while also exhibiting a strong preference for solutions that closely
align with the ground-truth data generating process (DGP) (Mitchell, 1980; Wilson & Izmailov,
2020). Conventional approaches of inductive bias selection generally rely on external expert knowl-
edge and its manual integration into the learning algorithm, e.g. via feature selection, specialised
loss functions, architectures or data augmentation techniques. Despite their successes, such man-
ual knowledge integration methods are limited by the extent to which expert information can be
transferred to the learner. Preferences over competing hypothesis can be challenging to formalise
and manually integrate into ML methods; with the knowledge integration step often forming the
core contribution of many ML papers Goyal & Bengio (2020). Thus, rather than relying on human-
engineered ML pipelines, it is natural to seek methods that automatically integrate task-specific
knowledge—represented in its native formats, such as natural language—into the learning algo-
rithm. In this paper, we propose the development of such automated methods for controllable bias
selection, meaning that the selected biases are contingent on human-interpretable knowledge repre-
sentations, facilitating intuitive and steerable specification of inductive biases.
Meta-learning for automating the selection of inductive biases. The problem of automatically
learning the inductive bias has been previously addressed by introduction of the meta-learning
paradigm (Thrun & Pratt, 1998; Baxter, 1997; 2000). In meta-learning, the learner is embedded
in an environment of related tasks and the problem of inductive bias learning is seen as the problem
of learning a prior over the hypothesis space that enables the learner to generalise to many tasks from
this environment. It has been shown that, under certain conditions, a prior learned in this manner
is guaranteed to perform well when applied to novel tasks originating from the same environment
(Baxter, 2000; Guan & Lu, 2022). However, despite the appeal of meta-learning methods for au-
tomated inductive bias selection, they may struggle with heterogeneous task distributions and their
performance often drops significantly when faced with out-of-distribution (OOD) tasks Chen et al.
(2019); Zhang et al. (2021). Furthermore, priors acquired through meta-learning are largely black-


                                                  1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


box in nature, intractably dependent on the choice of meta-training tasks. Once the meta-training
phase is concluded, it is not possible to condition the learner on external information specific to the
task at hand, and thus failing to satisfy our desideratum of inductive bias steerability.
                                                                           Learnable prior
Towards automated and controllable inductive
bias selection. Drawing from the ideas of conven- This paper:
tional meta-learning, we propose a model of auto- Can we learn this map?
mated and controllable inductive bias specification                                            Hypothesis space
via knowledge-conditioned meta-learning (Denevi
et al., 2020; 2022). Instead of learning a fixed prior                                         Knowledge space
                                                                                           (Human-interpretable)

pθ (f ) over the hypothesis space, we consider learn- Figure 1: Knowledge representations Ki con-
ing a knowledge-conditioned prior that maps arbi- dition the heterogeneous learnable prior pθ (f ).
trary representations of expert knowledge, K, to pri- The knowledge-conditioned priors pθ (f |Ki ) are
ors, pθ (f |K). The learned mapping, K 7→ pθ (f |K), more tightly concentrated around the ground
can be seen as a translator between the human- truth data-generating functions fi , facilitating
interpretable knowledge space (e.g. the space of nat- stronger inductive biases.
ural language) and the hypothesis space of a model, assigning higher prior probabilities to solutions
that are in agreement with the information conveyed in K. We refer to this model in short as in-
formed meta-learning. Within this framework, representations of knowledge condition the distri-
bution of tasks and thus inform about task similarity, mitigating the adverse effects of heterogeneous
environments of tasks (Fig. 1). As a result, learning with the informed prior, i.e. inferring the pos-
terior pθ (f |D, K) based on an observed dataset, D, can lead to improved data-efficiency, requiring
fewer samples of the empirical data to successfully recover the true solution.
The aim of our work is not to present a new method that surpasses existing baselines on a benchmark
dataset; rather, we propose a new viewpoint on meta-learning as a means of establishing an interface
between human domain knowledge and the hypothesis space of ML models.
Contributions. ▶ Section 2: We formalise the interplay between observable data, its underlying
generating process and human-interpretable knowledge representations. ▶ Section 3: We introduce
a new perspective on meta-learning as an approach enabling automated and controllable inductive
bias specification based on the provided representations of knowledge. ▶ Sections 3.2.1-3.2.2: We
provide theoretical motivations for this approach and critically discuss the potential opportunities
and challenges associated with developing robust informed meta-learners. ▶ Section 4: To illus-
trate our claims, we implement an instantiation of informed meta-learning—the Informed Neural
Process. ▶ Section 5: Through empirical evaluation on both synthetic and real-world datasets, we
demonstrate the feasibility of this approach to knowledge integration, as evidenced by improvements
in predictive performance and data efficiency. ▶ Section 6: Finally, we discuss future opportunities
for informed meta-learning in the context of emergent abilities of foundation models.

2       P ROBLEM S ETTING : T HE R ELATIONSHIP BETWEEN DATA & KNOWLEDGE
Let X , Y be the input and output spaces, respec-                                                     Observable data space
tively. A single learning task τ = (DC , DT , K)
is represented by: a context (aka training) dataset
DC = {(xi , yi )}ni=1 , a target (aka test) dataset DT =
            i=1 , and a representation of knowledge about
{(xi , yi )}m                                                                                     Underlying function space
the give learning task K. We assume that context and
target datasets are generated according to an underly-                "Non-linear" "Oscilating"    "Linear"    "Increasing"

ing function f : X → Y, sampled from an unknown
stochastic process f ∼ p(f ), and the observable data is                                                    Knowledge space

                                              1
generated according to DC , DT ∼ p(D|f ) . The ran-        Figure  2:  The     generating       process     of data and
domness of p(D|f ) captures the unpredictable variabil-    knowledge.
ity of the data generation, given a particular sample function f , typically modelled with a Gaussian
noise. The knowledge K is represented in a human-interpretable format, such as natural language,
and contains truthful, but likely incomplete information about the underlying f . For instance, in
the case of 1-dimensional regression, K could describe the shape of f , e.g. K = “This function
should be non-decreasing”. We assume that knowledge about a fixed f is generated according to a
distribution p(K|f ) which captures the variation of knowledge representations due to their semantic
    1
        See Appendix A.1.1 for a formal definition of the data and knowledge generating process.


                                                            2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


equivalence–a single property of a sample function f can be described by many semantically equiv-
alent expressions in natural language, and due to the incompleteness of information–information
expressed in K is insufficient to unambiguously determine the values of f (e.g. For K = “This
function is linear”, we are missing the information about the slope and bias of f ).
The goal. The goal of each learning task is to make predictions on DT , given DC and the additional
knowledge K (see last pane of Fig. 3). With a single task, we would need to rely on a human ML
engineer to interpret the information represented in K and translate it into a model endowed with ap-
propriate inductive biases, penalising (or completely excluding) functions from the hypothesis space
of the model that do not conform to the expert knowledge K. This paper considers the following:
   Can we learn a generalisable mapping between human-interpretable knowledge representations
   and inductive biases of a model? That is, can we learn a map: K 7→ pθ (f |K), where pθ (f |K)
   assigns approximately zero mass to regions of the hypothesis space that do not conform to the
   knowledge expressed in K?
As detailed in the following sections, learning this mapping will necessitate access to additional,
related learning tasks {τj }j∈J represented as tuples τj = (DC,j DT,j , Kj ), with contexts, targets
and knowledge representations generated according to the same process (first two steps in Fig 3) :
                         fj ∼ p(f ), DC,j , DT,j ∼ p(D|fj ), Kj ∼ p(K|fj ).
Knowledge vs. empirical data. Having in mind the key premise of this paper which is to allow
domain experts inject their prior knowledge of a given learning task in an intuitive and flexible man-
ner, we make the following distinctions between knowledge and empirical data: D1) The domain
of knowledge should be human-interpretable and can be distinct from the domain of empirical data.
D2) While empirical data is noisy, knowledge should contain only true information. In contrast, ad-
ditional empirical data or meta-data from potentially alternative modalities, are not a priori known
to contain truthful information that is relevant for the given predictive task. D3) The way in which
information contained in K is related to the underlying DGP of a task is assumed to be a priori
understood by the domain expert. See Appendix A.2.1 for more details and formalization.

3     I NFORMED META - LEARNING
3.1   M ETA - LEARNING PRELIMINARIES

In conventional meta-learning, to enable the learning of the inductive bias, we embed the learner in
a distribution of learning tasks. We assume access to a training set of tasks {τj }j∈J , represented
as tuples of context and target datasets τj = (DC,j , DT,j ). In the probabilistic view, the aim is to
learn a posterior predictive map, Aθ : DC 7→ pθ (f |DC ). This map can be also interpreted as the
learning algorithm. Aθ is parametrised by some unknown θ ∈ Θ and we seek θ that facilitates the
best generalisation from context to target data points across all datasets from our training collection.
Formally, we find θ that maximise s:
                                                            Z
               Ep(DC ,DT ) [pθ (yT |xT , DC )] = Ep(DC ,DT ) p(yT |xT , f )pθ (f |DC )df,            (1)

where p(yT |xT , f ) evaluates the likelihood of target data xT , yT ∈ DT for a fixed function f from
the hypothesis space. The expectation in (1) is approximated based on the context and target datasets
from the training set {τj }j∈J . Setting DC = ∅ covers cases where no context data is observed and
the learnt distribution pθ (f |∅) = pθ (f ) corresponds to the learnt prior over our hypothesis space ,
i.e. the learnable inductive bias (grey distribution in Fig. 1). After selecting θ, this prior, however,
cannot be adjusted based on potentially available task-specific expert knowledge.

3.2   I NFORMED = K NOWLEDGE - CONDITIONED META - LEARNING

To enable the learning of inductive biases that are dependent on external knowledge about the learn-
ing task, analogously to the ideas of meta-learning, we embed our learner in a distribution of learn-
ing tasks, with each task containing an additional representation of knowledge about the underlying
DGP of the data, τj = (DC,j , DT,j , Kj ). Analogously to meta-learning, the aim is to learn a pos-
terior predictive map that in this case is knowledge-dependent, Aθ : (K, DC ) 7→ pθ (f |DC , K). By
setting DC = ∅, Aθ becomes our sought-after map associating arbitrary knowledge representations


                                                   3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025



Data & knowledge             Meta-training tasks:                                       Test time:
generation:
                                                    = This function is sharply                                   = This function is non-decreasing.
                                                    decreasing.
   an underlying function                                                                                                           (y|x,D
                                                                                                                                 pµµ(y|x, DCC)): : uninformed
                                                                                                                                                    uninformedpredictions
                                                                                                                                                                predictions
                                                    = This function is increasing        5 5
                                                    and then reaches a plateau.                                                     (y|x,D
                                                                                                                                 pµµ(y|x, DCC, ,K)
                                                                                                                                                K): :informed
                                                                                                                                                       informedpredictions
                                                                                                                                                                 predictions
                                                                                         0 0


                                                                                    y
                                                                                    y
                                                                                                                                 DCC :: context
                                                                                                                                 D      contextdatapoints
                                                                                                                                                    datapoints
     observational noise
                                                                                        °5°5
                             Meta-training:
             expression of                                                                     °1°1   00    11       22
        partial knowledge                                                                              xx



Figure 3: Informed meta-learning. Successful knowledge integration via meta-learning ensures
that predictions obtained with the informed marginal: pθ (y|x, DC , KC ): a) improve upon the unin-
formed predictions obtained with pθ (y|x, DC ); b) qualitatively reflect our knowledge of the DGP.

K with an informed prior distribution pθ (f |K). This learned prior should reflect the knowledge
encoded in K. To learn Aθ we should choose θ that maximises:
                                                            Z
        Ep(DC ,DT ,K) [pθ (yT |xT , DC , K)] = Ep(DC ,DT ,K) p(yT |xT , f )pθ (f |DC , K)df.  (2)

Figure 3 summarises the three main steps involved in informed meta-learning. By learning the
mapping K 7→ pθ (f | K), informed meta-learning aligns the knowledge space with the hypothesis
space of a model (c.f. Fig. 1). At test time, this map can be utilised by a human domain expert
to communicate their prior knowledge about a new learning problem in an intuitive way (due to
D1-D3). If knowledge is represented in e.g. natural language, this allows for informing the learner
about the expected values of predictions in a more flexible way than it would be otherwise possible
with additional empirical data. For instance, we may want to convey information about the overall
shape of a regression function, rather than just its value at a particular input location. We also note
the generality of equations (1) and (2) enabling us to consider multiple incarnations of informed
meta-learning based on the existing gradient-based or fully amortised approaches.
Example 1 (MAML). ▶ Meta-learning: The popular gradient-based meta-learning, MAML (Finn
et al., 2018), can be recast under the probabilistic formulation of (1) (Grant et al., 2018). In MAML,
θ corresponds to the initialization of the weights of a neural network fθ and the map Aθ is re-
alised by taking a step of gradient decent with respect to DC . Given a loss function L, pθ (f |DC )
is a delta function centred at fθ′ –the neural network with weights θ′ = θ − ∇L(fθ ; DC ), and
p(yT |xT , f ) ∝ exp(−L(f ; DT )). ▶ Informed meta-learning To make the learnable prior of
MAML knowledge-dependent, we can modify its original formulation so that the initialization is not
common for all tasks, but is conditioned on K. Specifically, we may parametrise the neural network
fωK with weights ωK = gθ (K), where gθ maps knowledge representations K to the initialization
ωK . Therefore, pθ (f |DC , K) is a delta function centred at fωK
                                                                ′ with ω
                                                                         K = ωK − ∇L(fωK ; DC ) and
                                                                         ′

ωK = gθ (K). During meta-training, we learn the map, gθ : K 7→ ωK . Knowledge representations
inform the learner about the similarity of the task at hand with respect to the previously observed
learning task; two tasks with the same knowledge are mapped to the same initialization.
Example 2 (Amortised meta-learners). ▶ Meta-learning: Another class of meta-learning methods
that can be naturally formulated through (1) are amortised meta-learners for which Aθ is reduced
to a feed-forward map that embeds DC into a fixed vector parametrising p(yT |xT , f ). Examples
include prototypical networks (Snell et al., 2017) or the family of neural processes (Garnelo et al.,
2018a;b). ▶ Informed meta-learning: Informed extensions of amortised meta-learners can be
easily obtained by introducing K as an additional inputs to the feed-forward map Aθ .

3.2.1      D OES KNOWLEDGE IMPROVE PREDICTIONS ?
With informed meta-learning introducing additional inputs in the form of knowledge representa-
tions, it is intuitive to think that conditioning the learner on the extra knowledge about the DGP
should improve its final predictions on the target data. This is formalised with the following theo-
rem, drawing from the results of Ashman et al. (2024) (see Appendix A.3 for details):
Theorem 1. Suppose that the generating process of datasets and knowledge representations is such
that datasets D and knowledge representations K are conditionally independent given the underly-
ing f . Let p(y|x, I) be the marginal posterior distribution of y, given x and additional information
I, where I ∈ {DC , (DC , K), f }. Then,
       Ep(f,DC ,K) [KL (p(y|x, f )||p(y|x, DC , K))] ≤ Ep(f,DC ) [KL (p(y|x, f )||p(y|x, DC ))] , (3)


                                                                         4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Proof. See Appendix A.1.2.
In the above, the distribution p(y|x, f ) is the predictive marginal of y at a fixed location x, given
the ground-truth f that generated DC and that K describes. In practice, f is unknown and we
must infer it based on the available DC and optionally K. Theorem 1 suggests that predictions
based on p(y|x, DC , K) should be closer to the true marginal p(y|x, f ) than those based on the
uninformed predictive distribution p(y|, x, DC ). For further theoretical results, including conditions
for the inequality (3) to be strict, refer to Appendix A.1.3.

3.2.2   R EMARKS AND P RACTICAL CONSIDERATIONS
We make several remarks regarding the practical implementation of informed meta-learners.
Existence of the meta-training set. The required dataset of tasks consisting of pairs of datasets
and their corresponding knowledge representations may seem difficult to obtain, especially at scale.
At the same time, the importance of incorporating expert knowledge into ML predictions is greatest
where data is scarce. If for the downstream application we are interested in obtaining predictions for
a small dataset D, given expert knowledge K, the meta-training set could be obtained from related
learning tasks where data is abundant and knowledge easy to obtain. For instance, in medicine, D
could correspond to a classification task of a rare disease and K describe the typical symptoms as
provided by a medical expert. The meta-training set could then consists of classification tasks for
more common diseases, where plenty of medical records exist and knowledge about them is easily
obtainable, e.g. from medical textbooks. Alternatively, viewing LLMs as databases of knowledge,
we can generate synthetic representations of knowledge with LLMs, mimicking the ones expected
to be seen at test time. We will employ this technique in Section 5.2.
Finite sample approximation. In practice, we model the ground-truth p(y|x, DC , K) with
pθ (y|x, DC , K), where the parameters θ are found by maximising the expected posterior as in equa-
tion (2), which is approximated based on a finite meta-training set {τj }j∈J . While the inequality in
equation (1) holds for the ground-truth marginals, it is no longer guaranteed to hold for pθ . When the
number of training tasks is too small in comparison to the complexity of knowledge representations,
empirical approximation of p(y|x, DC , K) may fail and the resulting predictions could be worse than
those obtained with an uninformed meta-learner trained just on {(DC,j , DT,j )}j∈J . We empirically
demonstrate this in Appendix A.8.1 and A.8.2. However, as we will illustrate in section 5, with the
size of the meta-training set being sufficiently large, predictions made with the informed posterior
pθ (y|x, DC , K) should result in an improved performance over uninformed predictions, as expected.
Reduction to meta-learning.          If for a given learning task knowledge is not available,
we should expect that the predictions made with an informed meta-learner trained on tasks
{(Kj , DC,j , DT,j )}j∈J are no-worse than those obtained with an equivalent, uninformed model
that has been trained just on {(DC,j , DT,j )}j∈J .
generalisation & distribution shift. While generalisation to previously unseen, and semantically
novel knowledge representations is highly desirable, it remains a significant challenge, due to the is-
sue of distribution shift. If the underlying knowledge generation process p(K|f ) remains unchanged
at test time, then knowledge representations that are semantically novel with respect to those ob-
served during training must necessarily correspond to novel data generating functions f that are
OOD in comparison to the training examples.
The next section introduces a practical instantiation of informed meta-learning. This is followed by
a set of illustrative experiments aimed at highlighting the above discussion.

4   I NFORMED N EURAL P ROCESSES

To illustrate the concepts discussed in the previous section, we introduce a specific example of an
informed meta-learner, Informed Neural Processes (INPs). The proposed class of methods builds
on Neural Processes (NPs)—a family of amortised meta-learners first introduced by Garnelo et al.
(2018a;b) and later extended with attention-based architectures (Kim et al., 2019; Nguyen & Grover,
2023). NPs reduce the computational cost of learning to a feed-forward operation, eliminating the
need for costly gradient-based optimisation. NPs also model a distribution of functions, given the
contextual inputs, rather than returning point predictions. This property of NPs is of particular inter-


                                                   5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


est to us, as, given the incompleteness of expert knowledge, a single knowledge representation may
correspond to multiple underlying functions; a faithful informed meta-learner should adequately
represent this form of uncertainty. We remind that the focus of this paper is not to demonstrate
state-of-the-art performance on an existing benchmark dataset, but rather to put forward the idea of
incorporating expert knowledge into ML predictions via informed meta-learning. Consequently, our
implementation remains simple and lightweight, and its details can be found in Appendix A.4.
The model. We extend the in-context inputs of conventional NPs with the representations of knowl-
edge pertaining to each learning task and model the predictive posterior as:
                                             Z
   pθ (y | x, DC , K) := pθ (y | x, rC , k) = pθd (y | x, z)qθe (z | rC , k)dz, θ = (θe , θd ). (4)

In the above, pθd (y | x, z) and qθe (z | rC , k) model the conditional distributions p(y|x, f ) and
p(f |DC , K) through a latent variable z ∈ Rd . The variational distribution qθe (·|rC , k) depends
on both the contextual datapoints DC and expert knowledge K and is modelled with an encoder
network hθe consisting of two sub-networks: the data encoder hθe,D and knowledge encoder hθe,K .
Fusion of knowledge with data is realised with an aggregation operator a, so that hθe (DC , K) =
a(rC , k), with k = hθe,K (K) and rC = hθe,D (DC ). We let qθe (z|rC , k) = N (z; µz , σz ) with
(µz , σz ) = a(rC , k) and and we find that choosing a to be a simple sum of the two vectors works
well in practice. For regression tasks we model the outputs with a decoder network gθd so that
pθd (y | x, z) = N (y; µx , σx ), where (µx , σx ) = gθd (x, z). If either DC or K are not available, we
set their respective representations, rC or k, to a zero vector.
Training. INPs are trained in an episodic fashion over a distribution of learning tasks τj =
(Kj , DC,j , DT,j ). Omitting the dependence on j, we denote by rC and rT the representations of
context and target data, respectively, and by k the knowledge embedding vector of a single task.
Parameters of the model are learned by maximising the expectation of ELBO over all training tasks:
log pθ (yT |xT , rC , k) ≥ Eqθe (z|rT ,k) [log pθd (yT | xT , z)] − DKL (qθe (z | rT , k) || qθe (z | rC , k)) .
During training, we randomly mask knowledge representations by setting k = 0. This allows for the
possibility of knowledge being missing at test time. Further details on the derivation and estimation
of the ELBO loss can be found in Appendix A.5.

5     E MPIRICAL S TUDY
The experimental section is divided into two parts. First, we illustrate the benefits and challenges
associated with informed meta-learning on experiments with synthetic data, where knowledge repre-
sentations are well-structured and there exists an analytic, closed-form expression linking knowledge
with the true DGP. In the second part, we showcase possible applications on real-world data where
the underlying DGP is unknown and knowledge may be loosely formatted, particularly, represented
in natural language. Full experimental details are described in Appendix A.6.

5.1     PART I: I LLUSTRATIVE EXPERIMENTS

Based on the points made in section 3.2.2, we aim to explore the following questions:. Q1) Do
INPs successfully learn to integrate knowledge into their predictions, and, as a result, improve the
data efficiency of the learner? Q2) If knowledge is not available at test time, does the performance
of the INP model reduce to that of an equivalent NP model? Q3) Does the additional knowledge
about a learning task help in mitigating the negative affects of task distribution shift? If yes, can
the approach of conditional meta-learning enable generalisation to previously unseen and semanti-
cally novel knowledge representations? Q4) What are the qualitative differences in the impact of
knowledge vs. additional empirical data on our predictions?

5.1.1    Q1 & Q2: K NOWLEDGE AND DATA EFFICIENCY.
Setup. For each task, context, and target data points are sampled according to the following process.
A function f is sampled from the family of sinusoidal functions with a linear trend and bias, f (x) =
ax + sin(bx) + c, for some randomly sampled values of the parameters a, b, c. We introduce a
Gaussian observational noise, s.t. yi = f (xi ) + ϵi , ϵi ∼ N (0, 0.2). The parameters a, b, c are


                                                       6
                 Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                 randomly sampled according to: a ∼ U [−1, 1], b ∼ U [0, 6], c ∼ U [−1, 1]. We let K encode the
                 value of two, one or none (K = ∅) of the parameters a, b, or c. The number of context points n
                 ranges uniformly between 0 and 10; the number of targets is set to m = 100. This setup simulates a
                 scenario in which K contains partial, incomplete information about f . By training over a distribution
                 of tasks τ , we expect the model to learn how to put a strong prior on the function’s slope, level of
                 oscillations and bias.
                                                                                                                                                                                       0
                 Results. Fig. 4a shows the estimated log-likelihood on the test tasks
                 against the number of context data points for both the original NP


                                                                                                                                                       Negative Log-likelihood
                                                                                                                                                                                 −50

                 model and the INP. Results for INP are shown with knowledge pre-                                                                                                −100
                 sented at test time (K ≠ ∅) and when it is omitted (K = ∅). We                                                                                                 −150                                Task type:
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     K=∅
                 observe that informing the model significantly improves predictions.                                                                                            −200                                K 6= ∅
                 As the number of context points decreases, the performance gap                                                                                                                                      Model:
                 between raw and informed predictions increases. Moreover, under                                                                                                 −250                                NP
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     INP
                 K = ∅, INPs performs on par with vanilla NPs. Thus, the ability to                                                                                              −300
                                                                                                                                                                                            0          5          10        15
                 condition the prior on expert knowledge is not at the cost of reduced                                                                                                          Number of context datapoints
                 performance of purely data-driven predictions.
                                                                                                                                                      (a) Avg. log-likelihood vs.
                 To summarise the impact of knowledge on the predictive perfor-                                                                       number of context points.
                 mance of INPs we compute the relative ∆AUC score defined as the
                 integral of the “∆-likelihood against n” (von Rueden et al., 2023),                                                                                             150

                 with “∆-likelihood” is defined as: p(DT |DC , K) - p(DT |DC ). We


                                                                                                                                                         ∆AUC [%]
                                                                                                                                                                                 100
                 report relative values with respect to the AUC of the uninformed pre-
                                                                                                                                                                                  50
                 dictions. Fig. 4b shows the estimated ∆AUC depending on which of
                 the parameters a, b, or c have their values revealed at test time. Intu-                                                                                          0
                                                                                                                                                                                           {a}    {b}    {c} {a, b} {a, c} {b, c}
                 itively, exposing more information about f should provide the model                                                                                                                    Format of K
                 with stronger priors, simplifying the learning problem. As expected,                                                                     (b) Relative improvement by
                 when |K| = 2 the performance gains are larger than when |K| = 1.                                                                         knowledge type.
                                                                                                                                                                   Figure 4. .
                  5.1.2                  Q3: D ISTRIBUTION SHIFT AND GENERALISATION OF KNOWLEDGE
                                                                                                  7                              Setup. Performance of meta-learners often drops
                             0
                                                                                                  6                              drastically in the presence of a distribution shift
                                                                                 test log(loss)


                          −50
                                                                                                  5                              between training and testing tasks Chen et al.
Negative Log-likelihood


                          −100                                                                    4                              (2019). In this experiment, we simulate a dis-
                          −150                                                                    3                NP: K = ∅     tribution shift. Keeping everything else equal as
                                                                                                                   INP: K 6= ∅
                          −200                        NP: K = ∅
                                                                                                  2                              in the previous setup, for the training tasks, we
                                                                                                                                 sample b ∼ N (2, 1), and for testing tasks we let
                                                                      % of training tasks


                                                      INP: K 6= ∅                           0.4
                          −250
                                                      train                                 0.2                                  b ∼ N (3, 1). We let K encode the true value of b.
                          −300                        test

                                 0          5          10        15
                                                                                            0.0
                                                                                                      0     2         4      6
                                                                                                                                 Results. Fig. 5a shows how the performance gap
                                     Number of context datapoints                                          Value of b            between training and testing tasks is significantly
                                             (a)                                                          (b)                    reduced upon informing the model about the true
                                                                                                                                 value of b–the source of the distribution shift be-
                 Figure 5: a) Average log-likelihood on training vs.                                                             tween training and testing tasks. From Fig. 5b,
                 testing tasks. b) Top: Log(loss) on testing tasks. Bot-                                                         we observe that as at test time, as we take the
                 tom: Frequency of tasks for a given value of b ob-
                 served during training. Results presented for zero-
                                                                                                                                 value of the parameter b further out of the range
                 shot tasks with DC = ∅. Bars represent 1 standard                                                               observed during training, the performance of the
                 deviation across the tasks within one bin of the b pa-                                                          uninformed model degrades, while the INP main-
                 rameter values. Providing knowledge about the pa-                                                               tains its improved performance. Thus, in this in-
                 rameter b helps in generalisation to OOD tasks. INP                                                             stance, INPs successfully generalise to previously
                 generalises to previously unobserved values of b.                                                               unseen knowledge representations.

                  5.1.3                  Q4: Q UALITATIVE IMPACT OF KNOWLEDGE AND UNCERTAINTY REDUCTION .

                 The first two columns of Fig. 6 show sample functions from the trained INP from experiment 5.1.1
                 given a single data point in DC , and given the knowledge representation (see Fig. A.1 in the ap-
                 pendix for more examples). We find that qualitatively, predictions obtained with the INP correctly
                 reflect the semantic meaning of knowledge representations, with the sampled functions approx-
                 imately representing the provided values of the parameters a, b, or c. As expected, knowledge


                                                                                                                                 7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


provides information about the global behaviour of sampled functions while individual data points
anchor the predictions in the x-y plane.
NPs possess a key feature: the capability to sample from the solution space, instead of provid-
ing a single point estimate. This enables us to measure the decrease in model uncertainty when
incorporating expert knowledge. Our focus is primarily on measuring epistemic uncertainty—the
uncertainty stemming from a lack of knowledge about the true functional relationship, and not the
inherent randomness of the data-generating process.
              Informed by data
                f ≥ p◊ (f |DC )
                                           Informed by knolwedge
                                                 f ≥ p◊ (f |K)
                                                                                    Reduction in
                                                                                epistemic uncertainty        To measure the impact of contextual inputs on
                                       2
                                                                          5.0
                                                                                                             uncertainty reduction of the INP, we can esti-
     0
                                       0                                  2.5
                                                                                                             mate the predictive uncertainty as the condi-
    ≠2
                                                     K : {b = 1.33}
                                                                                                             tional entropy, H[pθ (y | x, I)], at a fixed lo-
                                                                          0.0
                                      ≠2
                                                                                                             cation x ∈ X and I ∈ {DC , K, (DC , K)}. Pre-
y


     2
                                       2
                                                                          10
                                                                                     data
                                                                                     knowledge
                                                                                                             dictive uncertainty is measured in the observa-
     0
                                       0                                   5
                                                                                                             tion space and therefore amounts for the uncer-
                                      ≠2             K : {b = 5.76}
                                                                                                             tainty associated with observational noise. We
                                                                           0
                                                                                                             can, however, decompose it as a sum:
    ≠2

         ≠2     ≠1    0    1      2        ≠2   ≠1    0     1         2         ≠2   ≠1   0      1   2
                                                      x
                                                                                                               I(y, f | x, I) + Ef ∼pθ (f |I) [H[pθ (y | x, f )]]
Figure 6: Sample functions from a trained INP and re-                                                          |     {z     } |                {z              }
duction in epistemic uncertainty.                                                                                 epistemic                  aleatoric

and approximate the predictive and aleatoric uncertainties with MC samples. The epistemic uncer-
tainty is then obtained as the difference of the two quantities (see appx. A.7 for more details). The
last column of Fig. 6 displays the reduction in uncertainty due to knowledge: I(y, f | x) − I(y, f |
x, K), and due to data: I(y, f | x) − I(y, f | x, DC ), computed at all input locations x ∈ [−2, 2].
As observed from the sample functions, we find that knowledge of the value of the parameter b,
responsible for the oscillations, provides information about global characteristics of f , rather than
local, in contrast to the single contextual data point in DC . Future research could explore active-
learning strategies (Rainforth et al., 2023) with the task-specific knowledge queried on the basis of
the epistemic uncertainty (Kaddour et al., 2020; Astorga et al., 2024; Kobalczyk et al., 2025).

5.2            PART II: R EAL DATA AND LOOSELY FORMATTED KNOWLEDGE

For illustrative purposes, representations of knowledge in the previous part were highly struc-
tured and with a well-defined relationship to the underlying DGP. Naturally, in such scenarios we
would resolve to direct knowledge integration methods e.g., a Bayesian regression model (c.f. Ap-
pendix A.8.4). However, the advantages of informed meta-learning become evident when: a) the
functions to be learned lack a known, closed-form expression; b) knowledge about the learning task
is loosely formatted, making manual integration of prior knowledge a significant challenge.

5.2.1                I NFORMED W EATHER P REDICTIONS
Setup: We use the sub-hourly temperature dataset from the U.S. Climate Reference Network, rep-
resenting values of the air temperature measured at regular 5-minute intervals. For each task, target
observations are uniformly sampled from a 24h time range. Context data points are selected by sub-
sampling at most 10, chronologically first samples. This setup enables us to assess extrapolation.
We perform independent experiments with two formats of knowledge:
• A: For each task, knowledge K is a vector encoding two values: the minimum temperature and
  the maximum temperature on the day.
• B: For each task, knowledge K is a synthetically generated “weather forecast” presented in natural
  language. We generate these with GPT-4 OpenAI et al. (2023) prompted to write two sentences
  mimicking a weather forecast, based on values from the ground truth temperature measurements.
Fig. 7a shows representative examples of the daily temperature paths from test tasks alongside purely
data-driven and informed predictions. NPs capture the general trend of the temperature rising during
the day, and then falling down towards the night, but unsurprisingly, fail to accurately extrapolate
beyond the observed regions. This is due to a high level of heterogeneity present in the collection of
meta-training tasks, which is reflected in the high variability of the sampled functions outside of the
observed data range. In terms of the informed predictions, we observe that the information contained


                                                                                                         8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025



                                               NP                             INP (A)                            INP (B)
                            20
                                                                                                                                                      n     INP A        INP B
                            10
                                                                                                                                                      0    63.5 (1.8)   60.7 (3.0)
                            15                                                                                                                        1    21.1 (1.4)   17.3 (1.3)

        Temperature [◦ C]
                            10
                                                                                                                                                      3    14.0 (1.1)   16.3 (1.3)
                                                                                                                                                      5    11.1 (1.0)   13.8 (1.2)
                             5
                                                                                                                                                     10     4.1 (0.5)    1.1 (0.3)
                            20                                                                                                                       15     0.6 (0.3)    0.1 (0.2)
                            10
                                                                                                                                                ∆AUC       24.6 (1.1)   22.2 (1.0)
                                 2400   0600   1200   1800   2400   2400   0600   1200   1800   2400   2400   0600   1200   1800   2400

                                                                     Time of the day

(a) Sample predictions. NP: uninformed, INP (A): informed by                                                                              (b) Relative performance gap (%) be-
knowledge about the minimum and maximum temperature on                                                                                    tween informed and uninformed predic-
the day. INP (B): informed by knowledge about the tempera-                                                                                tions. Bootstrap standard errors in brackets
ture presented in a text format (see appx. A.6)                                                                                           based on 110 testing tasks.
                                                                                                                      Figure 7. .
in K enables guided extrapolation beyond the observed range of values and reduces the variance of
the sampled functions. Table 7b compares the performance gap between informed and uninformed
predictions. Notably, knowledge enables sensible, 0-shot predictions with an average improvement
in log-likelihood of 57.7% and 48.1% for setups A and B, respectively. We also note that the rep-
resentation of knowledge, as presented in setup A should, in the theoretically optimal case, impose
hard constraints on the maximum and minimum values of the function’s range. However, given
that INP is only a neural approximation of these constraints, the resulting curves may exceed the
specified range as opposed to strictly adhering to it; as it could be possible with a custom-designed
model that explicitly incorporates such constraints into its optimisation objective.
Take-away: In practical scenarios, predictive functions are difficult to model with closed-form
mathematical expressions, making the process of external knowledge integration a challenging task.
The benefit of neural, meta- approaches, is their functional flexibility. NPs learn non-trivial “kernels”
from the collection of training tasks directly. INPs take this a step further, enabling the incorporation
of non-trivially representable information about the underlying function into the model.

5.2.2                       I NFORMED I MAGE C LASSIFICATION

Setup: We apply INPs to few-shot classification on the CUB-200-2011 dataset Wah et al. (2011).
We use 100 bird categories for training, 50 for validation, and 50 for testing and follow the standard
N -way, k-shot classification setup. We adjust the INP architecture to suit the image classification
task, employing CLIP vision and text encoders Fu et al. (2022) (details in appx. A.6.3). We perform
independent experiments with three formats of knowledge:
• A: Knowledge represents features of a given bird class, e.g. wing span, feather color. Class-level
  attributes are obtained by averaging the attribute vectors associated with each image from the
  dataset. Class-level attribute vectors are stacked together to obtain N × 312 tensors.
• B: Knowledge represents class-level textual descriptions of the N classes obtained by averaging
  sentence embedding of individual image captions belonging to the given class. We use human-
  generated captions as collected in Reed et al. (2016) and embed them with CLIP. Per-class aver-
  aged text embeddings are then stacked to form a N × 512 tensor.
• C: Here knowledge represents a set of N individual descriptions of each class. We generate these
  with GPT-4 based on the captions from B (see appx. A.6.3 for examples).
Table 1 displays results for 5-way and 10-way classification. Across all settings, we observe higher
classification accuracy when additional knowledge is utilised. This trend holds for 1, 3, 5, and
10-shot tasks, with the performance gap widening as the number of shots decreases. Moreover, the
information about characteristic elements of each class contained in K proves sufficient for relatively
good zero-shot prediction performance. While the zero-shot performance for setup C is lower than
that of setups A or B, it is nevertheless significantly higher than the accuracy of random guessing.
Take-away: INPs align the representations of images and knowledge about class-specific features
to construct latent representations that contain the essential multi-modal information. This align-
ment facilitates robust generalisation to new, previously unseen classes, enabling both zero-shot
classification and improved few-shot classification accuracy.


                                                                                                                                   9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Table 1: Accuracy (%) on N -way, k-shot classification tasks for the CUB-200-2011 dataset. Num-
bers in brackets represent the bootstrap standard errors of the estimates based on 60 tasks per each
setting. Individual tasks are constructed with only previously unseen bird categories.
                              N =5                                                N = 10
     k       NP        INP (A)      INP (B)      INP (C)         NP        INP (A)      INP (B)      INP (C)
     0    –            87.5 (0.7)   87.4 (0.5)   50.3 (0.6)   –            81.1 (0.4)   78.5 (0.4)   33.7 (0.3)
     1    82.2 (0.6)   88.1 (0.6)   89.1 (0.5)   85.1 (0.5)   73.3 (0.4)   82.2 (0.4)   81.9 (0.4)   77.0 (0.5)
     3    87.0 (0.5)   88.4 (0.6)   89.3 (0.5)   88.3 (0.5)   79.8 (0.4)   82.7 (0.4)   82.7 (0.4)   81.8 (0.4)
     5    88.1 (0.5)   88.5 (0.6)   89.6 (0.5)   88.9 (0.4)   81.5 (0.4)   82.8 (0.4)   82.8 (0.4)   83.0 (0.4)
     10   88.5 (0.5)   88.5 (0.6)   89.6 (0.5)   89.0 (0.4)   82.6 (0.4)   82.7 (0.4)   83.0 (0.4)   84.1 (0.4)

6   R ELATED W ORK , L IMITATIONS , & I MPACT
Manual knowledge integration. Conventional approaches to knowledge integration rely on the ML
engineer translating the a priori known property of the underlying function, into an inductive bias
of the model. This has been successfully achieved by introducing specialised loss functions (Wu
et al., 2018; Karpatne et al., 2017), enforcing informative priors (Mariëlle Zondervan-Zwijnenburg
& Schoot, 2017; Constantinou et al., 2016), or designing new model architectures (Cohen & Welling,
2016; Butter et al., 2018). However, such manual approaches are limited by the extent to which
expert information can be explicitly encoded in the learning algorithm. Even seemingly straight-
forward tasks, such as enforcing monotonicity or other shape constraints often require significant
engineering effort (Riihimäki & Vehtari, 2010; Link et al., 2022). This restricts representations
of expert knowledge to formal mathematical expressions (Karpatne et al., 2017; Qian et al., 2021),
knowledge graphs (Choi et al., 2017; Zhang et al., 2019), or logical rules (Yang et al., 2023; Richard-
son & Domingos, 2006). In contrast, informed meta-learning offers a way to integrate knowledge
from any source, including natural language, allowing for a greater flexibility in the type of infor-
mation that can be transferred to the learner. On the other hand, this approach lacks the guaranteed
correctness that conventional methods enjoy. With model-based methods, properties like equivari-
ance or sparsity can be guaranteed by design. Informed meta-learning in its presented form can only
approximate the true meaning of knowledge and its performance is contingent on, i.a., the number
and coverage of the training tasks, lack of spurious correlations, and complexity of knowledge (see
Appendix A.8). Finally, model-based methods do not require access to additional learning tasks that
informed meta-learning assumes.
LLMs to automate knowledge integration. As LLMs continue to improve, they show potential
to act as out-of-the-box, in-context learners, capable of integrating expert knowledge into their pre-
dictions. Recent works by Requeima et al. (2024); Jin et al. (2024) explore strategies for eliciting
numerical predictions over time series data, given a set of training points and expert information pro-
vided as text within the LLM’s context window. Such purely LLM-based methods create an interface
for human users to incorporate expert insights through language, while also leveraging problem-
relevant knowledge embedded in the LLM. These approaches eliminate the need for training an
informed meta-learner from scratch. On the other hand, they introduce the risk of incorporating
unwanted biases and require transforming numerical datasets into tokens which may limit applica-
bility and performance (Gruver et al., 2023). Future research should explore the mutual benefits of
LLM-based learners and informed meta-learning—for instance, by fine-tuning an LLM on the meta-
training dataset, or presenting a sample of training tasks within the context window. Such strategies
should enable to extend informed learning with LLMs beyond the current focus on 1-dimensional
time-series data. LLMs may also serve as a useful tool for synthetic data generation, addressing the
limitation of informed meta-learning due to potential difficulties in obtaining the training examples.
An extended discussion of the related work can be found in Appendix A.3.
Impact. In this paper, we have proposed a new perspective on automated inductive bias specifica-
tion based on expert knowledge represented in human-interpretable formats. We note that our work
primarily focuses on putting forward the idea of informed meta-learning with the introduced class
of INPs serving mainly as an illustration. We hope that this paper inspires future research to ex-
plore new architectures improving learning efficiency and generalisation to novel representations of
knowledge as well as real-world applications across a range of domains where expert knowledge is
present (see A.2.3 for examples). The growing capabilities of LLMs present an exciting opportunity
for informed meta-learning, and we look forward to future developments in this area.


                                                       10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


7   R EPRODUCIBILITY AND ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
Reproducibility. Appendix A.4-A.6 contains all the necessary details needed to reproduce the ex-
periments presented in the main body of this paper. We also provide access the anonymous reposi-
tory containing the source code together with the instructions to reproduce the experiments from sec-
tions 5.1 and 5.2.1 (code for the image classification experiments will be made available upon paper
acceptance). We also release the synthetically-generated datasets with GPT-4 used in experiments
5.2.1 and 5.2.2. Code and data can be found at: https://github.com/kasia-kobalczyk/informed-meta-
learning and at a wider lab repository: https://github.com/vanderschaarlab/informed-meta-learning.
Acknowledgements. This work was supported by Azure sponsorship credits granted by Microsoft’s
AI for Good Research Lab. Katarzyna Kobalczyk is supported by funding from Eedi.

R EFERENCES
Zeynep Akata, Florent Perronnin, Zaı̈d Harchaoui, and Cordelia Schmid. Label-Embedding for
  Image Classification. CoRR, abs/1503.08677, 2015. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/1503.
  08677. arXiv: 1503.08677.
Ziad Al-Halah, Makarand Tapaswi, and Rainer Stiefelhagen. Recovering the Missing Link: Predict-
  ing Class-Attribute Associations for Unsupervised Zero-Shot Learning. CoRR, abs/1610.04787,
  2016. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/1610.04787. arXiv: 1610.04787.
Matthew Ashman, Cristiana Diaconu, Adrian Weller, and Richard E. Turner. In-Context In-Context
 Learning with Transformer Neural Processes. In Javier Antorán and Christian A. Naesseth (eds.),
 Proceedings of the 6th Symposium on Advances in Approximate Bayesian Inference, volume 253
 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pp. 1–29. PMLR, July 2024. URL https:
 //proceedings.mlr.press/v253/ashman24a.html.
Nicolás Astorga, Tennison Liu, Nabeel Seedat, and Mihaela van der Schaar. Active Learning
  with LLMs for Partially Observed and Cost-Aware Scenarios. In A. Globerson, L. Mackey,
  D. Belgrave, A. Fan, U. Paquet, J. Tomczak, and C. Zhang (eds.), Advances in Neu-
  ral Information Processing Systems, volume 37, pp. 20819–20857. Curran Associates, Inc.,
  2024. URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/
  file/24f3041067ab24157912330344dc3bbd-Paper-Conference.pdf.
J. Baxter. A Model of Inductive Bias Learning. Journal of Artificial Intelligence Research, 12:
   149–198, March 2000. ISSN 1076-9757. doi: 10.1613/jair.731. URL http://dx.doi.org/
   10.1613/jair.731. Publisher: AI Access Foundation.
Jonathan Baxter. A Bayesian/Information Theoretic Model of Learning to Learn via Multiple
  Task Sampling. Machine Learning, 28(1):7–39, July 1997. ISSN 1573-0565. doi: 10.1023/A:
  1007327622663. URL https://doi.org/10.1023/A:1007327622663.
Filipe de Avila Belbute-Peres, Yi-fan Chen, and Fei Sha. HyperPINN: Learning parameterized
   differential equations with physics-informed hypernetworks, 2021. eprint: 2111.01008.
Anja Butter, Gregor Kasieczka, Tilman Plehn, and Michael Russell. Deep-learned Top Tagging
  with a Lorentz Layer. SciPost Physics, 5(3), September 2018. ISSN 2542-4653. doi: 10.21468/
  scipostphys.5.3.028. URL http://dx.doi.org/10.21468/SciPostPhys.5.3.028.
  Publisher: Stichting SciPost.
Wei-Yu Chen, Yen-Cheng Liu, Zsolt Kira, Yu-Chiang Frank Wang, and Jia-Bin Huang. A Closer
 Look at Few-shot Classification. In 7th International Conference on Learning Representations,
 ICLR 2019, New Orleans, LA, USA, May 6-9, 2019. OpenReview.net, 2019. URL https:
 //openreview.net/forum?id=HkxLXnAcFQ.
Edward Choi, Mohammad Taha Bahadori, Le Song, Walter F. Stewart, and Jimeng Sun. GRAM:
  Graph-Based Attention Model for Healthcare Representation Learning. In Proceedings of the
  23rd ACM SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining, KDD
  ’17, pp. 787–795, New York, NY, USA, 2017. Association for Computing Machinery. ISBN
  978-1-4503-4887-4. doi: 10.1145/3097983.3098126. URL https://doi.org/10.1145/
  3097983.3098126. event-place: Halifax, NS, Canada.


                                                 11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Taco Cohen and Max Welling. Group Equivariant Convolutional Networks. In Maria Florina Balcan
  and Kilian Q. Weinberger (eds.), Proceedings of The 33rd International Conference on Machine
  Learning, volume 48 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pp. 2990–2999, New York,
  New York, USA, June 2016. PMLR. URL https://proceedings.mlr.press/v48/
  cohenc16.html.
Anthony Costa Constantinou, Norman Fenton, and Martin Neil. Integrating expert knowledge with
  data in Bayesian networks: Preserving data-driven expectations when the expert variables re-
  main unobserved. Expert Systems with Applications, 56:197–208, 2016. ISSN 0957-4174. doi:
  https://doi.org/10.1016/j.eswa.2016.02.050. URL https://www.sciencedirect.com/
  science/article/pii/S0957417416300896.
Giulia Denevi, Massimiliano Pontil, and Carlo Ciliberto.     The Advantage of Condi-
  tional Meta-Learning for Biased Regularization and Fine Tuning. In Hugo Larochelle,
  Marc’Aurelio Ranzato, Raia Hadsell, Maria-Florina Balcan, and Hsuan-Tien Lin (eds.),
  Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 33: Annual Conference on Neu-
  ral Information Processing Systems 2020, NeurIPS 2020, December 6-12, 2020, vir-
  tual, 2020.      URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper/2020/hash/
  0a716fe8c7745e51a3185fc8be6ca23a-Abstract.html.
Giulia Denevi, Massimiliano Pontil, and Carlo Ciliberto. Conditional Meta-Learning of Linear Rep-
  resentations. In Sanmi Koyejo, S. Mohamed, A. Agarwal, Danielle Belgrave, K. Cho, and A. Oh
  (eds.), Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 35: Annual Conference on Neural
  Information Processing Systems 2022, NeurIPS 2022, New Orleans, LA, USA, November 28 - De-
  cember 9, 2022, 2022. URL http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2022/
  hash/01ecd39ca49ddecc5729ca996304781b-Abstract-Conference.html.
Stefan Depeweg, Jose-Miguel Hernandez-Lobato, Finale Doshi-Velez, and Steffen Udluft. Decom-
  position of Uncertainty in Bayesian Deep Learning for Efficient and Risk-sensitive Learning. In
  Jennifer Dy and Andreas Krause (eds.), Proceedings of the 35th International Conference on
  Machine Learning, volume 80 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pp. 1184–1193.
  PMLR, July 2018. URL https://proceedings.mlr.press/v80/depeweg18a.
  html.
Changxing Ding and Dacheng Tao. Robust Face Recognition via Multimodal Deep Face Represen-
  tation. IEEE Transactions on Multimedia, 17(11):2049–2058, 2015. doi: 10.1109/TMM.2015.
  2477042.
Mohamed Elhoseiny, Ahmed M. Elgammal, and Babak Saleh. Write a Classifier: Predicting Visual
 Classifiers from Unstructured Text. IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell., 39(12):2539–2553,
 2017. doi: 10.1109/TPAMI.2016.2643667. URL https://doi.org/10.1109/TPAMI.
 2016.2643667.
Chelsea Finn, Kelvin Xu, and Sergey Levine. Probabilistic Model-Agnostic Meta-Learning. In
  Samy Bengio, Hanna M. Wallach, Hugo Larochelle, Kristen Grauman, Nicolò Cesa-Bianchi, and
  Roman Garnett (eds.), Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 31: Annual Con-
  ference on Neural Information Processing Systems 2018, NeurIPS 2018, December 3-8, 2018,
  Montréal, Canada, pp. 9537–9548, 2018. URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/
  paper/2018/hash/8e2c381d4dd04f1c55093f22c59c3a08-Abstract.html.
Jinmiao Fu, Shaoyuan Xu, Huidong Liu, Yang Liu, Ning Xie, Chien-Chih Wang, Jia Liu, Yi Sun,
   and Bryan Wang. CMA-CLIP: Cross-Modality Attention Clip for Text-Image Classification. In
   2022 IEEE International Conference on Image Processing (ICIP), pp. 2846–2850, 2022. doi:
   10.1109/ICIP46576.2022.9897323.
Marta Garnelo, Dan Rosenbaum, Christopher Maddison, Tiago Ramalho, David Saxton, Murray
 Shanahan, Yee Whye Teh, Danilo Rezende, and S. M. Ali Eslami. Conditional Neural Processes.
 In Jennifer Dy and Andreas Krause (eds.), Proceedings of the 35th International Conference on
 Machine Learning, volume 80 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pp. 1704–1713.
 PMLR, July 2018a. URL https://proceedings.mlr.press/v80/garnelo18a.
 html.

                                               12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Marta Garnelo, Jonathan Schwarz, Dan Rosenbaum, Fabio Viola, Danilo J. Rezende, S. M. Ali
 Eslami, and Yee Whye Teh. Neural Processes, 2018b. eprint: 1807.01622.

Ian J. Goodfellow, Jean Pouget-Abadie, Mehdi Mirza, Bing Xu, David Warde-Farley, Sherjil
  Ozair, Aaron C. Courville, and Yoshua Bengio. Generative Adversarial Networks. CoRR,
  abs/1406.2661, 2014. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/1406.2661. arXiv: 1406.2661.

Anirudh Goyal and Yoshua Bengio. Inductive Biases for Deep Learning of Higher-Level Cogni-
  tion. CoRR, abs/2011.15091, 2020. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2011.15091. arXiv:
  2011.15091.

Erin Grant, Chelsea Finn, Sergey Levine, Trevor Darrell, and Thomas Griffiths. Recasting Gradient-
  Based Meta-Learning as Hierarchical Bayes, 2018. eprint: 1801.08930.

Nate Gruver, Marc Finzi, Shikai Qiu, and Andrew Gordon Wilson.        Large Language
  Models Are Zero-Shot Time Series Forecasters. In Alice Oh, Tristan Naumann, Amir
  Globerson, Kate Saenko, Moritz Hardt, and Sergey Levine (eds.), Advances in Neu-
  ral Information Processing Systems 36: Annual Conference on Neural Information Pro-
  cessing Systems 2023, NeurIPS 2023, New Orleans, LA, USA, December 10 - 16,
  2023, 2023. URL http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/
  3eb7ca52e8207697361b2c0fb3926511-Abstract-Conference.html.

Jiechao Guan and Zhiwu Lu. Task Relatedness-Based Generalization Bounds for Meta Learning. In
   International Conference on Learning Representations, 2022. URL https://openreview.
   net/forum?id=A3HHaEdqAJL.

Dan Hendrycks and Kevin Gimpel. Bridging Nonlinearities and Stochastic Regularizers with Gaus-
  sian Error Linear Units. CoRR, abs/1606.08415, 2016. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/
  1606.08415. arXiv: 1606.08415.

Jonathan Ho and Tim Salimans. Classifier-Free Diffusion Guidance. CoRR, abs/2207.12598, 2022.
  doi: 10.48550/ARXIV.2207.12598. URL https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2207.
  12598. arXiv: 2207.12598.

Jonathan Ho, Ajay Jain, and Pieter Abbeel. Denoising Diffusion Probabilistic Models. In
  Hugo Larochelle, Marc’Aurelio Ranzato, Raia Hadsell, Maria-Florina Balcan, and Hsuan-
  Tien Lin (eds.), Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 33: Annual Con-
  ference on Neural Information Processing Systems 2020, NeurIPS 2020, December 6-12,
  2020, virtual, 2020. URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper/2020/hash/
  4c5bcfec8584af0d967f1ab10179ca4b-Abstract.html.

Xiang Huang, Zhanhong Ye, Hongsheng Liu, Shi Ji, Zidong Wang, Kang Yang, Yang Li,
  Min Wang, Haotian Chu, Fan Yu, Bei Hua, Lei Chen, and Bin Dong.             Meta-Auto-
  Decoder for Solving Parametric Partial Differential Equations. In Sanmi Koyejo, S. Mo-
  hamed, A. Agarwal, Danielle Belgrave, K. Cho, and A. Oh (eds.), Advances in Neural
  Information Processing Systems 35: Annual Conference on Neural Information Process-
  ing Systems 2022, NeurIPS 2022, New Orleans, LA, USA, November 28 - December 9,
  2022, 2022. URL http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2022/hash/
  948552777302d3abf92415b1d7e9de70-Abstract-Conference.html.

Tomoharu Iwata and Atsutoshi Kumagai. Sharing Knowledge for Meta-learning with Feature De-
  scriptions. In Alice H. Oh, Alekh Agarwal, Danielle Belgrave, and Kyunghyun Cho (eds.), Ad-
  vances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2022. URL https://openreview.net/
  forum?id=kyY4w4IgtM8.

Ming Jin, Shiyu Wang, Lintao Ma, Zhixuan Chu, James Y. Zhang, Xiaoming Shi, Pin-Yu Chen,
 Yuxuan Liang, Yuan-Fang Li, Shirui Pan, and Qingsong Wen. Time-LLM: Time Series Fore-
 casting by Reprogramming Large Language Models. In The Twelfth International Conference on
 Learning Representations, ICLR 2024, Vienna, Austria, May 7-11, 2024. OpenReview.net, 2024.
 URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=Unb5CVPtae.


                                               13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Jean Kaddour, Steindór Sæmundsson, and Marc Peter Deisenroth. Probabilistic Active Meta-
  Learning. In Hugo Larochelle, Marc’Aurelio Ranzato, Raia Hadsell, Maria-Florina Balcan,
  and Hsuan-Tien Lin (eds.), Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 33: Annual
  Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems 2020, NeurIPS 2020, December 6-12,
  2020, virtual, 2020. URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper/2020/hash/
  ef0d17b3bdb4ee2aa741ba28c7255c53-Abstract.html.
Anuj Karpatne, William Watkins, Jordan Read, and Vipin Kumar. Physics-guided neural networks
  (pgnn): An application in lake temperature modeling. arXiv preprint arXiv:1710.11431, 2, 2017.
Hyunjik Kim, Andriy Mnih, Jonathan Schwarz, Marta Garnelo, Ali Eslami, Dan Rosenbaum, Oriol
  Vinyals, and Yee Whye Teh. Attentive Neural Processes. In International Conference on Learning
  Representations, 2019. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=SkE6PjC9KX.
Diederik P. Kingma and Jimmy Ba. Adam: A Method for Stochastic Optimization. In Yoshua
  Bengio and Yann LeCun (eds.), 3rd International Conference on Learning Representations, ICLR
  2015, San Diego, CA, USA, May 7-9, 2015, Conference Track Proceedings, 2015. URL http:
  //arxiv.org/abs/1412.6980.
Diederik P. Kingma and Max Welling. Auto-Encoding Variational Bayes. In Yoshua Ben-
  gio and Yann LeCun (eds.), 2nd International Conference on Learning Representations, ICLR
  2014, Banff, AB, Canada, April 14-16, 2014, Conference Track Proceedings, 2014. URL
  http://arxiv.org/abs/1312.6114.
Kasia Kobalczyk, Nicolás Astorga, Tennison Liu, and Mihaela van der Schaar. Active Task Disam-
  biguation with LLMs. In The Thirteenth International Conference on Learning Representations,
  2025. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=JAMxRSXLFz.
Alexander Kovacs, Lukas Exl, Alexander Kornell, Johann Fischbacher, Markus Hovorka, Markus
  Gusenbauer, Leoni Breth, Harald Oezelt, Masao Yano, Noritsugu Sakuma, Akihito Kinoshita,
  Tetsuya Shoji, Akira Kato, and Thomas Schrefl. Conditional physics informed neural net-
  works. Communications in Nonlinear Science and Numerical Simulation, 104:106041, 2022.
  ISSN 1007-5704. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cnsns.2021.106041. URL https://www.
  sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1007570421003531.
Patrick Link, Miltiadis Poursanidis, Jochen Schmid, Rebekka Zache, Martin von Kurnatowski, Uwe
  Teicher, and Steffen Ihlenfeldt. Capturing and incorporating expert knowledge into machine
  learning models for quality prediction in manufacturing. Journal of Intelligent Manufacturing,
  33(7):2129–2142, October 2022. ISSN 1572-8145. doi: 10.1007/s10845-022-01975-4. URL
  https://doi.org/10.1007/s10845-022-01975-4.
Yinhan Liu, Myle Ott, Naman Goyal, Jingfei Du, Mandar Joshi, Danqi Chen, Omer Levy,
  Mike Lewis, Luke Zettlemoyer, and Veselin Stoyanov. Ro{BERT}a: A Robustly Optimized
  {BERT} Pretraining Approach, 2020. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=
  SyxS0T4tvS.
Sarah Depaoli Mariëlle Zondervan-Zwijnenburg, Margot Peeters and Rens Van de Schoot. Where
  Do Priors Come From? Applying Guidelines to Construct Informative Priors in Small Sample
  Research. Research in Human Development, 14(4):305–320, 2017. doi: 10.1080/15427609.2017.
  1370966. URL https://doi.org/10.1080/15427609.2017.1370966. Publisher:
  Routledge eprint: https://doi.org/10.1080/15427609.2017.1370966.
Mehdi Mirza and Simon Osindero. Conditional Generative Adversarial Nets. CoRR, abs/1411.1784,
 2014. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/1411.1784. arXiv: 1411.1784.
Tom M. Mitchell. The Need for Biases in Learning Generalizations. Technical report, Rutgers Uni-
  versity, New Brunswick, NJ, 1980. URL http://dml.cs.byu.edu/˜cgc/docs/mldm_
  tools/Reading/Need%20for%20Bias.pdf.
Jiquan Ngiam, Aditya Khosla, Mingyu Kim, Juhan Nam, Honglak Lee, and Andrew Y. Ng. Mul-
   timodal Deep Learning. In Lise Getoor and Tobias Scheffer (eds.), Proceedings of the 28th In-
   ternational Conference on Machine Learning, ICML 2011, Bellevue, Washington, USA, June 28
   - July 2, 2011, pp. 689–696. Omnipress, 2011. URL https://icml.cc/2011/papers/
   399_icmlpaper.pdf.


                                               14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Tung Nguyen and Aditya Grover. Transformer Neural Processes: Uncertainty-Aware Meta Learning
  Via Sequence Modeling, 2023. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2207.04179. eprint:
  2207.04179.

OpenAI, :, Josh Achiam, Steven Adler, Sandhini Agarwal, Lama Ahmad, Ilge Akkaya, Floren-
  cia Leoni Aleman, Diogo Almeida, Janko Altenschmidt, Sam Altman, Shyamal Anadkat, Red
  Avila, Igor Babuschkin, Suchir Balaji, Valerie Balcom, Paul Baltescu, Haiming Bao, Mo Bavar-
  ian, Jeff Belgum, Irwan Bello, Jake Berdine, Gabriel Bernadett-Shapiro, Christopher Berner,
  Lenny Bogdonoff, Oleg Boiko, Madelaine Boyd, Anna-Luisa Brakman, Greg Brockman, Tim
  Brooks, Miles Brundage, Kevin Button, Trevor Cai, Rosie Campbell, Andrew Cann, Brittany
  Carey, Chelsea Carlson, Rory Carmichael, Brooke Chan, Che Chang, Fotis Chantzis, Derek
  Chen, Sully Chen, Ruby Chen, Jason Chen, Mark Chen, Ben Chess, Chester Cho, Casey
  Chu, Hyung Won Chung, Dave Cummings, Jeremiah Currier, Yunxing Dai, Cory Decareaux,
  Thomas Degry, Noah Deutsch, Damien Deville, Arka Dhar, David Dohan, Steve Dowling,
  Sheila Dunning, Adrien Ecoffet, Atty Eleti, Tyna Eloundou, David Farhi, Liam Fedus, Niko
  Felix, Simón Posada Fishman, Juston Forte, Isabella Fulford, Leo Gao, Elie Georges, Chris-
  tian Gibson, Vik Goel, Tarun Gogineni, Gabriel Goh, Rapha Gontijo-Lopes, Jonathan Gor-
  don, Morgan Grafstein, Scott Gray, Ryan Greene, Joshua Gross, Shixiang Shane Gu, Yufei
  Guo, Chris Hallacy, Jesse Han, Jeff Harris, Yuchen He, Mike Heaton, Johannes Heidecke,
  Chris Hesse, Alan Hickey, Wade Hickey, Peter Hoeschele, Brandon Houghton, Kenny Hsu,
  Shengli Hu, Xin Hu, Joost Huizinga, Shantanu Jain, Shawn Jain, Joanne Jang, Angela Jiang,
  Roger Jiang, Haozhun Jin, Denny Jin, Shino Jomoto, Billie Jonn, Heewoo Jun, Tomer Kaf-
  tan, Lukasz Kaiser, Ali Kamali, Ingmar Kanitscheider, Nitish Shirish Keskar, Tabarak Khan,
  Logan Kilpatrick, Jong Wook Kim, Christina Kim, Yongjik Kim, Hendrik Kirchner, Jamie
  Kiros, Matt Knight, Daniel Kokotajlo, Lukasz Kondraciuk, Andrew Kondrich, Aris Konstan-
  tinidis, Kyle Kosic, Gretchen Krueger, Vishal Kuo, Michael Lampe, Ikai Lan, Teddy Lee, Jan
  Leike, Jade Leung, Daniel Levy, Chak Ming Li, Rachel Lim, Molly Lin, Stephanie Lin, Mateusz
  Litwin, Theresa Lopez, Ryan Lowe, Patricia Lue, Anna Makanju, Kim Malfacini, Sam Man-
  ning, Todor Markov, Yaniv Markovski, Bianca Martin, Katie Mayer, Andrew Mayne, Bob Mc-
  Grew, Scott Mayer McKinney, Christine McLeavey, Paul McMillan, Jake McNeil, David Medina,
  Aalok Mehta, Jacob Menick, Luke Metz, Andrey Mishchenko, Pamela Mishkin, Vinnie Monaco,
  Evan Morikawa, Daniel Mossing, Tong Mu, Mira Murati, Oleg Murk, David Mély, Ashvin Nair,
  Reiichiro Nakano, Rajeev Nayak, Arvind Neelakantan, Richard Ngo, Hyeonwoo Noh, Long
  Ouyang, Cullen O’Keefe, Jakub Pachocki, Alex Paino, Joe Palermo, Ashley Pantuliano, Gi-
  ambattista Parascandolo, Joel Parish, Emy Parparita, Alex Passos, Mikhail Pavlov, Andrew Peng,
  Adam Perelman, Filipe de Avila Belbute Peres, Michael Petrov, Henrique Ponde de Oliveira
  Pinto, Michael, Pokorny, Michelle Pokrass, Vitchyr Pong, Tolly Powell, Alethea Power, Boris
  Power, Elizabeth Proehl, Raul Puri, Alec Radford, Jack Rae, Aditya Ramesh, Cameron Ray-
  mond, Francis Real, Kendra Rimbach, Carl Ross, Bob Rotsted, Henri Roussez, Nick Ryder, Mario
  Saltarelli, Ted Sanders, Shibani Santurkar, Girish Sastry, Heather Schmidt, David Schnurr, John
  Schulman, Daniel Selsam, Kyla Sheppard, Toki Sherbakov, Jessica Shieh, Sarah Shoker, Pranav
  Shyam, Szymon Sidor, Eric Sigler, Maddie Simens, Jordan Sitkin, Katarina Slama, Ian Sohl, Ben-
  jamin Sokolowsky, Yang Song, Natalie Staudacher, Felipe Petroski Such, Natalie Summers, Ilya
  Sutskever, Jie Tang, Nikolas Tezak, Madeleine Thompson, Phil Tillet, Amin Tootoonchian, Eliza-
  beth Tseng, Preston Tuggle, Nick Turley, Jerry Tworek, Juan Felipe Cerón Uribe, Andrea Vallone,
  Arun Vijayvergiya, Chelsea Voss, Carroll Wainwright, Justin Jay Wang, Alvin Wang, Ben Wang,
  Jonathan Ward, Jason Wei, C. J. Weinmann, Akila Welihinda, Peter Welinder, Jiayi Weng, Lilian
  Weng, Matt Wiethoff, Dave Willner, Clemens Winter, Samuel Wolrich, Hannah Wong, Lauren
  Workman, Sherwin Wu, Jeff Wu, Michael Wu, Kai Xiao, Tao Xu, Sarah Yoo, Kevin Yu, Qiming
  Yuan, Wojciech Zaremba, Rowan Zellers, Chong Zhang, Marvin Zhang, Shengjia Zhao, Tianhao
  Zheng, Juntang Zhuang, William Zhuk, and Barret Zoph. GPT-4 Technical Report, 2023. eprint:
  2303.08774.

Tzuf Paz-Argaman, Reut Tsarfaty, Gal Chechik, and Yuval Atzmon. ZEST: Zero-shot Learning from
  Text Descriptions using Textual Similarity and Visual Summarization. In Trevor Cohn, Yulan He,
  and Yang Liu (eds.), Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: EMNLP 2020,
  Online Event, 16-20 November 2020, volume EMNLP 2020 of Findings of ACL, pp. 569–579.
  Association for Computational Linguistics, 2020. doi: 10.18653/V1/2020.FINDINGS-EMNLP.
  50. URL https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2020.findings-emnlp.50.


                                               15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Ethan Perez, Florian Strub, Harm de Vries, Vincent Dumoulin, and Aaron C. Courville. FiLM:
  Visual Reasoning with a General Conditioning Layer. In Sheila A. McIlraith and Kilian Q.
  Weinberger (eds.), Proceedings of the Thirty-Second AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence,
  (AAAI-18), the 30th innovative Applications of Artificial Intelligence (IAAI-18), and the 8th
  AAAI Symposium on Educational Advances in Artificial Intelligence (EAAI-18), New Orleans,
  Louisiana, USA, February 2-7, 2018, pp. 3942–3951. AAAI Press, 2018. doi: 10.1609/AAAI.
  V32I1.11671. URL https://doi.org/10.1609/aaai.v32i1.11671.

Zhaozhi Qian, William R. Zame, Lucas M. Fleuren, Paul Elbers, and Mihaela van der Schaar. Inte-
  grating Expert ODEs into Neural ODEs: Pharmacology and Disease Progression. In A. Beygelz-
  imer, Y. Dauphin, P. Liang, and J. Wortman Vaughan (eds.), Advances in Neural Information Pro-
  cessing Systems, 2021. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=tDqef76wFaO.

Tom Rainforth, Adam Foster, Desi R. Ivanova, and Freddie Bickford Smith. Modern Bayesian
  Experimental Design, 2023. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2302.14545. eprint:
  2302.14545.

Aditya Ramesh, Prafulla Dhariwal, Alex Nichol, Casey Chu, and Mark Chen. Hierarchical Text-
  Conditional Image Generation with CLIP Latents. CoRR, abs/2204.06125, 2022. doi: 10.48550/
  ARXIV.2204.06125. URL https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2204.06125. arXiv:
  2204.06125.

Scott E. Reed, Zeynep Akata, Honglak Lee, and Bernt Schiele. Learning Deep Representations of
  Fine-Grained Visual Descriptions. In 2016 IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
  Recognition, CVPR 2016, Las Vegas, NV, USA, June 27-30, 2016, pp. 49–58. IEEE Computer
  Society, 2016. doi: 10.1109/CVPR.2016.13. URL https://doi.org/10.1109/CVPR.
  2016.13.

James Requeima, John Bronskill, Dami Choi, Richard E. Turner, and David Duvenaud. LLM
  Processes: Numerical Predictive Distributions Conditioned on Natural Language, 2024. URL
  https://arxiv.org/abs/2405.12856. eprint: 2405.12856.

Matthew Richardson and Pedro Domingos. Markov logic networks. Machine Learning, 62(1):
 107–136, February 2006. ISSN 1573-0565. doi: 10.1007/s10994-006-5833-1. URL https:
 //doi.org/10.1007/s10994-006-5833-1.

Jaakko Riihimäki and Aki Vehtari. Gaussian processes with monotonicity information. In
  Yee Whye Teh and Mike Titterington (eds.), Proceedings of the Thirteenth International Con-
  ference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics, volume 9 of Proceedings of Machine Learn-
  ing Research, pp. 645–652, Chia Laguna Resort, Sardinia, Italy, May 2010. PMLR. URL
  https://proceedings.mlr.press/v9/riihimaki10a.html.

Edgar Schönfeld, Sayna Ebrahimi, Samarth Sinha, Trevor Darrell, and Zeynep Akata. Generalized
  Zero- and Few-Shot Learning via Aligned Variational Autoencoders. In IEEE Conference on
  Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, CVPR 2019, Long Beach, CA, USA, June 16-20, 2019,
  pp. 8247–8255. Computer Vision Foundation / IEEE, 2019. doi: 10.1109/CVPR.2019.00844.
  URL                http://openaccess.thecvf.com/content_CVPR_2019/html/
  Schonfeld_Generalized_Zero-_and_Few-Shot_Learning_via_Aligned_
  Variational_Autoencoders_CVPR_2019_paper.html.

Xingjian Shi, Jonas Mueller, Nick Erickson, Nick Erickson, Mu Li, Alexander Smola, and
  Alexander Smola. Benchmarking Multimodal AutoML for Tabular Data with Text Fields.
  In J. Vanschoren and S. Yeung (eds.), Proceedings of the Neural Information Processing
  Systems Track on Datasets and Benchmarks, volume 1. Curran, 2021a. URL https:
  //datasets-benchmarks-proceedings.neurips.cc/paper_files/paper/
  2021/file/9bf31c7ff062936a96d3c8bd1f8f2ff3-Paper-round2.pdf.

Xingjian Shi, Jonas Mueller, Nick Erickson, Mu Li, and Alex Smola. Multimodal AutoML on
  Structured Tables with Text Fields. In 8th ICML Workshop on Automated Machine Learning
  (AutoML), 2021b. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=OHAIVOOl7Vl.


                                               16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Jake Snell, Kevin Swersky, and Richard Zemel. Prototypical Networks for Few-shot Learn-
  ing. In I. Guyon, U. Von Luxburg, S. Bengio, H. Wallach, R. Fergus, S. Vishwanathan,
  and R. Garnett (eds.), Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 30. Cur-
  ran Associates, Inc., 2017. URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper_files/
  paper/2017/file/cb8da6767461f2812ae4290eac7cbc42-Paper.pdf.
Kihyuk Sohn, Honglak Lee, and Xinchen Yan.        Learning Structured Output Repre-
  sentation using Deep Conditional Generative Models.   In Corinna Cortes, Neil D.
  Lawrence, Daniel D. Lee, Masashi Sugiyama, and Roman Garnett (eds.), Advances
  in Neural Information Processing Systems 28: Annual Conference on Neural Informa-
  tion Processing Systems 2015, December 7-12, 2015, Montreal, Quebec, Canada, pp.
  3483–3491, 2015. URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper/2015/hash/
  8d55a249e6baa5c06772297520da2051-Abstract.html.
Yang Song and Stefano Ermon.      Generative Modeling by Estimating Gradients of the
  Data Distribution. In Hanna M. Wallach, Hugo Larochelle, Alina Beygelzimer, Florence
  d’Alché Buc, Emily B. Fox, and Roman Garnett (eds.), Advances in Neural Informa-
  tion Processing Systems 32: Annual Conference on Neural Information Processing Sys-
  tems 2019, NeurIPS 2019, December 8-14, 2019, Vancouver, BC, Canada, pp. 11895–
  11907, 2019.      URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper/2019/hash/
  3001ef257407d5a371a96dcd947c7d93-Abstract.html.
Nitish Srivastava and Ruslan Salakhutdinov. Multimodal Learning with Deep Boltzmann Ma-
  chines. In Peter L. Bartlett, Fernando C. N. Pereira, Christopher J. C. Burges, Léon
  Bottou, and Kilian Q. Weinberger (eds.), Advances in Neural Information Processing Sys-
  tems 25: 26th Annual Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems 2012. Pro-
  ceedings of a meeting held December 3-6, 2012, Lake Tahoe, Nevada, United States, pp.
  2231–2239, 2012. URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper/2012/hash/
  af21d0c97db2e27e13572cbf59eb343d-Abstract.html.
Sebastian Thrun and Lorien Y. Pratt. Learning to Learn: Introduction and Overview. In Sebastian
  Thrun and Lorien Y. Pratt (eds.), Learning to Learn, pp. 3–17. Springer, 1998. doi: 10.1007/
  978-1-4615-5529-2 1. URL https://doi.org/10.1007/978-1-4615-5529-2_1.
Yao-Hung Hubert Tsai and Ruslan Salakhutdinov. Improving One-Shot Learning through Fusing
  Side Information. CoRR, abs/1710.08347, 2017. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/1710.
  08347. arXiv: 1710.08347.
Gabriel Tseng, Hannah Kerner, and David Rolnick. TIML: Task-Informed Meta-Learning for Agri-
  culture, 2022. eprint: 2202.02124.
Laura von Rueden, Jochen Garcke, and Christian Bauckhage. How Does Knowledge Injection Help
  in Informed Machine Learning? In 2023 International Joint Conference on Neural Networks
  (IJCNN), pp. 1–8, 2023. doi: 10.1109/IJCNN54540.2023.10191994.
Catherine Wah, Steve Branson, Peter Welinder, Pietro Perona, and Serge Belongie. The Caltech-
  UCSD Birds-200-2011 Dataset. California Institute of Technology, July 2011.
Andrew Gordon Wilson and Pavel Izmailov. Bayesian Deep Learning and a Probabilistic Perspec-
  tive of Generalization. In Hugo Larochelle, Marc’Aurelio Ranzato, Raia Hadsell, Maria-Florina
  Balcan, and Hsuan-Tien Lin (eds.), Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 33: An-
  nual Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems 2020, NeurIPS 2020, December 6-12,
  2020, virtual, 2020. URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper/2020/hash/
  322f62469c5e3c7dc3e58f5a4d1ea399-Abstract.html.
Jin-Long Wu, Heng Xiao, and Eric Paterson. Physics-informed machine learning approach for
   augmenting turbulence models: A comprehensive framework. Phys. Rev. Fluids, 3(7):074602,
   July 2018. doi: 10.1103/PhysRevFluids.3.074602. URL https://link.aps.org/doi/
   10.1103/PhysRevFluids.3.074602. Publisher: American Physical Society.
Yuan Yang, Siheng Xiong, Ali Payani, Ehsan Shareghi, and Faramarz Fekri. Harnessing the Power
  of Large Language Models for Natural Language to First-Order Logic Translation, 2023. eprint:
  2305.15541.


                                               17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Manzil Zaheer, Satwik Kottur, Siamak Ravanbakhsh, Barnabas Poczos, Russ R Salakhut-
 dinov, and Alexander J Smola.       Deep Sets.     In I. Guyon, U. Von Luxburg,
 S. Bengio, H. Wallach, R. Fergus, S. Vishwanathan, and R. Garnett (eds.), Ad-
 vances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 30. Curran Associates, Inc.,
 2017. URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper_files/paper/2017/
 file/f22e4747da1aa27e363d86d40ff442fe-Paper.pdf.
Marvin Zhang, Henrik Marklund, Nikita Dhawan, Abhishek Gupta, Sergey Levine, and Chelsea
 Finn. Adaptive Risk Minimization: Learning to Adapt to Domain Shift. In Marc’Aurelio
 Ranzato, Alina Beygelzimer, Yann N. Dauphin, Percy Liang, and Jennifer Wortman Vaughan
 (eds.), Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 34: Annual Conference on Neu-
 ral Information Processing Systems 2021, NeurIPS 2021, December 6-14, 2021, virtual,
 pp. 23664–23678, 2021. URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper/2021/
 hash/c705112d1ec18b97acac7e2d63973424-Abstract.html.
Zhengyan Zhang, Xu Han, Zhiyuan Liu, Xin Jiang, Maosong Sun, and Qun Liu. ERNIE: Enhanced
  Language Representation with Informative Entities. In Anna Korhonen, David Traum, and Lluı́s
  Màrquez (eds.), Proceedings of the 57th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational
  Linguistics, pp. 1441–1451, Florence, Italy, July 2019. Association for Computational Linguis-
  tics. doi: 10.18653/v1/P19-1139. URL https://aclanthology.org/P19-1139.


                                               18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A     A PPENDIX
                                   Table A.1: Table of Contents

      Appendix    Contents
      section

      A.1.1       Explaining the notation f ∼ p(f ) and the data and knowledge generating
                  process
      A.1.2       Proof of Theorem 1
      A.1.3       Further theoretical results following Theorem 1
      A.2.1       Extended discussion on assumptions D1-D3 regarding data vs. knowledge
      A.2.2       A short discussion on the curation of meta-training datasets
      A.2.3       Example applications of informed meta-learning
      A.3         Extended related work section
      A.4         Details of the INP architecture
      A.5         Training details and derivation of the ELBO loss
      A.6         Details of experiments presented in Section 5
      A.7         Details on uncertainty quantification with INPs
      A.8         Additional experiments: A.8.1: the impact of meta-training size on suc-
                  cessful knowledge integration; A.8.2 the impact of knowledge complexity
                  on successful knowledge integration; A.8.3: the impact of spurious corre-
                  lations of knowledge and data on correct “knowledge interpretation”; A.8.4
                  meta-learned vs. exact knowledge integration.


A.1     T HEORY

A.1.1    F ORMALISM
Let (Ω, ΣΩ , P ) be an abstract probability space and (Y, ΣY ) the measurable space of outputs. We
define a stochastic process F as a collection of Y-valued random variables:
                                       F := {F (x) : x ∈ X }.
A single realization of F ( · ; ω) : X → Y, is a function between the input space X and the output
space Y. We will denote with p = P ◦ F −1 the law of this stochastic process, so that for a subset
F ⊂ X Y,
                                 p(F) = P ({ω ∈ Ω : F (· ; ω) ∈ F}),
Thus, the notation f ∼ p(f ) corresponds to sampling a function F ( · ; ω) according to the law p.
The data-knowledge generating model. We assume the following data and knowledge DGP. First,
a sample, not directly observable function f : X → Y is sampled according to f ∼ p(f ). Given
f , the pair of context and targets datasets is generated according to DC , DT ∼ p(D|f ) and the
corresponding knowledge representation is generated according by K ∼ p(K|f ). Here p(D|f )
and p(K|f ) are the data and knowledge generating distributions respectively. Note, this model
assumes that knowledge representations and empirical data are conditionally independent given a
single realization f .
The somewhat unconventional notation of conditioning on functions f , through p(D|f ) and p(K|f )
serves to highlight the role of knowledge as expressing information about the true underlying func-
tional relationships between model inputs x ∈ X and its outputs y ∈ Y.
With a slight abuse of notation, we will denote by p(f, DC , K) the joint distribution on functions,
datasets and knowledge representations. The assumption of conditional independence tells us that it
factorise s as p(f, DC , K) = p(DC |f )p(K|f )p(f ).


                                                19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A.1.2     P ROOF OF T HEOREM 1
Theorem 1. Suppose that the generating process of datasets and knowledge representations is such
that datasets D and knowledge representations K are conditionally independent given the underly-
ing f . Let p(y|x, I) be the marginal posterior distribution of y, given x and additional information
I, where I ∈ {DC , (DC , K), f }. Then,
        Ep(f,DC ,K) [KL (p(y|x, f )||p(y|x, DC , K))] ≤ Ep(f,DC ) [KL (p(y|x, f )||p(y|x, DC ))] ,      (5)

Proof of Theorem 1 (informal). The proof is analogous to that presented by Ashman et al. (2024)
where K’s take a particular form of an additional sample of data generated according to the same
stochastic process as DC (see A.3, Meta-learning with meta-data for details).
We have that the LHS is equal to:
          Ep(f,DC ,K) [KL (p(y|x, f )||p(y|x, DC , K))]
                       = Ep(f,DC ,K) H [p(y|x, f )] − Ep(f,DC ,K) Ep(y|x,f ) [log p(y|x, DC , K)]       (6)

And that the RHS is equal to:
               Ep(f,DC ) [KL (p(y|x, f )||p(y|x, DC ))]
                         = Ep(f,DC ) H [p(y|x, f )] − Ep(f,DC ) Ep(y|x,f ) [log p(y|x, DC )]            (7)

We first consider the second term of (6).
− Ep(f,DC ,K) Ep(y|x,f ) [log p(y|x, DC , K)] =
= −Ep(f,DC ,K) Ep(y|x,f,DC ,K) [log p(y|x, DC , K)]                       (by conditional independence)
= −Ep(DC ,K)p(f |DC ,K) Ep(y|x,f,DC ,K) [log p(y|x, DC , K)]
= −Ep(DC ,K) Ep(y|DC ,K) [log p(y|x, DC , K)]                                                  (by Foubini)
= Ep(DC ,K) H [p(y|x, DC , K)]
≤ Ep(DC ) H [p(y|x, DC )]                                      (conditioning does not increase entropy)
The last expression is equal to the second term of (7):
           − Ep(f,DC ) Ep(y|x,f ) [log p(y|x, DC )]
           = −Ep(f,DC ) Ep(y|x,f,DC ) [log p(y|x, DC )]         (by conditional independence)
           = −Ep(DC ) Ep(f |DC ) Ep(y|x,f,DC ) [log p(y|x, DC )]
           = −Ep(DC ) Ep(y|x,DC ) [log p(y|x, DC )]                                 (by Foubini)
           = Ep(DC ) H [p(y|x, DC )]

Finally, we notice that the first terms of (6) and (7) are equal:
                          Ep(f,DC ,K) H [p(y|x, f )] = Ep(f,DC ) H [p(y|x, f )] ,
as the entropy term H [p(y|x, f )] does not depend on K. This concludes the proof.

A.1.3     A FURTHER THEORETICAL DISCUSSION
Strict inequality in Theorem 1. By examining the steps in the proof of Theorem 1, we note that
the inequality (5) can be made strict under the assumption of strictly positive mutual information
between target values y and knowledge K at the specified location x ∈ X , formalised as:
                          I(y; K|x) := H [p(y|x)] − Ep(K) H [p(y|x, K)] > 0                             (8)
Note, we do not require that for any observed context dataset DC , H [p(y|x, DC )] −
Ep(K) H [p(y|x, K, DC )] > 0. We may imagine special cases in which given a context dataset DC ,
any additional knowledge about the underlying function would be redundant. For instance, in the
noiseless setup of section 5.1.1, with f (x) = ax + sin(bx) + c, observing 3 distinct data points fully
determines the underlying values of the parameters a, b, and c; thus, any extra knowledge K would
be redundant in this case.


                                                      20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Proposition 1. Under the assumption of (8),
                       Ep(DC ,K) H [p(y|x, DC , K)] < Ep(DC ) H [p(y|x, DC )]                      (9)

Proof. Note, we can decompose Ep(DC ,K) H [p(y|x, DC , K)] as a sum of two terms:
          Ep(DC ,K) H [p(y|x, DC , K)] =
          = Ep(DC ,K) [1{DC = ∅}H [p(y|x, DC , K)] + 1{DC ̸= ∅}H [p(y|x, DC , K)]]

For the first term, we have:
      Ep(DC ,K) [1{DC = ∅}H [p(y|x, DC , K)]]
       = Ep(DC ,K) [1{DC = ∅}H [p(y|x, K)]]                        (p(y|x, ∅, K) = p(y|x, K))
       = Ep(f ) Ep(DC |f ) Ep(K|f ) [1{DC = ∅}H [p(y|x, K)]] (by conditional independence)
       = Ep(f ) P(DC = ∅|f )Ep(K|f ) H [p(y|x, K)]
       = P(DC = ∅)Ep(K) H [p(y|x, K)]                                                       (∗)
       < P(DC = ∅)H [p(y|x)]                                           (by the assumption (8))
       = Ep(DC ) [1{DC = ∅}H [p(y|x)]]
The transition in (∗) follows since the data generating process is such that the event 1{DC = ∅}
is independent of the particular choice of the data generating function f (e.g., in our experiments,
the number of available data points for conditioning is sampled uniformly from a range of values
regardless of the underlying function).
For the second term, since conditioning does not increase entropy, for any fixed dataset DC we have:
                           Ep(K|DC ) H [p(y|x, DC , K)] ≤ H [p(y|x, DC )] .
Multiplying both sides by 1{DC ̸= ∅} and taking the expectation with respect to p(DC ) yields:
       Ep(DC ,K) [1{DC ̸= ∅}H [p(y|x, DC , K)]] ≤ Ep(DC ) [1{DC ̸= ∅}H [p(y|x, DC )]] .
Combining the two inequalities gives us:
    Ep(DC ,K) H [p(y|x, DC , K)] =
    = Ep(DC ,K) [1{DC = ∅}H [p(y|x, DC , K)]] + Ep(DC ,K) [1{DC ̸= ∅}H [p(y|x, DC , K)]]
    < Ep(DC ) [1{DC = ∅}H [p(y|x)]] + Ep(DC ) [1{DC ̸= ∅}H [p(y|x, DC )]]
    = Ep(DC ) H [p(y|x, DC )]


Corollary 1. Suppose that the generating process of datasets and knowledge representations is
such that datasets D and knowledge representations K are conditionally independent given the
underlying f . Let p(y|x, I) be the marginal posterior distribution of y, given x and additional
information I, where I ∈ {DC , (DC , K), f }. Suppose that in addition, assumption (8) holds. Then,
    Ep(f,DC ,K) [KL (p(y|x, f )||p(y|x, DC , K))] < Ep(f,DC ) [KL (p(y|x, f )||p(y|x, DC ))] ,    (10)

Proof. It suffices to replace in the proof of Theorem 1 the inequality Ep(K|DC ) H [p(y|x, DC , K)] ≤
H [p(y|x, DC )] with the strict inequality from Proposition 1.

When can we expect assumption (8) to hold true? Given the above results, it is natural to consider
when can we expect I(y; K|x) > 0 to hold true. It may be in fact the case that K provides localised
information, e.g. K =“The values for x’s smaller than 0 should not exceed ...”. For this kind of
knowledge, if a given x does not fall into the region that K informs about (in the example, it is any
x ≥ 0), and without enforcing any further restrictions on the underlying process p(f ), (8) is may not
hold. However, instead of considering the impact of K’s at a specified location x, it is reasonable
to assume that a weaker conditions holds, i.e. that the conditional mutual information between the
targets y and knowledge K is positive in expectation across the domain X :
                                       Ep(x) [I(y; K|x)] > 0,


                                                 21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


in which case we obtain that:
  Ep(x,f,DC ,K) [KL (p(y|x, f )||p(y|x, DC , K))] < Ep(x,f,DC ) [KL (p(y|x, f )||p(y|x, DC ))] . (11)

We may also want to further break down the assumption of (8 with respect to the information gain
of K on the underlying y through f rather than directly. Due to the conditional independence of
observed values and knowledge given f , we have the following:
  I(y; K|x) = I(K; y|x)
            = H[p(K)] − Ep(y|x) H[p(K|x, y)]
              = H[p(K)] − Ep(f ) H [p(K|f )] + Ep(f ) H [p(K|f )] − Ep(y|x) H[p(K|x, y)]
              = H[p(K)] − Ep(f ) H [p(K|f )] + Ep(f ) H [p(K|f, x, y)] − Ep(y|x) H[p(K|x, y)] (†)
                                                                                             

              = H[p(K)] − Ep(f ) H [p(K|f )] −Ep(y|x) H[p(K|x, y)] − Ep(f ) H [p(K|f, x, y)]
                                                                                            
                |          {z              }           |               {z                   }
                            =I(K;f )                                        =I(K;f |x,y)

              = I(f ; K) − Ep(y|x) [I(f ; K|x, y)] ,

where we have used the conditional independence assumption in (†). Thus, I(y; K|x) > 0 if and
only if:
                             I(f ; K) − Ep(y|x) [I(f ; K|x, y)] > 0,                     (12)
where the above terms can be expressed as: I(f ; K) = H[p(f )] − Ep(K) H[p(f |K)] and
I(f ; K|x, y) = H[p(f |x, y)] − Ep(K) H[p(f |K, x, y)] . Therefore, for (12) to be true we require:

       1. Non-zero dependency between f and K. We must necessarily have that I(f ; K) > 0,
          which should trivially be true by the definition of knowledge as information about the
          ground truth data generating process.
       2. Sufficient informativeness of (x, y) about f . Note, Ep(y|x) [I(f ; K|x, y)] is always
          smaller or equal to I(f ; K). The condition of Ep(y|x) [I(f ; K|x, y)] < I(f ; K|x), im-
          plies that the observation noise of y’s should be low. High noise leads to higher
          Ep(y|x) [I(f ; K|x, y)] bringing it closer to I(f ; K) and thus causing I(y; K|x) to go to zero.

More information leads to stronger priors. In the experiments, we have observed what is quite
intuitive, namely, that providing the model with more information in knowledge representations
results in stronger priors and thus improved predictions. To formalise this claim we can assume
two competing knowledge-generating distributions: p(K|f ) and p̃(K|f ), with their corresponding
joints: p(f, DC , K) = p(f )p(DC |f )p(K|f ) and p̃(f, DC , K) = p(f )p(DC |f )p̃(K|f ). In this case
we have that :
           Z Z                       Z Z                                Z
p̃(y|x) =       p̃(y, f, K|x)dKdf =       p(f )p(y|x, f )p̃(K|f )dKdf = p(f )p(y|x, d)df = p(y|x).

Then, saying that p(K|f ) is (locally) more informative than p̃(K|f ) can be formalised as:
       H [p(y|x)] − Ep(K,DC ) H [p(y|x, DC , K)] > H [p(y|x)] − Ep̃(K,DC ) H [p̃(y|x, DC , K)] ⇔
                     Ep̃(K,DC ) H [p̃(y|x, DC , K)] > Ep(K,DC ) H [p(y|x, DC , K)] .                 (13)

Let,
                     ϵ(x) := Ep(f )p(DC |f )p(K|f ) [KL (p(y|x, f )||p(y|x, DC , K))]
and
                     ϵ̃(x) := Ep(f )p(DC |f )p̃(K|f ) [KL (p(y|x, f )||p̃(y|x, DC , K))] .

It is then straightforward to show that under the assumption of (13), ϵ(x) < ϵ̃(x), i.e. the posterior
predictive is closer to the ground-truth marginal p(y|x, f ) for knowledge generated according to the
more informative distribution.


                                                       22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A.2     E XTENDED R EMARKS , L IMITATIONS & F UTURE W ORK

A.2.1    K NOWLEDGE VS . DATA

We remind the reader that the primary objective of this paper is to consider a learning method
that allows domain experts to inject their prior knowledge of a given learning task in an intuitive and
flexible manner. In this regard, we elaborate on what distinguishes expert knowledge from empirical
(meta-) data.
In line with the goal of intuitive and flexible knowledge integration, D1) posits that the domain of
knowledge should be human-interpretable and, as such, distinct from the domain of empirical data.
Specifically, we argue that in many real-world applications, knowledge can be most naturally ex-
pressed in natural language, which allows for the articulation of task properties that may be difficult
to encode using strict mathematical equations, or additional data samples.
D2) asserts that, unlike empirical data, knowledge should consist only of true information. The
assumption of truthfulness in knowledge is a recurring theme throughout this paper and warrants
further clarification. Referring to our data and knowledge generation process, we assume the fol-
lowing: first, an underlying function f ∼ p(f ) is sampled. This function f generates both the
observable dataset DC ∼ p(D|f ) and the target dataset DT ∼ p(D|f ), with p(D|f ) introducing the
observational noise. An expert, with privileged insight into the data-generating process, provides
a description of the expected properties of f with K ∼ p(K|f ). Variability in p(K|f ) arises due
to two factors: 1) For a single function f , semantically equivalent representations may be used to
express the same properties–this is particularly relevant when K is represented in natural language;
2) Knowledge about a specific function f is typically partial–only a subset of the properties of the
underlying f may be reasonably expected to be known for a given task. The assumption of truth-
fulness also implies that, up to semantic equivalence, the process p(K|f ) should not be subject to
distributional shifts, unlike p(D|f ) or p(f ) itself.
Lastly, D3) states that the relationship between the information contained in K and the underlying
DGP of a task is assumed to be understood a priori by the domain expert. This implies that the
process p(K|f ) is, in itself, human-interpretable.
Assumptions D1) to D3) are in contrast with the use of additional data in hierarchical meta-learning
setups considered in prior works, where contextual data DC is supplemented by additional meta-
data about the task. For instance, (Iwata & Kumagai, 2022) condition the meta-learner on the fea-
ture names of the dataset DC . However, feature names alone do not convey meaningful, human-
interpretable information about the learning task that informs about the underlying relationship
between predictors and the target variable. While this relationship may be inferred during meta-
training, it would remain unknown to the human expert, violating D3). The relationships between
feature names and the underlying values of the variables is also likely to be subject to distribution
shifts, violating D2). As a result, even though conditioning on such additional data may lead to
improved predictive performance, it would not enable the intuitive steerability of inductive biases
during deployment.

A.2.2    C OLLECTION OF THE META - TRAINING DATASET.

In practice, a typical setup may begin with one or a few contextual datasets, each paired with ex-
pert knowledge about the underlying functional relationships expressed in K. This raises a natural
question: how can additional learning tasks required for informed meta-learning be obtained?
First, we acknowledge that the requirement of the additional training tasks is may be a limitation
of informed meta-learning in comparison to model-based strategies. In particular, the number of
training tasks required for successful knowledge integration via informed meta-learning grows with
the complexity of the knowledge representations, as illustrated in the synthetic experiment in Ap-
pendix A.8.2. For the informed meta-learner to understand the underlying meaning of knowledge,
it must be exposed to a variety of datasets corresponding to semantically distinct representations of
knowledge. Without semantic variation, learning a generalisable mapping between the knowledge
space and the hypothesis space of a model becomes impossible.
Given that interviewing a human domain expert to express knowledge about a large number of
related learning tasks may be impractical, we propose that LLMs, viewed as repositories of human


                                                  23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


knowledge, can be utilised for smart synthetic data and knowledge generation. While the exact
methods for generating such data safely and reliably are beyond the scope of this paper, we suggest
this as an avenue for future work. Nonetheless, synthetic data generation or augmentation is a viable
and promising strategy, as suggested by experiments 5.2.1 and 5.2.2.

A.2.3      E XAMPLE APPLICATIONS OF INFORMED META - LEARNING

The aim of the experiments presented in section 5.1.3 is not only to validate the empirical effective-
ness of our approach but also to illustrate its potential in practical, knowledge-rich domains where
natural language insights may improve low-data learning. We can draw parallels between these
experiments and other domains. To inspire future directions of applied research we have provided
additional example applications of informed meta-learning in Table A.2.

                    Table A.2: Example applications of informed meta-learning.

 Domain              Task type             Data                 Knowledge
 Finance             Economic / stock      GDP over time, or    Descriptions of trends e.g. “The stock
                     market forecasting    daily stock prices   prices for APPL are expected to con-
                                                                tinue the upward trend”.
 Healthcare          Disease               Patient health       Expected relationships between symp-
                     classification        measurements         toms and diseases e.g., “High blood
                                                                pressure is often linked to cardiovascu-
                                                                lar issues.”
 Medical Imaging     Disease detection     Images of lungs      Relationships between abnormalities
                     in X-rays                                  and diseases e.g., “Presence of shadows
                                                                in upper lung areas may suggest tuber-
                                                                culosis.”
 Energy              Demand                Hourly electricity   Expectations based on events or trends
                     forecasting           consumption data     e.g., “Energy demand is expected to
                                                                spike in winter months due to heating
                                                                needs.”
 Logistics           Delivery time         Delivery routes,     Expected effects of traffic and weather
                     estimation            traffic patterns     e.g., “Deliveries are typically delayed
                                                                during peak hours in urban areas.”
 Retail              Demand prediction     Sales data, time     Expected shopping behaviours e.g.,
                                           series               “Sales tend to increase during holi-
                                                                day seasons, especially for electronic
                                                                goods.”



A.3     E XTENDED R ELATED W ORK

The main body of this paper discusses prior work that is related with respect to achieving the goal of
knowledge integration. Here we discuss related work from the perspective of the proposed method
of informed meta-learning and the concrete instantiation of INPs.
Conditional generative models. The goal of deep generative models (DGMs) is to learn a neural
approximation of the distribution of the data p(x) over a space X , most commonly the space of
images. Popular DGMs include, VAEs Kingma & Welling (2014), GANs Goodfellow et al. (2014),
and diffusion models Ho et al. (2020); Song & Ermon (2019). Their conditional versions, e.g.
CVAEs Sohn et al. (2015), CGANs Mirza & Osindero (2014), and conditional diffusion models Ho
& Salimans (2022); Ramesh et al. (2022) model the conditional distribution p(x | c), where c is
an additional conditioning variable, e.g. a class label or a text sequence. A similar analogy can be
drawn between NPs and INPs which, as meta-learners, bring the idea of (conditional) generative
modelling to the space of predictive functions f : X → Y. The goal of NPs is to model the prior
distribution over functions p(f ); as well as the posterior predictive distribution p(f | DC ). Similarly
to CVAEs and CGANs, INPs introduce an additional conditioning variable–the expert knowledge,
and model the conditional distribution p(f | K), guiding the prior over the space of functions,
such that the informed predictions, dictated by p(f | DC , K) are concentrated around the region of
functions agreeing with both the observed dataset DC and the expert knowledge K.


                                                   24
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Multimodal deep learning. Mulitmodal deep learning refers to deep learning methods that can
process and relate information from multiple modalities simultaneously, such as image, audio, and
text. Our framework assumes that the datasets D and knowledge representations K may belong to
two different data modalities (e.g. D contains input-output pairs for 1-D regression and K contains
a natural language description of the expected shape of the regression curve). This places informed
meta-learning in the area of multimodal methods. What makes it distinct is that standard multimodal
strategies (e.g. Ngiam et al. (2011); Srivastava & Salakhutdinov (2012); Ding & Tao (2015); Shi
et al. (2021b;a)) consider finding a predictive function f , where X is a multimodal input space
X = X1 × . . . × XM , with each Xj , j ∈ [M ] corresponding to a different data modality. In informed
meta-learning, the learned functions f are typically unimodal, but the learning algorithm to fit each
function is conditioned on the knowledge representation K, belonging to a different modality.
Zero and Few-shot learning. As presented in the experimental section, informed meta-learning en-
ables sensible zero-shot predictions guided by expert knowledge. For instance, in multi-class image
classification, K may contain a list of characteristic attributes of each class or class-wide descrip-
tions in natural language. Seemingly similar ideas of utilising side information about each class for
zero-shot learning have been explored in works of Al-Halah et al. (2016); Elhoseiny et al. (2017);
Paz-Argaman et al. (2020). In contrast to these methods, informed meta-learning does not focus on
zero-shot learning only, but on the process of integrating external knowledge (e.g. knowledge about
what are the characteristic features of each class) with observed few-shot or zero-shot (DC = ∅)
data sample. In the image classification domain, the idea of combining sample images with zero-
shot attribute information was considered by Tsai & Salakhutdinov (2017) in application to one-shot
learning, and extended by Schönfeld et al. (2019) to few-shot learning. None of these works, how-
ever, consider the meta-learning setup of N -way, k-shot classification and require that the class
attribute information is always present at training and test time, as it implicitly defines class labels.
In our setup, the role of class information contained in K lies in enhancing model performance by
emphasising which visual features are most distinctive for a given class, enabling zero-shot classifi-
cation as a by-product. Contrary to Schönfeld et al. (2019), the additional information contained in
K is not necessary for few-shot predictions on previously unseen classes.
Meta-learning with meta-data. Several studies considered applying meta-learning to hierarchical
datasets that include empirical data alongside corresponding metadata, such as feature names Iwata
& Kumagai (2022), task-specific parameters Kaddour et al. (2020), or labels Tseng et al. (2022).
In these works, metadata is used in conjunction with empirical data as additional inputs defining
task similarities. While these works share similarities in terms of the data structure and the resulting
method, their motivations and goals are distinct. For instance, Kaddour et al. (2020) extend active
learning principles to meta-learning, allowing the algorithm to select which task to learn next based
on the task metadata. Huang et al. (2022); Belbute-Peres et al. (2021); Kovacs et al. (2022), apply
meta-learning to solve differential equations given a specific parametrisation. Another stream of
work utilise s additional data to improve performance and generalisation of meta-learners: Iwata
& Kumagai (2022) leverage feature descriptions, and Tseng et al. (2022) use multi-class agricul-
tural labels. Denevi et al. (2020; 2022) study theoretically the conditions under which conditional
meta-learning is advantageous to non-conditional meta-learning in the specific case of gradient-
based meta-learning and with hypothesis space restricted to linear functions of the input. A recent
work by Ashman et al. (2024) conditions the learner on an additional set of datasets, which are
known a priori to have been generated by the same stochastic process as the context and target data.
This approach aligns with informed meta-learning–it leverages the known relationship between the
knowledge representation, e.g. a set of extra datasets, and the underlying DGP of DC . Our work
generalises to arbitrary representations of knowledge, moving beyond structured numerical forms,
with a particular focus on human-interpretable representations, such as natural language.
In contrast to the existing works, the motivation of this paper is not on designing a new meta-
learning method suitable for hierarchically structured learning tasks. Instead, we view meta-learning
as means to enable human experts inject their prior knowledge about a given learning problem into
the learning algorithm, in an intuitive and more flexible way than it is possible with conventional,
model-based methods. Further discussion on the differences between informed meta-learning and
meta-learning with hierarchically structured datasets are discussed in A.2.1.

A.4   INP M ODEL A RCHITECTURE

The architecture of INPs consists of the following key components:


                                                   25
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


        • A data encoder, hθe,D : (X × Y)       P → R that takes in pairs (xi , yi ) and produces an
                                                  ∗        d

          order-invariant representation r = i hθe,D (xi , yi ).
        • A knowledge encoder, hθe,K , a map from the knowledge representation space to the latent
          space Rd that takes in the knowledge inputs K and extracts a latent knowledge vector
          k = hθe,K (K).
        • An aggregator, a, that combines the data representation, r, and the latent knowledge rep-
          resentation, k, into one representation that parametrises the latent distribution qθe . We take
          qθe (z | r, k) := N (z; µz , σz ), where (µz , σz ) = a(r, k).
        • A conditional decoder, gθd , that takes in samples of the global latent variable z ∼
          qθe (z | r, k) and the new target location x to output the predictions parametrised by
          pθd (y | x, z) := N (y; µx , σx ), with (µx , σx ) = gθd (x, z).
In all experiments any MLP is implemented with the GELU non-linearity Hendrycks & Gimpel
(2016). Number and dimensions of hidden layers are reported individually for each experiment in
section A.6. We experiment with different forms of aggregation, a:
      1. sum & MLP: a(r, k) = MLP(r + k),
      2. concat & MLP: a(r, k) = MLP([r||k]),
      3. MLP & FiLM: a(r, k) = FiLM(k) [MLP(r)]. We use the idea of modulation parameters
         introduced by Perez et al. (2018). Here a is an MLP whose parameters are modulated with
         a modulated with the outputs of hθe,K .
We find that in most cases, the first, least complex option performs the best.

A.5     INP T RAINING

INPs are trained in an episodic fashion over a distribution of learning tasks consisting of context and
target datasets, and associated knowledge representations. Denoting by rC and rT the context and
target data representations and by k the knowledge embedding vector of a single task, we derive the
evidence lower bound via:
                                       Z
               pθ (yT | xT , rC , k) = pθd (yT |xT , z)qθe (z | rC , k)dz                          (14)

                                                            qθ (z | rC , k)
                                       Z
                                     = pθd (yT | xT , z) e                   qθ (z | rT , k)dz     (15)
                                                            qθe (z | rT , k) e
                                                                         qθ (z | rC , k)

                                     = Eqθe (z|rT ,k) pθd (yT | xT , z) e                          (16)
                                                                         qθe (z | rT , k)
And therefore, by Jensen we obtain:
log pθ (yT | xT , rC , k) ≥ Eqθe (z|rT ,k) [log pθd (yT | xT , z)] − DKL (qθe (z | rT , k) || qθe (z | rC , k))
The parameters of the model are learned by maximising the above ELBO for randomly sampled
batches of tasks. During training, we use one sample of qθe (z | rT , k) to form a MC estimate of
the ELBO. For evaluation, we use 32 samples. Additionally, during training, we randomly mask
knowledge by setting k = 0, the frequency of masking is a hyperparameter of the model.

A.6     E XPERIMENTAL DETAILS

Throughout all experiments we use the Adam optimise r Kingma & Ba (2015). During training,
we use validation-based early stopping. All experiments were run on a machine with an AMD
Epyc Milan 7713 CPU, 120GB RAM, and using a single NVIDIA A6000 Ada Generation GPU
accelerator with 48GB VRAM.

A.6.1    1-D SINUSOIDAL REGRESSION ( SECTION 5.1)
For each task, context and target data points are sampled according to the following process. A
function f is sampled from the family of sinusoidal functions with trend and bias, f (x) = ax +
sin(bx) + c. We also introduce a Gaussian observational noise, s.t. yi = f (xi ) + ϵi , ϵi ∼ N (0, 0.2).
The parameters a, b, c are randomly sampled according to: a ∼ U [−1, 1], b ∼ U [0, 6], c ∼ U [−1, 1].
For each task, the context and target points are uniformly sampled from the range [−2, 2]. The


                                                      26
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Table A.3: Average negative log-likelihood for different knowledge types. Results averaged across
500 testing tasks with standard errors of the mean provided in the brackets.

                  K             ∅               {a}             {b}               {c}             {a, b}        {b, c}        {a, c}
                  n
                  0             292.7 (225.0)   196.2 (173.4)   80.9 (122.8)      222.1 (230.6)   43.1 (70.0)   49.3 (85.8)   106.8 (96.0)
                  1             218.1 (218.3)   165.9 (170.9)   47.8 (94.7)       192.6 (203.1)   30.3 (57.1)   40.6 (78.4)   145.1 (149.7)
                  3             97.4 (139.1)    75.3 (113.0)    10.8 (43.7)       88.7 (146.5)    3.1 (26.4)    8.9 (38.6)    64.8 (94.5)
                  5             47.0 (110.3)    34.6 (82.3)     -1.6 (27.4)       45.8 (104.6)    -3.4 (21.4)   -1.5 (26.5)   31.7 (77.9)
                  10            8.5 (52.2)      7.2 (49.6)      -9.1 (12.8)       7.9 (54.8)      -9.3 (11.8)   -9.1 (12.5)   4.5 (40.6)
                  15            2.2 (33.6)      -0.0 (30.0)     -9.0 (15.4)       1.5 (33.3)      -9.9 (11.9)   -9.3 (14.4)   -0.3 (28.5)


number of context points n ranges uniformly between 0 and 10; the number of targets, m = 100.
We let K to encode the value of two, one, or none (K = ∅) of the parameters a, b, or c.
The data encoder, hθe,D , is implemented as a 3-layer MLP. The knowledge encoder, hθe,K , is imple-
mented with the DeepSet architecture Zaheer et al. (2017), made of two 2-layer MLPs. Each element
of the set is represented by a one-hot encoding of the parameter type with its value appended at the
end. The decoder is a 4-layer MLP. We set the hidden dimension, d = 128 and use the sum & MLP
method for the aggregator, a. We use a learning rate of 1e-3 and set the batch size to 64. During
training, knowledge is masked at rate 0.3.
In section 5.1 we use this setup to demonstrate and discuss the impact of expert knowledge on
enhanced data-efficiency, reduction in uncertainty, and robustness to distribution shifts. Fig. A.1
shows sample predictions under 0, 1, or 3 observed data points and different formats of knowledge
K. Table A.3 provides a detailed summary of the negative log-likelihood by knowledge type.
                                                                               Format of K
                                    ∅             {c}            {a}                 {b}           {a, b}          {a, c}          {b, c}
                       n=0
 Number of context points
                       n=1
                       n=3


Figure A.1: Sample predictions under varying formats of knowledge. Knowledge about the value
of the slope or frequency of oscillations provides global information about the overall shape of the
function. Observing additional data points anchors the curves in the xy-coordinate system. Based
on a qualitative investigation we conclude that the INP successfully learned how to integrate prior
knowledge with observed data points.

A.6.2                            I NFORMED W EATHER P REDICTIONS ( SECTION 5.2.1)
We use the sub-hourly temperature dataset from the U.S. Climate Reference Network (USCRN)2 .
The data contains values of the air temperature measured at regular 5-minute intervals. For each
task, the context and target datasets consist of measurements from one day. Training, validation, and
testing collections of tasks are created by randomly selecting 507, 108, and 110 days, respectively,
between the years 2021 and 2022 in Aleknagik, Alaska. For each task, the target dataset consists
of all 288 measurements in the 24h range. Context observations are sampled by first uniformly
sampling 10 data points and then selecting the chronologically first n observations where n ∼
U [0, 10]. We perform independent experiments with two formats of knowledge:
                   2
                            https://www.ncei.noaa.gov/access/crn/qcdatasets.html


                                                                                  27
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A: For each task, knowledge K is a vector encoding two values: the minimum temperature and the
maximum temperature on the day. In this setup, the knowledge encoder, hθe,K , is a simple 2-layer
MLP .

B: For each task, knowledge K is a synthetically generated “weather forecast” presented in a natural
language format. For illustrative purposes, these weather descriptions were generated with GPT-4
OpenAI et al. (2023). In total, 726 descriptions, one per day were generated. The prompt used
contains instructions to generate 2 sentences mimicking a weather forecast, based on 48 values
sampled at 30-minute intervals from the ground truth temperature values. We use the following
prompt:

   System: You are given a vector of values representing the temperature
   for the next 24h at 30-minute intervals, starting at 12 am. Your
   task is to present the weather forecast according to these values.
   Keep it to max 2 sentences. Use descriptive words to refer to the
   times of the day, e.g. morning, afternoon, evening.
   User: <<Temperature values>>

There are two reasons for using LLM-generated weather forecast instead of real ones: 1) availability
of such data for research purposes not requiring web scraping; 2) the alignment of weather forecasts
with the observed values available as our task-specific data. Real weather forecasts may contain
a high degree of noise due to the predicted temperatures diverging from the recorded values. To
learn a faithful mapping between the knowledge space and the function space that aligns with our
human understanding, we require that information contained in the representations of knowledge
is in agreement with the underlying data generating process. To ensure that the output of GPT-
4 indeed aligns with the observed values, we have manually examined a random sample of the
generated weather forecasts and found them to be of high quality.
In this setup, the knowledge encoder hθe,K is implemented with a RoBERTa language model Liu
et al. (2020) with all weights frozen except for the layer norm weights, which are tuned during
the end-to-end training. The latent knowledge representation k is obtained as a pooled sentence
embedding. Here, we use the last hidden state of the CLS token.
For both setups A and B, the data encoder hθe,D is implemented as a 3-layer MLP and the de-
coder g as a 4-layer MLP. We used the MLP & FiLM aggregator a. We set the hidden dimension,
d = 128. We use a learning rate of 1e-3 and set the batch size to 64. The knowledge representation
is randomly masked at a rate 0.3 by setting k = 0. Vanilla NPs are known to underfit context obser-
vations and underestimate the variance, which became apparent with this more complex and noisy
dataset. To mitigate this issue, in this experiment, we have employed multi-head cross-attention
duringPthe encoding of the data representation, r, as proposed by Kim et al. (2019). Precisely,
        n
r = i=1 Atti hθe,D (xi , yi ), where Att = MultiHead(Q, K, V ), with Q being a matrix of target
inputs, K a matrix of context inputs and V a matrix consisting of individual data representations
ri = hθe,D (xi , yi ). We use 4 attention heads.
See the main body of the paper for a discussion of the results. Figure A.2, shows sample tasks and
their corresponding GPT-4 generated weather descriptions.

A.6.3    F EW- SHOT AND ZERO - SHOT IMAGE CLASSIFICATION WITH CUB-200-2011 ( SECTION
         5.2.2)
We apply our model to zero and few-shot classification using the CUB-200-2011 dataset Wah et al.
(2011). It contains 11,788 images of 200 subcategories belonging to birds. Following Akata et al.
(2015), we use 100 bird categories for training, 50 for validation, and 50 for testing. We generate
the labels for N -way classification tasks by choosing N random classes at each training step and
arbitrarily assigning the labels 0, . . . , N − 1 to each. For each task, the number of shots k, i.e. the
number of example images per class ranges uniformly between 0 and 10. The target set consists of
20 images per class. We perform independent experiments with three formats of knowledge:

A: Knowledge K represents attributes characteristic for a given class, e.g. wing span, feather color,
shape of the beak. This is obtained by a class-wide average of the binary attribute vectors from


                                                   28
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                   NP                       INP (A)                    INP (B)

                     0
                                                                                                          The night will start off cold with temperatures falling to -8.9°C
                                                                                                          by late morning, and then gradually rise to a high of 1.6°C in
                                                                                                          the late afternoon. Temperatures will start to drop again in the
            ≠10
                                                                                                          evening, reaching -3.1°C by midnight.

                    10
                                                                                                          The night will start off chilly with temperatures around 0.5°C,
                                                                                                          but it will drop to -1.7°C by early morning. The day will
Temperature [¶ C]


                     0                                                                                    gradually warm up, reaching a high of 5.1°C in the afternoon
                                                                                                          before cooling off to 1.0°C by midnight.


                                                                                                          The night will start off cold with temperatures falling to -16.8°C
            ≠10                                                                                           by dawn, and the day will continue to get colder, reaching a
                                                                                                          chilly -23.0°C by midnight. Afternoon temperatures will hover
            ≠20                                                                                           around -18.5°C, so bundle up if you're heading out.


                                                                                                          The night will be bitterly cold with temperatures around -18
            ≠10
                                                                                                          degrees, gradually increasing to -14 degrees by late afternoon.
                                                                                                          The temperature will slightly drop again to -15 degrees in the
            ≠20                                                                                           evening, warming up a bit to -14 degrees at midnight.
                         2400 0600 1200 1800 2400   2400 0600 1200 1800 2400   2400 0600 1200 1800 2400

                                                          Time of day

                         Figure A.2: Sample predictions and the GPT-4 generated “weather forecasts” for setup B.

the original dataset associated with each image. Knowledge representations, K, are constructed by
stacking all N class attribute vectors into a N × 312 tensor. In this setup, the knowledge encoder,
hθe,K , is a simple 2-layer MLP.

B: Knowledge K represents the average per class, natural language descriptions of the N classes.
These are obtained by averaging sentence embedding of individual image captions belonging to the
given class. We use human-generated captions as collected in Reed et al. (2016) and encode them
using CLIP embeddings Fu et al. (2022). Averaged per class text embeddings are then stacked to
form a N × dmodel , where dmodel = 512. In this setup, the knowledge encoder, hθe,K is a 2-layer
MLP.

C: We use GPT-4 to generate individual descriptions of each class based on the human-generated
image captions. We present 5 randomly sampled image captions pertaining to one class and prompt
GPT-4 to generate short descriptions of features characteristic of the given bird breed. To generate
the class descriptions, we use the following prompt format:

                    System:  You are given 5 descriptions of a bird breed. Based on this
                    information generate one comprehensive description of the bird
                    breed. Keep it short and informative.
                    User: <<List of 5 randomly sampled image captions>>

In this setup, the knowledge encoder, hθe,K is the CLIP text encoder. The embeddings of class
descriptions are obtained as the average of all outputs from the last layer of CLIP. After stacking
them together in a N × dmodel tensor, they are passed through a linear projection layer.

For all setups, A, B, and C, the data encoder, hθe,D is implemented with a frozen CLIP vision
model, followed by a linear projection layer. Following the approach of Garnelo et al. (2018a), we
only aggregate over inputs of the same class. The aggregated class-specific representations are then
concatenated to form the final representation of size N × d. We set d = 512. We use the sum & 2-
layer MLP aggregation a. We modify the decoder to return the logits of the categorical distribution.
For a N -way task with class labels c1 , . . . , cN , we define p(y | x, z) as:
                                                         exp(−wjT x)
                                  pθd (y = cj | x, z) = P          T
                                                                          ,                               [w1 , . . . , wN ] = gθd (z), z ∈ RN ×d ,
                                                         j ′ exp(−wj ′ x)

where x is a CLIP image embedding from the target set and gθd is a 2-layer MLP. In
our experiments, we use the Hugging Face implementation of the CLIP ViT-B/32 model


                                                                                                    29
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


(https://huggingface.co/openai/clip-vit-base-patch32). We use a learning rate or 1e-4, batch size
of 32 and knowledge is randomly masked at rate 0.5. For setups A and B, the INP model is trained
end-to-end. For setups C, the weights of the INP model from the trained weights of the already
trained, plain NP, and all model components, including the CLIP text encoder, are fine-tuned. As
opposed to setup B, in setup C fine-tuning of the CLIP text encoder was necessary to ensure align-
ment between the class-wide descriptions and image representations. Empirically, the two-stage
training resulted in improved convergence.
For the empirical results and short discussion, refer to the main body of the paper. In Table A.4 we
present sample human-generated captions (used in setup B) and their corresponding GPT-generated
class descriptions (used in setup C).

A.7   U NCERTAINTY Q UANTIFICATION WITH INP S

One particularly appealing property of Neural Process, which motivated their choice for the basis of
our informed meta-learner, is the ability to sample from the posterior instead of returning a single
point estimate. This allows us to measure the reduction in model uncertainty given prior expert
knowledge and/or observed data. We are mostly interested in measuring the epistemic, rather than
aleatoric uncertainty.
Aleatoric uncertainty refers to the notion of randomness seen as the variability in the outcomes
which is due to inherently random, unpredictable effects. As opposed to this, epistemic uncertainty
refers to uncertainty caused by the lack of knowledge about the true relationship between model
inputs and outputs. By observing data, or by inserting prior knowledge into the model, the epistemic
uncertainty is reduced.
A natural choice for measuring the epistemic uncertainty would be the (conditional) entropy. By
comparing H[p(f )] with H[p(f | K)] or H[p(f | DC )] we can measure the impact of prior expert
knowledge or observed data on the reduction in the epistemic uncertainty for a single learning task
(for notational convenience, we omit the dependence of p on θ, making the expressions applicable
both to the ground truth DGP and the approximate pθ ). However, in INPs, we only have access to
samples from the variational distribution and since the decoder is implemented as a neural network,
evaluating the distribution over functions f is not possible directly. Instead, we need to resolve to
measure the uncertainty in the observation space. Thus, we are interested in computing
                             H[p(y | x, I)],    I ∈ {K, DC , K ∪ DC , ∅}                           (17)
at a particular location x ∈ X in our input space, which can be then, for instance, averaged across
uniformly distributed points in X . The quantity in (17) is known as the predictive uncertainty. To
approximate (17) for an input x, we rely on Monte-Carlo estimation by sampling S functions based
on our variational decoder.
                             Z
        H[p(y | x, I)] := − p(y | x, I) log p(y | x, I)dy
                            Z  Z                               Z
                       =−          p(y | x, f )p(f | I)df log      p(y | x, f )p(f | I)df dy
                                    S
                                                      !         S
                                                                                  !
                                1X                           1X
                            Z
                       ≈−                         (s)
                                       p(y | x, f ) log                       (s)
                                                                   p(y | x, f ) dy             (18)
                                S s=1                        S s=1

For each sample f (s) , p(y | x, f (s) ) has a closed-form expression–in the case of regression it is
modelled with a normal distribution. Thus, (18) can be computed by numerically approximating the
integral in the last line. Note that, since predictive uncertainty is measured in the observation space,
it also encompasses the uncertainty associated with the observational noise. Depeweg et al. (2018)
suggest that (17) can be decomposed as:
                     H[p(y | x, I)] = I(y, f | x, I) + Ef ∼p(f |I) [H[p(y | x, f )]]               (19)
                                      |     {z     } |              {z            }
                                          epistemic               aleatoric

The second part, Ef ∼p(f |I) [H[p(y | x, f )]], is the average entropy when the predictive function
is known, thus can be interpreted as the aleatoric uncertainty. If we model p(y | x, f ) with a


                                                      30
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


       Table A.4: Example images, image captions and GPT-generated class descriptions.

        Sample Images                  Sample image captions                 GPT-generated class description

                            1. A large bird with a white belly, black        This bird breed is a medium to
                               and white wings with a long beak.             large size, characterised by its
                            2. This bird is white and grey in colour         grey body feathers, contrasting
                               with a curved beak, and black eye             white belly and face, black back
                               rings.                                        and wings, distinctive black eye
                            3. A large bird with a white belly and face,     rings, and a long, downward-
                               black back and wings, and peach bill.         curving peach bill.
                            4. Bird has gray body feathers, white
                               breast feather, and long beak
                            5. A medium sized bird with black wings,
                               and a bill that curves downwards


                            1. This big bird has a sharp beak and has        This bird breed is large and
                               black covering its body.                      entirely black with sparse
                            2. An all black bird with a distinct thick,      plumage, characterised by its
                               rounded bill.                                 thick brown beak, long tail, and
                            3. This entirely black bird has long and         wide rectrices relative to its
                               wide rectrices relative to the size of its    body size.
                               body.
                            4. A black bird with a long tail and large
                               beak.
                            5. This black bird has sparse plumage and
                               a thick brown beak.


                            1. This goofy looking bird sports webbed         This bird breed is characterised
                               feet and a bright orange bill, with           by its black body, webbed feet,
                               piercing white eyes and a dull coat of        a bright orange bill with an in-
                               gray.                                         verted feather curl at the base,
                            2. A black bird with a small, orange beak        piercing white eyes with a dis-
                               and a inverted feather curl at the base       tinctive stripe, and a dull grey
                               of the beak.                                  coat.
                            3. A black body, white eye with stripe next
                               to it, and an orange bill are on this bird.
                            4. This black bird has a orange bill with
                               hair coming out of it, small pupils, and
                               a white line across its face.
                            5. This bird has wings that are black and
                               has an orange bill


                            1. This is a black bird with a white spotted     This bird breed features a black
                               belly and a white eye.                        body with a white and black
                            2. This bird is black with white and has a       spotted underbelly, a white and
                               very short beak.                              grey speckled chest, a black
                            3. This bird has wings that are black and        crown, bright white eyes with
                               white and has a small bill                    very small pupils, and a short,
                            4. This small bird is white with black           pointed, black and orange bill.
                               spots, a white neck, and black around
                               its eyes.
                            5. This is a short stocky bird with webbed
                               feet, it is mostly white with black wings
                               and black speckles throughout.


                                                 31
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


normal distribution, H[p(y | x, f )] has a closed-form expression, 21 log(σ(x)2πe), where σ 2 (x) is
the variance at location x.
The first part, I(y, f | x, I), representing the information gain can be interpreted as the epistemic
uncertainty of interest. This quantity can be computed as the difference of H[p(y | x, I)] and
Ef ∼p(f |I) [H[p(y | x, f )]], where both quantities are easy to estimate, as discussed above.


A.8     A DDITIONAL E XPERIMENTS

A.8.1    M ODEL PERFORMANCE VS . NUMBER OF TRAINING TASKS

Setup: We follow the same setup as in the illustrative experiment from section 5.1.1. We cre-
ate multiple training collection of tasks with a varying number of total training tasks, N train ∈
{25, 50, 75, 100, 200, 1000}, with the upper limit being the number of tasks used in the original
experiment. For each training collection of tasks, we train independent INP and NP models. The
INP models receive information about two, one or none of the parameters a, b or c via knowledge
representations, K. All models are validated and tested on the same collection of validation / testing
tasks.

                                           Performance on training tasks              Performance on test tasks
                                 0                                                                                     N train
                              −50                                                                                      25
                                                                                                                       50
                              −100                                                                                     75
                                                                                                                       100
             Log Likelihood


                              −150
                                                                                                                       200
                              −200                                                                                     1000

                              −250                                                                                     model
                                                                                                                       INP
                              −300
                                                                                                                       NP
                              −350

                              −400
                                     0 1      3    5          10           15   0 1    3    5          10         15
                                                                    Number of context points


Figure A.3: Log likelihood of target data vs. number of context data points (higher is better).
Comparison across varying number of all training tasks, N train . Left - model performance on
training tasks, Right - model performance on test tasks.


Figure A.3 shows the performance of all models on training (left) and testing (right) tasks. We
observe that: 1) Both for the NP and INP models, as the number of training tasks decreases the
performance gap between training and testing tasks increases. We note that this performance gap
is already at a (subjectively) reasonable level with only as few as 75 training tasks. 2) For all
INP models trained with N train ≥ 50 tasks we the additional knowledge presented for each task
improves the performance over the plain, uninformed NP. When the number of training tasks is too
small, here N train = 25, we observe a “knowledge overfitting” effect. With insufficient number
of training tasks the INP is unable to appropriately capture the relationship between knowledge and
empirical data, and thus fails to generalise to new, previously unseen tasks and their corresponding,
also previously unseen, knowledge representations.
Take-away: We tested the robustness of the INP model to the reduction in the number of training
tasks. We showed that in the experimental setup of section 5.1.1, adding external knowledge con-
tinues to deliver noticeable performance gains over the uninformed NP when dropping from 1000
to as few as 50 training tasks. We also noted that with too few training tasks, the INP may fail to
generalise. To prevent this effect from occurring in real-world deployment, we advise testing the
model on held-out validation tasks and comparing its performance against an uninformed baseline,
monitoring the knowledge overfitting effect. We note that in real-world applications, more training
tasks can be obtained by (semi-)synthetic data generation, augmenting the size of the meta-training
set to improve model generalisation.


                                                                                32
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A.8.2                  M ODEL PERFORMANCE AND KNOWLEDGE COMPLEXITY

Setup. To assess the impact of knowledge complexity on the efficacy of learning the relationship
between knowledge and the model hypothesis space, we again follow the same setup as in section
5.1.1. We create multiple training collection of tasks with a varying number of total training tasks,
N train ∈ {25, 50, 75, 100, 200, 1000}. All models are validated and tested on the same collection of
validation / testing tasks. For each setting of N train we train an uninformed NP and 3 independent
INP models with different knowledge representations used during training:
                     • Mabc is a model where for each task its corresponding knowledge encodes, at random, one
                       of the three parameters, a, b, or c;
                     • Mab is a model where for each task its corresponding knowledge encodes, at random, one
                       of the two parameters: a or b (the value of c is never revealed);
                     • Mb is a model where for each task its corresponding knowledge encodes the value of a
                       (the values of parameters a and c are never revealed).
Knowledge representations are constructed by one-hot encoding the type of the revealed parame-
ter with its value appended at the end. We note that for the INP models Mb , Mab , Mabc , the
complexity of knowledge representations gradually increases; the knowledge space is 1, 2 and 3 di-
mensional, respectively. We hypothesise that as the complexity of the knowledge space grows, more
training tasks are needed to effectively learn the mapping from knowledge representations to prior
distributions over functions. Given the same number of training tasks, the INP model Mab needs
to learn how to disentangle the information about the function’s oscillations (parameter b) from the
information about the function’s slope (parameter a). Model Mabc additionally needs to discover
the meaning of knowledge about the intercept (parameter c). Therefore, we expect that, given the
same number of context points and the same information contained in K, the relative performance
gains of the INP models Mb , Mab , Mabc over the uniformed NP model should decrease as the
complexity of knowledge space increases.

                                         Mb                           Mab                               Mabc
                       0
                                                                                                                         N train
                    −50                                                                                                  25
                                                                                                                         50
                    −100                                                                                                 75
                                                                                                                         100
   Log Likelihood


                    −150
                                                                                                                         200
                    −200                                                                                                 1000

                    −250                                                                                                 model
                                                                                                                         INP
                    −300
                                                                                                                         NP
                    −350

                    −400
                           0 1   3   5        10   15   0 1   3   5         10       15   0 1   3   5          10   15
                                                              Number of context points

Figure A.4: Log-Likelihood of target data vs. number of context data points (higher is better).
Comparison across a varying number of tasks used for training N train . Complexity of knowledge
space grows from left to right. All INP models are presented with the same knowledge about each
task–the value of the parameter b.

Figure A.4 shows the log-likelihood of the target data evaluated on 500 testing tasks. For every
INP model at test time we reveal the same information via knowledge representations—the value
of the parameter b. Firstly, we observe the same two effects as in experiment A.8.1. With more
training tasks, model performance improves. 2) An insufficient number of training tasks may lead
to the “knowledge overfitting” effect; here at N train = 25 the INP performs worse than the NP.
Secondly, we look at the performance gap between the INP and the NP (the gap between solid and
dashed lines). We observe that as the complexity of the knowledge space grows (left to right) the
performance gap between the INP and the NP decreases. This is summarised through the ∆AUC
metric, presented in the Table A.5. From Figure A.4 we can also conclude that the more complex
the the knowledge space is the more training tasks are needed to effectively train an INP model. For
instance, performance of the INP model Mb trained with N train = 75 tasks is comparable to the
performance of the INP Mabc trained with N train = 100 tasks.


                                                                        33
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Table A.5: Average relative performance improvement (%) between informed and uninformed pre-
dictions. The performance gains become smaller as the complexity of the knowledge space grows
(top to bottom). N train is the number of training tasks used. INP performs better than the NP for
all settings of N train ≥ 50 indicating effective transfer between knowledge representations and
functional priors. INP overfits with not enough training tasks, here at N train = 25.

                  N train    1000     500      200         100      75      50       25
                  model
                  Mb        81.74   83.51    64.52         79.1   44.78   39.71    -8.52
                  Mab        65.3   67.45    43.46        54.66   22.41    6.67   -18.67
                  Mabc      71.76   57.51     2.02        26.46    9.48    8.05     -5.6



Take-away: The above experiment confirms our hypothesis about the complexity of the information
conveyed in knowledge representations and the hardness of learning the mapping between knowl-
edge representations and the model hypothesis space. As the complexity of knowledge increases,
more training tasks are needed to effectively learn the relationship between knowledge representa-
tions and the functional priors.

A.8.3    C ORRELATION IN TRAINING DATA AND KNOWLEDGE DISENTANGLEMENT
Setup: For each task, context and target data points are sampled according to a similar process as in
the experiments from section 5.1.1. A function f is sampled from the family of sinusoidal functions
with a linear trend, f (x) = ax + sin(bx). As previously, we also introduce a Gaussian observational
noise, s.t. yi = f (xi ) + ϵi , ϵi ∼ N (0, 0.2). In this experiment. we simulate a scenario in which the
training data exhibits a potentially spurious correlation. We sample the parameters a and b from a
multivariate Gaussian,

                                         a             0    1 σ
                                             ∼N           ,
                                         b             3    σ 2
We create 6 training and validation collection of tasks, one for each value of the covariance between
a and b, σ ∈ {0.0, 0.3, 0.6, 0.9, 1.2, 1.4}. We then train 6 independent INP and NP models. For the
INP models we let K encode the value of one of the two parameters a or b. The number of context
points n ranges uniformly between 0 and 10; the number of targets is set to m = 100. The testing
collection of tasks is created by sampling functions where a and b are independent (i.e. σ = 0.0).
This setup aims to test the robustness of the INP model to spurious correlations in the training data.
We want to investigate whether the INP model is able disentangle the meanings of parameters a
and b. In this setup, p(K|f ) remains the same at training at test time–it always provides partial
information about the value of one of the parameters. It is the underlying process p(f ) that changes
between training and test time.
Results presented in table A.6 show that when the correlation between the parameter a and b in-
creases, the test-time performance of both the INP and NP models downgrades. This is due to the
train-test distribution shift. Moreover, when the correlation is moderate (ρ ≤ 0.64), the INP model
outperforms or mathces the performance of the NP. We note, however, that for ρ >= 0.42, the
zero-shot predictions (n = 0) are better for the uninformed model than the INP. This is also true for
all values of n at higher correlation levels (ρ ≥ 0.85). We hypothesize that this is because the INP
has overfitted to the correlation between the parameters a and b. In the training dataset, revealing
the information about the value of one parameter gives information about the value of the other,
unrevealed parameter. INP exploits this dependency.
Take-away: INPs learn the meaning of knowledge based on its relationship with the empirical data.
If this relationship changes at test time, good performance of the INP can no longer be guaranteed.
This characteristic may be especially dangerous when there are spurious correlations in the dataset.
The INP is prone to overfitting to these correlations, “misunderstanding” the true meaning of knowl-
edge, and thus failing to generalise to new knowledge representations and their corresponding tasks,
where the spurious correlations are no longer present.

A.8.4    M ETA - LEARNED VS . EXACT KNOWLEDGE INTEGRATION


                                                     34
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025



Table A.6: Average log-likelihood on test tasks vs. correlation in training data (higher is better). ρ
- the correlation coefficient between random parameters a and b. n - number of context data points
per task. Model results for which the log likelihood is higher by a statistically significant margin
highlighted in bold. Values in brackets stand standard errors estimated with bootstrap.

                                          ρ                   0.00                                  0.21                           0.42
                                 model              INP                  NP              INP                NP             INP               NP
                                  n=0           -139.1 (10.2)        -209.2 (8.3)    -174.4 (13.7)      -196.5 (7.7)   -266.1 (19.6)    -221.7 (9.2)
                                  n=1            -99.0 (10.6)        -102.1 (6.5)      -73.1 (6.2)      -120.4 (5.4)     -95.0 (9.4)    -108.6 (4.4)
                                  n=4             -16.9 (1.7)         -30.9 (2.6)      -34.8 (3.9)       -41.0 (3.4)     -29.2 (3.8)     -38.2 (3.4)
                                  n=5             -12.1 (2.0)         -11.9 (2.0)      -15.7 (1.8)       -17.8 (2.6)     -12.4 (2.5)     -21.7 (2.9)
                                 n = 10             1.3 (1.1)           1.8 (1.4)       -0.5 (1.2)         2.1 (0.9)       0.2 (0.9)      -4.5 (2.0)
                                 n = 15             3.5 (0.7)           5.4 (1.4)        0.8 (0.8)         2.6 (1.6)       3.1 (0.6)      -2.2 (2.1)


                                      ρ                    0.64                                  0.85                              0.99
                             model                 INP                 NP               INP                NP              INP                NP
                             n=0              -356.4 (22.2)     -214.0 (9.2)        -795.6 (38.9)     -321.8 (14.8)    -1367.3 (63.6)     -410.7 (15.2)
                             n=1               -108.1 (7.1)     -160.3 (7.4)         -234.4 (9.3)      -200.0 (9.9)     -830.9 (40.9)     -527.3 (19.2)
                             n=3                -26.2 (2.2)      -64.6 (4.4)         -149.0 (6.6)      -118.6 (6.3)     -551.5 (32.5)     -360.1 (10.6)
                             n=5                -18.3 (2.0)      -30.3 (3.0)         -101.4 (4.9)       -94.0 (5.1)     -404.2 (13.2)      -319.9 (9.0)
                            n = 10               -6.2 (1.2)      -18.2 (2.6)          -81.2 (4.4)       -70.6 (4.5)     -342.7 (11.1)      -324.9 (9.3)
                            n = 15               -4.3 (1.2)      -11.6 (2.3)          -74.1 (4.3)       -66.2 (4.3)     -332.2 (11.1)      -313.0 (8.9)



                             0                                                The primary advantage of informed meta-learning lies in its
                                                                              universality and applicability to scenarios where model-based
                          −50                                                 approaches to knowledge integration are infeasible or require
Negative Log-Likelihood


                                                                              significant human efforts. Unlike informed meta-learning,
                          −100                                                model-based approaches require knowledge representations to
                                                                              be easily translatable into explicit inductive biases, such as
                          −150                                                functional representations, parameter priors, or regularisers for
                                                          model name          the loss function. On the other hand, a model-based approach
                                                          INP
                          −200                                                may guarantee the correctness of knowledge integration by
                                                          Bayes Reg.
                                                          knowledge
                                                                              design instead of relying on a neural approximation learned
                          −250                            K=∅                 based on a finite number of meta-training tasks. However,
                                                          K 6= ∅              the universality of informed meta-learning necessarily comes
                          −300
                                  0   1      3       5                 10
                                                                              with a trade-off in performance. In this section we investi-
                                          Number of Context Points            gate the efficacy of the data-driven approach of informed meta-
                                                                              learning to knowledge integration in comparison to a model-
Figure A.5: Knowledge integration                                             based approach–fitting an explicit parametric model encoding
via the INP vs. exact inference with                                          the available task-specific knowledge exactly.
Bayesian regression.                   Setup. We again follow the setup of section 5.1 with sinusoidal
functions. We compare the INP and NP models, against an exact Bayesian regression model with
observations modelled according to: p(y|x) = N (y; µ(x), σ 2 ), where µ(x) = ax + sin(bx) + c
and we put priors on the parameters a, b, and c that correspond precisely to the ground-truth process
p(f ) used in your setup, i.e. a ∼ U [−1, 1], b ∼ U [0, 6], c ∼ U [−1, 1]. We fix σ to its ground-truth
value of 0.2. For a given task with knowledge K about the value of one or two of the parameters a,
b, c, we fix the value of the respective parameters and only estimate the posteriors p(·|DC ) for the
remaining, unknown quantities. Given the non-linear transformation of the parameter b through the
sine function, we find the posterior of the parameters a, b, c with MCMC estimation with the NUTS
algorithm. For each task, we run 4 chains with 1000 burn-in samples and 2000 samples used for
estimation.
Results. Figure A.5 compares the performance of predictions made based according to an exact
regression model and the meta-learned predictive posterior with INPs. We first note that already
for the the uninformed case, K = ∅, the INP performs worse than the Bayesian regression model,
specifically when more data becomes available. This is expected, as the regression model is ex-


                                                                                            35
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


plicitly based on the ground-truth data generating process Meanwhile, the Neural Process only ap-
proximates this distribution over sample functions by learning on a finite collection of meta-training
tasks and is also known to underfit contextual observations. In terms of knowledge integration, we
observe that even thought the informed predictions of the INP significantly improve upon the non-
informed INP (which is effectively the plain NP), there is still a noticeable gap between the INP
and the theoretically achievable upper bound dictated by the informed Bayes regression. It is also
worth comparing the inference times of Bayes regression with MCMC estimation vs. that of the
(I)NPs. After training, predictions with (I)NPs simplify to a forward pass through the trained neural
network, which for a single task in this instance takes less than 0.004 seconds on a machine with the
AMD Epyc Milan 7713 CPU, 120GB RAM and the NVIDIA 48GB A6000 GPU. In comparison,
estimating the parameters of the regression model with MCMC took us on average 8.6s per task.
For reference, training an INP model in this instance takes around 20min.
Take-away. The major advantage of informed meta-learning is its applicability across diverse
knowledge and data formats, as illustrated with the real-world and natural language data experi-
ments of section 5.2. However, as demonstrated with the above experiment, this universality comes
with trade-offs in performance. When a model-based approach is available, it should be preferred,
as it may guarantee the correctness and exactness of knowledge integration by design instead of
relying on a neural approximation learned based on a finite number of meta-training tasks. The
appeal of informed meta-learning becomes evident when the underlying functional form of the data
generating processes is not known explicitly and the task-specific knowledge is difficult to represent
in a form of an exact mathematical equation or a constraint. In such cases, model-based approaches
to knowledge integration become challenging if not infeasible.


                                                 36
