Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


S TOCHASTIC P OLYAK S TEP - SIZES AND M OMENTUM :
C ONVERGENCE G UARANTEES AND P RACTICAL
P ERFORMANCE
 Dimitris Oikonomou                                  Nicolas Loizou
 CS & MINDS                                          AMS & MINDS
 Johns Hopkins University                            Johns Hopkins University
 doikono1@jh.edu                                     nloizou1@jh.edu



                                           A BSTRACT
         Stochastic gradient descent with momentum, also known as Stochastic Heavy
         Ball method (SHB), is one of the most popular algorithms for solving large-scale
         stochastic optimization problems in various machine learning tasks. In practical
         scenarios, tuning the step-size and momentum parameters of the method is a pro-
         hibitively expensive and time-consuming process. In this work, inspired by the
         recent advantages of stochastic Polyak step-size in the performance of stochastic
         gradient descent (SGD), we propose and explore new Polyak-type variants suit-
         able for the update rule of the SHB method. In particular, using the Iterate Moving
         Average (IMA) viewpoint of SHB, we propose and analyze three novel step-size
         selections: MomSPSmax , MomDecSPS, and MomAdaSPS. For MomSPSmax , we
         provide convergence guarantees for SHB to a neighborhood of the solution for
         convex and smooth problems (without assuming interpolation). If interpolation is
         also satisfied, then using MomSPSmax , SHB converges to the true solution at a
         fast rate matching the deterministic HB. The other two variants, MomDecSPS and
         MomAdaSPS, are the first adaptive step-size for SHB that guarantee convergence
         to the exact minimizer - without a priori knowledge of the problem parameters
         and without assuming interpolation. Our convergence analysis of SHB is tight
         and obtains the convergence guarantees of stochastic Polyak step-size for SGD as
         a special case. We supplement our analysis with experiments validating our theory
         and demonstrating the effectiveness and robustness of our algorithms.


1   I NTRODUCTION
We consider the unconstrained finite-sum optimization problem,
                                       "            n
                                                             #
                                                1X
                                   min f (x) =         fi (x) ,                                   (1)
                                  x∈Rd          n i=1

where each fi : Rd → R is convex, smooth, and lower bounded by ℓ∗i . Let X ∗ be the set of
minimizers of (1). We assume that X ∗ ̸= ∅ and we fix x∗ ∈ X ∗ . This problem is the cornerstone of
machine learning tasks, (Hastie et al., 2009), where x corresponds to the model parameters, fi (x)
represents the loss on the training point i, and the aim is to minimize the average loss f (x) across
training points.
When n is large, stochastic gradient methods are the preferred methods for solving (1) mainly be-
cause of their cheap per iteration cost. One of the most popular stochastic algorithms for solving
such large-scale machine learning optimization problems is stochastic gradient descent (SGD) with
momentum, (Sutskever et al., 2013), a.k.a. stochastic heavy ball method (SHB) given by:
                            xt+1 = xt − γt ∇fSt (xt ) + βt (xt − xt−1 ).                       (SHB)
where St ⊆ [n] a random subset of data-points (mini-batch)       with cardinality B sampled indepen-
dently at each iteration t, and ∇fSt (xt ) = B1 i∈St ∇fi (xt ) is the mini-batch gradient. Here
                                                     P
γt > 0 is the step-size/learning rate at iteration t while βt ≥ 0 represents the momentum parameter.


                                                 1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


When the momentum parameter βt = 0, ∀t ≥ 0, then the update rule SHB is equivalent to the
well-studied mini-batch SGD, xt+1 = xt − γt ∇fSt (xt ), (Robbins and Monro, 1951), which has
been efficiently analyzed under different properties of problem (1) and different step-size selections
γt (Nemirovski and Yudin, 1983; Nemirovski et al., 2009; Hardt et al., 2016; Needell et al., 2016;
Nguyen et al., 2018; Gower et al., 2019; 2021). Additionally, when the cardinality of the random
subset St is B = n, then the update rule of SHB is equivalent to the deterministic heavy ball method
(HB) proposed by Polyak (1964), as a way to improve the convergence behavior of deterministic
Gradient Descent (GD).
There is a rich literature on the convergence of SHB and HB in different scenarios. In Polyak (1964),
it was proved that for a specific choice of the step-size γ and the momentum parameter β, the HB
method enjoys an accelerated linear convergence when minimizing strongly convex quadratic func-
tions while more recently, Ghadimi et al. (2015) proved a global sublinear convergence guarantee
for HB for convex and smooth functions. In the stochastic setting, several works focus on conver-
gence guarantees of SHB under constant step-size and momentum parameters (Ma and Yarats, 2019;
Kidambi et al., 2018; Yan et al., 2018; Gitman et al., 2019; Liu et al., 2020). However, in practical
scenarios, these choices suffer from a prohibitively expensive and time-consuming hyper-parameter
tuning process. This has motivated a large body of research on the development of adaptive SHB -
a method that adapts their parameters using information collected during the iterative process. Such
analysis is challenging, and the current adaptive versions of SHB either focus on the full batch set-
ting (deterministic) (Barré et al., 2020; Saab Jr et al., 2022; Wang et al., 2023), or assume that an
interpolation condition is satisfied (Schaipp et al., 2023b) or focus on moving averaged gradient (a
different form of momentum) (Wang et al., 2023).
Previous studies in the fully stochastic (non-interpolated) scenario have predominantly concentrated
on analyzing adaptive versions of SGD, with limited attention given to developing adaptive variants
for the SHB. In this work, we take inspiration from the recently introduced and highly efficient
Polyak-type adaptive step-sizes for SGD and investigate its applicability and extension to SHB.


1.1   M AIN C ONTRIBUTIONS

Our main contributions are summarized below.
⋄ Efficient Polyak Step-sizes via IMA viewpoint. We explain and illustrate by experiment (see
Figure 1) why naively using SPSmax of Loizou et al. (2021) as a step-size γt in the update rule of
SHB is not robust, leading to divergence even in simple problems. To resolve this issue, we provide
an alternative way of selecting Polyak-type step-sizes for SHB via the Iterate Moving Average view-
point from Sebbouh et al. (2021). Through our approach, we propose three novel adaptive step-size
selections, namely MomSPSmax , MomDecSPS, MomAdaSPS. Each of the proposed step-sizes de-
pends on the choice of the momentum parameter β adding further stability to SHB and comes with
specific benefits over their constant step-size counterparts or other adaptive variants of SHB.
⋄ MomSPSmax : Convergence of SHB in non-interpolated setting. Our first step-size selection of
SHB is MomSPSmax , which has a similar structure to SPSmax of Loizou et al. (2021) but includes
also (1 − β) in its expression. For this choice, we provide convergence guarantees for SHB to
a neighborhood of the solution for convex and smooth problems. Our analysis provides the first
convergence guarantees of adaptive SHB using Polyak-type step-size. Previous works on Polyak
step-size with momentum in the stochastic setting have guarantees either only under the interpolation
setting (Schaipp et al., 2023b) or for a moving averaged gradient momentum (Wang et al., 2023).
In addition, as a corollary of our main theoretical results, we show that MomSPSmax under the
interpolation setting and in deterministic scenarios (full batch) converges to the true solution at a
fast rate matching the deterministic HB.
⋄ Convergence of SHB to exact solution via MomDecSPS and MomAdaSPS. Inspired by two
recent Polyak-type step-size selections for SGD, the DecSPS in Orvieto et al. (2022) and AdaSPS
in Jiang and Stich (2023), we propose two new ways for tuning the step-size
                                                                       √        for SHB. These are
MomDecSPS and MomAdaSPS. Our analysis provides the first O(1/ T ) convergence guarantees
to the exact solution in the non-interpolated regime for a Polyak-type adaptive variant of SHB. Our
proposed update rules converge for any choice of momentum parameter β ∈ [0, 1), which makes
them particularly useful in practical scenarios.


                                                  2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Step-size                       Assumptions / Setting      Adaptive Exact Convergence Rate
Constant (Liu et al., 2020)  Knowledge of L                   ✗               ✗           O( T1 + σ̂ 2 )
IMA (Sebbouh et al., 2021)   Knowledge of L                   ✗               ✓           O( T1 + σ̂ 2 )
ALR-SMAG (Wang et al., 2023) Moving Averaged Gradient         ✓               ✗           O( T1 + σ 2 )
MomSPSmax (Thm 3.2)          Restriction on β                 ✓               ✗           O( T1 + σ 2 )
MomDecSPS (Thm 3.6)          Bounded Iterates                 ✓               ✓           O( √1T )
MomAdaSPS (Thm 3.7)          Bounded Iterates                 ✓               ✓           O( T1 + √σT )

Table 1: Summary of the considered step-sizes and the corresponding theoretical results in the
stochastic setting. All the rates are given for convex and smooth functions. The quantity of conver-
                                                           PT
gence in our rates is E[f (xT ) − f (x∗ )], where xT = T1 t=0 xt . Here σ̂ 2 = E ∥∇fi (x∗ )∥2 < ∞
and σ 2 = E[fi (x∗ ) − ℓ∗i ] < ∞. The “Exact Convergence” column refers to convergence to the exact
solution x∗ with no interpolation assumption.


⋄ Tight Convergence Guarantees. All of our convergence guarantees are true generalizations of the
theoretical analysis of SGD using SPSmax , DecSPS, and AdaSPS. That is, if β = 0 (no momentum)
in the update rule of SHB, our theorems obtain as a special case the best-known convergence rates
of Polyak-type step-size for SGD, highlighting the tightness of our analysis. See also Table 1 for a
summary of our main complexity results and a comparison with closely related works.
⋄ Further Convergence Results. As a byproduct of our theoretical analysis, we provide two in-
teresting corollaries: a novel analysis of constant step-size SHB (as a corollary of our Theorem
on MomSPSmax ) and the first robust convergence of SHB via our theorem on MomAdaSPS. For a
constant step-size, the Corollary 3.5 of our Theorem 3.2 allows larger step-sizes than the analysis
of SHB in Liu et al. (2020) and provides convergence without assuming the restrictive bounded
variance condition (there exist q > 0 such that E ∥∇fi (x) − ∇f (x)∥2 < q). In addition, via The-
orem 3.7 we provide the first robust convergence of adaptive SHB that guarantees convergence to
the exact solution and automatically adapts to whether our problem is interpolated or not. That is,
if interpolation is assumed, then the rate of SHB with MomAdaSPS is the same as the rate of SHB
with MomSPSmax (or constant step-size), and if no interpolation is assumed, then it matches the
rate of SHB with MomDecSPS. The analysis achieves the best-known rates in both settings.
⋄ Numerical Evaluation. In Section 4, we verify our theoretical results via numerical ex-
periments on various problems, demonstrating the effectiveness and practicality of our ap-
proach. An open-source implementation of our method is available at https://github.com/
dimitris-oik/MomSPS.
2     E XPLORING THE I NTERPLAY OF SPS AND H EAVY BALL M OMENTUM
In this section, we present the expression of Stochastic Polyak Step-size (SPS) and its different
variants. We illustrate that a naive combination of SPS with momentum is not robust, leading to
divergence in simple problems. We explain how we resolve this issue using the Iterate Moving
Average viewpoint of SHB and propose three adaptive Polyak-type step-sizes for SHB.

2.1   BACKGROUND ON S TOCHASTIC P OLYAK S TEP - SIZE
The deterministic Polyak step-size (PS) was first introduced by Polyak (1987) as an efficient step-
size selection for GD for solving convex optimization problems. It has the following expression:
         (xt )−f (x∗ )
γt = f∥∇f     (xt )∥2 which is obtained by minimizing an upper bound of the quantity ∥x
                                                                                           t+1
                                                                                               − x∗ ∥ 2
in the analysis of GD. Since its original proposal, the PS has been successfully used in the analysis
of deterministic subgradient methods in different settings with favorable convergence guarantees
(Boyd et al., 2003; Davis et al., 2018; Hazan and Kakade, 2019). PS requires the prior knowledge
of f (x∗ ), which might look like a strong assumption. However, as shown in Boyd et al. (2003),
this is known in several applications, including finding a point in the intersection of convex sets and
positive semi-definite matrix completion.
Inspired by the convergence of PS in the deterministic setting, Loizou et al. (2021) has effectively
modified the Polyak step-size for the stochastic setting, achieving convergence rates comparable
to those of finetuned SGD. The proposed stochastic Polyak step-size (SPS) has several benefits,


                                                  3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


including independence on parameters of the problem (e.g., L-smoothness or µ strong convexity)
and competitive performance in over-parametrized models. More specifically, Loizou et al. (2021)
proposed the SPSmax given below1 :
                                           fSt (xt ) − ℓ∗St

                               γt = min                     , γb   .                  (SPSmax )
                                           c∥∇fSt (xt )∥2
Here, γb > 0 is a bound that restricts SPS from being very large and is essential to ensure conver-
gence to a small neighborhood around the solution and c > 0 is a positive constant that depends on
the function class the objective f belongs to.
As mentioned in Orvieto et al. (2022), the SPSmax comes with strong convergence guarantees and
competitive performance; however, it has one main drawback when used in non-over-parameterized
regimes: It can guarantee convergence only to a neighborhood of the solution. For this reason,
Orvieto et al. (2022) suggests a decreasing variant of the original SPSmax named DecSPS, given by:
                                             fSt (xt ) − ℓ∗St

                                   1
                             γt = min                         , ct−1 γ t−1   ,          (DecSPS)
                                   ct        ∥∇fSt (xt )∥2
where ct is an increasing sequence of positive real
                                                 √numbers and c−1 := c0 and γ−1 = γb > 0.√The
authors proved that SGD with DecSPS and ct = t + 1, converges with a sublinear rate O(1/ T )
for convex and smooth functions with bounded iterates (i.e., D2 := maxt∈[T −1] ∥xt − x∗ ∥2 < ∞).
More recently, in Jiang and Stich (2023), another decreasing variant of SPS was introduced, named
AdaSPS:
                                    fSt (xt )−ℓ∗         1
                       γt = min c∥∇f (xt )∥2 PtSt
                                                  √         s    ∗
                                                                   , γt−1 ,             (AdaSPS)
                                                                                s=0 fSs (x         )−ℓSs
                                             St


where γ−1 = +∞ and c > 0. For convex and L-smooth functions with bounded    2 iterates,
                                                                                      it can
                                                                           τ     τσ
be shown that SGD with AdaSPS converges to an exact solution with a rate O T + T , where
                                                                                 √

τ = 2cLD2 + 1c . The interesting aspect of the convergence of AdaSPS is that it provides a robust
result for SGD, meaning that the method recovers the best bounds for both the interpolated (σ = 0)
and non-interpolated regimes.

2.2   NAIVE SPS IN SHB
All of the above variants of SPS were proposed and analyzed for SGD (SHB with no momentum).
With the increased popularity of momentum in machine learning, one can naturally ask the following
question: Is it possible to combine SPS with momentum? This question was partially answered in
Wang et al. (2023) when they proposed a Polyak-type step-size for a moving averaged gradient
(MAG) momentum but not for the SHB. Their MAG framework is not equivalent to SHB when their
stepsizes are adaptive and while their proposed stepsize reduces to the original SPSmax stepsize
when β = 0, their guarantees do not reduce to the original SPSmax guarantees for convex functions.
The most straightforward approach is to                               100                    MomSPSmax
directly apply the SPSmax in the SHB up-                                                     SPSmax + Naive Momentum

date rule. Let us call this update rule                                                                                                    100


SPSmax with naive momentum. Unfortu-
                                                     f(x0) f(x * )


                                                                                                                          f(x0) f(x * )
                                                     f(xk) f(x * )


                                                                                                                          f(xk) f(x * )


nately, this approach does not necessar-
ily lead to convergence for natural choices
of momentum parameter β ∈ (0, 1), as
                                                                                                                                                                 MomSPSmax
shown in Figure 1.2 In this experiment,                              10 1
                                                                                                                                          10 1
                                                                                                                                                                 SPSmax + Naive Momentum
                                                                            0    10000   20000    30000   40000   50000                          0   10000   20000    30000   40000   50000
even for simple convex and smooth prob-                                                    Iterations                                                          Iterations

lems like a logistic regression with syn-
thetic data, the naive rule fails to converge      Figure 1: Comparison of MomSPSmax versus SPSmax
when β gets larger (a typical choice for           with naive momentum for different momentum param-
momentum parameter is β = 0.9). This               eters β on a logistic regression problem. Left: β = 0.2,
indicates that a more careful step-size se-        Right: β = 0.5
lection is needed, which may also depend
    1
      Originally Loizou et al. (2021) use fS∗t instead of the lower bound ℓ∗St . The lower bound is due to Orvieto
et al. (2022), which proves that the more relaxed lower bound can still lead to the same convergence guarantees.
    2
      See also Figure 9 in Appendix for more values of β.


                                                                      4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


on the momentum parameter. In Figure 1, we compare the SPSmax with naive momentum with
one of our proposed and analyzed step-size selection MomSPSmax . As seen in Figure 1, when β is
small, then both SPSmax with naive momentum and SHB with MomSPSmax have similar behavior.
When β = 0, the two methods have identical performance as both are reduced to the same method:
SGD with SPSmax . However, as β gets larger, the performance of SPSmax with naive momentum
gets worse and less stable, and at some point, it diverges. On the other hand, in this example, SHB
with MomSPSmax converges for any of the selected β.

2.3   I TERATIVE M OVING AVERAGE : BALANCE BETWEEN SPS AND M OMENTUM
Having explained how naively combining SPSmax with heavy ball momentum can lead to diver-
gence, in this section, we leverage the iterate moving-average (IMA) viewpoint of SHB from Seb-
bouh et al. (2021) to propose SPS-type adaptations that depend on momentum parameter as well for
SHB. As we will see later, this viewpoint provides stability and robustness to the proposed update
rules.
Iterate Moving Average (IMA). Sebbouh et al. (2021) provide the IMA as an alternative way of
expressing the update rule of SHB and explain how the IMA formulation is crucial in comparing
SHB and SGD as it allows to establish connections between the step-sizes of the two methods. The
Iterate Moving Average method is given by the following update rule:
                                                      λt+1            1
                z t+1 = z t − ηt ∇fSt (xt ), xt+1 =          xt +            z t+1 ,
                                                    λt+1 + 1      λt+1 + 1
where z 0 = x0 , ηt > 0 and λt ≥ 0. As proved in Sebbouh et al. (2021), if for any t ∈ N, holds
1 + λt+1 = λβtt and ηt = (1 + λt+1 )γt then the xt iterates of the IMA method are equal to the xt
iterates produced by the SHB method. For completeness, we include the proof of this statement in
Appendix C.3.
In our proposed methods, we select the most common setting of constant momentum (βt = β).
Considering the equivalence between IMA and SHB under the correct parameter selection, let us
present the following proposition that will allow us to obtain convergence guarantees for SHB via a
convergence analysis of IMA.
                                                           λ
 Proposition 2.1. If λt = λ ≥ 0 then assuming that β = 1+λ     and γt = (1 − β)ηt the xt iterates
 of the IMA method are equal to the xt iterates produced by the SHB method.

Using the above proposition, let us provide the following corollary that explains the derivation of
our proposed step-size selections for SHB.
 Corollary 2.2. Let the step-size ηt in IMA be one of the previously proposed Polyak step-sizes:
 SPSmax , DecSPS or AdaSPS and let λt = λ. Then via Proposition 2.1, the SHB has constant
 momentum parameter βt = β and the step-sizes are MomSPSmax , MomDecSPS or MomAdaSPS
 respectively.

Three New Adaptive Step-sizes for SHB. Using the IMA viewpoint and Proposition 2.1 and Corol-
lary 2.2 let us present three Polyak-type step-size for SHB.
(i) MomSPSmax . Let us start with the variant associated with the SPSmax . That is, via Corollary 2.2
if we use SPSmax as a step-size for IMA, then this is equivalent to using the following step-size in
the update rule of SHB:
                                            fSt (xt ) − ℓ∗St

                      γt = (1 − β) min                       , γb .                   (MomSPSmax )
                                            c∥∇fSt (xt )∥2
Here, the parameter γb > 0 has the same purpose as in the original SPSmax , and it is a bound that re-
stricts MomSPSmax from being very large and is essential to ensure convergence to a neighborhood
around the solution. It is clear from its expression that MomSPSmax has the same form as SPSmax
but multiplied by a correcting momentum factor 1 − β. This follows from Corollary 2.2. In practice,
this small change allows the SHB to be more “stable” for different momentum parameters, as we
show in Figure 1. Using MomSPSmax and a restriction on the momentum parameter β in Section 3,
we establish O(1/T ) convergence for SHB up to a neighborhood of the solution for convex and
smooth functions.


                                                  5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Our following two proposed step-size selections are variants of the two decreasing variants of Polyak
step-sizes DecSPS and AdaSPS. As such, we can prove SHB’s convergence to the exact solution
instead of a neighborhood. More importantly, using MomDecSPS or MomAdaSPS, we can provide
convergence guarantees for any choice of the momentum coefficients β ∈ [0, 1) making SHB fully
adaptive (no tuning necessary).
(ii) MomDecSPS. Firstly, we propose an adaptation of DecSPS with momentum. We call this step-
size selection MomDecSPS, and it is given by:
                                (1 − β)[fSt (xt ) − ℓ∗St ] γt−1 ct−1

                    γt = min                              ,            ,               (MomDecSPS)
                                    ct ∥∇fSt (xt )∥2          ct
                                                            √
where γ−1 := γb > 0 is a step-size bound and ct = c t + 1 for t ≥ 0 with c−1 := c0 = c > 0
be a constant to regulate the step-size. Note that γt is indeed decreasing. This step-size is adaptive
and, in its definition, does not require knowledge of any function properties (e.g., smoothness/strong
convexity constants). In Section 3 we prove that SHB √      with MomDecSPS and constant momentum
β ∈ [0, 1) converges to exact solution with a rate O(1/ T ).
(iii) MomAdaSPS. Similar to the previous two steps, let us propose the following adaptation of
AdaSPS with momentum. We call this MomAdaSPS, and is given by:

                               (1−β)[fSt (xt )−ℓ∗
                                                St ]
             γt = min            t 2
                                     √Pt             s ∗
                                                         , γt−1 .              (MomAdaSPS)
                             c∥∇fSt (x )∥      s=0 fSs (x   )−ℓSs

By definition, this is a decreasing step-size (γt ≤ γt−1 ). In Section 3, we prove that SHB with
MomAdaSPS also converges to the exact solution for any choice of β  ∈ [0, 1). More
                                                                                      specifically,
                                                                              1  √σ
we show that MomAdaSPS converges to the exact solution with a rate O          T + T   . Thus, when we
                                        2
are in the interpolation regime (i.e., σ = 0), the convergence of SHB with MomAdaSPS matches
SHB with MomSPSmax√while when the setting does not satisfy interpolation condition, this became
equivalent to the O(1/ T ) of MomDecSPS. Following the terminology of Jiang and Stich (2023),
our results are the first robust adaptive step-size selection for SHB, as it can automatically adapt to
the optimization setting (interpolation vs. non-interpolation).
Let us close this section by mentioning two remarks related to the above three step-size selections:
 Remark 2.3. The “correcting factor” 1 − β is outside the minimum in the MomSPSmax while
 for the decreasing variants MomDecSPS and MomAdaSPS, it only appears in the first term of the
 minimum. This follows from Proposition 2.1 and the derivation of Corollary 2.2 and is explained
 in detail in Appendix C.3. In Appendix F.3, via experiments, we also test other variants of the
 above step-sizes with the correcting factor outside of the minimum. We observe that the other
 choices do not have good practical performance.

 Remark 2.4. For no momentum, i.e., β = 0, all three proposed step-size choices, MomSPSmax ,
 MomDecSPS and MomAdaSPS are reduced to SPSmax , DecSPS and AdaSPS and our conver-
 gence analysis recovers the convergence guarantees for SGD showing the tightness of our ap-
 proach.

3   C ONVERGENCE A NALYSIS
In this section, we present the convergence results for SHB with all of the proposed Polyak step-
sizes. For the formal definitions and helpful lemmas, see Appendix C. The proofs can be found in
Appendix D. For all of our results, we make the following assumption:
 Assumption 3.1 (Finite optimal objective difference).
                        σ 2 := ESt [fSt (x∗ ) − ℓ∗St ] = f (x∗ ) − ESt [ℓ∗St ] < ∞

This assumption was first introduced in Loizou et al. (2021) and Orvieto et al. (2022). Note that
σ 2 < ∞ when all fi are lower bounded like we have assumed. We say that problem (1) is in-
terpolated if σ 2 = 0. If the interpolation condition is satisfied then there exists x∗ ∈ X ∗ such


                                                    6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


that f (x∗ ) = fSt (x∗ ) = ℓ∗St for all St ⊆ [n]. Many modern machine learning models satisfy
this condition. Examples include non-parametric regression (Liang and Rakhlin, 2020) and over-
parameterized deep neural networks (Zhang et al., 2021; Ma et al., 2018).

3.1   C ONVERGENCE TO A NEIGHBORHOOD OF THE SOLUTION

We start with the analysis of SHB with MomSPSmax .
 Theorem 3.2. Assume that each fi ish convex and
                                                Li -smooth. Then,
                                                               n the iterates
                                                                          o of SHB with
 MomSPSmax with c = 1 and β ∈ 0, 2γbα−α where α = min 2L1max , γb and Lmax =
 maxi {Li }, converge as
                                                     C1 ∥x0 − x∗ ∥2
                            E[f (xT ) − f (x∗ )] ≤                  + C2 σ 2 ,
                                                           T
                 PT −1                                 1−β              2γb −αβ−α
 where xT = T1      t=0   xt and the constants C1 = αβ+α−2βγ b
                                                               and C2 = αβ+α−2βγ b
                                                                                   .

Firstly, let us note that both constants C1 and C2 in Theorem 3.2 are positive since the denominator
of both is positive because β ∈ [0, 1) and the numerator of C2 is positive because γb ≥ α > 0. The
above result shows that MomSPSmax has a sublinear convergence to a neighborhood matching the
best-known rate for SHB in the convex setting, see Liu et al. (2020). Moreover, when β = 0, the
update rule of SHB with MomSPSmax becomes equivalent to SGD with SPSmax (no momentum)
and the result of Theorem 3.2 reduces to convergence guarantees provided in Loizou et al. (2021),
only with a slightly better neighborhood of convergence (here when β = 0 we have C2 = (2γb −
α)/α while in the original it is C2 = 2γb /α).
In addition, note that in Theorem 3.2, there is a restriction in the momentum coefficient. This
stems from the technique used in the proof (which forces C1 and C2 to be positive). However,
this restriction is not vital as in practical scenarios, the method converges even when β is selected
outside the given interval. Moreover, let us highlight that the constants C1 and C2 are increasing
when viewed as functions of β in the given interval (see also Figure 14). This means that our theory
suggests that β = 0 (no momentum) is the best theoretical choice, which is typical in many works
on stochastic methods with momentum (Wang et al., 2023; Loizou and Richtárik, 2020). This is not
ideal but does not undermine the importance of Theorem 3.2, as this is the first result showing the
convergence of SHB with SPS in a non-interpolated setting.
From Theorem 3.2, we can also deduce rates for the deterministic and interpolated regimes.
 Corollary 3.3 (Deterministic Heavy Ball Method). Assume that f is convex and L-smooth. Then
 HB with β ∈ [0, α/(2γb − α)) and
                                               f (xt ) − f (x∗ )

                            γt = (1 − β) min                     , γb   ,              (MomPSmax )
                                                   ∥∇f (xt )∥2
                                                                                0
                                                                                  −x∗ ∥2
                    , γb , converges as mint∈[T ] {f (xt ) − f (x∗ )} ≤ (1−β)∥x
                 1
 where α = min 2L                                                         (αβ+α−2βγb )T .



Note that in the setting of Corollary 3.3, we have used f (x∗ ) instead of a lower bound ℓ∗ . This is
in accordance with previous work in the deterministic setting (Polyak, 1987). We highlight that in
Hazan and Kakade (2019) (PS) and Wang et al. (2023) (ALR-MAG), there is no upper bound in the
step-size for the deterministic setting. This is due to the fact that in these works, the step-size is
derived as a minimizer of an upper bound of the quantity ∥xt − x∗ ∥2 . Our step-size MomPSmax is
not a minimizer of such bound when β > 0. Nevertheless, when β = 0 (no momentum), by setting
γb = ∞ we recover the corresponding result in Hazan and Kakade (2019). In our setting, we cannot
set γb = ∞ when β > 0 because the term βγb appears in the denominator of our convergence result.

 Corollary 3.4 (Interpolation). Assume interpolation (σ 2 = 0) and let all assumptions of The-
 oremn3.2 be satisfied. Then SHB with MomSPSmax and β ∈ [0, α/(2γb − α)) where α =
                                                              −x∗ ∥2
                o                                           0                     PT −1 t
 min 2L1max , γb converges as E[f (xT ) − f (x∗ )] ≤ (1−β)∥x                T
                                                     (αβ+α−2βγb )T , where x = T
                                                                                1
                                                                                     t=0 x .



                                                     7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


In the closely related works Loizou et al. (2021) (SPSmax ) and Wang et al. (2023) (ALR-SMAG),
there is no upper bound in the proposed step-sizes for the interpolated setting. In our analysis, we
focus on the fully stochastic setting (interpolation is only a corollary), and the result of Corollary 3.4
shows a saddle connection between the momentum parameter and the parameter γb (we cannot select
γb = ∞ when momentum is used). Nevertheless, via our corollary, when β = 0 by setting γb = ∞,
we can recover the corresponding result in Loizou et al. (2021).
Another Corollary of Theorem 3.2 is a novel analysis for SHB with constant step-size.
 Corollary 3.5 (Constant Step-size). Let all assumptions of Theorem 3.2 be satisfied. If γb ≤
   1                        1−β                                    T      ∗     ∥x0 −x∗ ∥2
 2Lmax , then SHB with γ ≤ 2Lmax and β ∈ [0, 1) converges as E[f (x )−f (x )] ≤     Tγ     +σ 2 ,
                  T −1
 where xT = T1 t=0 xt .
                P


Note that in Corollary 3.5, there is no restriction that depends on the smoothness parameter in the
momentum parameter β. We allow to have β ∈ [0, 1). A similar result is obtained        in Liu et al.
                                                                            ∗
                                                                     0
                                                                                     2
(2020), where the authors establish the convergence rate O f (x )−f
                                                                 T
                                                                    (x )
                                                                         + Lγ
                                                                           1−β
                                                                              σ̂
                                                                                 for the quantity

                                            2
 1   T −1                             (1−β)           1
                    t 2                                     √ 1 2 . Here σ̂ 2 is assumed to be
   P
T    t=0 E[∥∇fSt (x )∥ ] when γ ≤       L     min 4−β+β  2,
                                                                2   2β+2β
a bound of the variance Et ∥∇fSt (xt )−∇f (xt )∥2 ≤ σ̂ 2 . In comparison, in our analysis, we provide
                                                                                         T        ∗
                                                                   √ quantity E[f (x ) − f (x )].
the same asymptotic rate O(1/T ) for the common in the convex setting
By comparing the two results, our step-size is larger when β ≥ 5 − 2 ≈ 0.236. However, in
our result, the neighborhood of convergence is constant and does not depend on the step-size γ or
the momentum coefficient. For a numerical comparison of SHB with the two different constant
step-sizes, see Appendix F.2.
3.2   C ONVERGENCE TO THE EXACT SOLUTION
In this section, we provide theoretical results for the adaptive decreasing step-sizes, MomDecSPS
and MomAdaSPS. The main advantage of these decreasing step-sizes is that we can guarantee con-
vergence to the exact solution while keeping the main adaptiveness properties. Due to the nature of
the decreasing step-sizes, there is no restriction in the momentum parameter, as was the case with
Theorem 3.2. For the results of this section, we make the extra assumption of bounded iterates,
i.e., we assume that D2 = maxt∈[T ] ∥xt − x∗ ∥2 is finite. This is a standard assumption for several
adaptive step-sizes, see: (Reddi et al., 2018; Ward et al., 2020; Orvieto et al., 2022; Jiang and Stich,
2023).
                                                                                      PT −1
 Theorem
         1 3.6. Assume     that each fi is convex and Li -smooth. Let xT = T1 t=0 xt , α =
 min 2L , γb and D2 = maxt∈[T ] ∥xt − x∗ ∥2 . Then, the iterates of SHB with MomDecSPS
 with c = 1 and β ∈ [0, 1) converge as:
                                          2β[f (x0 ) − f (x∗ )]    (1 + β)D2 2σ 2
                 E[f (xT ) − f (x∗ )] ≤                         +         √ +√ .
                                              (1 − β)T            (1 − β)α T   T

Notice that when there is no momentum, i.e., for β = 0, Theorem 3.6 recovers the original result
of SGD with DecSPS from Orvieto et al. (2022). To our knowledge, the only other result that
guarantees convergence to the exact solution for SHB in the non-interpolated regime appears in
                                                                                     ηt
Sebbouh et al. (2021). In particular, Sebbouh et al. (2021) proves that for γt = 1+λ  t+1
                                                                                          and βt =
                                                                q
                                                           t−1
  λt              √η    with 0 ≤ η ≤ 4L1max and λt = 12 i=0 t+1
                                                         P
1+λt where ηt =     t+1                                            i+1 with λ0 = 0, SHB converges
          t       ∗
                                  √
as E[f (x ) − f (x )] ≤ O(log t/ t). This result √ only holds for a specific choice of βt , it needs
knowledge of Lmax , and only guarantees O(log t/ t) rate. However, it does not make a bounded
iteration assumption, and it shows convergence of the last iterate. In contrast, our convergence of
SHB with MomDecSPS holds for any choice of     √ β ∈ [0, 1), the step-size is adaptive and does not
depend on Lmax , and it achieves a rate of O(1/ k).
Next, we present the theoretical guarantees for MomAdaSPS.



                                                    8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


 Theorem 3.7. Assume that each fi is convex and Li -smooth. Then, the iterates of SHB with
 MomAdaSPS and β ∈ [0, 1) converge as
                                                                                              τ2  τσ
                                   E[f (xT ) − f (x∗ )] ≤                                        +√ ,
                                                                                              T    T
                                      √
                 PT −1            β       f (x0 )−f (x∗ )            2
 where xT = T1           t
                    t=0 x , τ =              1−β          + (1+β)cLD
                                                              2(1−β)
                                                                         1
                                                                       + 2c and D2 = maxt∈[T ] ∥xt − x∗ ∥.

As in our previous theorems, when there is no momentum (β = 0), Theorem 3.7 recovers the con-
vergence guarantees of AdaSPS from Jiang and Stich (2023). Let us highlight that our convergence
guarantees of SHB with MomAdaSPS offers the first robust step-size selection for SHB, in the sense
that it can automatically adapt
                              √ to the optimization setting. More specifically, for no interpolation,
our result has a rate of O(1/ T ), which matches the best-known rate for SHB while if we assume
interpolation (σ 2 = 0), then we are able to achieve a rate of O(1/T ) which matches the best-known
rate for SHB in the convex setting (see Liu et al. (2020) and Theorem 3.2). Furthermore, under
interpolation, Theorem 3.7 improves the convergence of Corollary 3.4. In particular, when σ 2 = 0,
Theorem 3.7 reaches the rate O(1/T ) for any β ∈ [0, 1), while in Corollary 3.4 this is possible only
under tighter restrictions on β.

4    N UMERICAL E XPERIMENTS
In this section, we test our proposed algorithms in deterministic and stochastic convex problems as
well as in training popular deep neural networks (DNNs). Our experiments are designed to highlight
the benefits of our momentum variants over the vanilla (no-momentum) SPS.
Deterministic Setting. For the de-
terministic setting, we focus on the
least squares problem. The loss func-
tion in this case is given by f (x) =                            100                                                             101

1            2                 n×d
2 ∥Ax − b∥ , where A ∈ R           and                          10 2
                                                                                                                                 100
        n
b ∈ R . In our experiments, we fol-                             10 4
                                                                                                                     Stepsize


low the setting of Wang et al. (2023)                                                                                           10 1
                                                f(x0) f(x * )
                                                f(xk) f(x * )


                                                                10 6
                                                    GD
and choose n = d = 1000 while the                   Nesterov AGD10 8                                                            10 2
                                                    GD Polyak
matrix A has been generated accord-                 AHB
                                                    HB Optimal  10 10                             GD Polyak                     10 3
ing to Lenard and Minkoff (1984)                    AGM                                           HB Optimal
                                                    ALR-MAG     10 12                             ALR-MAG
                                                    MomPS                                         MomPSmax
such that the condition number of                                       0       200
                                                                                      max
                                                                                            400   600   800   1000
                                                                                                                                10 4
                                                                                                                                       0   200   400   600   800   1000
  T         4                                                   Iterations             Iterations
A A is 10 . We test the following
algorithms: Gradient Descent (GD),
Nesterov’s Accelerated Gradient De- Figure 2: Comparison of deterministic algorithms for least
scent (AGD) (Nesterov, 2018), Gra- squares. Left: Relative error, Right: Step-sizes.
dient Descent with Polyak’s step-size
(Polyak, 1987), Adaptive Heavy Ball (AHB) (Saab Jr et al., 2022), Polyak’s Heavy Ball (HB)
(Polyak, 1964), Accelerated Gradient Method (AGM) (Barré et al., 2020), ALR-MAG (Wang
et al., 2023) and finally our step-size from Corollary 3.3, called (MomPSmax ), which guarantees
O(1/T ) rate. For the least squares problem, there is an established theory from Polyak (1964)
that guarantees
          √       acceleration
                         √      of HB with optimal step-size       √ and momentum coefficient given by
                 √               √
β ∗ = ( L − µ)2 /( L + µ)2 and γ ∗ = (1 + β ∗ )/L. For ALR-MAG and SHB with
MomPSmax , we have used the optimal momentum β ∗ for direct comparison with optimal HB. More-
over, for GD Polyak, ALR-MAG, and MomPSmax , we have used the precomputed f (x∗ ) (via GD),
and for MomPSmax , we have chosen γb = 100 (for other choices, see Appendix F.4). The results
in Figure 2 show that MomPSmax has performance comparable to AGM and ALR-MAG which are
faster than vanilla Polyak step-size after the initial iterations. Furthermore, to explore the behavior
of the various adaptive step-sizes, we plot the Polyak, the ALR-SMAG, the MomPSmax , and the
optimal HB step-sizes. We can see that the original Polyak step-size oscillates around the optimal
HB step-size while MomPSmax converges from below to the optimal.
Stochastic Setting: Convex Problems. Here, we compare our step-sizes with previous works in
the stochastic setting. As noticed initially for SPSmax (Loizou et al., 2021), the value of the upper
bound γb that results in good convergence depends on the problem and requires careful parameter


                                                                            9
  Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


  tuning. To alleviate this problem, Loizou et al. (2021) uses a smoothing procedure that prevents
  large fluctuations in the step-size across iterations. That is, γbt = τ b/n γt−1 for each iteration t where
  τ = 2, b is the batch-size, and n is the number of examples. We use the same smoothing trick for
  γb in the implementation of the proposed methods. Similar smoothing procedures have been used in
  Tan et al. (2016); Vaswani et al. (2019b).
  We considered multi-class logistic regression applied to commonly used benchmark datasets from
  the LIBSVM repository (Chang and Lin, 2011). We separate our experiments between two classes
  of step-sizes: non-decreasing step-sizes (which might guarantee convergence to a neighborhood of
  the solution) and decreasing step-sizes (which guarantee convergence to the exact solution). For
  the first class of step-sizes we test the following algorithms: SGD (Nesterov, 2018), SHB with the
  constant step-size and β = 0.9, ADAM as described in Kingma and Ba (2015), the warm-up version
  of ALR-SMAG with the hyper-parameters suggested in Wang et al. (2023), the SPSmax , the SPSmax
  with naive momentum as described in Section 2.2 and our proposed MomSPSmax . For the Polyak-
  based step-sizes such as ALR-SMAG, SPSmax , and MomSPSmax , we select ℓ∗i = 0 and c = 1. For
  SHB, ALR-SMAG, MomSPSmax , SPSmax , with naive momentum, we use momentum β = 0.9.
  All the convex experiments are run for 100 epochs and for 5 trials. We plot the average of the trials
  and the standard deviation. Since there are no standard train/test splits, and due to the small sizes
  of the datasets, we present training loss and accuracy curves only. We present the comparison of
  these methods in Figure 3. In all experiments, we observe that the performance of our proposed
  MomSPSmax significantly outperforms the other methods in both training loss and test accuracy.
  For the decreasing variants, we test AdaGrad-Norm (Duchi et al., 2011), SGD with DecSPS, SGD
  with AdaSPS, and our proposed SHB with MomDecSPS and SHB with MomAdaSPS. We present
  the outcome of this comparison in Figure 4. MomDecSPS and MomAdaSPS outperform their no-
  momentum counterparts in both training loss and test accuracy.
                                                                                              80                                                                                                                                             80
                 100
                                                                                              70                                                           100                                                                               70

                                                                                              60                                                                                                                                             60
                                           SGD                                                                                                                                                                          Train Accuracy (%)
                                                                         Train Accuracy (%)


                                                                                                                                                                                                   DecSPS                                    50
                                           SHB                                                50
                                                                                                                                                                                                   MomDecSPS
                                                                                                                                          Train Loss
Train Loss


             6 × 10 1                      SPSmax
                                                                                              40                                                       6 × 10 1                                    AdaSPS                                    40
                                           MomSPSmax                                                        SGD                                                                                    MomAdaSPS
                                           Adam                                                             SHB                                                                                    AdaGrad-Norm                              30
                                           ALR-SMAG                                           30            SPSmax                                                                                                                                                        DecSPS
             4 × 10 1                                                                                       MomSPSmax                                                                                                                                                     MomDecSPS
                                                                                              20                                                       4 × 10 1                                                                              20
                                                                                                            Adam                                                                                                                                                          AdaSPS
                                                                                              10
                                                                                                            SPSmax + Naive Momentum                                                                                                          10                           MomAdaSPS
             3 × 10 1                                                                                       ALR-SMAG                                                                                                                                                      AdaGrad-Norm
                                                                                                                                                       3 × 10 1
                            0    20    40       60      80    100                                  0   20      40        60   80    100                               0      20     40        60       80    100                                  0   20   40        60       80    100
                                           Epochs                                                               Epochs                                                                  Epochs                                                              Epochs


  Figure 3: LibSVM dataset: vowel, Batch size: Figure 4: LibSVM dataset: letter, Batch size:
  52                                                                                                                                        1500
  MomSPS for DNNs. In our final experiment, we go beyond the convex setting of our conver-
  gence guarantees, and we test MomSPSmax on the training of DNNs. We consider non-convex
  minimization for multi-class classification using deep network models on the CIFAR 10 and CI-
  FAR 100 datasets (Krizhevsky et al., 2009). We use two standard image-classification architectures:
  ResNet18 and ResNet34, (He et al., 2016). For space concerns, we report only the ResNet34 exper-
  iments in the main paper and relegate the ResNet18 to the Appendix. In these experiments we run
  MomSPSmax with c = 0.4. We present the results for CIFAR 10 in Figure 5 and for CIFAR 100
  in Figure 6. We observe that MomSPSmax consistently outperforms its no-momentum counterpart
  SPSmax and has competitive generalization performance compared to other popular optimizers.
                                                                                        90
                                      SGD                                                                                                                                                                                              70
                                      SHB
                                      SPSmax                                            80
                                      MomSPSmax                                                                                                         100
                                      ADAM                                              70                                                                                                                                             60
              100                     SPSmax + Naive Momentum
                                      ALR-SMAG                                          60                     SGD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Test Accuracy (%)
                                                                    Test Accuracy (%)


                                                                                                               SHB                                                                                                                     50
                                                                                                               SPSmax
                                                                                                                                          Train Loss
Train Loss


                                                                                        50                     MomSPSmax
                                                                                                               ADAM                                                                                                                    40
                                                                                        40                     SPSmax + Naive Momentum                 10 1
             10 1                                                                                              ALR-SMAG                                                   SGD                                                                              SGD
                                                                                        30                                                                                SHB                                                          30                  SHB
                                                                                                                                                                          SPSmax                                                                           SPSmax
                                                                                                                                                                          MomSPSmax                                                                        MomSPSmax
                                                                                        20                                                                                ADAM                                                                             ADAM
                                                                                                                                                                          SPSmax + Naive Momentum                                      20                  SPSmax + Naive Momentum
                                                                                        10                                                                                ALR-SMAG                                                                         ALR-SMAG
                        0       20    40       60      80    100                                   0   20     40     60       80    100                           0         20     40       60        80    100                                   0   20   40    60           80    100
                                       Epochs                                                                   Epochs                                                               Epochs                                                                 Epochs



                            Figure 5: Resnet 34 on CIFAR 10                                                                                                       Figure 6: ResNet 34 on CIFAR 100


                                                                                                                                                        10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


R EFERENCES
Farshed Abdukhakimov, Chulu Xiang, Dmitry Kamzolov, Robert Gower, and Martin Takáč. Sania:
  Polyak-type optimization framework leads to scale invariant stochastic algorithms. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2312.17369, 2023.
Hilal Asi and John C Duchi. The importance of better models in stochastic optimization. Proceed-
  ings of the National Academy of Sciences, 116(46):22924–22930, 2019a.
Hilal Asi and John C Duchi. Stochastic (approximate) proximal point methods: Convergence, opti-
  mality, and adaptivity. SIAM Journal on Optimization, 29(3):2257–2290, 2019b.
Mahmoud Assran, Nicolas Loizou, Nicolas Ballas, and Mike Rabbat. Stochastic gradient push for
 distributed deep learning. In International Conference on Machine Learning, 2019.
Mathieu Barré, Adrien Taylor, and Alexandre d’Aspremont. Complexity guarantees for polyak steps
 with momentum. In COLT, 2020.
Leonard Berrada, Andrew Zisserman, and M Pawan Kumar. Training neural networks for and by
  interpolation. In ICML, 2020.
Dimitri Bertsekas and John N Tsitsiklis. Neuro-dynamic Programming. Athena Scientific, 1996.
Stephen Boyd, Lin Xiao, and Almir Mutapcic. Subgradient methods. Lecture Notes of EE392o,
  Stanford University, Autumn Quarter, 2003.
Karan Chadha, Gary Cheng, and John Duchi. Accelerated, optimal and parallel: Some results on
  model-based stochastic optimization. In ICML, 2022.
Chih-Chung Chang and Chih-Jen Lin. Libsvm: A library for support vector machines. ACM Trans-
  actions on Intelligent Systems and Technology, 2(3):1–27, 2011.
Sayantan Choudhury, Eduard Gorbunov, and Nicolas Loizou. Single-call stochastic extragradient
  methods for structured non-monotone variational inequalities: Improved analysis under weaker
  conditions. In NeurIPS, 2024a.
Sayantan Choudhury, Nazarii Tupitsa, Nicolas Loizou, Samuel Horvath, Martin Takac, and Eduard
  Gorbunov. Remove that square root: A new efficient scale-invariant version of adagrad. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2403.02648, 2024b.
Damek Davis, Dmitriy Drusvyatskiy, Kellie J MacPhee, and Courtney Paquette. Subgradient meth-
  ods for sharp weakly convex functions. Journal of Optimization Theory and Applications, 179
  (3):962–982, 2018.
Aaron Defazio and Samy Jelassi. A momentumized, adaptive, dual averaged gradient method.
  Journal of Machine Learning Research, 23(144):1–34, 2022.
Alexandre Défossez, Léon Bottou, Francis R. Bach, and Nicolas Usunier. A simple convergence
  proof of adam and adagrad. Transactions on Machine Learning Research, 2022, 2022.
Ryan D’Orazio, Nicolas Loizou, Issam H Laradji, and Ioannis Mitliagkas. Stochastic mirror descent:
  Convergence analysis and adaptive variants via the mirror stochastic polyak stepsize. Transactions
  on Machine Learning Research, 2023.
John Duchi, Elad Hazan, and Yoram Singer. Adaptive subgradient methods for online learning and
  stochastic optimization. Journal of Machine Learning Research, 12(7), 2011.
Guillaume Garrigos and Robert M Gower. Handbook of convergence theorems for (stochastic)
  gradient methods. arXiv preprint arXiv:2301.11235, 2023.
Guillaume Garrigos, Robert M Gower, and Fabian Schaipp. Function value learning: Adap-
  tive learning rates based on the polyak stepsize and function splitting in erm. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2307.14528, 2023.

                                                11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Euhanna Ghadimi, Hamid Reza Feyzmahdavian, and Mikael Johansson. Global convergence of the
  heavy-ball method for convex optimization. In European Control Conference (ECC), 2015.
Igor Gitman, Hunter Lang, Pengchuan Zhang, and Lin Xiao. Understanding the role of momentum
  in stochastic gradient methods. In NeurIPS, 2019.
Eduard Gorbunov, Hugo Berard, Gauthier Gidel, and Nicolas Loizou. Stochastic extragradient:
  General analysis and improved rates. In AISTATS, 2022.
Robert Gower, Othmane Sebbouh, and Nicolas Loizou. SGD for structured nonconvex functions:
  Learning rates, minibatching and interpolation. In AISTATS, 2021.
Robert M Gower, Mathieu Blondel, Nidham Gazagnadou, and Fabian Pedregosa. Cutting some
  slack for SGD with adaptive polyak stepsizes. arXiv preprint arXiv:2202.12328, 2022.
Robert Mansel Gower, Nicolas Loizou, Xun Qian, Alibek Sailanbayev, Egor Shulgin, and Peter
  Richtárik. SGD: General analysis and improved rates. In ICML, 2019.
Moritz Hardt, Benjamin Recht, and Yoram Singer. Train faster, generalize better: Stability of
 stochastic gradient descent. In ICML, 2016.
Trevor Hastie, Robert Tibshirani, and Jerome H Friedman. The Elements of Statistical Learning:
  Data Mining, Inference, and Prediction, volume 2. Springer, 2009.
Elad Hazan and Sham Kakade. Revisiting the polyak step size. arXiv preprint arXiv:1905.00313,
  2019.
Kaiming He, Xiangyu Zhang, Shaoqing Ren, and Jian Sun. Deep residual learning for image recog-
  nition. In CVPR, 2016.
Geoffrey Hinton, Nitish Srivastava, and Kevin Swersky. Neural networks for machine learning:
  Lecture 6a overview of mini-batch gradient descent. Lecture Notes, page 2, 2012.
Xiaowen Jiang and Sebastian U Stich. Adaptive SGD with polyak stepsize and line-search: Robust
  convergence and variance reduction. In NeurIPS, 2023.
Ahmed Khaled, Othmane Sebbouh, Nicolas Loizou, Robert M Gower, and Peter Richtárik. Unified
  analysis of stochastic gradient methods for composite convex and smooth optimization. Journal
  of Optimization Theory and Applications, 199(2):499–540, 2023.
Rahul Kidambi, Praneeth Netrapalli, Prateek Jain, and Sham Kakade. On the insufficiency of ex-
  isting momentum schemes for stochastic optimization. In Information Theory and Applications
  Workshop (ITA), pages 1–9. IEEE, 2018.
Diederik Kingma and Jimmy Ba. Adam: A method for stochastic optimization. In ICLR, 2015.
Anastasia Koloskova, Nicolas Loizou, Sadra Boreiri, Martin Jaggi, and Sebastian Stich. A unified
  theory of decentralized sgd with changing topology and local updates. In ICML, 2020.
Alex Krizhevsky et al. Learning Multiple Layers of Features from Tiny Images. Technical report,
  University of Toronto, 2009.
Melanie L Lenard and Michael Minkoff. Randomly generated test problems for positive definite
 quadratic programming. ACM Transactions on Mathematical Software (TOMS), 10(1):86–96,
 1984.
Shuang Li, William J. Swartworth, Martin Takác, Deanna Needell, and Robert M. Gower. SP2 : A
  second order stochastic polyak method. In ICLR, 2023.
Xiaoyu Li and Francesco Orabona. On the convergence of stochastic gradient descent with adaptive
  stepsizes. In AISTATS, 2019.
Tengyuan Liang and Alexander Rakhlin. Just iterpolate: Kernel “ridgeless” regression can general-
  ize. The Annals of Statistics, 48(3):1329–1347, 2020.

                                               12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Yanli Liu, Yuan Gao, and Wotao Yin. An improved analysis of stochastic gradient descent with
  momentum. In NeurIPS, 2020.
Nicolas Loizou and Peter Richtárik. Momentum and stochastic momentum for stochastic gradi-
  ent, newton, proximal point and subspace descent methods. Computational Optimization and
  Applications, 77(3):653–710, 2020.
Nicolas Loizou, Hugo Berard, Alexia Jolicoeur-Martineau, Pascal Vincent, Simon Lacoste-Julien,
  and Ioannis Mitliagkas. Stochastic hamiltonian gradient methods for smooth games. In ICML,
  2020.
Nicolas Loizou, Sharan Vaswani, Issam Hadj Laradji, and Simon Lacoste-Julien. Stochastic polyak
  step-size for SGD: An adaptive learning rate for fast convergence. In AISTATS, 2021.
Ilya Loshchilov and Frank Hutter. Decoupled weight decay regularization. In ICLR, 2019.
Jerry Ma and Denis Yarats. Quasi-hyperbolic momentum and adam for deep learning. In ICLR,
   2019.
Siyuan Ma, Raef Bassily, and Mikhail Belkin. The power of interpolation: Understanding the
  effectiveness of SGD in modern over-parametrized learning. In ICML, 2018.
Sohom Mukherjee, Nicolas Loizou, and Sebastian U Stich. Locally adaptive federated learning via
  stochastic polyak stepsizes. arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.06306, 2023.
D. Needell, N. Srebro, and R. Ward. Stochastic gradient descent, weighted sampling, and the ran-
  domized kaczmarz algorithm. Mathematical Programming, Series A, 155(1):549–573, 2016.
Arkadi Nemirovski and David B. Yudin. Problem Complexity and Method Efficiency in Optimiza-
  tion. Wiley Interscience, 1983.
Arkadi Nemirovski, Anatoli Juditsky, Guanghui Lan, and Alexander Shapiro. Robust stochastic
  approximation approach to stochastic programming. SIAM Journal on Optimization, 19(4):1574–
  1609, 2009.
Yurii Nesterov. A method of solving a convex programming problem with convergence rate o(1/k 2 ).
  In Doklady Akademii Nauk, volume 269, pages 543–547. Russian Academy of Sciences, 1983.
Yurii Nesterov. Lectures on Convex Optimization, volume 137. Springer, 2018.
Lam Nguyen, Phuong Ha Nguyen, Marten Dijk, Peter Richtárik, Katya Scheinberg, and Martin
  Takác. Sgd and hogwild! convergence without the bounded gradients assumption. In ICML,
  2018.
Antonio Orvieto, Simon Lacoste-Julien, and Nicolas Loizou. Dynamics of SGD with stochastic
  polyak stepsizes: Truly adaptive variants and convergence to exact solution. In NeurIPS, 2022.
Boris T Polyak. Some methods of speeding up the convergence of iteration methods. USSR Com-
  putational Mathematics and Mathematical Physics, 4(5):1–17, 1964.
Boris T Polyak. Introduction to Optimization. New York, Optimization Software, 1987.
Mariana Oliveira Prazeres and Adam M. Oberman. Stochastic gradient descent with polyak’s learn-
 ing rate. Journal Scientific Computing, 89(1):25, 2021.
Alexander Rakhlin, Ohad Shamir, and Karthik Sridharan. Making gradient descent optimal for
  strongly convex stochastic optimization. In ICML, 2012.
Benjamin Recht, Christopher Re, Stephen Wright, and Feng Niu. Hogwild!: A lock-free approach
  to parallelizing stochastic gradient descent. In NeurIPS, 2011.
Sashank J. Reddi, Satyen Kale, and Sanjiv Kumar. On the convergence of adam and beyond. In
  ICLR, 2018.


                                               13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Herbert Robbins and Sutton Monro. A stochastic approximation method. The Annals of Mathemat-
  ical Statistics, pages 400–407, 1951.
Michal Rolinek and Georg Martius. L4: Practical loss-based stepsize adaptation for deep learning.
 In NeurIPS, 2018.
Samer Saab Jr, Shashi Phoha, Minghui Zhu, and Asok Ray. An adaptive polyak heavy-ball method.
  Machine Learning, 111(9):3245–3277, 2022.
Fabian Schaipp, Robert M. Gower, and Michael Ulbrich. A stochastic proximal polyak step size.
  Transactions on Machine Learning Research, 2023a.
Fabian Schaipp, Ruben Ohana, Michael Eickenberg, Aaron Defazio, and Robert M Gower. Momo:
  Momentum models for adaptive learning rates. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.07583, 2023b.
Mark Schmidt and Nicolas Le Roux. Fast convergence of stochastic gradient descent under a strong
 growth condition. arXiv preprint arXiv:1308.6370, 2013.
Othmane Sebbouh, Robert M Gower, and Aaron Defazio. Almost sure convergence rates for stochas-
  tic gradient descent and stochastic heavy ball. In COLT, 2021.
Ohad Shamir and Tong Zhang. Stochastic gradient descent for non-smooth optimization: Conver-
  gence results and optimal averaging schemes. In ICML, 2013.
Zheng Shi, Abdurakhmon Sadiev, Nicolas Loizou, Peter Richtárik, and Martin Takáč. Ai-sarah:
  Adaptive and implicit stochastic recursive gradient methods. Transactions on Machine Learning
  Research, 2022.
Ilya Sutskever, James Martens, George Dahl, and Geoffrey Hinton. On the importance of initializa-
   tion and momentum in deep learning. In ICML, 2013.
Conghui Tan, Shiqian Ma, Yu-Hong Dai, and Yuqiu Qian. Barzilai-borwein step size for stochastic
  gradient descent. In NeurIPS, 2016.
Sharan Vaswani, Francis Bach, and Mark Schmidt. Fast and faster convergence of SGD for over-
  parameterized models and an accelerated perceptron. In AISTATS, 2019a.
Sharan Vaswani, Aaron Mishkin, Issam Laradji, Mark Schmidt, Gauthier Gidel, and Simon Lacoste-
  Julien. Painless stochastic gradient: Interpolation, line-search, and convergence rates. In NeurIPS,
  2019b.
Sharan Vaswani, Issam Laradji, Frederik Kunstner, Si Yi Meng, Mark Schmidt, and Simon Lacoste-
  Julien. Adaptive gradient methods converge faster with over-parameterization (but you should do
  a line-search). arXiv preprint arXiv:2006.06835, 2020.
Jun-Kun Wang, Chi-Heng Lin, Andre Wibisono, and Bin Hu. Provable acceleration of heavy ball
  beyond quadratics for a class of polyak-lojasiewicz functions when the non-convexity is averaged-
  out. In ICML, 2022.
Xiaoyu Wang, Mikael Johansson, and Tong Zhang. Generalized polyak step size for first order
  optimization with momentum. In ICML, 2023.
Rachel Ward, Xiaoxia Wu, and Leon Bottou. Adagrad stepsizes: Sharp convergence over nonconvex
  landscapes. The Journal of Machine Learning Research, 21(1):9047–9076, 2020.
Yan Yan, Tianbao Yang, Zhe Li, Qihang Lin, and Yi Yang. A unified analysis of stochastic mo-
  mentum methods for deep learning. In Proceedings of the Twenty-Seventh International Joint
  Conference on Artificial Intelligence, IJCAI, 2018.
Yun Zeng, Deren Han, Yansheng Su, and Jiaxin Xie. On adaptive stochastic heavy ball momentum
  for solving linear systems. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.05482, 2023.
Chiyuan Zhang, Samy Bengio, Moritz Hardt, Benjamin Recht, and Oriol Vinyals. Understanding
  deep learning (still) requires rethinking generalization. Communications of the ACM, 64(3):107–
  115, 2021.


                                                 14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Supplementary Material
The Supplementary Material is organized as follows: In Appendix A, we have more details on
related work on adaptive and momentum methods. In Appendix B, we include the main pseudo-
codes for our algorithms. In Appendix C, we give the basic definitions and lemmas as well as
the basic theory of IMA. Appendix D presents the proofs of the theoretical guarantees from the
main paper. In Appendix F, we describe in detail our experimental setup and provide additional
experiments.

C ONTENTS

1   Introduction                                                                                               1
    1.1   Main Contributions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     2

2   Exploring the Interplay of SPS and Heavy Ball Momentum                                                     3
    2.1   Background on Stochastic Polyak Step-size . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      3
    2.2   Naive SPS in SHB . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     4
    2.3   Iterative Moving Average: Balance between SPS and Momentum . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .             5

3   Convergence Analysis                                                                                       6
    3.1   Convergence to a neighborhood of the solution . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      7
    3.2   Convergence to the exact solution . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    8

4   Numerical Experiments                                                                                      9

A Further Related Work                                                                                        17

B Pseudo-codes                                                                                                19

C Technical Preliminaries                                                                                     21
    C.1 Basic Definitions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     21
    C.2 Basic Lemmas . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      21
    C.3 Iterate Moving Average . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      22
    C.4 Connection of MomSPSmax and SPSmax . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .            23

D Proofs of the main results                                                                                  25
    D.1 Proof of Theorem 3.2 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      25
    D.2 Proof of Theorem 3.6 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      28
    D.3 Proof of Theorem 3.7 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      31

E Beyond the bounded iterates assumption                                                                      33

F Additional Experiments                                                                                      35
    F.1   Extra Deterministic Experiment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    35
    F.2   Stochastic Heavy Ball with Constant Step-size . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     35
    F.3   Other Choices . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   35
    F.4   Is γb needed? . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   37


                                                       15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


   F.5   Plots for C1 and C2 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   38
   F.6   More convex experiments and parameter settings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      39
   F.7   More deep learning experiments and parameter settings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       39


                                                      16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A    F URTHER R ELATED W ORK

Adaptive methods. Two of the first adaptive algorithms are AdaGrad (Duchi et al., 2011) and
RMSProp (Hinton et al., 2012). The very popular algorithm Adam (Kingma and Ba, 2015) was in-
troduced as a momentum extension of RMSProp, and its more recent weight-decay variant AdamW
(Loshchilov and Hutter, 2019) is the de facto optimizer for deep neural networks. Investigating the
convergence guarantees of adaptive methods across various settings continues to be an active area of
research (Vaswani et al., 2020; Ward et al., 2020; Li and Orabona, 2019; Shi et al., 2022; Défossez
et al., 2022; Choudhury et al., 2024b; Defazio and Jelassi, 2022).

More recently, a new line of work for adaptive algorithms has appeared, inspired by Polyak step-
sizes. Some attempts for efficiently generalizing the Polyak step-size from the deterministic setting
to the stochastic were made in Rolinek and Martius (2018); Prazeres and Oberman (2021); Berrada
et al. (2020). Loizou et al. (2021) was the first work proposing SPSmax and providing strong conver-
gence guarantees in different settings, including strongly convex, convex, and non-convex functions.
Further extensions with decreasing variants were proposed in Orvieto et al. (2022); Jiang and Stich
(2023). Many recent works propose SPS-type update rules for solving optimization problems in
different settings. For example, extensions of SPS to proximal setting analyzed in Schaipp et al.
(2023a), SPS variants for mirror descent presented in D’Orazio et al. (2023), and SPS for federated
learning proposed in Mukherjee et al. (2023). There are also strong connections between SPS and
Model-Based approaches (Asi and Duchi, 2019a;b; Chadha et al., 2022). For further results related
to SPS, see Gower et al. (2022); Li et al. (2023); Garrigos et al. (2023) and Abdukhakimov et al.
(2023).

Momentum with constant step-size. Polyak (1964) introduced the concept of momentum for
the Gradient Descent (GD) method. He showed that for strongly convex quadratic problems,       √ the
                                                                                          ∗
momentum     method   provably  accelerates   GD   with  optimal  momentum  coefficient β   = (  L−
√ 2 √           √                        √
  µ) /( L + µ)2 and γ ∗ = (1 + β ∗ )2 /L where µ is the strong convexity constant and L the
smoothness constant. Ghadimi et al. (2015) proved a global sublinear convergence guarantee for HB
for convex and smooth functions and global linear convergence when the function is also smooth and
strongly convex. Moreover, Nesterov (1983) introduced Nesterov’s Accelerated Gradient Descent
(AGD) method, where he shows acceleration over GD for strongly convex and smooth as well as
convex and smooth objectives. Note that both of these methods require knowledge of both µ and
L. In the stochastic setting, Liu et al. (2020) provides new convergence guarantees for SHB with
constant step-size. In particular, it shows that for both strongly convex and non-convex objectives,
SHB enjoys the same convergence bound as SGD. Sebbouh et al. (2021), among other things, shows
that in the smooth and convex setting SHB converges in expectation   √ at the last iterate with a rate
of O(1/T ) to a neighborhood of the minimum and at a O(log T / T ) rate to the minimum exactly.
For these guarantees, one needs knowledge of the problem parameters (such as the smoothness
constant), and their results hold for a specific selection of the momentum parameter. Momentum has
also been successfully applied in linear systems, see Loizou and Richtárik (2020) where it provides
convergence guarantees of SGD, stochastic Newton, stochastic proximal point, and stochastic dual
subspace ascent with momentum for consistent linear systems.

Adaptive Momentum. In this paragraph, we review the bibliography for adaptive methods with
momentum. Momentum can be either SHB or Nesterov’s acceleration, and in this case, the adaptiv-
ity can be either the step-size or the momentum coefficient. In the deterministic setting, Barré et al.
(2020) proposed the Accelerated Gradient Method (AGM), an adaptive algorithm built upon AGD
that guarantees acceleration over GD. AGM approximates the strong convexity constant µ by the
inverse of the classical Polyak Step-size. However, their algorithm still requires the knowledge of L
(but not µ). Furthermore, Saab Jr et al. (2022) suggests an Adaptive Heavy Ball (AHB) algorithm
where it approximates the constants µ and L iteratively in each step based on the formula of the
optimal constants of HB, but it does not show any acceleration over HB or GD. In the stochastic set-
ting, Wang et al. (2023) propose an adaptive algorithm for a moving averaged gradient momentum,
named ALR-SMAG. It shows that ALR-SMAG enjoys a linear convergence rate for semi-strongly
convex and smooth functions. Schaipp et al. (2023b) proposes a new adaptive learning rate that
can be combined with any momentum-based method. Finally, Zeng et al. (2023) proposes adaptive
variants for SHB in linear systems solvers.


                                                  17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


On Technical Assumptions for Convergence. In the literature of stochastic optimization prob-
lems, there are several assumptions on the noise of the stochastic estimators that typically are made
on top of smoothness and convexity to prove the convergence of stochastic optimization algorithms.

For example, many works (Recht et al., 2011; Rakhlin et al., 2012; Shamir and Zhang, 2013; Nguyen
et al., 2018) assume bounded gradients, i.e., that is, there exists a M ∈ R such that E ∥∇fi (x)∥2 ≤
M . While this might look like a natural assumption, in the unconstrained setting, it contradicts
the assumption of strong convexity leading to convergence guarantees that hold for an empty set of
problems (Nguyen et al., 2018; Gower et al., 2019; 2021). A much more relaxed assumption used
in the literature is the growth condition on the stochastic gradients, (Bertsekas and Tsitsiklis, 1996;
Schmidt and Roux, 2013; Vaswani et al., 2019a). It states that there exist constants ρ ∈ R and δ ∈ R
such that E ∥∇fi (x)∥2 ≤ ρ∥∇f (x)∥2 +δ. Based on a strong growth condition (δ = 0), Schmidt and
Roux (2013) were the first to establish linear convergence of SGD, with Vaswani et al. (2019a) later
showing that SGD can find a first-order stationary point as efficiently as full gradient descent in non-
convex settings. Similar conditions have also been proved and used in the analysis of decentralized
variants of SGD (Koloskova et al., 2020; Assran et al., 2019). More recently, a line of work that uses
smoothness (via expected smoothness/residual conditions) to provide closed-form expressions for
the values of ρ and δ of growth condition was able to provide tight convergence analysis of several
stochastic algorithms, including SGD (Gower et al., 2019; 2021), variance reduced methods (Khaled
et al., 2023), stochastic algorithms for min-max optimization (Loizou et al., 2021; 2020; Gorbunov
et al., 2022; Choudhury et al., 2024a).

In the convex regime, the original analysis of SGD with SPS of Loizou et al. (2021) was one of the
first papers that did not require any additional assumptions to guarantee convergence for SGD. Fol-
lowing the convergence guarantees of Loizou et al. (2021), we highlight that our proposed analysis
of SHB with Polyak step-size does not require any additional assumptions for guaranteeing conver-
gence. To the best of our knowledge, as mentioned in the main paper, our approach provides the
first analysis of SHB without the restrictive bounded variance and growth conditions.

For proving convergence of SHB, Liu et al. (2020) makes the strong assumption of bounded variance
and assumes knowledge of the smoothness L for tuning the parameters. Another work on theoretical
guarantees for SHB is Sebbouh et al. (2021), where a last iterate convergence is proved for
                                                                                         √ a specific
choice of γt and βt , but also requires knowledge of L and only achieves rate O(log T / T ) for the
decreasing step-size variant. Furthermore, the authors of Wang et al. (2022) propose a Polyak-based
stepsize for a moving averaged gradient momentum variant, different from SHB, and provide guar-
antees for the deterministic and stochastic setting for strongly convex objectives. Finally, Schaipp
et al. (2023b) assumes a stochastic convex and interpolated regime for their results.


                                                  18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


B     P SEUDO - CODES

In this section, we include the pseudo-codes of the SHB with the proposed stochastic Polyak step-
sizes for a better understanding of the methods and easier comparison with other algorithms.

SHB with MomSPSmax. We start with the pseudo-code for SHB with            h MomSPS    max . In The-
                                                                                α
orem 3.2 we established convergence to a neighborhood for β ∈ 0, 2γb −α where α =
     n          o
min 2L1max , γb and for c = 1. However, in practice, it seems to have convergence even for
different choices of c or even if β is chosen outside of this bound, so we provide the pseudo-code
for a general β ∈ [0, 1) and c. Thus, the user must provide the momentum coefficient β, the upper
bound γb , the constant c, and the lower bounds ℓ∗St . In practice, the usual choices are β = 0.9,
c = 1, and ℓ∗St = 0.


Algorithm 1 SHB with MomSPSmax
 1: Parameters: β ∈ [0, 1), γb > 0, c > 0, ℓ∗St lower bounds
 2: Initialization: x0 ∈ Rd , x−1 = x0
 3: for t = 0, 1, 2, . . . do
 4:     Choose uniformly      at random St ⊆ {1,
                                                . . . , n}
                                  fSt (xt )−ℓ∗
                                             St
 5:      γt = (1 − β) min        c∥∇fSt (xt )∥2 , γb

 6:    xt+1 = xt − γt ∇fSt (xt ) + β(xt − xt−1 )
 7: end for



SHB with MomDecSPS. For the decreasing step-sizes, Theorems 3.6 and 3.7 make no assumption
on β ∈ [0, 1). For SHB with MomDecSPS, the user needs to provide the momentum coefficient β,
the upper bound γb , the constant c and the lower bounds ℓSt , like the previous algorithm. In practice,
the usual choices are c = 1 and ℓ∗St = 0. Note that when t = 0, the step-size is equal to

                        (1 − β)[fS0 (x0 ) − ℓ∗S0 ] γb c                             fS0 (x0 ) − ℓ∗S0

         γ0 = min                                 ,             = (1 − β) min                        , γb ,
                            c∥∇fS0 (x0 )∥2          c                               c∥∇fS0 (x0 )∥2

which is equal to MomSPSmax for t = 0.

Algorithm 2 SHB with MomDecSPS
                                                                                      √
 1: Parameters: β ∈ [0, 1), γ−1 = γb > 0, c > 0, c−1 = c > 0, ct = c t + 1 for t ≥ 0, ℓ∗St lower
      bounds
 2: Initialization: x0 ∈ Rd , x−1 = x0
 3: for t = 0, 1, 2, . . . do
 4:     Choose uniformly
                              at random St ⊆ {1, .
                                                   . . , n}
                        (1−β)[fSt (xt )−ℓ∗St ] γt−1 ct−1
 5:      γt = min         ct ∥∇fSt (xt )∥2    ,   ct

 6:    xt+1 = xt − γt ∇fSt (xt ) + β(xt − xt−1 )
 7: end for



SHB with MomAdaSPS. Finally, for SHB with MomAdaSPS the requirements are less since the
user only needs to provide the momentum coefficient β, the constant c and the lower bounds ℓ∗St .
Furthermore, according to Jiang and Stich (2023) one can set c = √f (x10 )−ℓ∗ after randomly
                                                                                       S0      S0

choosing S0 ⊆ [n] in the first iteration. Moreover, the minimum with respect to γt−1 is to ensure
that the step-size is decreasing.


                                                           19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Algorithm 3 SHB with MomAdaSPS
 1: Parameters: β ∈ [0, 1), γ−1 = +∞, c > 0, ℓ∗St lower bounds
 2: Initialization: x0 ∈ Rd , x−1 = x0
 3: for t = 0, 1, 2, . . . do
 4:     Choose uniformly
                              at random St ⊆ {1, . . . , n}
                          (1−β)[fSt (xt )−ℓ∗St ]
 5:     γt = min                  √Pt                 ∗
                                                        , γt−1
                   c∥∇fSt (xt )∥2                s
                                     s=0 fSs (x )−ℓSs
          t+1    t              t         t       t−1
 6:     x     = x − γt ∇fSt (x ) + β(x − x )
 7: end for



Note that for all the above algorithms, one needs only lower bounds ℓ∗St , which can be chosen equal
to ℓ∗St = 0 in practice. Of course, if the true infima fS∗t = inf x∈Rd fSt are known, then one should
use them because it will lead to better convergence in terms of the neighborhood. Furthermore,
notice that we start by initializing x−1 = x0 , where x0 is the given starting point. This is because
the first step of SHB (i.e. for t = 0) is just an iteration of SGD because we have no previous iterate
x−1 , that is x1 = x0 − γ0 ∇fS0 (x0 ) + β(x0 − x−1 ) = x0 − γ0 ∇fS0 (x0 ).


                                                    20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


C     T ECHNICAL P RELIMINARIES

C.1    BASIC D EFINITIONS

In this section, we present some basic definitions we use throughout the paper.

 Definition C.1 (Convexity). A differentiable function f : Rd → R is convex if
                                  f (x) ≥ f (y) + ⟨∇f (y), x − y⟩,
 for all x, y ∈ Rd .


 Definition C.2 (L-smooth). A differentiable function f : Rd → R is L-smooth if there exists a
 constant L > 0 such that
                                 ∥∇f (x) − ∇f (y)∥ ≤ L∥x − y∥,
 or equivalently
                                                                    L
                          |f (x) − f (y) − ⟨∇f (y), x − y⟩| ≤         ∥x − y∥2
                                                                    2
 for all x, y ∈ Rd .


C.2    BASIC L EMMAS

Here we have gathered useful lemmas for various Polyak related step-sizes. These lemmas are used
repeatedly in the proofs of the main results.
 Lemma C.3 ((Loizou et al., 2021)). Suppose each fi is Li -smooth, then the step-size of SPSmax
 satisfies:

                         1
            α = min          , γb ≤ γt ≤ γb and γt2 ∥∇fSt (xt )∥2 ≤ γt [fSt (xt ) − ℓ∗St ],  (2)
                      2cLmax
 where Lmax = maxi∈[n] {Li }.


 Lemma C.4 (Lemma 1, (Orvieto et al., 2022)). Suppose each fi is Li -smooth, then the step-size
 of DecSPS satisfies

            1      c0 γb          c0 γb                                      γt
  min            ,         ≤ γt ≤       and γt−1 ≤ γt and γt2 ∥∇fSt (xt )∥2 ≤ [fSt (xt ) − ℓ∗St ],
        2ct Lmax ct                ct                                        ct
                                                                                              (3)
 where Lmax = maxi∈[n] {Li }.


 Lemma C.5 (Lemma 12, (Jiang and Stich, 2023)). For any non-negative sequence a0 , . . . , aT ,
 the following holds:
                       v                               v
                       u T          T                  u T
                       uX          X       a  t
                                                       uX
                       t      at ≤      qP         ≤ 2t      at .                           (4)
                                            t
                          t=0      t=0      s=0 as       t=0

 If a0 ≥ 1, then the following holds:
                               T                         T
                                                                    !
                                       a
                                     qP t
                               X                         X
                                                 ≤ log         at       + 1.                   (5)
                                       t
                               t=0      s=0 as           t=0


                                                 21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                       2
 Lemma C.6 (Lemma  √ 13, (Jiang and Stich, 2023)). If x ≤ a(x + b) for a ≥ 0 and b ≥ 0, then it
 holds that x ≤ a + ab.

 Lemma C.7 (Lemma 16, (Jiang and Stich, 2023)). Suppose each fi is Li -smooth, then the step-
 size of AdaSPS satisfies
            1                  1                        fSt (xt ) − ℓ∗St           1
                                               ≤ ηt ≤                                              ,    (6)
                                                        c∥∇fSt (xt )∥2 Pt
               q                                                         q
         2cLmax Pt                  s     ∗                                             s     ∗
                          s=0 fSs (x ) − ℓSs                                  s=0 fSs (x ) − ℓSs

 where Lmax = maxi∈[n] {Li }.


C.3   I TERATE M OVING AVERAGE

As mentioned in the main paper, the iterates of the SHB method are equal to the 2.3 method. The
following proposition is from Sebbouh et al. (2021). We include the proof for completeness.
 Proposition C.8 (Proposition 1.6, (Sebbouh et al., 2021)). Let ηt > 0 and λt ≥ 0. Consider the
 Iterate Moving Average (IMA) method given by the following update rule:
                                   z t+1 = z t − ηt ∇fSt (xt )                                          (7)
                                               λt+1            1
                                   xt+1 =            xt +           z t+1 ,                             (8)
                                           λt+1 + 1        λt+1 + 1
 where z 0 = x0 . If the following equations hold for any t ∈ N
                                                          λt
                                            1 + λt+1 =                                                  (9)
                                                          βt
                                            ηt = (1 + λt+1 )γt ,                                       (10)
 then the xt iterates of the 2.3 method are equal to the xt iterates produced by the SHB method.


Proof. We will start from the 2.3 update rule and we will prove that its (xt ) iterates satisfy the
SHB update rule. Suppose that we have the (z t+1 ) and (xt+1 ) iterates as well as the (λt ) and (ηt )
sequences. Define the sequences (βt ) and (γt ) using eqs. (9) and (10). We will show that (xt )
iterates satisfy the SHB update rule. Solving for z t+1 in eq. (8) we get
                                     z t+1 := xt+1 + λt+1 (xt+1 − xt )                                 (11)
Now substituting eqs. (7) and (11) in eq. (8) we have
                         λt+1             1
             xt+1 =             xt +           z t+1
                       λt+1 + 1       λt+1 + 1
                   (7)   λt+1             1
                                xt +              z t − ηt ∇fSt (xt )

                   =
                       λt+1 + 1       λt+1 + 1
                  (11)    λt+1             1
                                 xt +             xt + λt (xt − xt−1 ) − ηt ∇fSt (xt ))

                   =
                        λt+1 + 1       λt+1 + 1
                               η t                      λt
                   = xt −            ∇fSt (xt ) +              (xt − xt−1 )
                            λt+1 + 1                λ+t+1 + 1
                 (9,10)
                   = xt − γt ∇fSt (xt ) + βt (xt − xt−1 ),
as wanted.


The above proposition essentially states that momentum is a convex combination of SGD under
a certain transformation. In this paper, we work only with a constant momentum coefficient, i.e.,
βt = β. For this case, we also assume constant λt , and we have Proposition 2.1 and Corollary 2.2.


                                                     22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Proof of Proposition 2.1. Setting λt = λ in Equation (9) we have
                                              λ          λ
                                   1+λ=          ⇒ βt =     =: β.
                                              βt        1+λ
                               β
Then solving for λ we get λ = 1−β . Hence
                                                    ηt
                                              γt =
                                                  1+λ
                                                     ηt
                                                =       β
                                                  1 + 1−β
                                                = (1 − β)ηt



Proof of Corollary 2.2.          • Let ηt = SPSmax . Then
                                    γt = (1 − β)ηt
                                                      fSt (xt ) − ℓ∗St

                                      = (1 − β) min                    , ηb
                                                      c∥∇fSt (xt )∥2
                                                      fSt (xt ) − ℓ∗St

                                      = (1 − β) min                    , γb .
                                                      c∥∇fSt (xt )∥2
         Here γb = ηb .
      • Let ηt = DecSPS. Then
                            γt = (1 − β)ηt
                                                 fSt (xt ) − ℓ∗St ηt−1 ct−1

                               = (1 − β) min                      ,
                                                ct ∥∇fSt (xt )∥2      ct
                                       (1 − β)[fSt (xt ) − ℓ∗St ] (1 − β)ηt−1 ct−1

                               = min                             ,
                                           ct ∥∇fSt (xt )∥2              ct
                                                       t      ∗
                                       (1 − β)[fSt (x ) − ℓSt ] γt−1 ct−1

                               = min                             ,            ,
                                           ct ∥∇fSt (xt )∥2          ct
         since γt−1 = (1 − β)ηt−1 from Proposition 2.1.
      • Let ηt = AdaSPS. Then
                    γt = (1 − β)ηt
                                                                                         
                                                      fSt (xt ) − ℓ∗St                   
                          = (1 − β) min                   qP                       , ηt−1
                                         c∥∇f (xt )∥2          t         s      ∗
                                                                s=0 fSs (x ) − ℓSs
                                                                                          
                                                St
                                                                                        
                                         (1 − β)[fSt (xt ) − ℓ∗St ]                     
                          = min                 qP                         , (1 − β)ηt−1
                                 c∥∇f (xt )∥2        t           s     ∗
                                                      s=0 fSs (x ) − ℓSs
                                                                                         
                                        St
                                                                                
                                         (1 − β)[fSt (xt ) − ℓ∗St ]             
                          = min                 qP                         , γt−1 .
                                                      t
                                 c∥∇f (xt )∥2
                                         St                f (xs ) − ℓ∗
                                                          s=0   Ss     Ss
                                                                                 


C.4   C ONNECTION OF M OM SPSmax AND SPSmax

In this section, we explore the connection between the MomSPSmax and the SPSmax step-sizes.
In particular, one can view the MomSPSmax step-size as the SPSmax step-size with c = 1/(1 −


                                                     23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


β). Here, we explain why these are two different step-sizes. Recall from Proposition 2.1 and
Corollary 2.2 that our proposed step-sizes for the SHB setting are scaled versions of Polyak step-
sizes for SGD. In particular, let’s assume that
                                                fSt (xt ) − fS∗t

                      γtSP Smax = min                            , γ SP Smax
                                           cSP Smax ∥∇fSt (xt )∥2 b
and
                                                    fSt (xt ) − fS∗t

          γtM omSP Smax = (1 − β) min                                   , γ M omSP Smax
                                              cM omSP Smax ∥∇fSt (xt )∥2 b
            t          t
so we have γSP Smax = γM omSP Smax if and only if

                   1−β            1
                            =          and γbSP Smax = (1 − β)γbM omSP Smax .
               cM omSP Smax   cSP Smax
Without loss of generalization, we can assume that cM omSP Smax = 1 (this is also what Theo-
                                                     1
rem 3.2 guarantees). In this case we get β = 1 − cSP Smax . Hence, we can restate Theorem 3.2 as
follows:
 Theorem C.9. Assume
                 h             fi is convex and Li -smooth. Then,
                      that each                                 n the iterates
                                                                             o of SHB with
                       b −2α
 SPSmax with c ∈ 1, 2γ
                     2γb −α   and β  =  1 −  1
                                             c where  α =   min     1
                                                                  2Lmax , γb   and Lmax =
 maxi∈[n] {Li }, converge as
                                                    C1 ∥x0 − x∗ ∥2
                           E[f (xT ) − f (x∗ )] ≤                  + C2 σ 2 ,
                                                          T
                 PT −1                                                       1−β
 where xT = T1      t=0   xt is the Cesaro average and the constants C1 = αβ+α−2βγ b
                                                                                     and C2 =
 2γb −αβ−α
 αβ+α−2βγb .


This means that MomSPSmax can be viewed as a special case of SPSmax . However, note that the
update rules are different since in SHB we have the extra term +β(xt − xt−1 ) so a different analysis
is needed.

The same line of thought can be applied to other works related to HB. For example, in Ghadimi
et al. (2015), the first global guarantees for HB were established. The authors show that for a convex
and L-smooth function f HB with any β ∈ [0, 1) and 0 < γ < 2(1−β)        L   converges with a rate of
O(1/T ). Also, recall that GD for convex and L-smooth function converges for 0 < γ < L2 with rate
O(1/T ). Hence, we can restate the result of Ghadimi et al. (2015) as follows: Let f be a convex
and L-smooth function. Then HB with γ = Lc , where c ∈ (0, 2), and β = 1 − 2c converges with rate
O(1/T ).

Similarly, for SGD in the convex and smooth setting, we are guaranteed convergence O(1/T ) to a
                                        1
neighborhood of the solution when γ ≤   L . In Liu et al. (2020),
                                                                the authors guarantee that SHB
                                    2
with any β ∈ (0, 1) and γ ≤ (1−β)
                              L   min            1       √ 1
                                              4−β+β 2 , 2 2β 2 +2β    converges with rate O(1/T ) to a
                       be restated as follows: SHB with γ = Lc , where c ∈ (0, 1), and β given by
neighborhood. This can
                            (1−β)2           2
the solution of c = min               √(1−β)
                           4−β+β 2 , 2 2β 2 +2β     , converges with rate O(1/T ) to a neighborhood.


                                                    24
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


D     P ROOFS OF THE MAIN RESULTS
In this section we present the proofs of the main theoretical results presented in the main paper, i.e.,
the convergence analysis of SHB with MomSPSmax , MomDecSPS and MomAdaSPS for convex
and smooth functions fi and f of Problem 1. The idea for all the proofs is that we firstly show the
corresponding result in the 2.3 setting, and then we transfer it to the SHB setting with the help of
Proposition 2.1.

Compared to the analysis of SGD with SPS, the SHB update rule requires taking into consideration
extra terms related to the previous iterate xt−1 . This needs new algebraic tricks in order to use
convexity, and after that, one needs to deal with the two quantities f (xt ) and f (xt−1 ) at the same
time. We deal with this using the 2.3 framework, similarly with Sebbouh et al. (2021). However,
we highlight that we finish our proofs with a different approach. More specifically, in the proof of
Theorem G.1 in Sebbouh et al. (2021) the authors choose the momentum coefficients λt in such a
way that the main sum telescopes and the final result only has the expectation of the last iterate. In
our proof, we make no such simplifications, and instead, we use Jensen’s inequality to finish. This
approach allows us to have more freedom in the selection of λt . This is more prominent in the proofs
of the decreasing variants.

Compared to the classical analysis of constant step-size SHB, the use of SPS requires an adaptive
step-size that uses the loss and stochastic gradient estimates at an iterate, resulting in correlations
of the step-size with the gradient, i.e. we might have E[γt ∇fi (xt )] ̸= γt E[∇fi (xt )]. One of the
technical challenges in the proofs is to carefully analyze the SHB iterates, taking these correlations
into account. Moreover, since we try to be adaptive to the Lipschitz constant, we can not use any
standard descent lemmas (implied by the smoothness and the SHB update) that are used in the clas-
sical analysis of SGD and constant step-size SHB. This makes the convex proof more challenging
than the standard analysis of SHB.

D.1    P ROOF OF T HEOREM 3.2

First, we state and prove the corresponding theorem for SPSmax in the 2.3 setting.
 Theorem D.1. Assume that each fi is convex and Li -smooth. Then, the iterates of 2.3 with
                           fSt (xt ) − ℓ∗St

                                                                         α
              ηt = min                      , ηb   and λ t = λ ∈  0,             ,
                           ∥∇fSt (xt )∥2                             2(ηb − α)
              n           o
 where α = min 2L1max , ηb and Lmax = maxi∈[n] {Li }, converge as

                                            ∥x0 − x∗ ∥2       (2ηb + 2ηb λ − 2αλ − α)σ 2
            E[f (xT ) − f (x∗ )] ≤                          +                            ,
                                         (2αλ + α − 2ηb λ)T        2αλ + α − 2ηb λ
                 PT −1
 where xT = T1          t=0   xt and σ 2 = E[fi (x∗ ) − fi∗ ].

Proof. We have
∥z t+1 − x∗ ∥2 = ∥z t − x∗ ∥2 − 2ηt ⟨∇fSt (xt ), z t − x∗ ⟩ + ηt2 ∥∇fSt (xt )∥2
              (11)
               = ∥z t − x∗ ∥2 − 2ηt ⟨∇fSt (xt ), xt − x∗ ⟩ − 2ηt λt ⟨∇fSt (xt ), xt − xt−1 ⟩
                     + ηt2 ∥∇fSt (xt )∥2
            convexity
               ≤        ∥z t − x∗ ∥2 − 2ηt [fSt (xt ) − fSt (x∗ )] − 2ηt λt [fSt (xt ) − fSt (xt−1 )]
                     + ηt2 ∥∇fSt (xt )∥2
               (2)
               ≤ ∥z t − x∗ ∥2 − 2ηt [fSt (xt ) − fSt (x∗ )] − 2ηt λt [fSt (xt ) − fSt (xt−1 )]
                     + ηt [fSt (xt ) − ℓ∗St ]
               = ∥z t − x∗ ∥2 − 2ηt [fSt (xt ) − ℓ∗St ] + 2ηt [fSt (x∗ ) − ℓ∗St ] − 2ηt λt [fSt (xt ) − ℓ∗St ]


                                                         25
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                      + 2ηt λt [fSt (xt−1 ) − ℓ∗St ] + ηt [fSt (xt ) − ℓ∗St ]

                               ∗ 2                       1
                        t
                  = ∥z − x ∥ − 2ηt 1 + λt −                   [fSt (xt ) − ℓ∗St ] + 2ηt λt [fSt (xt−1 ) − ℓ∗St ]
                                                         2
                      + 2ηt [fSt (x∗ ) − ℓ∗St ]
                  (2)

                               ∗ 2                  1
                        t
                  ≤ ∥z − x ∥ − 2α λt +                  [fSt (xt ) − ℓ∗St ] + 2ηb λt [fSt (xt−1 ) − ℓ∗St ]
                                                    2
                      + 2ηb [fSt (x∗ ) − ℓ∗St ]

                               ∗ 2                 1                         ∗                   1
                        t
                  ≤ ∥z − x ∥ − 2α λt +                          t
                                                        [fSt (x ) − fSt (x )] − 2α λt +              [fSt (x∗ ) − ℓ∗St ]
                                                   2                                             2
                     + 2ηb λt [fSt (xt−1 ) − fSt (x∗ )] + 2ηb λt [fSt (x∗ ) − ℓ∗St ] + 2ηb [fSt (x∗ ) − ℓ∗St ].

Now take expectation conditional on xt to get

                     ∗ 2                    ∗ 2            1
  ESt ∥z   t+1                       t
                 − x ∥ ≤ ESt ∥z − x ∥ − 2α λt +                ESt [fSt (xt ) − fSt (x∗ )]
                                                           2

                                       1
                         − 2α λt +         ESt [fSt (x∗ ) − ℓ∗St ] + 2ηb λt ESt [fSt (xt−1 ) − fSt (x∗ )]
                                       2
                         + 2ηb λt ESt [fSt (x∗ ) − ℓ∗St ] + 2ηb ESt [fSt (x∗ ) − ℓ∗St ]

                                                     1                                     1
                       = ∥z t − x∗ ∥2 − 2α λt +           [f (xt ) − f (x∗ )] − 2α λt +        σ2
                                                     2                                     2
                        + 2ηb λt [f (xt−1 ) − f (x∗ )] + 2ηb λt σ 2 + 2ηb σ 2

                                                    1
                      = ∥z t − x∗ ∥2 − 2α λt +          [f (xt ) − f (x∗ )] + 2ηb λt [f (xt−1 ) − f (x∗ )]
                                                    2

                                                         1
                        + 2 ηb (1 + λt ) − α λt +               σ2 .                                    (12)
                                                         2

Note that in eq. (12) the coefficient 2 ηb (1 + λt ) − α λt + 21 of σ 2 is positive since ηb ≥ α.

Taking expectation again and using the tower property we have

                       1
            2α λt +        E[f (xt ) − f (x∗ )] − 2ηb λt E[f (xt−1 ) − f (x∗ )]
                       2

                                                                                     1
             ≤ E ∥z t − x∗ ∥2 − E ∥z t+1 − x∗ ∥2 + 2 ηb (1 + λt ) − α λt +                 σ2 .         (13)
                                                                                     2
Summing eq. (13) for t = 0, . . . , T − 1 and telescoping we get
     T −1
     X               1
           2α λt +       E[f (xt ) − f (x∗ )] − 2ηb λt E[f (xt−1 ) − f (x∗ )]
     t=0
                     2
            T −1                                          −1
                                                      TX

            X
                      t     ∗ 2         t+1     ∗ 2                                   1
                                                                                           σ2

          ≤       E ∥z − x ∥ − E ∥z          −x ∥ +          2 ηb (1 + λt ) − α λt +
            t=0                                          t=0
                                                                                      2
                                                T −1
                                                X                              1
          = E ∥z 0 − x∗ ∥2 − E ∥z T − x∗ ∥2 +        2 ηb (1 + λt ) − α λt +        σ2
                                                t=0
                                                                               2
         0  0                T −1
       z =x                  X                                 1
          ≤ ∥x0 − x∗ ∥2 +         2 ηb (1 + λt ) − α λt +            σ2 .                     (14)
                             t=0
                                                               2

The LHS of eq. (14) can be bounded as follows (using x−1 = x0 )
  T −1
  X             1
        2α λt +     E[f (xt ) − f (x∗ )] − 2ηb λt E[f (xt−1 ) − f (x∗ )]
  t=0
                2


                                                           26
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


    T −1                                    T −1
    X            1                    ∗
                                            X
  =      2α λt +            t
                     E[f (x ) − f (x )] −        2ηb λt E[f (xt−1 ) − f (x∗ )]
    t=0
                 2                          t=0
    T −1                                    T −2
    X            1                          X
  =      2α λt +     E[f (xt ) − f (x∗ )] −      2ηb λt+1 E[f (xt ) − f (x∗ )]
    t=0
                 2                          t=0
                                              T −2
                1          T −1         ∗
                                               X               1
  = 2α λT −1 +      E[f (x      ) − f (x )] +      2α λt +         E[f (xt ) − f (x∗ )]
                2                              t=0
                                                               2
        T
        X −2
    −          2ηb λt+1 E[f (xt ) − f (x∗ )]
        t=0
                                                T −2
                 1                              X             1
  = 2α λT −1 +        E[f (xT −1 ) − f (x∗ )] +       2α λt +     − 2ηb λt+1 E[f (xt ) − f (x∗ )]
                 2                              t=0
                                                              2

                   1
  ≥ 2α λT −1 +         − 2ηb λT E[f (xT −1 ) − f (x∗ )]
                   2
      T −2
       X               1
    +       2α λt +        − 2ηb λt+1 E[f (xt ) − f (x∗ )]
       t=0
                       2
    T −1
    X               1
  =       2α λt +        − 2ηb λt+1 E[f (xt ) − f (x∗ )].                                    (15)
    t=0
                    2

Combining eq. (14) and eq. (15) we have
                           T −1
                           X             1
                                 2α λt +             − 2ηb λt+1 E[f (xt ) − f (x∗ )]
                           t=0
                                         2
                                                 T −1
                                                 X                            1
                           ≤ ∥x0 − x∗ ∥2 +            2 ηb (1 + λt ) − α λt +      σ2 .         (16)
                                                  t=0
                                                                              2

In eq. (16), setting λt = λ, ∀t > 0 with 0 ≤ λ < 2(ηbα−α) (in order to ensure that quantity
2α λ + 12 − 2ηb λ in the LHS is positive) we get


                        TX−1
          1                                                                              1
 2α λ +       − 2ηb λ         E[f (xt ) − f (x∗ )] ≤ ∥x0 − x∗ ∥2 + 2T ηb (1 + λ) − α λ +       σ2 .
          2              t=0
                                                                                         2
                                                                                            (17)

Now dividing eq. (17) by T 2α λ + 21 − 2ηb λ and using Jensen’s inequality we get


                                                T −1
                                    ∗1 X
                       T
                E[f (x ) − f (x )] ≤       E[f (xt ) − f (x∗ )]
                                     T t=0
                                              ∥x0 − x∗ ∥2 + T (2ηb + 2ηb λ − 2αλ − α) σ 2
                                            ≤
                                                          (2αλ + α − 2ηb λ)T
                                                  ∥x − x∗ ∥2
                                                    0
                                                                     2ηb + 2ηb λ − 2αλ − α 2
                                            =                     +                       σ ,
                                              (2αλ + α − 2ηb λ)T        2αλ + α − 2ηb λ
as wanted.


                                                                                       β
Now the proof of Theorem 3.2 follows immediately from Theorem D.1 setting λ = 1−β        (from
                                                                          λ
Proposition 2.1) and γb = ηb (from Corollary 2.2). The bound on β = 1+λ follows from the bound
                                                  x
on λ and from the fact that the function f (x) = 1+x is strictly increasing for x ≥ 0.


                                                            27
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


D.2        P ROOF OF T HEOREM 3.6

Here we state and prove the corresponding theorem for DecSPS in the 2.3 setting.
 Theorem D.2. Assume that each fi is convex and Li -smooth. Then, the iterates of 2.3 with
                                  fSt (xt ) − ℓ∗St

                        1
                  ηt = min                         , c   η
                                                      t−1 t−1   and λt ≥ 0,
                        ct        ∥∇fSt (xt )∥2
 where (ct ) is an increasing sequences with ct ≥ 1, c−1 = c0 , η−1 = ηb and (λt ) is a decreasing
 sequence, converge as
                                                                                         T −1
                                               2λ1 [f (x0 ) − f (x∗ )] cT −1 Dz2   σ2 X 1
                   E[f (xT ) − f (x∗ )] ≤                             +          +          ,
                                                         T                Tα       T t=0 ct
                     PT −1
 where xT = T1                                               and Dz2 = maxt∈[T ] ∥z t − x∗ ∥2 .
                                                1
                         t=0    xt , α = min    2L , ηb c0


Proof. We have
                                   (7)
                ∥z t+1 − x∗ ∥2 = ∥z t − x∗ ∥2 − 2ηt ⟨∇fSt (xt ), z t − x∗ ⟩ + ηt2 ∥∇fSt (xt )∥2 .
Rearranging and dividing by ηt > 0 we get
                                       ∥z t − x∗ ∥2   ∥z t+1 − x∗ ∥2
                 2⟨∇fSt (xt ), z t − x∗ ⟩ ≤         −                + ηt ∥∇fSt (xt )∥2 .
                                            ηt              ηt
Summing the above for t = 0, . . . , T − 1 and telescoping we have
    T
    X −1
2         ⟨∇fSt (xt ), z t − x∗ ⟩
    t=0
     T −1
              ∥z t − x∗ ∥2   ∥z t+1 − x∗ ∥2
     X
 ≤                         −                + ηt ∥∇fSt (xt )∥2
      t=0
                   ηt              ηt
     T −1            T −1             T −1
     X ∥z t − x∗ ∥2 X ∥z t+1 − x∗ ∥2 X
 =                 −                +      ηt ∥∇fSt (xt )∥2
   t=0
            ηt       t=0
                            ηt        t=0
                    T −1           T −1             T −1
      ∥z 0 − x∗ ∥2 X ∥z t − x∗ ∥2 X ∥z t+1 − x∗ ∥2 X
 =                +              −                +      ηt ∥∇fSt (xt )∥2
           η0       t=1
                          ηt       t=0
                                          η t       t=0
                    T −2             T −1             T −1
      ∥z 0 − x∗ ∥2 X ∥z t+1 − x∗ ∥2 X ∥z t+1 − x∗ ∥2 X
 =                +                −                +      ηt ∥∇fSt (xt )∥2
           η0       t=0
                          ηt+1       t=0
                                            ηt        t=0
                    T −2                      T −2                                       T −1
   ∥z 0 − x∗ ∥2 X ∥z t+1 − x∗ ∥2 X ∥z t+1 − x∗ ∥2                      ∥z T − x∗ ∥2 X
 =              +                          −                        −                +        ηt ∥∇fSt (xt )∥2
        η0           t=0
                                ηt+1          t=0
                                                        η t                η T −1        t=0
      0    ∗ 2      T −2                                         T      ∗ 2     T −1
   ∥z − x ∥         X         1       1                       ∥z − x ∥           X
 =              +                  −       ∥z t+1 − x∗ ∥2 −                   +      ηt ∥∇fSt (xt )∥2
        η0           t=0
                           η t+1     η t                          η T −1         t=0
             −2                              −1
           T                      !        T
      1    X         1      1              X
 ≤       +               −          Dz2 +       ηt ∥∇fSt (xt )∥2
     η0    t=0
                  η t+1    η  t            t=0
              T −1
       Dz2    X
 =          +      ηt ∥∇fSt (xt )∥2 .                                                                     (18)
      ηT −1   t=0

Taking expectation in eq. (18) we have
                          −1                                                −1
                        T
                                                              "           T
                                                                                              #
                        X                                          Dz2    X
                               E ⟨∇f (xt ), z t − x∗ ⟩ ≤ E                                t 2

                    2                                                   +      ηt ∥∇fSt (x )∥ .           (19)
                        t=0
                                                                  ηT −1   t=0



                                                             28
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Now the LHS of eq. (19) can be bounded as follows
    T
    X −1
           E ⟨∇f (xt ), z t − x∗ ⟩

2
    t=0
                                                T −1
      (z 0 =x0 )                                X
                   2 E ⟨∇f (x0 ), x0 − x∗ ⟩ + 2      E ⟨∇f (xt ), z t − x∗ ⟩

           =
                                                            t=1
                                     −1
          (11)                  ∗
                                    TX
                       0    0
                                        E 2⟨∇f (xt ), xt − x∗ ⟩ + 2λt ⟨∇f (xt ), xt − xt−1 ⟩

           = 2 E ⟨∇f (x ), x − x ⟩ +
                                                      t=1
                                                 T −1
      convexity                                  X
                   2 E f (x0 ) − f (x∗ ) +              E 2(f (xt ) − f (x∗ )) + 2λt (f (xt ) − f (xt−1 ))

           ≥
                                                 t=1
                                              T
                                              X −1
           = 2 E f (x0 ) − f (x∗ ) +                  2(1 + λt ) E[f (xt ) − f (x∗ )] − 2λt E[f (xt−1 ) − f (x∗ )]

                                               t=1
                                              T
                                              X −1                                         T
                                                                                           X −1
           = 2 E f (x0 ) − f (x∗ ) +                 2(1 + λt ) E[f (xt ) − f (x∗ )] −            2λt E[f (xt−1 ) − f (x∗ )]

                                               t=1                                         t=1
                                     −1                                     −2
                                    TX                                    T
                                                                          X
           = 2 E f (x0 ) − f (x∗ ) +    2(1 + λt ) E[f (xt ) − f (x∗ )] −      2λt+1 E[f (xt ) − f (x∗ )]

                                               t=1                                         t=0
                                                T
                                                X −1                            T
                                                                                X −1
           = 2 E f (x0 ) − f (x∗ ) + 2                 E[f (xt ) − f (x∗ )] +          2λt E[f (xt ) − f (x∗ )]

                                                t=1                             t=1
                   T
                   X −2
               −          2λt+1 E[f (xt ) − f (x∗ )]
                   t=0
                                       T
                                       X −1
           = 2 E f (x0 ) − f (x∗ ) + 2      E[f (xt ) − f (x∗ )] + 2λT −1 E[f (xT −1 ) − f (x∗ )]

                                                t=1
                   T
                   X −2                                 T
                                                        X −2
               +          2λt E[f (xt ) − f (x∗ )] −           2λt+1 E[f (xt ) − f (x∗ )] − 2λ1 E[f (x0 ) − f (x∗ )]
                   t=1                                   t=1
                   T
                   X −1
           =2             E[f (xt ) − f (x∗ )] + 2λT −1 E[f (xT −1 ) − f (x∗ )]
                   t=0
                     T
                     X −2
               +2           (λt − λt+1 ) E[f (xt ) − f (x∗ )] − 2λ1 E[f (x0 ) − f (x∗ )]
                     t=1
                   T
                   X −1
           ≥2             E[f (xt ) − f (x∗ )] − 2λ1 [f (x0 ) − f (x∗ )],                                               (20)
                   t=0

using the fact that (λt ) is decreasing and the fact that E[f (xt ) − f (x∗ )] ≥ 0. Combining eq. (19)
and eq. (20) we have
        −1                                                               −1
      T
                                                           "           T
                                                                                             #
      X
                 t         ∗             0        ∗            Dz2     X
                                                                                         t 2
    2      E[f (x ) − f (x )] − 2λ1 [f (x ) − f (x )] ≤ E           +       E ηt ∥∇fSt (x )∥ . (21)
      t=0
                                                             ηT −1     t=0
Now for the RHS of eq. (21) we have
         T −1                             T −1
  Dz2    X                     (3) D 2    X    1
       +      ηt ∥∇fSt (xt )∥2 ≤     z
                                        +          [fSt (xt ) − ℓ∗St ]
 ηT −1   t=0
                                  ηT −1   t=0
                                               c t

                                                      T −1                              T −1
                                               Dz2    X    1                            X    1
                                          =         +         [fSt (xt ) − fSt (x∗ )] +         [fSt (x∗ ) − ℓ∗St ]
                                              ηT −1   t=0
                                                           ct                           t=0
                                                                                             ct



                                                                  29
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                   T −1                           T −1
                                        cT −1 Dz2 X 1                       ∗
                                                                                  X    1
                                      ≤          +               t
                                                          [fSt (x ) − fSt (x )] +        [fSt (x∗ ) − ℓ∗St ],
                                            α      t=0 t
                                                        c                         t=0 t
                                                                                       c
                                                                                                        (22)
where the last inequality follows from the fact that ηt is decreasing and ηt ≥ cαt with α =
min{ 2L1max , ηb c0 }, from Lemma C.4. Thus, combining eq. (21) and eq. (22) we have
    T −1                                                                       T −1                          T −1 2
    X                                                               cT −1 Dz2 X 1                            X    σ
2          E[f (xt ) − f (x∗ )] − 2λ1 [f (x0 ) − f (x∗ )] ≤                  +        E[f (xt ) − f (x∗ )] +        .
    t=0
                                                                        α      t=0 t
                                                                                    c                        t=0 t
                                                                                                                  c
                                                                                                                 (23)
Rearranging eq. (23) we get
        T −1                                                                             T −1
                                                                          cT −1 Dz2

        X          1                                                                     X    1
               2−        E[f (xt ) − f (x∗ )] ≤ 2λ1 [f (x0 ) − f (x∗ )] +           + σ2                         (24)
        t=0
                   c t                                                        α          t=0 t
                                                                                              c

and using the fact that 2 − c1t ≥ 1 > 0 eq. (24) reduces to
                   T −1                                                                        T −1
                   X                                                            cT −1 Dz2      X    1
                          E[f (xt ) − f (x∗ )] ≤ 2λ1 [f (x0 ) − f (x∗ )] +                + σ2                   (25)
                    t=0
                                                                                    α          t=0 t
                                                                                                    c

Dividing eq. (25) by T and using Jensen’s inequality we get
                                                   T −1
                                               1 X
                    E[f (xT ) − f (x∗ )] ≤           E[f (xt ) − f (x∗ )]
                                               T t=0
                                                                                             T −1
                                               2λ1 [f (x0 ) − f (x∗ )] cT −1 Dz2   σ2 X 1
                                           ≤                          +          +          ,
                                                         T                Tα       T t=0 ct

as wanted.

                                                                                                             √
If σ 2 > 0 like in the standard SGD
                                 √ analysis under decreasing step-sizes, the choice ct =                         t+1
leads to the asymptotic rate O(1/ t).
                                                          √
 Corollary D.3. Under the setting of Theorem D.2, for ct = t + 1 (c−1 = c0 ) we have
                                                     2λ1 [f (x0 ) − f (x∗ )]   D2   2σ 2
                           E[f (xT ) − f (x∗ )] ≤                            + √z + √ .
                                                               T              α T     T

Proof. It follows from the well known inequality
                                                   T −1
                                                   X           1     √
                                                          √       ≤ 2 T.
                                                   t=0
                                                              t+1



                                                                                      β
Now the proof of Theorem 3.6 follows immediately from Corollary D.3 setting λt = λ = 1−β
(from Proposition 2.1). Moreover we have
                                            (11)
                              ∥z t − x∗ ∥2 = ∥(1 + λ)xt − λxt−1 − x∗ ∥2
                                            ≤ (1 + λ)∥xt − x∗ ∥2 + λ∥xt−1 − x∗ ∥2
                                            ≤ (1 + 2λ) max ∥xt − x∗ ∥2 ,                                         (26)
                                                                t
                                       1+β 2
thus Dz2 ≤ (1 + 2λ) maxt ∥xt − x∗ ∥2 = 1−β D , where D2 = maxt∈[T ] ∥xt − x∗ ∥.


                                                               30
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


D.3   P ROOF OF T HEOREM 3.7

Here we state and prove the corresponding theorem for AdaSPS in the 2.3 setting.
Theorem D.4. Assume that each fi is convex and Li -smooth. Then, the iterates of 2.3 with
                                                                  
                    f (xt ) − ℓ∗              1                   
                      St          St
          ηt = min                                          , ηt−1    and λt ≥ 0,
                    c∥∇fSt (xt )∥2 Pt f (xs ) − ℓ∗
                                     q
                                                                   
                                                      s=0     Ss        Ss

where η−1 = +∞, c > 0 and (λt ) a decreasing sequence, converge as
                                                                   τ2  τσ
                                        E[f (xT ) − f (x∗ )] ≤        +√ ,
                                                                   T    T
                                                                  2
                    PT −1             p
where xT = T1               t                 0 ) − f (x∗ ) + cLDz + 1       2          t   ∗
                      t=0 x   , τ =  λ 1 f (x                   2    2c and Dz = maxt ∥z − x ∥.



Proof. Using Equation (21) from the proof of Theorem 3.6, we have
       −1                                                            −1
     T
                                                         "         T
                                                                                         #
     X
                t        ∗              0        ∗          Dz2    X
                                                                                     t 2
   2      E[f (x ) − f (x )] − 2λ1 [f (x ) − f (x )] ≤ E         +      E ηt ∥∇fSt (x )∥ .       (27)
     t=0
                                                           ηT −1   t=0

By Lemma C.7 we have
                                                     v
                                                     uT −1
                                       Dz2         2t
                                                     uX
                                              ≤ cLDz       fSs (xs ) − ℓ∗Ss ,                    (28)
                                      ηT −1               s=0

and by Lemma C.5 we have
                                                             v
         T −1                          T −1 t       ∗
                                                             uT −1
         X
                        t 2
                                     fSt
                                       X (x   ) − ℓ St     1 uX
             ηt ∥∇fSt (x )∥ ≤       qP                    ≤ t      fSs (xs ) − ℓ∗Ss .            (29)
                                       t           s   ∗   c
         t=0                  t=0 2c   s=0 fSs (x ) − ℓSs      s=0

Now combining Equations (27) to (29) and using Jensen’s inequality we get
                    T
                    X −1
                2          E[f (xt ) − f (x∗ )] − 2λ1 [f (x0 ) − f (x∗ )]
                    t=0
                          v                            v                      
                           uT −1                        uT −1
                           uX                         1 u  X
                ≤ E cLDz2 t      fSs (xs ) − ℓ∗Ss + t         fS (xs ) − ℓ∗Ss 
                              s=0
                                                       c s=0 s
                                  vuT −1                    

                            1       uX
                = cLDz2 +       E t        fSs (xs ) − ℓ∗Ss 
                            c          s=0
                                  v                                                   
                                    u  T −1
                            1       u  X
                = cLDz2 +       E t        (fSs (xs ) − fSs (x∗ ) + fSs (x∗ ) − ℓ∗Ss )
                            c          s=0
                                v
                                uTX −1
                       2    1 u
                ≤ cLDz +        t       E[f (xs ) − f (x∗ )] + σ 2 .                             (30)
                            c      s=0

Rearranging eq. (30) we have
                                                                   v
  T −1                                                             uT −1
  X                                                             1 u  X
 2     E[f (xt ) − f (x∗ )] ≤ 2λ1 [f (x0 ) − f (x∗ )] + cLDz2 +    t     E[f (xs ) − f (x∗ )] + σ 2 .
   t=0
                                                                c    s=0
                                                                                                 (31)


                                                         31
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025



                          p
Now let us choose cq =     f (x0 ) − f (x∗ ). Then
                                                             p
                   2λ1 [f (x0 ) − f (x∗ )] = 2λ1 cq      f (x0 ) − f (x∗ )
                                                        v
                                                        uT −1
                                                        uX
                                               ≤ 2λ1 cq t     E[f (xs ) − f (x∗ )] + σ 2 ,                    (32)
                                                                 s=0

Combining eq. (31) and eq. (32) we get
                                                        v
        T −1                                    2
                                                        uT −1
        X                                   cLDz    1 u   X
             E[f (xt ) − f (x∗ )] ≤ λ1 cq +       +     t     E[f (xs ) − f (x∗ )] + σ 2 .                    (33)
         t=0
                                              2     2c    s=0

Squaring both sides of eq. (33) we have
                 T −1
                                               !2             T −1
                                                                                                      !
                 X                                            X
                              t            ∗             2                   t       ∗            2
                        E[f (x ) − f (x )]          ≤τ                 E[f (x ) − f (x )] + T σ           ,   (34)
                 t=0                                             t=0

                 cLD 2

                        1
where τ = λ1 cq + 2 z + 2c   . Now we use Lemma C.6 in eq. (33) to get

                                  T −1
                                  X                                      √
                                         E[f (xt ) − f (x∗ )] ≤ τ 2 + τ σ T .                                 (35)
                                  t=0

Finally by Jensen’s inequality and eq. (35) we have
                                                                       τ2  τσ
                                    E[f (xT ) − f (x∗ )] ≤                +√ ,
                                                                       T    T
as wanted.

                                                                               β
Now the proof of Theorem 3.7 follows immediately from Theorem D.4 setting λ = 1−β (from
                                                         1+β 2
Proposition 2.1). Moreover, using eq. (26) we have Dz2 ≤ 1−β D .


                                                         32
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


E    B EYOND THE BOUNDED ITERATES ASSUMPTION
The two main theorems on the convergence of MomDecSPS/MomAdaSPS require the bounded
iterates assumption. As mentioned in the main paper, this is a standard assumption for several
adaptive step-sizes, see: (Reddi et al., 2018; Ward et al., 2020; Orvieto et al., 2022; Jiang and Stich,
2023). However, one can artificially remove this assumption by adding a projection step in the
update rule of IMA onto a compact and convex subset D ⊆ Rd as described in this section.
Consider the constrained finite-sum optimization problem,
                                       "            n
                                                             #
                                                 1X
                                   min f (x) =         fi (x) ,                                    (36)
                                   x∈D           n i=1

where each fi : Rd → R is convex, smooth, and lower bounded by ℓ∗i and D ⊆ Rd is a compact and
                    ∗                                                        ∗
convex subset. Let XD ⊆ D be the set of minimizers of (36). We assume that XD   ̸= ∅ and we fix
x∗ ∈ XD∗
         .
The new update rule of IMA, takes the following form (Projected IMA):
                             z t+1 = projD z t − ηt ∇fSt (xt )

                                                                                                   (37)
                                        λt+1            1
                             xt+1 =            xt +            z t+1 ,                             (38)
                                     λt+1 + 1        λt+1 + 1
with x0 = z 0 ∈ D, where projD (x) ∈ arg mind∈D ∥d − x∥2 . Note that the projection step is
only needed for the update of z t+1 because xt+1 is already a convex combination of elements in the
convex set D, namely z t+1 and xt by induction. We highlight the fact that Projected IMA is not
necessarily equivalent to Projected SHB. Now the proofs of Theorems D.2 and D.4 will go through
using the non-expansiveness of the projection operator, as explained in the following lemma:

 Lemma E.1 (Non-expansiveness). For all x, y ∈ Rd it holds
                                    ∥projD (x) − projD (y)∥ ≤ ∥x − y∥

Proof. See Example 8.14 and Lemma 8.16 in Garrigos and Gower (2023).

Now we have:
 Theorem E.2 (Pojected IMA version of Theorem D.2). Assume that each fi is convex and Li -
 smooth. Then, the iterates of Projected IMA with
                                      fSt (xt ) − ℓ∗St

                             1
                      ηt = min                         , c   η
                                                          t−1 t−1   and λt ≥ 0,
                            ct        ∥∇fSt (xt )∥2
 where (ct ) is an increasing sequences with ct ≥ 1, c−1 = c0 , η−1 = ηb and (λt ) is a decreasing
 sequence, converge as
                                                                                 T −1
                                         2λ1 [f (x0 ) − f (x∗ )] cT −1 D2   σ2 X 1
               E[f (xT ) − f (x∗ )] ≤                           +         +          ,
                                                   T                Tα      T t=0 ct
                 PT −1
 where xT = T1
                                          1
                   t=0   xt , α = min      2L , ηb c0   and D = diam D.

Proof. We have
            ∥z t+1 − x∗ ∥2 = ∥projD (z t − ηt ∇fSt (xt )) − projD (x∗ )∥
                         Lem. E.1
                           ≤        ∥z t − ηt ∇fSt (xt ) − x∗ ∥
                           = ∥z t − x∗ ∥2 − 2ηt ⟨∇fSt (xt ), z t − x∗ ⟩ + ηt2 ∥∇fSt (xt )∥2 .
Now we continue exactly like the rest of the proof of Theorem D.2.



                                                        33
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Theorem E.3 (Pojected IMA version of Theorem D.4). Assume that each fi is convex and Li -
smooth. Then, the iterates of Projected IMA with
                                                              
                       f (xt ) − ℓ∗             1             
                           St        St
           ηt = min                                     , ηt−1   and λt ≥ 0,
                       c∥∇fSt (xt )∥2 Pt f (xs ) − ℓ∗
                                         q
                                                               
                                             s=0    Ss       Ss

where η−1 = +∞, c > 0 and (λt ) a decreasing sequence, converge as
                                                         τ2  τσ
                                E[f (xT ) − f (x∗ )] ≤      +√ ,
                                                         T    T
                PT −1             p                         2

where xT = T1     t=0   xt , τ = λ1 f (x0 ) − f (x∗ ) + cLD
                                                          2
                                                                1
                                                              + 2c   and D = diam D.


Proof. Same as above.


                                               34
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


F     A DDITIONAL E XPERIMENTS

F.1   E XTRA D ETERMINISTIC E XPERIMENT

Here we have included an extra experiment in the deterministic setting, this one for logistic regres-
sion. We have performed a grid search to find the best β for MomPSmax since no optimal choices for
β are known for the general convex case. We use the same β for HB and ALR-MAG for direct com-
parison. For the step-size of HB we used γ = 2(1 − β)/L as recomended in Ghadimi et al. (2015).
The results are presented in Figure 7. In this problem we observe that our step-size (MomPSmax ) is
the fastest, having similar performace with ALR-MAG and GD Polyak. For the deterministic setting
we have used a 12 core AMD Ryzen 5 5600H CPU to run the experiments.


                                            100                                GD                                                                     GD Polyak
                                                                               Nesterov AGD                                                           ALR-MAG
                                                                               GD Polyak                                                              HB-PS
                                           10 2
                                                                               AHB                           2 × 101
                                                                               HB
                                                                               AGM
                                                                               ALR-MAG
                                                                               HB-PS



                                                                                                  Stepsize
                                           10 4
                           f(x0) f(x * )
                           f(xk) f(x * )


                                                                                                                101
                                           10 6



                                           10 8
                                                                                                             6 × 100


                                                  0   100   200   300    400   500   600   700                         0   5   10    15     20   25     30    35
                                                                  Iterations                                                        Iterations

                                            (a) Relative Error Plot                                                    (b) Step-size Plot

Figure 7: Comparison of various deterministic algorithms for the logistic regression problem on
synthetic data.



F.2   S TOCHASTIC H EAVY BALL WITH C ONSTANT S TEP - SIZE

As we saw in Corollary 3.5, when γb ≤ 2L1max then we have new theoretical guarantees for SHB
                                    1−β
with the constant step-size γ = 2L       . The most recent analysis of constant SHB is from Liu et al.
                                     max
                              (1−β)2           1          1
(2020) with step-size γ = L min 4−β+β 2 ,             √          . As mentioned in the main text our
                                                     2 2β+2β 2
                                 √
step-size is larger when β ≥ 5 − 2 ≈ 0.236. In Figure 8 we provide a numerical comparison
of these results for logistic regression with synthetic data. We observe that SHB with the Liu et al.
(2020) step-size has faster convergence for the first iterations but it reaches a plateau much earlier.
Moreover, note that as β → 1 both step-sizes have similar performance.



F.3   OTHER C HOICES

In this paper, we have provided convergence guarantees for SHB update rule xt+1 =
xt − γ          t
       t ∇fSt (x ) + β(x
                         t  t−1
                         − x ) with the MomSPSmax step-size given by γt = (1 −
           fSt (xt )−ℓ∗
                      St
β) min    c∥∇fSt (xt )∥2 , γb                     . However, as discussed in the main paper a more natural step-size would
be to choose the well known SPSmax on the SHB rule. We call this new update rule SPSmax with
naive momentum. Here we numerically compare these two updates. As we see in Figure 9, when
β is “small” and close to 0 then both SPSmax with naive momentum and MomSPSmax are close
in performance. Of course, when β = 0 they are both equal to standard SPSmax . However, as
β gets larger the performance of SPSmax with naive momentum gets worse and less stable and at
some point it diverges. For β ≥ 0.7 there is no SPSmax with naive momentum, since it cannot be
numerically computed.


                                                                                                 35
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                        100                               SHB with Liu et al                      100                                           SHB with Liu et al                                   100                                          SHB with Liu et al                      100                               SHB with Liu et al
                                                          SHB with ours                                                                         SHB with ours                                                                                     SHB with ours                                                             SHB with ours


                       10 1                                                                      10 1                                                                                               10 1                                                                                 10 1


       f(x0) f(x * )


                                                                                 f(x0) f(x * )


                                                                                                                                                                                    f(x0) f(x * )


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         f(x0) f(x * )
       f(xk) f(x * )


                                                                                 f(xk) f(x * )


                                                                                                                                                                                    f(xk) f(x * )


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         f(xk) f(x * )
                       10 2                                                                      10 2                                                                                               10 2                                                                                 10 2



                              0    10000   20000    30000      40000     50000                          0    10000   20000             30000            40000       50000                                  0           10000       20000    30000      40000     50000                          0    10000   20000    30000      40000     50000
                                             Iterations                                                                Iterations                                                                                                    Iterations                                                                Iterations


                                  (a) β = 0.1                                                               (b) β = 0.2                                                                                         (c) β = 0.3                                                                         (d) β = 0.4
                        100                               SHB with Liu et al                      100                                           SHB with Liu et al                                   100                                          SHB with Liu et al                      100                               SHB with Liu et al
                                                          SHB with ours                                                                         SHB with ours                                                                                     SHB with ours                                                             SHB with ours


                       10 1                                                                      10 1                                                                                               10 1                                                                                 10 1
       f(x0) f(x * )


                                                                                 f(x0) f(x * )


                                                                                                                                                                                    f(x0) f(x * )


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         f(x0) f(x * )
       f(xk) f(x * )


                                                                                 f(xk) f(x * )


                                                                                                                                                                                    f(xk) f(x * )


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         f(xk) f(x * )
                       10 2                                                                      10 2                                                                                               10 2                                                                                 10 2



                              0    10000   20000    30000      40000     50000                          0    10000   20000             30000            40000       50000                                  0           10000       20000    30000      40000     50000                          0    10000   20000    30000      40000     50000
                                             Iterations                                                                Iterations                                                                                                    Iterations                                                                Iterations


                                  (e) β = 0.5                                                               (f) β = 0.6                                                                                         (g) β = 0.7                                                                         (h) β = 0.8
                                                                                                                                              100                                                      SHB with Liu et al
                                                                                                                                                                                                       SHB with ours


                                                                                                                                             10 1
                                                                                                                             f(x0) f(x * )
                                                                                                                             f(xk) f(x * )


                                                                                                                                             10 2



                                                                                                                                                    0           10000       20000             30000            40000       50000
                                                                                                                                                                              Iterations


                                                                                                                                                          (i) β = 0.9

Figure 8: Comparison of SHB with constant step-size. (Liu et al., 2020) vs Corollary 3.5 for various
momentum coefficients β on logistic regression with synthetic data.

                        100                    MomSPSmax                                          100                    MomSPSmax                                                                   100                               MomSPSmax                                          100                    MomSPSmax
                                               SPSmax + Naive Momentum                                                   SPSmax + Naive Momentum                                                                                       SPSmax + Naive Momentum                                                   SPSmax + Naive Momentum
       f(x0) f(x * )


                                                                                 f(x0) f(x * )


                                                                                                                                                                                    f(x0) f(x * )


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         f(x0) f(x * )
       f(xk) f(x * )


                                                                                 f(xk) f(x * )


                                                                                                                                                                                    f(xk) f(x * )


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         f(xk) f(x * )


                       10 1                                                                      10 1                                                                                               10 1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         10 1

                              0    10000   20000    30000      40000     50000                          0    10000   20000             30000            40000       50000                                  0           10000       20000    30000      40000     50000                          0    10000   20000    30000      40000     50000
                                             Iterations                                                                Iterations                                                                                                    Iterations                                                                Iterations


                                  (a) β = 0.0                                                               (b) β = 0.1                                                                                         (c) β = 0.2                                                                         (d) β = 0.3
                        100                    MomSPSmax                                                                                                                                             101                               MomSPSmax                                          100                    MomSPSmax
                                               SPSmax + Naive Momentum                                                                                                                                                                 SPSmax + Naive Momentum                                                   SPSmax + Naive Momentum

                                                                                                  100
       f(x0) f(x * )


                                                                                 f(x0) f(x * )


                                                                                                                                                                                    f(x0) f(x * )


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         f(x0) f(x * )
       f(xk) f(x * )


                                                                                 f(xk) f(x * )


                                                                                                                                                                                    f(xk) f(x * )


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         f(xk) f(x * )


                                                                                                                                                                                                     100


                                                                                                 10 1
                                                                                                                         MomSPSmax                                                                                                                                                       10 1
                       10 1                                                                                              SPSmax + Naive Momentum                                                    10 1
                              0    10000   20000    30000      40000     50000                          0    10000   20000             30000            40000       50000                                  0           10000       20000    30000      40000     50000                          0    10000   20000    30000      40000     50000
                                             Iterations                                                                Iterations                                                                                                    Iterations                                                                Iterations


                                  (e) β = 0.4                                                               (f) β = 0.5                                                                                         (g) β = 0.6                                                                         (h) β = 0.7

Figure 9: Comparison of MomSPSmax versus SPSmax with naive momentum for various momentum
coefficients β on logistic regression with synthetic data.


Furthermore, recall that our decreasing variants MomDecSPS and MomAdaSPS are respectively
given by
                                                       √
                        (1 − β)[fSt (xt ) − ℓ∗St ] γt−1 t

          γt = min        √                       ,√        ,             (MomDecSPS)
                         c t + 1∥∇fSt (xt )∥2        t+1
                                                                    
                              (1 − β)[fSt (xt ) − ℓ∗St ]            
          γt = min                     qP                      , γt−1 .  (MomAdaSPS)
                                             t
                       c∥∇f (xt )∥2              f (xs ) − ℓ∗       
                                                                                           St                                                           s=0                   Ss                                                    Ss



                                                                                                                                                                            36
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


The above step-sizes are theoretically inspired by IMA, as explained in Appendix C.3, but again a
natural question is what happens if we take the “correcting factor” 1 − β outside the minimum. We
call these step-sizes Alternative MomDecSPS and Alternative MomAdaSPS and are given by
                                                           √
                                fSt (xt ) − ℓ∗St

                                                       γt−1 t
       γt = (1 − β) min √                            , √        ,                (Alt MomDecSPS)
                            c t + 1∥∇fSt (xt )∥2          t+1
                                                                         
                                         fSt (xt ) − ℓ∗St                
       γt = (1 − β) min                     qP                      , γt−1 .     (Alt MomAdaSPS)
                                                   t
                           c∥∇f (xt )∥2               f (xs ) − ℓ∗       
                                                                                                                     St                                     s=0              Ss                                       Ss

In Figure 10 and Figure 11 we see that when β = 0 we have similiar performances, however when
β > 0 then our proposed step-sizes are significantly better. A possible reason is that for both Alt
MomDecSPS and Alt MomadaSPS it holds γt ≤ (1 − β)γt−1 for all t. Thus inductively we get
γt ≤ (1 − β)t γ0 . So when β > 0, (1 − β)t → 0 as t → ∞ which means that the step-size is too
small and it barely updates xt .

                           100                                         MomDecSPS                              100
                                                                                                                                                                                         100
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   100
                                                                       Alt MomDecSPS
                       9 × 10 1                                                                           9 × 10 1                                                                                                                                             9 × 10 1
                                                                                                                                                                                     9 × 10 1

                       8 × 10 1                                                                           8 × 10 1                                                                                                                                             8 × 10 1
                                                                                                                                                                                     8 × 10 1
       f(x0) f(x * )


                                                                                          f(x0) f(x * )


                                                                                                                                                                     f(x0) f(x * )


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               f(x0) f(x * )
       f(xk) f(x * )


                                                                                          f(xk) f(x * )


                                                                                                                                                                     f(xk) f(x * )


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               f(xk) f(x * )
                       7 × 10 1                                                                           7 × 10 1                                                                                                                                             7 × 10 1
                                                                                                                                                                                     7 × 10 1


                       6 × 10 1                                                                                                                                                                                                                                6 × 10 1
                                                                                                          6 × 10 1                                                                   6 × 10 1



                       5 × 10 1
                                                                                                          5 × 10 1        MomDecSPS                                                  5 × 10 1        MomDecSPS                                                 5 × 10 1        MomDecSPS
                                                                                                                          Alt MomDecSPS                                                              Alt MomDecSPS                                                             Alt MomDecSPS
                                      0      10000    20000    30000      40000   50000                              0     10000   20000    30000   40000   50000                               0     10000   20000    30000   40000   50000                              0     10000   20000    30000   40000   50000
                                                        Iterations                                                                   Iterations                                                                 Iterations                                                                Iterations


                                          (a) β = 0.0                                                                    (b) β = 0.3                                                                (c) β = 0.6                                                               (d) β = 0.9

Figure 10: Comparison of MomDecSPS versus Alternative MomDecSPS for various momentum
coefficients β on logistic regression with synthetic data.


                        100
                                                                                                              100                                                                        100                                                                       100


                                                                                                          9 × 10 1


                       10 1                                                                               8 × 10 1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               9 × 10 1
       f(x0) f(x * )
       f(xk) f(x * )


                                                                                          f(x0) f(x * )


                                                                                                                                                                     f(x0) f(x * )


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               f(x0) f(x * )
                                                                                          f(xk) f(x * )


                                                                                                                                                                     f(xk) f(x * )


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               f(xk) f(x * )


                                                                                                          7 × 10 1                                                                   6 × 10 1



                       10 2                                                                               6 × 10 1                                                                                                                                             8 × 10 1


                                                                                                                                                                                     4 × 10 1
                                          MomAdaSPS                                                       5 × 10 1        MomAdaSPS                                                                  MomAdaSPS                                                                 MomAdaSPS
                                          Alt MomAdaSPS                                                                   Alt MomAdaSPS                                                              Alt MomAdaSPS                                                             Alt MomAdaSPS
                                  0        10000     20000    30000      40000    50000                              0     10000   20000    30000   40000   50000                               0     10000   20000    30000   40000   50000                              0     10000   20000    30000   40000   50000
                                                       Iterations                                                                    Iterations                                                                 Iterations                                                                Iterations


                                          (a) β = 0.0                                                                    (b) β = 0.3                                                                (c) β = 0.6                                                               (d) β = 0.9

Figure 11: Comparison of MomAdaSPS versus Alternative MomAdaSPS for various momentum
coefficients β on logistic regression with synthetic data.


F.4   I S γb NEEDED ?
                                                             (x )−f (x∗ )
                                                          n t                  o
Recall the definition of MomPSmax , γt = (1 − β) min f∥∇f          t
                                                                 (x )∥ 2  , γb  . The more natural choice
would be without the upper bound γb . Moreover, as in Appendix F.3, we can have the naive version
of both of the above step-sizes, i.e. with no correcting factor 1 − β. We compare the following step-
sizes on both the least squares problem, in Figure 12, and logistic regression problem, in Figure 13,
in the deterministic setting on synthetic data. The method is SHB with β = 0.97 for the least squares
and β = 0.3 for the logistic regression.
                                                                                                         f (xt ) − f (x∗ )
                                                                                            γt = (1 − β)                                                                                                                                                                                                         (MomPS)
                                                                                                           ∥∇f (xt )∥2
                                                                                                 f (x ) − f (x∗ )
                                                                                                     t
                                                                                            γt =                                                                                                                                                                                                       (Alt MomPS)
                                                                                                   ∥∇f (xt )∥2
                                                                                                                 f (xt ) − f (x∗ )

                                                                                            γt = (1 − β) min                       , γb                                                                                                                                                                (MomPSmax )
                                                                                                                   ∥∇f (xt )∥2

                                                                                                                                                                    37
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                                                                                                                   f (xt ) − f (x∗ )

                                                                                              γt = min                                                               , γb .                                                                                                                                       (Alt MomPSmax )
                                                                                                                                                     ∥∇f (xt )∥2

We see that if γb is chosen large enough, all these step-sizes have similar performance. However,
we highlight the fact that convergence guarantees are known only for MomPSmax .

                                                                             MoPS                                                                                    MoPS                                                                      MoPS                                                                                            MoPS
                                                                             Alt MoPS                                                                                Alt MoPS                                                                  Alt MoPS                                                                                        Alt MoPS
                       10 1                                                  MoPSmax                        10 1                                                     MoPSmax                        10 1                                       MoPSmax                            10 1                                                         MoPSmax
                                                                             Alt MoPSmax                                                                             Alt MoPSmax                                                               Alt MoPSmax                                                                                     Alt MoPSmax


                       10 3                                                                                 10 3                                                                                    10 3                                                                          10 3


                       10 5                                                                                 10 5                                                                                    10 5                                                                          10 5
       f(x0) f(x * )


                                                                                            f(x0) f(x * )


                                                                                                                                                                                    f(x0) f(x * )


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  f(x0) f(x * )
       f(xk) f(x * )


                                                                                            f(xk) f(x * )


                                                                                                                                                                                    f(xk) f(x * )


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  f(xk) f(x * )
                       10 7                                                                                 10 7                                                                                    10 7                                                                          10 7


                       10 9                                                                                 10 9                                                                                    10 9                                                                          10 9


                       10 11                                                                                10 11                                                                                   10 11                                                                         10 11


                               0         200         400      600      800           1000                           0         200     400         600          800          1000                            0    200   400      600      800          1000                                 0          200         400          600       800            1000
                                                      Iterations                                                                          Iterations                                                                    Iterations                                                                                  Iterations


                                   (a) γb = 0.1                                                                         (b) γb = 0.5                                                                            (c) γb = 1                                                                      (d) γb = 10

Figure 12: Comparison of various upper bounds for MomPSmax and other alternatives on least
squares with synthetic data.



                        100                                                  MoPS                            100                                                     MoPS                            100                                       MoPS                                100                                                         MoPS
                                                                             Alt MoPS                                                                                Alt MoPS                                                                  Alt MoPS                                                                                        Alt MoPS
                                                                             MoPSmax                                                                                 MoPSmax                                                                   MoPSmax                                                                                         MoPSmax
                                                                             Alt MoPSmax                                                                             Alt MoPSmax                                                               Alt MoPSmax                                                                                     Alt MoPSmax

                       10 2                                                                                 10 2                                                                                    10 2                                                                          10 2



                       10 4                                                                                 10 4
       f(x0) f(x * )


                                                                                            f(x0) f(x * )


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  f(x0) f(x * )
       f(xk) f(x * )


                                                                                            f(xk) f(x * )


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  f(xk) f(x * )
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  10 4
                                                                                                                                                                                    f(x0) f(x * )
                                                                                                                                                                                    f(xk) f(x * )


                                                                                                                                                                                                    10 4



                       10 6                                                                                 10 6                                                                                    10 6                                                                          10 6



                       10 8                                                                                 10 8                                                                                    10 8                                                                          10 8


                               0    50         100     150     200   250       300                                  0    20     40   60      80    100   120         140    160                             0     5    10           15    20                 25                           0.0   2.5         5.0   7.5   10.0     12.5   15.0     17.5
                                                      Iterations                                                                          Iterations                                                                   Iterations                                                                                  Iterations


                                   (a) γb = 1                                                                           (b) γb = 2                                                                              (c) γb = 10                                                                    (d) γb = 100

Figure 13: Comparison of various upper bounds for MomPSmax and other alternatives on logistic
regression with synthetic data.


F.5   P LOTS FOR C1 AND C2

Below it a plot of the constants C1 and C2 as functions of β with γb = 2 and α = 1 (recall γb ≥ α)
from Theorem 3.2. Both functions are hyperbolas and the vertical line is the constant β = 2γbα−α .
                                h
We see that in the interval β ∈ 0, 2γbα−α both functions are increasing.


Figure 14: Plots for the constants C1 and C2 as functions of β. Here we have chosen γb = 2 and
α = 1.


                                                                                                                                                                                   38
  Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


  F.6                       M ORE CONVEX EXPERIMENTS AND PARAMETER SETTINGS

  In this section, we list the parameters, architectures and hardware that we used for the deep learning
  experiments. The information is collected in Table 2. We also include some extra experiments in
  Figures 15 to 18.

                                                              Hyper-parameter Value
                                                              Architecture                                          Logistic Regression
                                                              GPUs                                                  1x NVIDIA GeForce RTX 3050
                                                              Batch-size                                            See caption of each plot
                                                              Epochs                                                100
                                                              Trials                                                5
                                                              Weight Decay                                          0.0

                                                                                            Table 2: Logistic regression experiment



                                               SGD                                 80
                 100                                                                                                                                                                                             70
                                               SHB
                                               SPSmax                              70
                                               MomSPSmax                                                                                                                                                         60
                                               Adam                                60                                                            100                         SGD                                               SGD
                                                              Train Accuracy (%)


                                                                                                                                                                                            Train Accuracy (%)
                                               ALR-SMAG                                                                                                                      SHB                                 50            SHB
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               SPSmax
Train Loss


                                                                                                                                Train Loss


                                                                                   50                                                                                        SPSmax                              40            MomSPSmax
                                                                                                  SGD                                                                        MomSPSmax                                         Adam
             6 × 10 1                                                              40             SHB                                        6 × 10 1                        Adam                                30            SPSmax + Naive Momentum
                                                                                                  SPSmax                                                                     ALR-SMAG                                          ALR-SMAG
                                                                                   30             MomSPSmax                                                                                                      20
                                                                                                  Adam                                       4 × 10 1
                                                                                   20             SPSmax + Naive Momentum                                                                                        10
             4 × 10 1                                                                             ALR-SMAG                                   3 × 10 1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  0
                        0     20   40    60       80    100                             0    20      40    60       80    100                           0   20   40    60       80    100                             0   20      40    60       80    100
                                    Epochs                                                            Epochs                                                      Epochs                                                           Epochs


  Figure 15: LibSVM dataset: vehicle, Batch size: 16 Figure 16: LibSVM dataset: letter, Batch size: 256

                                                                                   80                                                                                                                            60
                 100
                                                                                                                                                                            DecSPS
                                                                                                                                                 100                        MomDecSPS
                                                                                   70                                                                                       AdaSPS                               50
                                                                                                                                             9 × 10 1                       MomAdaSPS
                                                                                                                                                                            AdaGrad-Norm
                                                              Train Accuracy (%)


                                                                                                                                                                                            Train Accuracy (%)


                                              DecSPS                               60                                                                                                                            40
                                              MomDecSPS                                                                                      8 × 10 1
Train Loss


                                                                                                                                Train Loss


                                              AdaSPS                               50
                                              MomAdaSPS                                                                                      7 × 10 1                                                            30
             6 × 10 1                         AdaGrad-Norm
                                                                                   40                           DecSPS                                                                                                                       DecSPS
                                                                                                                MomDecSPS                    6 × 10 1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 20                          MomDecSPS
                                                                                                                AdaSPS                                                                                                                       AdaSPS
                                                                                   30                           MomAdaSPS                                                                                                                    MomAdaSPS
                                                                                                                AdaGrad-Norm                                                                                     10                          AdaGrad-Norm
                        0     20   40    60       80    100                             0    20      40    60       80    100                           0   20   40    60       80    100                             0   20      40    60       80    100
                                    Epochs                                                            Epochs                                                      Epochs                                                           Epochs


  Figure 17: LibSVM dataset: vehicle, Batch size: 85                                                                                   Figure 18: LibSVM dataset: glass, Batch size: 32

  F.7                       M ORE DEEP LEARNING EXPERIMENTS AND PARAMETER SETTINGS

  In this section, we list the parameters, architectures and hardware that we used for the deep learning
  experiments. The information is collected in Table 3. We also include some extra experiments in
  Figures 19 and 20. For ALR-SMAG we use c = 0.1 in the DL experiments.

                                                       Hyper-parameter Value
                                                       Architecture                                             ResNet 10/34 (He et al., 2016)
                                                       GPUs                                                     1x Nvidia RTX 6000 Ada Generation
                                                       Batch-size                                               256
                                                       Epochs                                                   100
                                                       Trials                                                   5
                                                       Weight Decay                                             0.0

                                                                                                   Table 3: CIFAR10 experiment


                                                                                                                                39
 Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                                             90
                              SGD                                                                                                                                                                       70
                              SHB
                              SPSmax                                         80
              100             MomSPSmax                                                                                             100                                                                 60
                              ADAM                                           70
                              SPSmax + Naive Momentum
                              ALR-SMAG                                       60            SGD                                                                                                                        SGD
                                                                                                                                                                                                        50


                                                                                                                                                                                    Test Accuracy (%)
                                                         Test Accuracy (%)
                                                                                           SHB                                                                                                                        SHB
                                                                                           SPSmax                                                                                                                     SPSmax


                                                                                                                      Train Loss
Train Loss


                                                                             50            MomSPSmax                                                                                                                  MomSPSmax
                                                                                           ADAM                                                                                                         40            ADAM
                                                                             40            SPSmax + Naive Momentum                 10 1                                                                               SPSmax + Naive Momentum
             10 1                                                                          ALR-SMAG                                            SGD                                                                    ALR-SMAG
                                                                             30                                                                SHB                                                      30
                                                                                                                                               SPSmax
                                                                                                                                               MomSPSmax
                                                                             20                                                                ADAM
                                                                                                                                               SPSmax + Naive Momentum                                  20
                                                                             10                                                                ALR-SMAG
                                                                                                                                   10 2
                    0    20   40    60      80     100                            0   20   40    60      80     100                       0      20     40     60        80   100                            0   20   40    60      80     100
                               Epochs                                                       Epochs                                                        Epochs                                                       Epochs



                        Figure 19: Resnet 18 on CIFAR 10                                                                                      Figure 20: Resnet 18 on CIFAR 100


                                                                                                                      40
