Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


REGENT: A R ETRIEVAL -AUGMENTED G ENERALIST
A GENT T HAT C AN ACT I N -C ONTEXT IN N EW E NVI -
RONMENTS

 Kaustubh Sridhar1 , Souradeep Dutta1,2 , Dinesh Jayaraman1 , Insup Lee1
 1
   University of Pennsylvania, 2 University of British Columbia
 ksridhar@seas.upenn.edu



                                             A BSTRACT
         Building generalist agents that can rapidly adapt to new environments is a key
         challenge for deploying AI in the digital and real worlds. Is scaling current agent
         architectures the most effective way to build generalist agents? We propose a
         novel approach to pre-train relatively small policies on relatively small datasets
         and adapt them to unseen environments via in-context learning, without any fine-
         tuning. Our key idea is that retrieval offers a powerful bias for fast adaptation.
         Indeed, we demonstrate that even a simple retrieval-based 1-nearest neighbor agent
         offers a surprisingly strong baseline for today’s state-of-the-art generalist agents.
         From this starting point, we construct a semi-parametric agent, REGENT, that
         trains a transformer-based policy on sequences of queries and retrieved neigh-
         bors. REGENT can generalize to unseen robotics and game-playing environments
         via retrieval augmentation and in-context learning, achieving this with up to 3x
         fewer parameters and up to an order-of-magnitude fewer pre-training datapoints,
         significantly outperforming today’s state-of-the-art generalist agents. Website:
         https://kaustubhsridhar.github.io/regent-research

1    I NTRODUCTION
AI agents, both in the digital [38, 19, 37, 28, 53] and real world [5, 7, 63, 33, 48, 24], constantly face
changing environments that require rapid or even instantaneous adaptation. True generalist agents
must not only be capable of performing well on large numbers of training environments, but arguably
more importantly, they must be capable of adapting rapidly to new environments. While this goal
has been of considerable interest to the reinforcement learning research community, it has proven
elusive. The most promising results so far have all been attributed to large policies [38, 19, 37, 28, 5],
pre-trained on large datasets across many environments, and even these models still struggle to
generalize to unseen environments without many new environment-specific demonstrations.
In this work, we take a different approach to the problem of constructing such generalist agents.
We start by asking: Is scaling current agent architectures the most effective way to build generalist
agents? Observing that retrieval offers a powerful bias for fast adaptation, we first evaluate a simple
1-nearest neighbor method: “Retrieve and Play (R&P)”. To determine the action at the current state,
R&P simply retrieves the closest state from a few demonstrations in the target environment and plays
its corresponding action. Tested on a wide range of environments, both robotics and game-playing,
R&P performs on-par or better than the state-of-the-art generalist agents. Note that these results
involve no pre-training environments, and not even a neural network policy: it is clear that larger
model and pre-training dataset sizes are not the only roadblock to developing generalist agents.
Having thus established the utility of retrieval for fast adaptation of sequential decision making agents,
we proceed to incorporate it into the design of a “Retrieval-Augmented Agent” (REGENT). REGENT
is a semi-parametric architecture: it pre-trains a transformer policy whose inputs are not only the
current state and previous reward, but also retrieved tuples of (state, previous reward, action) from
a set of demonstrations for each pre-training task, drawing inspiration from the recent successes
of retrieval augmentation in language modeling [20]. At each “query” state, REGENT is trained to
prescribe an action through aggregating the action predictions of R&P and the transformer policy. By
exploiting retrieval-augmentation as well as in-context learning, REGENT permits direct deployment


                                                    1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                Figure 1: Problem setting in JAT/Gato environments.



in entirely unseen environments and tasks with only a few demonstrations. REGENT is only one of
two models developed so far that can adapt to new environments via in-context learning: the other
model is the multi-trajectory transformer (MTT) [37].
We train and evaluate REGENT on two problem settings in this paper, shown in Figures 1 and 2. The
first setting is based on the environments used in Gato [38] (and its open source reproduction JAT
[19]) and the second setting is based on the ProcGen environments used in MTT [37].
In both settings, REGENT demonstrates significant generalization to unseen environments without
any finetuning. In the JAT/Gato setting, REGENT outperforms JAT/Gato even when the baseline
is finetuned on demonstrations from the unseen environments. In the ProcGen setting, REGENT
significantly surpasses MTT. Moreover, in both settings, REGENT trains a smaller model with 1.4x to
3x fewer parameters and with an order-of-magnitude fewer pre-training datapoints. Finally, while
REGENT’s design choices are aimed at generalization, its gains are not limited to unseen environments:
it even performs better than baselines when deployed within the pre-training environments.

2    R ELATED W ORK
Recent work in the reinforcement learning community has been aimed at building foundation models
and multi-task generalist agents [38, 19, 5, 28, 7, 63, 33, 48, 24, 10, 22, 3, 17, 54, 40, 41, 55, 60].
Many existing generalist agents struggle to adapt to new environments. Gato [38], a popular
generalist agent trained on a variety of gameplay and robotic environments, struggles to achieve
transfer to an unseen Atari game even after fine-tuning, irrespective of the pretraining data. The
authors attribute this difficulty to the "pronounced differences in the visuals, controls, and strategy"
among Atari games. They also attribute Gato’s lack of in-context adaptation to the limited context
length of the transformer not allowing for adequate data to be added in the context. Our method
sidesteps this issue by retrieving only limited but relevant parts of demonstration trajectories to include
in the context. JAT [19], an open-source version of Gato, faces similar problems. We compare with
and significantly outperform JAT/Gato using fewer parameters and an order-of-magnitude
fewer pre-training datapoints. While REGENT is a 138.6M parameter model, JAT uses 192.7M
parameters. The closed-source Gato, with similar performance as the open-source JAT, reports
using 1.2B parameters. JAT is also pre-trained on up to 5-10x the amount of data used by our method
and yet cannot generalize to unseen environments. Even after finetuning on a few demonstrations
from an unseen environment, JAT fails to meaningfully improve.
Many recent generalist agents cannot leverage in-context learning. In-context learning capabil-
ities enable easier and faster adaptation compared to finetuning. Robocat [5], which builds on the
Gato model, undergoes many cycles of fine-tuning, data collection, and pre-training from scratch
to adapt to new manipulation tasks. The multi-game decision transformer [28], an agent trained on
over 50 million Atari gameplay transitions, requires another 1 million transitions for fine-tuning on a


                                                        2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                           Figure 2: Problem setting in ProcGen environments adapted from [37].



held-out game which is not practical in real robot settings. We, on the other hand, show that REGENT
(and even R&P) can adapt to new Atari games with as little as 10k transitions and no finetuning on
said transitions. Finally, the RT series of robotics models [7, 63, 33], recent Vision-Language-Action
models like Octo, OpenVLA, Mobility VLA [48, 24, 10], and other generalist agents like BAKU,
RoboAgent [22, 3] do not evaluate or are demonstrated to not possess in-context learning capabilities.
REGENT on the other hand can adapt simply with in-context learning to unseen environments.
Agents that can adapt to new tasks via in-context learning, only do so within the same envi-
ronment. Algorithm Distillation [26], Decision Pretrained Transformer [27], and Prompt Decision
Transformer [52] are three in-context reinforcement learning methods proposed to generalize to
new goals and tasks within the same environment. None of these can handle changes in visual
observations, available controls, and game dynamics.
We also compare with and outperform MTT [37], the only other model that can adapt in-context
in the ProcGen setting, with improved data efficiency and a smaller model size. MTT trains a
transformer on sequences of trajectories from a particular level and environment and adapts to unseen
environments by throwing the demonstrations into its context. The ProcGen variant of REGENT use
an order-of-magnitude fewer transitions in pre-training and is about one-third the size of MTT.
Retrieval-augmented generation for training and deployment is a core part of our policy. Various
language models trained with retrieval-augmentation such as the original RAG model [29], RETRO
[4], and REALM [21] have demonstrated performance on par with vanilla language models with
significantly fewer parameters. Moreover, retrieval-augmented generation [20] with large language
models has enabled them to quickly adapt to new or up-to-date data. We hope that our work can
enable similar capabilities for decision-making agents.

3    P ROBLEM F ORMULATION

We aim to pre-train a generalist agent on datasets obtained from different environments, with the goal
of generalizing to new unseen environments. The agent has access to a few expert demonstrations in
these new environments. In this work, the agent achieves this through in-context learning without any
additional finetuning. We assume that the state and action spaces of unseen environments are known.
We model each environment i as a Markov Decision Process (MDP). The i-th Markov Decision
Process (MDP) Mi is a tuple (Si , Ai , Pi , Ri , γi , Ii ), where Si is the set of states, Ai is the set of
actions, Pi (s′ |s, a) is the probability of transitioning from state s to s′ when taking action a, Ri (s, a)
is the reward obtained in state s upon taking action a, γi ∈ [0, 1) is the discount factor, and Ii is the
initial state distribution. We assume that the MDP’s operate over trajectories with finite length Hi , in
an episodic fashion. Given a policy πi acting on Mi , the expected cumulative reward accrued over
                                                                                 PHi
the duration of an episode (i.e., expected return) is given by J(πi ) = Eπi [ t=1       Ri (st , at )].


                                                            3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


We denote the expert demonstration dataset corresponding to the i-th (training or un-
seen) environment consisting of tuples of (state, previous-reward, action) as Di =
{(s0 , 0, a0 ), (s1 , r0 , a1 ), . . . , (sNi , rNi −1 , aNi )}. Let us assume that we have access to K such
training environments for i from 1 through K, and unseen environments indexed from K + 1 through
M . We assume that the datasets Di ’s are generated by acting according to an expert policy πi∗ which
maximizes J(πi ). The training environments (i ≤ K) have a sizeable dataset of expert demonstra-
tions, while the unseen environments have only a handful of them, i.e |Di | >> |Dj |, where j > K.

4     REGENT: A R ETRIEVAL -AUGMENTED G ENERALIST AGENT
Simple nearest neighbor retrieval approaches have a long history in few-shot learning [50, 2, 49, 43, 9].
These works have found that, at small training dataset sizes, while parametric models might struggle
to extract any signal without extensive architecture or hyperparameter tuning, nearest neighbor
approaches perform about as well as the data can support. Motivated by these prior results in other
domains, we first construct such an approach for an agent that can learn directly in an unseen env-
ironment with limited expert demonstrations in Section 4.1. Then, we consider how to improve this
agent through access to experience in pre-training environments, so that it can transfer some knowled-
ge to novel environments that allows it to adapt even more effectively with limited data in Section 4.2.

4.1   R ETRIEVE AND P LAY (R&P)

This is arguably one of the simplest decision agents that leverages the retrieval toolset for adaptation.
Given a state st from an environment j, let us assume that it is possible to retrieve the n-nearest states
(and their corresponding previous rewards, actions) from Dj . We refer to this as the context ct ∈ Cj .
The set Cj is the set of all such contexts in environment j. We also call the state st the query state
following terminology from retrieval-augmented generation for language modeling [20].
The R&P agent takes the state st and context ct as input, picks the nearest retrieved state s′ in ct , and
plays the corresponding action a′ . That is, πR&P (st , ct ) = a′ . We describe the retrieval process in
detail later in Section 4.2. Clearly, R&P is devoid of any learning components which can transfer
capabilities from pre-training to unseen environments.

4.2   R ETRIEVAL -AUGMENTED G ENERALIST AGENT (REGENT)

To go beyond R&P, we posit that if an agent learns to meaningfully combine relevant context to
act in a set of training environments, then this skill should be transferable to novel environments as
well. We propose exactly such an agent in REGENT. We provide an overview of REGENT in Figure
3 where we depict the reinforcement learning loop with the retrieval mechanism and the REGENT
transformer. In the figure, we also include the retrieved context and query inputs to the transformer
and its output interpolation with the R&P action. We describe REGENT in detail below.
REGENT consists of a deep neural network policy πθ , which takes as input the state st , previous
reward rt−1 , context ct , and outputs the action directly for continuous environments and the logits
over the actions in discrete environments. In the context ct , the retrieved tuples of (state, previous
reward, action) are placed in order of their closesness to the query state st with the closest retrieved
state s′ placed first. Let d(st , s′ ) be the distance between st and s′ . We perform a distance weighted
interpolation between the outputs of the neural network policy and R&P as follows,
                                              ′                                    ′
        θ
       πREGENT (st , rt−1 , ct ) = e−λd(st ,s ) πR&P (st , ct ) + (1 − e−λd(st ,s ) ) σ(πθ (st , rt−1 , ct ))   (1)

                                     Softmax(x),                  if action space is discrete
                        σ(x) =                                                                                  (2)
                                     L × MixedReLU(x), if action space is continuous
where MixedReLU : R → [−1, 1] is a tanh-like activation function from [46] and is detailed in
Appendix A. Further, L ∈ R is a hyperparameter for scaling the output of the neural network for
continuous action spaces after the MixedReLU. We simply set both L and λ to 10 everywhere
following a similar choice in [46]. The function πθ is a causal transformer, which is adept at modeling
relatively long sequences of contextual information and predicting the optimal action [29, 4, 8, 28].
All distances are normalized and clipped to [0, 1] as detailed in Appendix A. For discrete action
spaces, where the transformer outputs a distribution over actions, we use a softened version of πR&P


                                                         4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 3: The REGENT architecture and overview. (1) A query state (from the unseen environment during deployment or from training
environments’ datasets during pre-training) is processed for retrieval. (2) The n nearest states from a few demonstrations in an unseen
environment or from a designated retrieval subset of pre-training environments’ datasets are retrieved. These states, and their corresponding
previous rewards and actions, are added to the context in order of their closeness to the query state, followed by the query state and previous
reward. (3) The predictions from the REGENT transformer are combined with the first retrieved action. (4) At deployment, only the predicted
query action is used. During pre-training, the loss from predicting all actions is used to train the transformer.



as described in Appendix A. As shown in Figure 3, for predicting each action, either for a retrieved
state in the context or for the query state, we set d(s, s′ ) in Equations (1) and (3) to the distance
between that state s and the first (closest) retrieved state in the context s′ .
Further, the exponential weights in Equation (1) allows us to smoothly transition between R&P and
the parametric policy πθ . When the state st is close enough to first retrieved state in the context ct ,
πREGENT simply plays the retrieved action. However, as it moves further away, policy πR&P becomes
a uniform distribution and the parametric policy πθ takes more precedence. We also hypothesize
that this interpolation allows the transformer to more readily generalize to unseen environments,
since it is given the easier task of predicting the residual to the R&P action rather than predicting the
complete action.
Pre-training REGENT and Loss Function: We train REGENT by minimizing the total cross-entropy
loss on discrete actions and total mean-squared error on continuous actions for all n + 1 action
predictions (n in the context and 1 query). We also follow the JAT recipe in ensuring that each
training batch consists only of data from a single environment’s dataset. We provide details about the
training hyperparameters in Appendix A.
REGENT Training Data and Environment Suites: In the JAT/Gato setting, we pre-train on 100k
transitions in each of the 45 Metaworld training environments, 9 Mujoco training environments,
52 Atari training environments, and 39 BabyAI training environments. This adds up to a total of
14.5M transitions used to pre-train REGENT. We obtain these transitions by taking a subset of the
open-source JAT dataset [19]. The complete JAT dataset consists of 5-10x the amount of data
we use in each environment. The Atari environments have discrete actions and four consecutive
grayscale images as states. However, we embed each combined four-stacked image into a vector of
512 dimensions and use this image embedding everywhere (for R&P and REGENT). The details of
embedding images are discussed later in this Section. The Metaworld and Mujoco environments have
proprioceptive vector observations and continuous action spaces. The BabyAI environments have
discrete observations, text specifying a goal in natural language, and discrete actions. We emphasize
that the same generalist policy handles completely different observation and action modalities and
dimensions across environments. The dimensions of observations & actions are given in Appendix A.
In the ProcGen setting that borrows from MTT [37], we generate 20 rollouts with PPO policies on
each of the 12 training environments for various levels depending on the environment. We do so to
ensure that the total number of transitions in each environment is 1M. The total size of the pre-training


                                                                      5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


dataset is 12M. All environments have an image-based state space and discrete actions. The number
of levels varies from 63 at the smallest in bigfish to 1565 at the largest in maze. This variation arises
from the difference in rollout horizon in each environment. We note that, even the largest value of
1565 is an order-of-magnitude fewer than the 10k levels in each game used by MTT for pre-training.
REGENT Architecture: REGENT adapts the JAT architecture in the JAT/Gato setting. It consists of
a causal transformer trunk. It has a shared linear encoder for image embeddings, vector observations,
and continuous actions. This encoder takes a maximum input vector of length 513, accommodating
the largest input vectors—image embeddings of size 512—plus a single reward value. When the
length of an input vector is less than that, it is cyclically repeated and padded to the maximum length.
It has a large shared lookup table with the GPT2 [35] vocabulary size for encoding discrete actions,
discrete observations, and text observations. Another linear layer is used to combine multiple discrete
values and text tokens present in a single observation vector. It has a shared linear head for predicting
continuous actions. A shared linear head is used for predicting distributions over discrete actions. All
of the above components are shared across environments with but only a subset of input encoders and
output heads may be triggered during a forward and backward pass depending on the input modalities
in an environment and output action space. We note that states and rewards are concatenated together
before encoding following the JAT recipe [19]. REGENT has a total of 138.6M parameters, including
the frozen ResNet18 image encoder, compared to JAT’s 192.7M parameters.
We simplify REGENT for the ProcGen setting keeping the transformer trunk with only a convolution
encoder for direct image inputs; a lookup table for encoding discrete actions; and a linear head for
predicting distributions over discrete actions. Here, following the MTT recipe, we do not use any
rewards. We only use the states and actions. Here, REGENT has a total of 116M parameters compared
to MTT’s 310M parameters. We detail all architectural hyperparameters and the differences between
JAT, MTT, and REGENT in Appendix A.
Processing Raw Observations, Distance Metrics, Retrieval Mechanism, and Preprocessing
Training Data: Recall that we are evaluating in two settings, depicted in Figures 1 and 2. In the
JAT/Gato setting, if the raw observations consist of images, we embed the image with an off-the-
shelf ResNet18 encoder [13] trained only on ImageNet data. If instead, the raw observations are
proprioceptive vectors, we use them directly without modification. In the ProcGen setting, the raw
observations consist of images that we use directly without modification.
In the JAT/Gato setting, we use the ℓ2 distance metric to compute distances between pairs of
observations, regardless of whether they are image embeddings or proprioceptive vectors. To
significantly speed up the search for nearest states to a query state, we leverage similarity search
indices [15]. In the ProcGen setting, we utilize the SSIM distance metric [51] to obtain distances
between two images. We perform a naive search for the nearest images to a query image, however all
SSIM distance calculations are parallelized on GPUs to speed up the retrieval process.
R&P simply performs the retrieval process described above at evaluation time, obtains the closest
state to a query state, and plays the corresponding action. REGENT on the other hand has to setup its
pre-training dataset as follows. It first designates a certain number of randomly chosen demonstrations
per environment as the retrieval set in that environment. This is described in Appendix A. Then,
for each state in each environment’s training dataset, we retrieve the n = 19 closest states from the
designated retrieval subset for that dataset. We ensure that none of the retrieved states are from the
same demonstration as the query state. In this process, we convert our dataset of transitions to a
dataset of (context, query state, query reward) datapoints where the context consists of 19 retrieved
(state, reward, action) tuples. Now, we can begin pre-training REGENT on this dataset.
Evaluating REGENT: After pre-training, in each of the two settings, we have one model that can be
deployed directly, without finetuning, on unseen environments. During deployment in an environment,
at each step, we retrieve the n = 19 closest states to the current query state (and their corresponding
actions and rewards). We pass this context with the query state, and previous reward into Equation
(1) through the architecture described above to predict the query action to take in the environment.
In the JAT/Gato setting, for the unseen environments, we hold-out 5 Metaworld, 5 Atari, and two
Mujoco environments (see Figure 1). In the ProcGen setting, following MTT [37], we hold-out 5
environments. Unlike MTT, we also evaluate on unseen levels in training environments (see Figure
2). We explain these choices in Appendix A. In this work, we focus on unseen environments in the
same suite as training environments and leave further generalization to future work. Finally, we also


                                                   6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


note that in all game-playing environments, we add a small sticky probability [31] of 0.05 in unseen
Atari environments and 0.2 in unseen ProcGen environments following [37]. This is not present in
any data or demonstration, which induces further stochasticity and tests the ability of both R&P and
REGENT to truly generalize under novel and stochastic dynamics.

5    S UB -O PTIMALITY B OUND FOR REGENT P OLICIES
In this section, we aim to bound the sub-optimality of the REGENT policy. This is measured with
respect to the expert policy πj∗ , that generated the retrieval demonstrations Dj . We focus on the
discrete action case here and leave the continuous action case for future work. The sub-optimality gap
in (training or unseen) environment j is given by (J(πj∗ ) − J(πREGENT
                                                                    θ
                                                                          )). Inspired by the theoretical
analysis of Sridhar et al. [46], we define the "most isolated state" and use this definition to bound the
total variation in the REGENT policy class and hence the sub-optimality gap.
That is, first, given Dj , we wish to obtain the maximum value of the distance term d(st , s′ ) in
Equations (1) and (3). To do so, we define the most isolated state as follows.
Definition 5.1 (Most Isolated State). For a given set of retrieval demonstrations   Dj in environment j,
                                                                 ′

we define the most isolated state sIDj := arg max min ′
                                                           d(s, s  )   , and consequently the distance to
                                                  s∈Sj    s ∈Dj
                                                      ′
the most isolated state as dIDj =   min         I
                                             d(sDj , s ).
                                    s′ ∈Dj

All distances between a state in this environment and its closest retrieved state are less than the above
value, which also measures state space coverage by the demonstrations available for retrieval. Using
the above definition, we have the following.
Theorem         5.2.     The        sub-optimality       gap        in      environment          j     is
                                                 −λdID
J(πj∗ ) − J(πREGENT
             θ
                    ) ≤ min{H, H 2 (1 − e             j   )}

Proof : We provide the proof in Appendix B.
The main consequence of this theorem, also observed in our results, is that the sub-optimality gap
reduces with more demonstrations in Dj because of the reduced distance to the most isolated state.

6    E XPERIMENTAL E VALUATION
In our experiments, we aim to answer the following key questions in the two settings depicted in
Figures 1 and 2. (1) How well can R&P and REGENT generalize to unseen environments? (2) How
does finetuning in the new environments improve REGENT? (3) How well can REGENT generalize to
variations of the training environments and perform in aggregate on training environments? (4) How
does REGENT qualitatively compare with R&P in using the retrieved context?
▶ Metrics: We plot the normalized return computed using the return of a random and expert agent
                        (total return−random return)
in each environment as (expert  return−random return) . The expert and random returns for all JAT/Gato
environments are made available in the original work [19]. The expert and random returns for the
ProcGen environments can be found in the original ProcGen paper [11].
▶ Baselines: We consider a different set of baselines for each of the two settings. In the JAT/Gato
setting, we compare R&P and REGENT with two variants of JAT. The first is a JAT model trained on
the same dataset as REGENT. The second is a JAT model trained on all available JAT data which
consists of an order of magnitude more datapoints (in particular, 5x more data in Atari environments
and 10x more data in all other environments). We label the former apples-to-apples comparison as
JAT/Gato and the latter as JAT/Gato (All Data). We also compare with JAT/Gato with RAG
at inference time. We use the same retrieval mechanism as REGENT for this baseline. Additional
details and all hyperparameters for the baselines are in Appendix A.
In the ProcGen setting, we compare with MTT [37]. MTT only reports results on unseen environments
and not on unseen levels in training environments. We simply take the best MTT result on each of the
four unseen environments in [37], obtained when 4 demonstrations are included in the MTT context.
▶ Finetuning and Train-from-scratch Baselines: We fully finetune and parameter-efficient finetune
(PEFT with IA3 [30]) both JAT/Gato and JAT/Gato (All Data) on various number of demo-
nstrations in each unseen environment in the JAT/Gato setting and compare with REGENT. We also


                                                          7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 4: Normalized returns in the unseen Metaworld and Atari environments against the number of demonstration trajectories the agent can
retrieve from or finetune on. Each agent is evaluated across 100 rollouts of different seeds in Metaworld and 15 rollouts of different seeds (with
psticky = 0.05) in Atari. We compute the overall mean and standard deviation over three training seeds for REGENT, REGENT Finetuned, the
PEFT with IA3 baselines, and DRIL. See Table 1 for detailed results.


compare with a train-from-scratch behavior cloning baseline and another imitation learning baseline
(DRIL [6]). For completeness, we also finetune REGENT on various number of demonstrations
in each unseen environment in the JAT/Gato setting. We use the same hyperparameters in each
finetuning method across JAT/Gato variants and REGENT. Additional details are in Appendix A.
Generalization to Unseen Environments: We plot the normalized return obtained by all methods
in unseen Metaworld and Atari environments from the JAT/Gato setting for various number of
demonstrations (25, 50, 75, 100) in Figure 4. For a fair comparison across Atari environments with
marked differences in episode horizons, we plot normalized return against various number of states in
the demonstrations (atleast 10k, 15k, 20k, 25k) rather than the number of demonstrations itself. These
demonstrations can be used by the different methods for retrieval or fine-tuning. We also plot the
normalized return obtained by all methods in unseen ProcGen environments against various number
of demonstrations (2, 4, 8, 12, 16, 20) to retrieve from in Figure 5. As mentioned before in Section
4.2, unseen Atari environments have a sticky probability of 0.05 and unseen ProcGen environments
have a sticky probability of 0.2.
In both Figures 4 and 5, we observe that R&P and REGENT can generalize well to unseen Atari and
ProcGen environments with image observations and discrete actions as well as to unseen Metaworld
environments with vector observations and continuous actions. R&P is a surprisingly strong baseline,
but REGENT improves on R&P consistently. In general, both methods appear to steadily improve
with more demonstrations (with only a few exceptions).
In Figure 4, we observe that JAT/Gato cannot generalize to most unseen environments. REGENT
(and even R&P) outperform even the All Data variants of JAT/Gato which were pre-trained on
5-10x the size of the REGENT dataset. The sticky probability in unseen Atari environments adds
further stochasticity and stress tests true generalization against simply replaying demonstrations. The
JAT/Gato + RAG baselines actually improve over zero-shot JAT/Gato but are still significantly
outperformed by REGENT. This demonstrates the advantage of REGENT’s architecture and retrieval
augmented pretraining over just performing RAG at inference time.
In Figure 5, REGENT (and even R&P) outperform MTT which was trained on an order of magnitude
more training levels and data than REGENT while also having approximately 3x the parameters.
We also note that without the interpolation between R&P and the output of the transformer, RE-
GENT does not generalize to unseen environments (i.e., it performs like a random agent on unseen
environments). This interpolation is key to REGENT.


                                                                        8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 5: Normalized returns in unseen ProcGen environments against the number of demonstration trajectories the agent can retrieve from.
REGENT and R&P agents are evaluated across 10 levels with 5 rollouts and psticky = 0.2. We compute the overall mean and standard deviation
over three training seeds for REGENT. The values for MTT are the best scores reported in [37]. See Table 7 for detailed results.


Figure 6: Normalized returns in unseen levels in 4 (of 12) ProcGen training environments against the number of demonstration trajectories the
agent can retrieve from. Each value is an average across 10 levels with 5 rollouts each with psticky = 0.1. The other 8 plots are similar to the
above and can be found in Figure 19 (in Appendix D). See Table 8 for detailed results.


Effect of Finetuning: From Figure 4, we see that JAT/Gato, along with its All Data variant,
struggles to perform in all unseen environments even after full finetuning. JAT/Gato performs
slightly better after PEFT with IA3 in the unseen metaworld environments. Training from scratch on
the few demonstrations in each unseen environment also does not obtain any meaningful performance
in most environments. REGENT (and even R&P), without any finetuning, outperforms all finetuned
variants of JAT/Gato. Moreover, we can see that REGENT further improves after finetuning, even
with only a few demonstrations.
To highlight REGENT’s ability to adapt from very little data, we note that in Figure 4, we only vary
the number of states in Atari demonstrations until 25k. Whereas, the closest generalist policy that fine-
tunes to new Atari environments, the multi-game decision transformer [28], requires 1M transitions.
Finally, we note that all methods face a hurdle in generalizing to the very long-horizon atari-
spaceinvaders and atari-stargunner environments, which have horizons about 10x that of atari-pong
and hence have not been shown in Figure 4. Generalization to the new embodiments in the two
unseen Mujoco environments proves equally challenging, we discuss this in detail in Appendix C.
Generalization to Variations of the Training Environments: In the ProcGen setting in Figure
2, the unseen levels of the 12 training environments provide an avenue to test a middle ground of
generalization between training and unseen environments. We plot the normalized returns on unseen
levels of 4 (of 12) training environments (with a sticky probability of 0.1) in Figure 6. The remaining
can be found in Figure 19 (Appendix D) and are similar to the above 4. In Figure 6, we again observe
that REGENT performs the best in unseen levels while R&P remains a strong baseline. We also depict
the performance of REGENT on seen levels of these training environments with a dotted line in this
Figure. This represents an upper bound for REGENT’s performance in unseen levels. We observe that
with a large number of demonstrations, REGENT appears to reach close to this upper bound simply
via retrieval-augmentation and in-context learning in some environments.
Aggregate Performance on Training Environments: We plot the aggregate normalized return, both
IQM [1] and mean, on training environments for each of the 4 suites (in the JAT/Gato setting) in
Figure 7. We notice that REGENT significantly exceeds JAT/Gato on Metaworld, exceeds it on Atari,
matches it on Mujoco, and is close to matching it on BabyAI. This demonstrates the dual advantage
of REGENT which gains the capability to generalize to unseen environments while preserving overall
multi-task performance in training environments.


                                                                       9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 7: Aggregate normalized returns in the 45 training Metaworld environments, 9 training Mujoco environments, 52 training Atari
environments, and 39 training BabyAI environments. See Figures 15, 16, 17, 18 (in Appendix C) for performance on each training environment
of each suite.


Figure 8: Qualitative examples of a few inputs and outputs of REGENT for two states in a rendered rollout in the unseen, discrete action space,
atari-pong environment. REGENT leverages its in-context learning capabilities and interpolation with R&P to either make a simple decision and
predict the same action as R&P (see blue box on the right) or predict better actions at key states (see black box on the left) that leads to better
overall performance as seen in Figure 4.


Qualitative Examples: We plot examples of the inputs and outputs of REGENT at various states
during a rendered rollout in the atari-pong environment in Figure 8 to highlight REGENT’s learned
in-context learning capabilities and interpolation with R&P. We also provide a qualitative example in
a continuous metaworld environment in Appendix C.
Ablations and Discussions: We performed ablations on REGENT’s context length, context order,
and distance metric in Figures 9, 10, and 12 in Appendix C. We found that a larger context length
improves performance (but saturates quickly), the order of states in the context is key especially when
unseen environments significantly differ from pretraining environments (such as in Atari), and that ℓ2
outperforms cosine distance. We also discuss inference runtimes in Figure 11 in Appendix C.
7     C ONCLUSIONS AND F UTURE W ORK
In this work, we demonstrated that retrieval offers generalist agents a powerful bias for rapid
adaptation to new environments, even without large models and vast datasets. We showed that
a simple retrieval-based 1-nearest neighbor agent, Retrieve and Play (R&P), is a strong baseline
that matches or exceeds the performance of today’s state-of-the-art generalist agents in unseen
environments. Building on this, we proposed a semi-parametric generalist agent, REGENT, that
pre-trains a transformer-based policy on sequences of query state, reward, and retrieved context.
REGENT exploits retrieval-augmentation and in-context learning for direct deployment in unseen
environments with only a few demonstrations. Even after pre-training on an order of magnitude fewer
datapoints than other generalist agents and with fewer parameters, REGENT outperforms them across
unseen environments and surpasses them even after they have been finetuned on demonstrations from
those unseen environments. REGENT, itself, further improves with finetuning on even a small number
of demonstrations. We note that REGENT faces a couple of limitations: adapting to new embodiments
and long-horizon environments. In future work, we believe a larger diversity of embodiments in
the training dataset and improved retrieval from longer demonstrations can help REGENT overcome
these challenges. We conclude with the conviction that retrieval in general and REGENT in particular
redefines the possibilities for developing highly adaptive and efficient generalist agents, even with
limited resources.


                                                                       10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Acknowledgements: This work was supported in part by ARO MURI W911NF-20-1-0080, NSF
2143274, NSF CAREER 2239301, NSF 2331783, and DARPA TIAMAT HR00112490421. Any
opinions, findings, conclusions or recommendations expressed in this material are those of the authors
and do not necessarily reflect the views the Army Research Office (ARO), the Department of Defense,
or the United States Government.

Reproducibility statement: To ensure reproducibility, we have released all code at https://
kaustubhsridhar.github.io/regent-research. We have also described all datasets,
environment suites, baselines, and REGENT itself in detail in Section 4, Section 6, and Appendix A.

R EFERENCES
 [1] Rishabh Agarwal, Max Schwarzer, Pablo Samuel Castro, Aaron C Courville, and Marc Belle-
     mare. Deep reinforcement learning at the edge of the statistical precipice. Advances in neural
     information processing systems, 34:29304–29320, 2021. (Cited on 9)
 [2] M Saiful Bari, Batool Haider, and Saab Mansour. Nearest neighbour few-shot learning for
     cross-lingual classification. arXiv preprint arXiv:2109.02221, 2021. (Cited on 4)
 [3] Homanga Bharadhwaj, Jay Vakil, Mohit Sharma, Abhinav Gupta, Shubham Tulsiani, and
     Vikash Kumar. Roboagent: Generalization and efficiency in robot manipulation via semantic
     augmentations and action chunking. In 2024 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and
     Automation (ICRA), pp. 4788–4795. IEEE, 2024. (Cited on 2, 3)
 [4] Sebastian Borgeaud, Arthur Mensch, Jordan Hoffmann, Trevor Cai, Eliza Rutherford, Katie
     Millican, George Bm Van Den Driessche, Jean-Baptiste Lespiau, Bogdan Damoc, Aidan Clark,
     et al. Improving language models by retrieving from trillions of tokens. In International
     conference on machine learning, pp. 2206–2240. PMLR, 2022. (Cited on 3, 4)
 [5] Konstantinos Bousmalis, Giulia Vezzani, Dushyant Rao, Coline Devin, Alex X Lee, Maria
     Bauza, Todor Davchev, Yuxiang Zhou, Agrim Gupta, Akhil Raju, et al. Robocat: A self-
     improving foundation agent for robotic manipulation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.11706, 2023.
     (Cited on 1, 2)
 [6] Kiante Brantley, Wen Sun, and Mikael Henaff. Disagreement-regularized imitation learning. In
     International Conference on Learning Representations, 2019. (Cited on 8, 18)
 [7] Anthony Brohan, Noah Brown, Justice Carbajal, Yevgen Chebotar, Joseph Dabis, Chelsea Finn,
     Keerthana Gopalakrishnan, Karol Hausman, Alex Herzog, Jasmine Hsu, et al. Rt-1: Robotics
     transformer for real-world control at scale. arXiv preprint arXiv:2212.06817, 2022. (Cited on 1,
     2, 3)
 [8] Lili Chen, Kevin Lu, Aravind Rajeswaran, Kimin Lee, Aditya Grover, Misha Laskin, Pieter
     Abbeel, Aravind Srinivas, and Igor Mordatch. Decision transformer: Reinforcement learning
     via sequence modeling. Advances in neural information processing systems, 34:15084–15097,
     2021. (Cited on 4)
 [9] Wei-Yu Chen, Yen-Cheng Liu, Zsolt Kira, Yu-Chiang Frank Wang, and Jia-Bin Huang. A closer
     look at few-shot classification. arXiv preprint arXiv:1904.04232, 2019. (Cited on 4)
[10] Hao-Tien Lewis Chiang, Zhuo Xu, Zipeng Fu, Mithun George Jacob, Tingnan Zhang, Tsang-
     Wei Edward Lee, Wenhao Yu, Connor Schenck, David Rendleman, Dhruv Shah, et al. Mobility
     vla: Multimodal instruction navigation with long-context vlms and topological graphs. arXiv
     preprint arXiv:2407.07775, 2024. (Cited on 2, 3)
[11] Karl Cobbe, Chris Hesse, Jacob Hilton, and John Schulman. Leveraging procedural generation
     to benchmark reinforcement learning. In International conference on machine learning, pp.
     2048–2056. PMLR, 2020. (Cited on 7)
[12] Erwin Coumans and Yunfei Bai. Pybullet, a python module for physics simulation for games,
     robotics and machine learning. http://pybullet.org, 2016–2019. (Cited on 17)


                                                 11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


[13] Sudeep Dasari, Mohan Kumar Srirama, Unnat Jain, and Abhinav Gupta. An unbiased look
     at datasets for visuo-motor pre-training. In Conference on Robot Learning, pp. 1183–1198.
     PMLR, 2023. (Cited on 6, 16, 17)
[14] Alexey Dosovitskiy, German Ros, Felipe Codevilla, Antonio Lopez, and Vladlen Koltun. Carla:
     An open urban driving simulator. In Conference on robot learning, pp. 1–16. PMLR, 2017.
     (Cited on 17)
[15] Matthijs Douze, Alexandr Guzhva, Chengqi Deng, Jeff Johnson, Gergely Szilvasy, Pierre-
     Emmanuel Mazaré, Maria Lomeli, Lucas Hosseini, and Hervé Jégou. The faiss library. arXiv
     preprint arXiv:2401.08281, 2024. (Cited on 6)
[16] Souradeep Dutta, Kaustubh Sridhar, Osbert Bastani, Edgar Dobriban, James Weimer, Insup Lee,
     and Julia Parish-Morris. Exploring with sticky mittens: Reinforcement learning with expert
     interventions via option templates. In Conference on Robot Learning, pp. 1499–1509. PMLR,
     2023. (Cited on 17)
[17] Kiana Ehsani, Tanmay Gupta, Rose Hendrix, Jordi Salvador, Luca Weihs, Kuo-Hao Zeng,
     Kunal Pratap Singh, Yejin Kim, Winson Han, Alvaro Herrasti, et al. Imitating shortest paths
     in simulation enables effective navigation and manipulation in the real world. arXiv preprint
     arXiv:2312.02976, 2023. (Cited on 2)
[18] Lasse Espeholt, Hubert Soyer, Remi Munos, Karen Simonyan, Vlad Mnih, Tom Ward, Yotam
     Doron, Vlad Firoiu, Tim Harley, Iain Dunning, et al. Impala: Scalable distributed deep-rl
     with importance weighted actor-learner architectures. In International conference on machine
     learning, pp. 1407–1416. PMLR, 2018. (Cited on 18)
[19] Quentin Gallouédec, Edward Beeching, Clément Romac, and Emmanuel Dellandréa. Jack of
     all trades, master of some, a multi-purpose transformer agent. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.09844,
     2024. (Cited on 1, 2, 5, 6, 7, 17)
[20] Yunfan Gao, Yun Xiong, Xinyu Gao, Kangxiang Jia, Jinliu Pan, Yuxi Bi, Yi Dai, Jiawei Sun,
     and Haofen Wang. Retrieval-augmented generation for large language models: A survey. arXiv
     preprint arXiv:2312.10997, 2023. (Cited on 1, 3, 4)
[21] Kelvin Guu, Kenton Lee, Zora Tung, Panupong Pasupat, and Mingwei Chang. Retrieval
     augmented language model pre-training. In International conference on machine learning, pp.
     3929–3938. PMLR, 2020. (Cited on 3)
[22] Siddhant Haldar, Zhuoran Peng, and Lerrel Pinto. Baku: An efficient transformer for multi-task
     policy learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.07539, 2024. (Cited on 2, 3)
[23] Tomoyuki Kagaya, Thong Jing Yuan, Yuxuan Lou, Jayashree Karlekar, Sugiri Pranata, Akira
     Kinose, Koki Oguri, Felix Wick, and Yang You. Rap: Retrieval-augmented planning with
     contextual memory for multimodal llm agents. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.03610, 2024. (Cited
     on 30)
[24] Moo Jin Kim, Karl Pertsch, Siddharth Karamcheti, Ted Xiao, Ashwin Balakrishna, Suraj Nair,
     Rafael Rafailov, Ethan Foster, Grace Lam, Pannag Sanketi, et al. Openvla: An open-source
     vision-language-action model. arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.09246, 2024. (Cited on 1, 2, 3)
[25] Louis Kirsch, James Harrison, Daniel Freeman, Jascha Sohl-Dickstein, and Jürgen Schmidhuber.
     Towards general-purpose in-context learning agents. Workshop on Distribution Shifts, 37th
     Conference on Neural Information . . . , 2023. (Cited on 30)
[26] Michael Laskin, Luyu Wang, Junhyuk Oh, Emilio Parisotto, Stephen Spencer, Richie Steiger-
     wald, DJ Strouse, Steven Hansen, Angelos Filos, Ethan Brooks, et al. In-context reinforcement
     learning with algorithm distillation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2210.14215, 2022. (Cited on 3)
[27] Jonathan Lee, Annie Xie, Aldo Pacchiano, Yash Chandak, Chelsea Finn, Ofir Nachum, and
     Emma Brunskill. Supervised pretraining can learn in-context reinforcement learning. Advances
     in Neural Information Processing Systems, 36, 2024. (Cited on 3)


                                                12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


[28] Kuang-Huei Lee, Ofir Nachum, Mengjiao Sherry Yang, Lisa Lee, Daniel Freeman, Sergio
     Guadarrama, Ian Fischer, Winnie Xu, Eric Jang, Henryk Michalewski, et al. Multi-game
     decision transformers. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 35:27921–27936,
     2022. (Cited on 1, 2, 4, 9, 17)

[29] Patrick Lewis, Ethan Perez, Aleksandra Piktus, Fabio Petroni, Vladimir Karpukhin, Naman
     Goyal, Heinrich Küttler, Mike Lewis, Wen-tau Yih, Tim Rocktäschel, et al. Retrieval-augmented
     generation for knowledge-intensive nlp tasks. Advances in Neural Information Processing
     Systems, 33:9459–9474, 2020. (Cited on 3, 4)

[30] Haokun Liu, Derek Tam, Mohammed Muqeeth, Jay Mohta, Tenghao Huang, Mohit Bansal, and
     Colin A Raffel. Few-shot parameter-efficient fine-tuning is better and cheaper than in-context
     learning. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 35:1950–1965, 2022. (Cited on
     7, 17)

[31] Marlos C Machado, Marc G Bellemare, Erik Talvitie, Joel Veness, Matthew Hausknecht, and
     Michael Bowling. Revisiting the arcade learning environment: Evaluation protocols and open
     problems for general agents. Journal of Artificial Intelligence Research, 61:523–562, 2018.
     (Cited on 7)

[32] Chiara Dalla Man, Francesco Micheletto, Dayu Lv, Marc Breton, Boris Kovatchev, and Claudio
     Cobelli. The uva/padova type 1 diabetes simulator: new features. Journal of diabetes science
     and technology, 8(1):26–34, 2014. (Cited on 17)

[33] Abhishek Padalkar, Acorn Pooley, Ajinkya Jain, Alex Bewley, Alex Herzog, Alex Irpan,
     Alexander Khazatsky, Anant Rai, Anikait Singh, Anthony Brohan, et al. Open x-embodiment:
     Robotic learning datasets and rt-x models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.08864, 2023. (Cited on 1,
     2, 3)

[34] Jean Park, Sydney Pugh, Kaustubh Sridhar, Mengyu Liu, Navish Yarna, Ramneet Kaur,
     Souradeep Dutta, Elena Bernardis, Oleg Sokolsky, and Insup Lee. Automating weak label
     generation for data programming with clinicians in the loop. In Conference on Connected
     Health: Applications, Systems and Engineering Technologies (CHASE), 2024. (Cited on 17)

[35] Alec Radford, Jeffrey Wu, Rewon Child, David Luan, Dario Amodei, Ilya Sutskever, et al.
     Language models are unsupervised multitask learners. OpenAI blog, 1(8):9, 2019. (Cited on 6)

[36] Nived Rajaraman, Lin F. Yang, Jiantao Jiao, and Kannan Ramchandran. Toward the fundamental
     limits of imitation learning. In Proceedings of the 34th International Conference on Neural
     Information Processing Systems, NIPS’20, Red Hook, NY, USA, 2020. Curran Associates Inc.
     ISBN 9781713829546. (Cited on 19)

[37] Sharath Chandra Raparthy, Eric Hambro, Robert Kirk, Mikael Henaff, and Roberta Raileanu.
     Generalization to new sequential decision making tasks with in-context learning. arXiv preprint
     arXiv:2312.03801, 2023. (Cited on 1, 2, 3, 5, 6, 7, 9, 17, 28)

[38] Scott Reed, Konrad Zolna, Emilio Parisotto, Sergio Gomez Colmenarejo, Alexander Novikov,
     Gabriel Barth-Maron, Mai Gimenez, Yury Sulsky, Jackie Kay, Jost Tobias Springenberg, et al.
     A generalist agent. arXiv preprint arXiv:2205.06175, 2022. (Cited on 1, 2)

[39] Thomas Schmied, Fabian Paischer, Vihang Patil, Markus Hofmarcher, Razvan Pascanu, and
     Sepp Hochreiter. Retrieval-augmented decision transformer: External memory for in-context rl.
     arXiv preprint arXiv:2410.07071, 2024. (Cited on 30)

[40] Dhruv Shah, Ajay Sridhar, Arjun Bhorkar, Noriaki Hirose, and Sergey Levine. Gnm: A general
     navigation model to drive any robot. In 2023 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and
     Automation (ICRA), pp. 7226–7233. IEEE, 2023. (Cited on 2)

[41] Dhruv Shah, Ajay Sridhar, Nitish Dashora, Kyle Stachowicz, Kevin Black, Noriaki Hi-
     rose, and Sergey Levine. Vint: A foundation model for visual navigation. arXiv preprint
     arXiv:2306.14846, 2023. (Cited on 2)


                                                13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


[42] Aaditya Singh, Stephanie Chan, Ted Moskovitz, Erin Grant, Andrew Saxe, and Felix Hill.
     The transient nature of emergent in-context learning in transformers. Advances in Neural
     Information Processing Systems, 36, 2024. (Cited on 16)
[43] Jake Snell, Kevin Swersky, and Richard Zemel. Prototypical networks for few-shot learning.
     Advances in neural information processing systems, 30, 2017. (Cited on 4)
[44] Kaustubh Sridhar and Srikant Sukumar. Finite-time, event-triggered tracking control of quadro-
     tors. In 5th CEAS Specialist Conference on Guidance, Navigation & Control (EurGNC 19)
     Milano, Italy, 2019. (Cited on 17)
[45] Kaustubh Sridhar, Oleg Sokolsky, Insup Lee, and James Weimer. Improving neural network
     robustness via persistency of excitation. In 2022 American Control Conference (ACC), pp.
     1521–1526. IEEE, 2022. (Cited on 17)
[46] Kaustubh Sridhar, Souradeep Dutta, Dinesh Jayaraman, James Weimer, and Insup Lee. Memory-
     consistent neural networks for imitation learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.06171, 2023. (Cited
     on 4, 7, 16, 17)
[47] Kaustubh Sridhar, Souradeep Dutta, James Weimer, and Insup Lee. Guaranteed conformance of
     neurosymbolic models to natural constraints. In Learning for Dynamics and Control Conference,
     pp. 76–89. PMLR, 2023. (Cited on 17)
[48] Octo Model Team, Dibya Ghosh, Homer Walke, Karl Pertsch, Kevin Black, Oier Mees, Sudeep
     Dasari, Joey Hejna, Tobias Kreiman, Charles Xu, et al. Octo: An open-source generalist robot
     policy. arXiv preprint arXiv:2405.12213, 2024. (Cited on 1, 2, 3)
[49] Oriol Vinyals, Charles Blundell, Timothy Lillicrap, Daan Wierstra, et al. Matching networks for
     one shot learning. Advances in neural information processing systems, 29, 2016. (Cited on 4)
[50] Yan Wang, Wei-Lun Chao, Kilian Q Weinberger, and Laurens Van Der Maaten. Simpleshot: Re-
     visiting nearest-neighbor classification for few-shot learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1911.04623,
     2019. (Cited on 4)
[51] Zhou Wang, Alan C Bovik, Hamid R Sheikh, and Eero P Simoncelli. Image quality assessment:
     from error visibility to structural similarity. IEEE transactions on image processing, 13(4):
     600–612, 2004. (Cited on 6)
[52] Mengdi Xu, Yikang Shen, Shun Zhang, Yuchen Lu, Ding Zhao, Joshua Tenenbaum, and Chuang
     Gan. Prompting decision transformer for few-shot policy generalization. In international
     conference on machine learning, pp. 24631–24645. PMLR, 2022. (Cited on 3)
[53] John Yang, Carlos E Jimenez, Alexander Wettig, Kilian Lieret, Shunyu Yao, Karthik
     Narasimhan, and Ofir Press. Swe-agent: Agent-computer interfaces enable automated software
     engineering. arXiv preprint arXiv:2405.15793, 2024. (Cited on 1)
[54] Jonathan Yang, Dorsa Sadigh, and Chelsea Finn. Polybot: Training one policy across robots
     while embracing variability. arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.03719, 2023. (Cited on 2)
[55] Jonathan Yang, Catherine Glossop, Arjun Bhorkar, Dhruv Shah, Quan Vuong, Chelsea Finn,
     Dorsa Sadigh, and Sergey Levine. Pushing the limits of cross-embodiment learning for manipu-
     lation and navigation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.19432, 2024. (Cited on 2)
[56] Yahan Yang, Ramneet Kaur, Souradeep Dutta, and Insup Lee. Interpretable detection of distri-
     bution shifts in learning enabled cyber-physical systems. In 2022 ACM/IEEE 13th International
     Conference on Cyber-Physical Systems (ICCPS), pp. 225–235. IEEE, 2022. (Cited on 17)
[57] Zhuolin Yang, Wei Ping, Zihan Liu, Vijay Korthikanti, Weili Nie, De-An Huang, Linxi Fan,
     Zhiding Yu, Shiyi Lan, Bo Li, et al. Re-vilm: Retrieval-augmented visual language model for
     zero and few-shot image captioning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.04858, 2023. (Cited on 30)
[58] Tianhe Yu, Deirdre Quillen, Zhanpeng He, Ryan Julian, Karol Hausman, Chelsea Finn, and
     Sergey Levine. Meta-world: A benchmark and evaluation for multi-task and meta reinforcement
     learning. In Conference on robot learning, pp. 1094–1100. PMLR, 2020. (Cited on 17)


                                                14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


[59] Andrew Zhao, Daniel Huang, Quentin Xu, Matthieu Lin, Yong-Jin Liu, and Gao Huang. Expel:
     Llm agents are experiential learners. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial
     Intelligence, volume 38, pp. 19632–19642, 2024. (Cited on 30)
[60] Haoyu Zhen, Xiaowen Qiu, Peihao Chen, Jincheng Yang, Xin Yan, Yilun Du, Yining Hong,
     and Chuang Gan. 3d-vla: A 3d vision-language-action generative world model. arXiv preprint
     arXiv:2403.09631, 2024. (Cited on 2)
[61] Yichen Zhu, Zhicai Ou, Xiaofeng Mou, and Jian Tang. Retrieval-augmented embodied agents.
     In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp.
     17985–17995, 2024. (Cited on 30)
[62] Yuke Zhu, Josiah Wong, Ajay Mandlekar, Roberto Martín-Martín, Abhishek Joshi, Soroush
     Nasiriany, and Yifeng Zhu. robosuite: A modular simulation framework and benchmark for
     robot learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2009.12293, 2020. (Cited on 17)
[63] Brianna Zitkovich, Tianhe Yu, Sichun Xu, Peng Xu, Ted Xiao, Fei Xia, Jialin Wu, Paul
     Wohlhart, Stefan Welker, Ayzaan Wahid, et al. Rt-2: Vision-language-action models transfer
     web knowledge to robotic control. In Conference on Robot Learning, pp. 2165–2183. PMLR,
     2023. (Cited on 1, 2, 3)


                                               15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A PPENDIX

A    A DDITIONAL D ETAILS FOR REGENT A ND VARIOUS BASELINES

                                   Additional Details for REGENT

MixedReLU activation: MixedReLU is a tanh-like activation function from [46] given by
MixedReLU(x) = (2(ReLU( x+1              x−1
                              2 ) − ReLU( 2 )) − 1) which simplifies to −1 for x < −1, x
for −1 ≤ x ≤ 1, and 1 for x > 1.
Normalizing distances to [0, 1]: We compute the 95th percentile of all distances d(s, s′ ) between any
(retrieved or query) state s and the first (closest) retrieved state s′ . This value is computed from the
demonstrations Dj and is used to normalize all distances in that environment. This value is calculated
for all (training or unseen) environments during the preprocessing stage. If after normalization, a
distance value is greater than 1, we simply clip it to 1.
Softening πR&P logits for discrete action environments: Let us assume that the discrete action space
consists of Nact different actions. We have the following.
                                             1+(Nact −1)(1−d(st ,s′ ))
                                           (
                                                                       , if a = a′
                        πR&P (a|st , ct ) = d(st ,s′ ) Nact                                      (3)
                                              Nact                     , if a ̸= a′

The distribution induced by the modified πR&P function assigns all probability mass to the action a′
when d(st , s′ ) = 0 and acts like a uniform distribution when d(st , s′ ) = 1, thereby preventing bias
toward any single logit.
Architectural hyperparameters: In both settings, the transformer trunk consists of 12 layers and 12
heads with a hidden size of 768. We set the maximum position encodings to 40 for 20 (state, previous
reward)’s and 20 actions. Of these 20, 19 belong to the retrieved context and 1 belongs to the query.
In the JAT/Gato setting, the maximum multi-discrete observation size is 212 (for BabyAI). The
maximum continuous observation size as discussed before in Section 4 is set to 513, a consequence of
the ResNet18 image embedding models’s [13] embedding size of 512 with an additional 1 dimension
for the reward. All linear encoding layers map from their corresponding input size to the hidden size.
Following the JAT model, the linear decoder head for predicting continuous actions maps from the
hidden size to the maximum continuous size discussed above (513). On the other hand, the linear
decoder head for predicting distributions over discrete actions maps from the hidden size to only
the maximum number of discrete actions across all discrete environments (18), whereas in the JAT
model, they map to the full GPT2 vocab size of 50257.
In the JAT/Gato setting, the original JAT architecture has a much larger context size (that is
not required for REGENT), a larger image encoder (than the resnet18 used in REGENT), a much
larger discrete decoder predicting distributions over the entire GPT2 vocab size (instead of just the
maximum number of discrete actions in REGENT), and has (optional) decoders for predicting various
observations (that is also not required for REGENT).
In the ProcGen setting, MTT has a 18 layers, 16 heads, and a hidden size of 1024 – all three of which
are much larger than REGENT’s architectural hyperparameters mentioned above.
Training hyperparameters: In the JAT/Gato setting, we use a batch size of 512 and the AdamW
optimizer with parameters β1 = 0.9 and β2 = 0.999. The learning rate starts at 5e-5 and decays to
zero through 3 epochs over all pre-training data. We early stop after a single epoch because we find
that overtraining reduces in-context learning performance. This observation is consistent with similar
observations about the transience of in-context learning in literature [42].
In the ProcGen setting, we use a batch size of 1024, a starting learning of 1e-4 also decaying over 3
epochs over all the pre-training data with an early stop after the first epoch. We again use the AdamW
optimizer with parameters β1 = 0.9 and β2 = 0.95.
Designating retrieval demonstrations in each training environment’s dataset: In the JAT/Gato
setting, we designate 100 random demonstrations from the each of training vector observation
environments as the retrieval subset for that environment. We also designate 5 random demonstrations
from the training image environments as the retrieval subsets for said environments. In the ProcGen


                                                   16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


setting, with only 20 demonstrations per level per environment, we designate all 20 as the retrieval
set for that level in that environment.
We use all states in all demonstrations in each training environment’s dataset as query states. So,
when a query state is from a demonstration in the designated retrieval subset, we simply retrieve
from all other demonstrations in the designated retrieval subset except the current one. When a
query state is from a demonstration not in the designated retrieval subset, we retrieve simply from
the designated retrieval subset. This way, we ensure that none of the retrieved states are from the
same demonstration as the query state. A possible direction for future work includes intelligently
designating and collecting demonstrations for retrieval (perhaps using ideas like persistency of
excitation [45], memory-based methods [56, 46, 47, 34], expert intervention methods [16]).
Choice of held-out environments: In the JAT/Gato setting, for the unseen environments, we
hold-out the 5 Metaworld environments recommended in [58], the 5 Atari environments held-out
in [28], and finally, we choose two Mujoco environments of mixed difficulty (see Figure 1). In the
ProcGen setting, following MTT [37], we hold-out 5 environments.
In this work, we generalize to unseen environments from the same suites as the training environments.
In future work, it would be interesting to examine what is needed for generalization to new suites (such
as more manipulation suites [62], quadrotor, driving simulators [12, 14, 44], biological simulation
[32], etc.).
Additional details on all environments: In the JAT/Gato setting, the Atari environments have 18
discrete actions and four consecutive grayscale images as states. However, we embed each combined
four-stacked image, with an off-the-shelf ResNet18 encoder [13], into a vector of 512 dimensions
and use this image embedding everywhere (for R&P and REGENT). All Metaworld environments
have observations with 39 dimensions and actions with 4 dimensions. Mujoco environments have
observations with 4 to 376 dimensions and actions with 1 to 17 dimensions. The BabyAI environments
have up to 7 discrete actions. They have discrete observations and text observations. After tokenizing
the BabyAI text observations, which specify a goal in natural language, into 64 tokens, BabyAI
observations have 212 total dimensions and consist only of discrete values.

                             Additional Details on Various Baselines

Additional information on re-training JAT/Gato: When retraining JAT/Gato, we follow all
hypepermaters chosen in [19]. We note that we skip the VQA datasets in our retraining of JAT/Gato,
and use a smaller batch size to fit available GPUs. For JAT/Gato (All Data) we train over the
full JAT dataset for the specified 250k training steps. For JAT/Gato we train on the REGENT subset
(which is 5-10x smaller) for 25k training steps. In both variants, the training loss converges to the
same low value at about 5000 steps into the training run.
Additional information on JAT/Gato + RAG (at inference): We note that JAT/Gato is like
a typical LLM— it has a causal transformer architecture and undergoes vanilla pretraining on
consecutive states-rewards-actions. In both the JAT/Gato + RAG baselines, we use the same
retrieval mechanism as REGENT. We provide the retrieved states-rewards-actions context to these
RAG baselines replacing the context of the past few states-rewards-actions in vanilla JAT/Gato
baselines.
REGENT significantly outperforms both JAT/Gato + RAG baselines in Figure 4. This demonstrates
the advantage of REGENT’s architecture and retrieval augmented pretraining over just performing
RAG at inference time. But, the JAT/Gato + RAG baselines outperform vanilla JAT/Gato as well
as the JAT/Gato fully Finetuned baselines in the unseen metaworld environments. From this we can
conclude that RAG at inference time is also important for performance.
Additional information on JAT/Gato Finetuned and REGENT Finetuned: Starting from a pre-
trained checkpoint, we finetune the full REGENT and JAT/Gato checkpoints using the same opti-
mizer as pre-training time but starting with 1/10th the learning rate (i.e., 5e-6) and for 3 epochs over
the finetuning demonstrations. We use this same recipe across all environments and for both REGENT
and JAT/Gato. We only use 3 epochs to prevent the overwriting of any capabilities learned during
pre-training.
Additional information on Parameter Efficient Finetuing (PEFT) of JAT/Gato with IA3 [30]:
We finetuned JAT/Gato and JAT/Gato (All Data) with the IA3 PEFT method [30] and plotted the


                                                  17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


results in Figure 4. We used the huggingface implementation and the hyperparameters given in the
IA3 paper (i.e. 1000 training steps, batch size of 8, and the adafactor optimizer with 3e-3 learning
rate and 60 warmup steps in a linear decay schedule). We found that finetuning JAT/Gato with IA3
improved performance over our simple full finetuning recipe, especially in 3 metaworld environments.
REGENT still outperforms both the IA3 finetuned JAT/Gato and the fully finetuned JAT/Gato in
all unseen environments in Figure 4.
Additional information on the train-from-scratch behavior cloning baseline: For the policy in
this baseline, we use the Impala CNN [18] in Atari environments and a MLP with two hidden layers
with 256 neurons each in Metaworld and Mujoco environments. We use the same learning rate (5e-5)
for the same 3 epochs with the same optimizer (AdamW with β1 = 0.9 and β2 = 0.999) as used for
REGENT except we use a constant learning rate schedule.
Additional information on DRIL: We added an imitation learning baseline, DRIL [6], to the atari
environments in Figure 4. Please note that DRIL consists of two stages. The first stage is pre training
with a BC loss. In the second stage, the DRIL ensemble policy is allowed to interact in the online
environment where it reduces the variance between the members of its ensemble with an online RL
algorithm. We run the second online stage for 1M steps or around 1000 episodes. REGENT and all
the other methods in Figure 4, on the other hand, are completely offline and never interact with any
environment for training. While DRIL improves over the BC baseline, REGENT still outperforms
DRIL in all three unseen atari environments.
Additional information on MTT: The MTT model weights are closed-source. In their ICML
publication, the authors do not provide results on new levels. MTT is also difficult to train from
scratch in any setting since they put multiple full trajectories in the context of the transformer, leading
to exploding GPU VRAM requirements beyond academic compute resources. However, we simply
report the best values from their paper in their exact setting to demonstrate REGENT’s significantly
improved performance even with a 3x smaller model and an order-of-magnitude less pretraining data.
Similarly, we compare with JAT/Gato in their exact setting and significantly outperform JAT/Gato
and JAT/Gato Finetuned, even though JAT/Gato has 1.5x our parameters and 5-10x our data.
We note that it is likely that MTT performance is close to random on a couple of unseen ProcGen
environments only because the authors are forced to constrain MTT rollouts to 200 steps, stopping
short of the true horizon of these environments. This is simply because of the quadratically increasing
complexity of attention with increase in context size. MTT also likely does not report results beyond
4 demonstrations in the context for this reason. Yet, this is not an issue for R&P or REGENT which
can scale to any number of demonstrations to retrieve from since it only uses up to the 19 closest
states in the context.

B        P ROOF OF T HEOREM 5.2
To prove theorem 5.2, we first state and prove the following lemma.
                                                       θ
Let us refer to the family of policies represented by πREGENT (a|s, r, c) in Equation (1) for various θ as
  θ
Π (a|s, r, c). The parameters θ of the transformer are drawn from the space Θ.
Lemma B.1. (Total Variation in the Policy Class) The total variation of the policy class Πθ (a|s, r, c)
in environment j, ∀ θ1 , θ2 ∈ Θ and for some s ∈ Sj , r ∈ Rj , c ∈ Cj , defined as
          θ1                    θ2                                                 −λdID
sup sup |πREGENT (a|s, r, c) − πREGENT (a|s, r, c)|, is upper bounded by (1 − e         j   ).
θ1 ,θ2   a

Proof : We have,
                   θ1                    θ2
         sup sup |πREGENT (a|s, r, c) − πREGENT (a|s, r, c)|
         θ1 ,θ2   a

                      = sup sup (1 − e−λd ) Softmax(πθ1 (a|s, r, c)) − Softmax(πθ2 (a|s, r, c))        (4)
                        θ1 ,θ2   a

                      = (1 − e−λd ) sup sup Softmax(πθ1 (a|s, r, c)) − Softmax(πθ2 (a|s, r, c))        (5)
                                     θ1 ,θ2   a
                                 −λdID
                      ≤ (1 − e       j   )                                                             (6)


                                                     18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


The first equality holds because for the same tuple of (state, previous reward, context), the R&P
component does not change since it is not affected by the choice of parameters. The last inequality
can be interpreted as a property of Softmax and the distance to the most isolated state.
Now, we rewrite theorem 5.2 below and prove it.
Theorem         B.2.     The       sub-optimality       gap       in      environment        j      is
                                        −λdID
J(πj∗ ) − J(πREGENT
             θ
                    ) ≤ min{H, H2 (1 − e      j )}



Proof : Recall that in imitation learning, if the population total variation (TV) risk T(π̂, π ∗ ) ≤ ϵ,
then, J(π ∗ ) − J(π̂) ≤ min{H, H 2 ϵ} (See [36] Lemma 4.3). Using this with Lemma B.1 proves the
theorem.
The main consequence of this theorem, also observed in our results, is that the sub-optimality gap
reduces with more demonstrations in Dj because of the reduced distance to the most isolated state.


                                                 19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


C      A DDITIONAL JAT/G A T O R ESULTS
Effect of number of states/rewards/actions in the context: We plot the normalized return obtained
by REGENT for different context sizes at evaluation time in unseen environments in Figure 9. We find
that, in general, a larger context size leads to better performance. We also notice that the improvement
in performance saturates quickly in many environments. Our choice of 20 states in the context
(including the query state) leads to the best performance overall.


Figure 9: Normalized returns obtained by REGENT in the unseen Metaworld and Atari environments with a fixed retrieval buffer against the
number of states given in-context (including the query state). Please note that the context size is 2n − 1 if there are n states in the context.
Each value is from a single model training seed but evaluated over 100 rollouts of different seeds in Metaworld and 15 rollouts of different seeds
(with psticky = 0.05) in Atari.


Figure 10: Normalized returns obtained by REGENT in the unseen Metaworld and Atari environments with a fixed retrieval buffer against the
choice of ordering of states in the context. Each value is from a single model training seed but evaluated over 100 rollouts of different seeds in
Metaworld and 15 rollouts of different seeds (with psticky = 0.05) in Atari.



Effect of the ordering of the context: We plot the normalized return obtained by REGENT for differ-
ent choices of context ordering at evaluation time in unseen environments in Figure 10. We evaluated
three options: "current", "random-permuted", and "reverse". In the "current" order, the retrieved
tuples of (state, previous reward, action) are placed in order of their closeness to the query state st .
In "random-permuted", the retrieved tuples are placed in a randomly chosen order in the context.


                                                                       20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


In "reverse", the "current" order of the retrieved tuples is reversed with the furthest state in the 19
retrieved states placed first. Our current choice performs the best overall. It significantly outperforms
the other two orderings in the more challenging task of generalizing to unseen Atari games which
have different image observations, dynamics, and rewards. In some metaworld environments on the
other hand, all three orderings have similar performance denoting that all the 19 retrieved states for
each query state are very similar to each other.
Inference runtime values: In Figure 11, we plot the inference runtime values of REGENT’s two main
components in a metaworld environment: retrieval from demonstrations and forward propagation
through the REGENT architecture. We find that retrieval takes between 2 to 8 milliseconds of time
(for increasing number of demonstrations to retrieve from) while forward propagation takes around
8 milliseconds uniformly. Both these runtimes are small enough to allow real-time deployment of
REGENT on real robots.


Figure 11: Average runtime values for retrieval and forward propagation through REGENT in metaworld for various number of demonstrations
in the retrieval buffer.



Effect of the distance metric: We compared REGENT with cosine distance everywhere (from
pretraining to evaluation) against our current version of REGENT with ℓ2 distance everywhere in
the JAT/Gato setting in Figure 12. REGENT with cosine distance performs similarly to REGENT
with ℓ2 distance in 3 unseen metaworld environments. In the other unseen metaworld environments
as well as the more challenging unseen atari environments, REGENT with ℓ2 distance significantly
outperforms REGENT with cosine distance. We speculate that this is because the magnitude of
observations is important with both image embeddings and proprioceptive states and this is only
taken into account by the ℓ2 distance (not the cosine distance).


Figure 12: Normalized returns in the unseen Metaworld and Atari environments against the number of demonstration trajectories the agent
can retrieve from. The ’REGENT (cosine distance)’ values are an average over 100 rollouts of different seeds in Metaworld and 15 rollouts of
different seeds (with psticky = 0.05) in Atari.



                                                                    21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Generalization to unseen Mujoco environments/embodiments: In the two unseen Mujoco tasks
shown in Figure 13, R&P appears to be a strong baseline even at generalizing to new embodiments!
Moreover, after finetuning on just 25 demonstrations, only REGENT, not JAT/Gato, significantly
improves to outperform other methods and only continues to get better with more demonstrations.


Figure 13: Normalized returns in the unseen Mujoco environments against the number of demonstration trajectories the agent can retrieve from
or finetune on. Each value is an average across 100 rollouts of different seeds.


Additional qualitative examples: We plot examples of the inputs and outputs of REGENT at various
states during a rendered rollout in the metaworld-bin-picking environment in Figure 14. In this
continuous Metaworld example, REGENT can be seen predicting actions that are somewhat similar
to but not the same as the first retrieved (R&P) action. These differences lead to better overall
performance as seen in Figure 4. These differences are also the direct result of REGENT’s in-context
learning capabilities, learned from the preprocessed datasets from the pre-training environments.


Figure 14: Qualitative examples of a few inputs and outputs of REGENT for various states in a rendered rollout in the unseen, continuous action
space, metaworld-bin-picking environment.



                                                                     22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 15: Normalized returns in each of the 45 seen Metaworld envs. Each value is an average across 100 rollouts of different seeds. See Table
3 for all values.


Figure 16: Normalized returns in each of the 9 seen Mujoco envs. Each value is an average across 100 rollouts of different seeds. See Table 4 for
all values.


Figure 17: Normalized returns in each of the 52 seen Atari envs. Each value is an average across 15 rollouts of different seeds. See Table 5 for
all values.


Figure 18: Normalized returns in each of the 45 seen BabyAI envs. Each value is an average across 100 rollouts of different seeds. See Table 6
for all values.


                                                                      23
                        Env                 Num        R&P       REGENT           REGENT        JAT/Gato     JAT/Gato    JAT/Gato       JAT/Gato       JAT/Gato     JAT/Gato     JAT/Gato       JAT/Gato        Train        DRIL
                                           demos                                  Finetuned                   + RAG      Finetuned        PEFT         (All Data)   (All Data)   (All Data)     (All Data)      From
                                                                                                                                           with                      + RAG       Finetuned        PEFT         Scratch
                                                                                                                                           IA3                                                   with IA3
                metaworld-bin-picking        25        0.33     0.31 ± 0.142    0.3 ± 0.025        0.0        0.01          0.0        0.0 ± 0.005        0.0          0.01         0.0        0.01 ± 0.0       0.0             -
                metaworld-bin-picking        50         0.4     0.55 ± 0.031    0.6 ± 0.049        0.0        0.04          0.0       0.01 ± 0.005        0.0          0.01         0.0        0.01 ± 0.0       0.0             -
                metaworld-bin-picking        75        0.34     0.59 ± 0.097    0.69 ± 0.021       0.0        0.08          0.01      0.01 ± 0.005        0.0          0.01        0.01        0.01 ± 0.0       0.0             -
                metaworld-bin-picking        100       0.33     0.67 ± 0.051    0.73 ± 0.005       0.0        0.06          0.0       0.01 ± 0.005        0.0          0.02        0.01        0.01 ± 0.0       0.0             -
                 metaworld-box-close         25        0.58     0.73 ± 0.123    0.81 ± 0.09        0.0         0.0          0.0         0.0 ± 0.0         0.0          0.09         0.0         0.0 ± 0.0      0.01             -
                 metaworld-box-close         50        0.69     0.82 ± 0.142    0.86 ± 0.102       0.0         0.2          0.0         0.0 ± 0.0         0.0          0.2          0.0         0.0 ± 0.0       0.0             -
                 metaworld-box-close         75        0.68     0.84 ± 0.026    0.99 ± 0.017       0.0         0.4          0.0         0.0 ± 0.0         0.0          0.23         0.0         0.0 ± 0.0       0.0             -
                 metaworld-box-close         100       0.81     0.93 ± 0.067    0.98 ± 0.005       0.0        0.56          0.0         0.0 ± 0.0         0.0          0.31         0.0         0.0 ± 0.0       0.0             -
                 metaworld-door-lock         25        0.58     0.73 ± 0.019    0.8 ± 0.012        0.13       0.33          0.12      0.12 ± 0.012       0.24          0.18        0.31       0.23 ± 0.039      0.0             -
                 metaworld-door-lock         50        0.55     0.81 ± 0.047    0.82 ± 0.014       0.13       0.34          0.15      0.09 ± 0.021       0.24          0.24        0.25       0.29 ± 0.028     0.03             -
                 metaworld-door-lock         75        0.63     0.85 ± 0.028    0.84 ± 0.022       0.13       0.39          0.17      0.14 ± 0.029       0.24          0.31        0.27       0.4 ± 0.026      0.01             -
                 metaworld-door-lock         100       0.64     0.85 ± 0.028     0.85 ± 0.0        0.13       0.48          0.17      0.15 ± 0.029       0.24          0.38        0.28       0.42 ± 0.019     0.03             -
                metaworld-door-unlock        25        0.53     0.65 ± 0.054    0.72 ± 0.037       0.01       0.36          0.03      0.22 ± 0.057       0.06          0.31        0.07       0.15 ± 0.036      0.0             -
                metaworld-door-unlock        50        0.55     0.81 ± 0.049    0.84 ± 0.031       0.01       0.47          0.03       0.23 ± 0.08       0.06          0.42        0.07       0.25 ± 0.083     0.01             -
                metaworld-door-unlock        75        0.78     0.88 ± 0.008    0.92 ± 0.005       0.01       0.41          0.02       0.2 ± 0.022       0.06          0.44        0.05       0.3 ± 0.074       0.0             -
                metaworld-door-unlock        100       0.86     0.9 ± 0.017     0.93 ± 0.005       0.01       0.45          0.03      0.16 ± 0.031       0.06          0.5         0.08       0.24 ± 0.094     0.03             -
                metaworld-hand-insert        25        0.27     0.62 ± 0.022    0.54 ± 0.022       0.01       0.07          0.07       0.1 ± 0.019       0.01          0.06        0.05       0.29 ± 0.034      0.0             -
                metaworld-hand-insert        50        0.54     0.68 ± 0.031    0.69 ± 0.012       0.01       0.13          0.04      0.16 ± 0.031       0.01          0.1         0.06       0.58 ± 0.012      0.0             -
                metaworld-hand-insert        75        0.56     0.78 ± 0.028    0.79 ± 0.021       0.01       0.22          0.04      0.16 ± 0.022       0.01          0.1         0.06       0.63 ± 0.017      0.0             -
                metaworld-hand-insert        100       0.69     0.82 ± 0.042     0.83 ± 0.0        0.01       0.23          0.02      0.15 ± 0.054       0.01          0.14        0.03       0.61 ± 0.065     0.01             -
                      atari-pong         7 (11599)     0.08      0.08 ± 0.0     0.17 ± 0.042       0.0         0.0          0.0         0.0 ± 0.0         0.0          0.0          0.0         0.0 ± 0.0       0.0         0.0 ± 0.0
                      atari-pong         10 (16533)    0.18       0.2 ± 0.0      0.23 ± 0.0        0.0         0.0          0.0         0.0 ± 0.0         0.0          0.0          0.0       0.0 ± 0.005       0.0         0.0 ± 0.0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                      atari-pong         13 (21468)    0.18     0.23 ± 0.009    0.23 ± 0.009       0.0         0.0          0.0         0.0 ± 0.0         0.0          0.0          0.0       0.0 ± 0.005       0.0       0.04 ± 0.016
                      atari-pong         16 (26400)    0.18     0.25 ± 0.047    0.3 ± 0.005        0.0         0.0          0.0         0.0 ± 0.0         0.0          0.0          0.0       0.0 ± 0.005       0.0       0.06 ± 0.016
                      atari-alien        3 (12759)     0.04     0.08 ± 0.005     0.09 ± 0.0        0.0         0.0          0.0         0.0 ± 0.0         0.0          0.0          0.0         0.0 ± 0.0       0.0         0.0 ± 0.0


24
                      atari-alien        4 (17353)     0.05     0.08 ± 0.005    0.09 ± 0.005       0.0         0.0          0.0         0.0 ± 0.0         0.0          0.0          0.0         0.0 ± 0.0       0.0         0.0 ± 0.0
                      atari-alien        5 (22684)     0.05      0.08 ± 0.0     0.09 ± 0.005       0.0         0.0          0.0        0.0 ± 0.005        0.0          0.0          0.0         0.0 ± 0.0       0.0         0.0 ± 0.0
                      atari-alien        6 (27692)     0.05     0.09 ± 0.005    0.1 ± 0.005        0.0         0.0          0.0        0.0 ± 0.005        0.0          0.01         0.0         0.0 ± 0.0       0.0       0.01 ± 0.005
                   atari-mspacman        4 (11902)     0.68     0.82 ± 0.017    0.82 ± 0.005       0.0        0.01          0.0       0.02 ± 0.005       0.01          0.02        0.02       0.04 ± 0.005      0.0       0.1 ± 0.026
                   atari-mspacman        5 (14520)     0.68     0.81 ± 0.031    0.83 ± 0.016       0.0        0.02          0.01      0.02 ± 0.005       0.01          0.02        0.02        0.04 ± 0.0       0.0       0.06 ± 0.042
                   atari-mspacman        9 (22490)     0.82     0.85 ± 0.029    0.89 ± 0.009       0.0        0.02          0.02      0.03 ± 0.005       0.01          0.02        0.01       0.04 ± 0.005      0.0       0.17 ± 0.045
                   atari-mspacman        10 (25160)    0.82     0.86 ± 0.031      0.9 ± 0.0        0.0        0.01          0.01       0.03 ± 0.0        0.01          0.01        0.02        0.04 ± 0.0       0.0       0.18 ± 0.047
                   Aggregate Mean                      0.473        0.602           0.633         0.019       0.165        0.029          0.063          0.04         0.129        0.052          0.143        0.004


     Table 1: Values in Figure 4. For a particular training seed, each agent is evaluated across 100 rollouts of different seeds in Metaworld and 15 rollouts of different seeds (with psticky = 0.05) in Atari. We compute the overall mean and
     standard deviation over three training seeds for REGENT, REGENT Finetuned, the PEFT with IA3 baselines, and DRIL. For REGENT, this means that we trained and thoroughly evaluated three REGENT policies. Then, we finetuned each
     of these three REGENT policies 32 times, with 8 environments and 4 points per environment, for a total of 96 finetuned policies. We compute the final average over both training seeds and evaluation seeds and the final standard deviation
     over training seeds. We note that R&P does not have a standard deviation across training seeds as it does not have any training parameters at all.
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


        Env             Num       R&P       REGENT         REGENT         JAT/Gato     JAT/Gato       JAT/Gato         JAT/Gato      Train
                       demos                               Finetuned                   Finetuned      (All Data)       (All Data)    From
                                                                                                                       Finetuned    Scratch
 mujoco-halfcheetah      25        0.08        0.01           0.19          0.0           0.0            0.0               0.0       0.04
 mujoco-halfcheetah      50        0.08        0.01           0.26          0.0          0.01            0.0               0.0       0.04
 mujoco-halfcheetah      75        0.09        0.0            0.31          0.0          0.03            0.0               0.0       0.04
 mujoco-halfcheetah     100        0.1         0.0            0.34          0.0          0.03            0.0              0.01       0.04
  mujoco-hopper          25        0.21        0.01           0.01          0.0           0.0           0.01              0.03       0.04
  mujoco-hopper          50        0.26        0.01           0.04          0.0           0.0           0.01              0.03       0.02
  mujoco-hopper          75        0.24        0.01           0.1           0.0           0.0           0.01              0.05       0.02
  mujoco-hopper         100        0.25        0.01           0.12          0.0           0.0           0.01              0.05       0.01
  Aggregate Mean                  0.164       0.008          0.171          0.0          0.009          0.005            0.021       0.031

                      Table 2: Values in Figure 13. Each value is an average across 100 rollouts of different seeds.


                                          Env                          Num demos       REGENT        JAT/Gato
                                  metaworld-assembly                      100            0.83          0.89
                                 metaworld-basketball                     100            0.68          0.03
                          metaworld-button-press-topdown-wall             100            0.62          0.43
                            metaworld-button-press-topdown                100            0.62          0.43
                              metaworld-button-press-wall                 100            0.94          0.61
                                metaworld-button-press                    100            0.62          0.43
                                metaworld-coffee-button                   100            0.84          0.33
                                 metaworld-coffee-pull                    100            0.62          0.01
                                metaworld-coffee-push                     100            0.18          0.04
                                  metaworld-dial-turn                     100            0.83          0.33
                                metaworld-disassemble                     100            2.24           0.0
                                 metaworld-door-close                     100            1.0           0.46
                                 metaworld-door-open                      100            0.98          0.46
                                metaworld-drawer-close                    100            1.0           0.89
                                metaworld-drawer-open                     100            0.96          0.91
                                metaworld-faucet-close                    100            0.53          0.16
                                metaworld-faucet-open                     100            0.99          0.68
                                  metaworld-hammer                        100            0.95          0.52
                              metaworld-handle-press-side                 100            0.99          0.83
                                metaworld-handle-press                    100            0.99          0.83
                              metaworld-handle-pull-side                  100            0.48           0.0
                                 metaworld-handle-pull                    100            0.48           0.0
                                 metaworld-lever-pull                     100            0.19          0.03
                               metaworld-peg-insert-side                  100            0.7           0.15
                              metaworld-peg-unplug-side                   100            0.31          0.02
                              metaworld-pick-out-of-hole                  100            0.01           0.0
                               metaworld-pick-place-wall                  100            0.99          0.01
                                 metaworld-pick-place                     100            0.99          0.01
                            metaworld-plate-slide-back-side               100            1.0           0.02
                              metaworld-plate-slide-back                  100            1.0           0.02
                               metaworld-plate-slide-side                 100            0.99          0.19
                                 metaworld-plate-slide                    100            1.0           0.02
                                 metaworld-push-back                      100            0.84          0.01
                                 metaworld-push-wall                      100            0.81          0.01
                                    metaworld-push                        100            0.84          0.01
                                 metaworld-reach-wall                     100            0.99          1.03
                                   metaworld-reach                        100            0.99          1.03
                                 metaworld-shelf-place                    100            0.96           0.0
                                   metaworld-soccer                       100            0.61          0.21
                                 metaworld-stick-pull                     100            0.88          0.04
                                 metaworld-stick-push                     100            0.75          0.02
                                 metaworld-sweep-into                     100            0.91          0.16
                                   metaworld-sweep                        100            0.91          0.16
                               metaworld-window-close                     100            0.9            0.1
                               metaworld-window-open                      100            0.97          0.14
                                   Aggregate Mean                                        0.82          0.281

                      Table 3: Values in Figure 15. Each value is an average across 100 rollouts of different seeds.



                                                                     25
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                    Env                  Num demos        REGENT        JAT/Gato
                                 mujoco-ant                 100             0.17           0.12
                           mujoco-doublependulum            100             0.02           0.01
                             mujoco-humanoid                100             0.02           0.02
                             mujoco-pendulum                100             0.06           0.03
                               mujoco-pusher                100             0.9            0.95
                               mujoco-reacher               100             0.9            0.91
                              mujoco-standup                100             0.26           0.2
                              mujoco-swimmer                100             0.82           0.97
                               mujoco-walker                100             0.05           0.16
                              Aggregate Mean                               0.356          0.374

                Table 4: Values in Figure 16. Each value is an average across 100 rollouts of different seeds.


                                         Env             Num demos        REGENT        JAT/Gato
                                    atari-amidar             5              0.96          0.02
                                    atari-assault            5              0.02          0.02
                                    atari-asterix            5              0.13          0.03
                                  atari-asteroids            5              0.07           0.0
                                   atari-atlantis            5              0.18          0.03
                                 atari-bankheist             5              0.46          0.18
                                 atari-battlezone            5              0.47          0.01
                                 atari-beamrider             5              0.04           0.0
                                   atari-berzerk             5              0.14           0.0
                                   atari-bowling             5              1.0            1.0
                                    atari-boxing             5              0.22          0.38
                                  atari-breakout             5              0.15           0.0
                                 atari-centipede             5              0.35          0.07
                            atari-choppercommand             5              0.02           0.0
                               atari-crazyclimber            5              0.19          0.14
                                  atari-defender             5              0.1           0.01
                               atari-demonattack             5              0.0            0.0
                                atari-doubledunk             5              0.54          0.28
                                    atari-enduro             5              0.0            0.0
                               atari-fishingderby            5              0.62           0.1
                                   atari-freeway             5              0.82           0.6
                                  atari-frostbite            5              0.44          0.01
                                    atari-gopher             5              0.66          0.01
                                   atari-gravitar            5              0.03          0.06
                                     atari-hero              5              1.0           0.17
                                 atari-icehockey             5              0.21           0.1
                                atari-jamesbond              5              0.01           0.0
                                  atari-kangaroo             5              0.0            0.0
                                     atari-krull             5              0.5           0.41
                              atari-kungfumaster             5              0.0           0.02
                           atari-montezumarevenge            5              0.0            0.0
                              atari-namethisgame             5              0.61          0.03
                                   atari-phoenix             5              0.07           0.0
                                    atari-pitfall            5              0.97          1.01
                                 atari-privateeye            5              0.0           0.79
                                     atari-qbert             5              0.57          0.01
                                  atari-riverraid            5              0.19          0.04
                                atari-roadrunner             5              0.03          0.02
                                  atari-robotank             5              0.23          0.04
                                  atari-seaquest             5              0.48          0.11
                                    atari-skiing             5              0.0            0.0
                                    atari-solaris            5              0.0            0.0
                                  atari-surround             5              0.36          0.03
                                    atari-tennis             5              0.15          0.01
                                  atari-timepilot            5              0.04           0.0
                                 atari-tutankham             5              0.16          0.02
                                  atari-upndown              5              0.13          0.01
                                   atari-venture             5              1.0            1.0
                               atari-videopinball            5              0.0           0.01
                               atari-wizardofwor             5              0.76          0.01
                               atari-yarsrevenge             5              0.01          0.01
                                   atari-zaxxon              5              0.14          0.01
                                Aggregate Mean                             0.293          0.131

                Table 5: Values in Figure 17. Each value is an average across 15 rollouts of different seeds.



                                                             26
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                       Env                  Num demos        REGENT        JAT/Gato
                            babyai-action-obj-door             20              0.39           0.57
                        babyai-blocked-unlock-pickup           20              0.45           0.97
                         babyai-boss-level-no-unlock           20              0.49           0.1
                               babyai-boss-level               20              0.49           0.1
                               babyai-find-obj-s5              20              0.61           0.92
                               babyai-go-to-door               20              0.49           0.89
                           babyai-go-to-imp-unlock             20              0.21           0.03
                               babyai-go-to-local              20              0.66           0.46
                            babyai-go-to-obj-door              20              0.14           0.76
                                babyai-go-to-obj               20              0.14           0.76
                          babyai-go-to-red-ball-grey           20              0.68           0.76
                        babyai-go-to-red-ball-no-dists         20              0.95           0.98
                             babyai-go-to-red-ball             20              0.68           0.76
                          babyai-go-to-red-blue-ball           20              0.71           0.71
                                babyai-go-to-seq               20              0.46           0.46
                                   babyai-go-to                20              0.49           0.89
                              babyai-key-corridor              20              0.07           0.47
                            babyai-mini-boss-level             20              0.61           0.28
                        babyai-move-two-across-s8n9            20               0.0           0.0
                              babyai-one-room-s8               20              0.96           0.97
                               babyai-open-door                20              0.58           0.92
                         babyai-open-doors-order-n4            20              0.54           0.33
                             babyai-open-red-door              20              0.99           0.99
                            babyai-open-two-doors              20              0.37           0.37
                                   babyai-open                 20              0.58           0.92
                             babyai-pickup-above               20              0.44           0.86
                               babyai-pickup-dist              20              0.66           0.4
                               babyai-pickup-loc               20              0.42           0.38
                                  babyai-pickup                20              0.44           0.86
                             babyai-put-next-local             20              0.12           0.0
                                 babyai-put-next               20              0.12           0.0
                                babyai-synth-loc               20               0.5           0.3
                                babyai-synth-seq               20              0.59           0.07
                                   babyai-synth                20               0.5           0.3
                            babyai-unblock-pickup              20              0.25           0.23
                              babyai-unlock-local              20              0.93           0.99
                             babyai-unlock-pickup              20              0.81           0.96
                           babyai-unlock-to-unlock             20              0.35           0.79
                                  babyai-unlock                20              0.93           0.99
                                Aggregate Mean                                0.508          0.577

                Table 6: Values in Figure 18. Each value is an average across 100 rollouts of different seeds.


                                                             27
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


D      A DDITIONAL P ROC G EN R ESULTS


Figure 19: Normalized returns in unseen levels in all 12 ProcGen training environments against the number of demonstration trajectories the
agent can retrieve from. Each value is an average across 10 levels with 5 rollouts each with psticky = 0.1. See Table 8 for all values.


                   Env         sticky prob    num demos       (epoch, end batch)     REGENT           R&P      MTT [37]
                   ninja       p=0.2          n=2             (0, 11612)             7.13± 0.09       5.67
                                              n=4             (0, 11612)             7.53± 0.34       5.5      4.1± 0.35
                                              n=8             (0, 11612)             6.8± 0.85        6.4
                                              n=12            (0, 11612)             7.6± 0.28        6.33
                                              n=16            (0, 11612)             7.8± 0.28        7.4
                                              n=20            (0, 11612)             8.07± 0.19       7.6
                   climber     p=0.2          n=2             (0, 11612)             4.65± 0.25       3.17
                                              n=4             (0, 11612)             6.01± 0.52       3.95     1.85± 0.41
                                              n=8             (0, 11612)             5.89± 0.44       3.12
                                              n=12            (0, 11612)             7.02± 0.13       5.64
                                              n=16            (0, 11612)             6.2± 0.43        3.77
                                              n=20            (0, 11612)             6.13± 0.72       5.41
                   plunder     p=0.2          n=2             (0, 11612)             10.48± 0.43      8.46
                                              n=4             (0, 11612)             12.33± 0.48      8.3      2.5± 0.2
                                              n=8             (0, 11612)             12.23± 0.66      8.2
                                              n=12            (0, 11612)             13.51± 0.22      9.36
                                              n=16            (0, 11612)             13.75± 0.2       9.84
                                              n=20            (0, 11612)             14.13± 0.26      10.8
                   jumper      p=0.2          n=2             (0, 11612)             4.53± 0.25       3.75
                                              n=4             (0, 11612)             5.4± 0.57        4.0      4.65± 0.28
                                              n=8             (0, 11612)             5.6± 0.71        4.25
                                              n=12            (0, 11612)             6.47± 1.06       5.25
                                              n=16            (0, 11612)             6.47± 0.47       6.0
                                              n=20            (0, 11612)             6.4± 0.33        5.5

Table 7: Values in Figure 5 before normalization. We trained three REGENT generalist agents for three training seeds. We evaluated each of the
three agents’ performance, as well as the R&P agent, across 10 levels with 5 rollouts and psticky = 0.2 in each unseen ProcGen environment.
We computed the final average over both training seeds and evaluation levels/rollouts and the final standard deviation over training seeds. The
values for MTT are the best scores reported in [37].



                                                                     28
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


           Env            sticky prob    num demos       (epoch, end batch)     REGENT        R&P      REGENT (ID seed)
           bigfish        p=0.1          n=2             (0, 11612)             11.32         6.75
                                         n=4             (0, 11612)             14.32         11.85
                                         n=8             (0, 11612)             18.82         14.7
                                         n=12            (0, 11612)             20.66         14.02
                                         n=16            (0, 11612)             21.32         14.43
                                         n=20            (0, 11612)             22.74         13.28    25.7
           bossfight      p=0.1          n=2             (0, 11612)             3.76          1.45
                                         n=4             (0, 11612)             5.52          3.38
                                         n=8             (0, 11612)             5.24          3.67
                                         n=12            (0, 11612)             5.12          3.17
                                         n=16            (0, 11612)             4.32          3.51
                                         n=20            (0, 11612)             4.44          4.1      5.6
           caveflyer      p=0.1          n=2             (0, 11612)             7.44          2.74
                                         n=4             (0, 11612)             7.34          2.98
                                         n=8             (0, 11612)             7.0           3.29
                                         n=12            (0, 11612)             6.96          3.27
                                         n=16            (0, 11612)             6.72          3.31
                                         n=20            (0, 11612)             7.08          4.04     7.68
           chaser         p=0.1          n=2             (0, 11612)             1.15          1.01
                                         n=4             (0, 11612)             1.51          1.51
                                         n=8             (0, 11612)             1.46          1.47
                                         n=12            (0, 11612)             1.61          1.77
                                         n=16            (0, 11612)             1.47          1.53
                                         n=20            (0, 11612)             1.79          1.73     2.4
           coinrun        p=0.1          n=2             (0, 11612)             7.8           6.2
                                         n=4             (0, 11612)             7.2           5.9
                                         n=8             (0, 11612)             7.0           6.4
                                         n=12            (0, 11612)             6.8           6.2
                                         n=16            (0, 11612)             7.2           6.6
                                         n=20            (0, 11612)             8.0           5.8      8.2
           dodgeball      p=0.1          n=2             (0, 11612)             3.36          1.93
                                         n=4             (0, 11612)             3.44          1.8
                                         n=8             (0, 11612)             4.04          2.17
                                         n=12            (0, 11612)             3.72          2.07
                                         n=16            (0, 11612)             3.64          2.33
                                         n=20            (0, 11612)             3.56          2.4      7.12
           fruitbot       p=0.1          n=2             (0, 11612)             3.18          0.98
                                         n=4             (0, 11612)             7.48          1.6
                                         n=8             (0, 11612)             11.02         3.67
                                         n=12            (0, 11612)             13.02         4.38
                                         n=16            (0, 11612)             15.04         7.45
                                         n=20            (0, 11612)             15.62         4.67     16.36
           heist          p=0.1          n=2             (0, 11612)             4.6           3.8
                                         n=4             (0, 11612)             5.0           3.7
                                         n=8             (0, 11612)             5.2           4.9
                                         n=12            (0, 11612)             5.4           3.4
                                         n=16            (0, 11612)             6.0           5.1
                                         n=20            (0, 11612)             5.4           4.6      7.2
           leaper         p=0.1          n=2             (0, 11612)             6.4           3.33
                                         n=4             (0, 11612)             7.4           5.83
                                         n=8             (0, 11612)             7.6           7.17
                                         n=12            (0, 11612)             8.2           7.5
                                         n=16            (0, 11612)             9.0           7.83
                                         n=20            (0, 11612)             9.2           6.17     9.2
           maze           p=0.1          n=2             (0, 11612)             5.6           5.0
                                         n=4             (0, 11612)             4.8           3.1
                                         n=8             (0, 11612)             5.8           4.9
                                         n=12            (0, 11612)             6.0           4.6
                                         n=16            (0, 11612)             6.0           4.5
                                         n=20            (0, 11612)             6.0           4.5      8.4
           miner          p=0.1          n=2             (0, 11612)             2.88          2.14
                                         n=4             (0, 11612)             4.72          3.12
                                         n=8             (0, 11612)             3.68          2.96
                                         n=12            (0, 11612)             4.54          3.09
                                         n=16            (0, 11612)             4.38          3.45
                                         n=20            (0, 11612)             3.76          3.12     6.58
           starpilot      p=0.1          n=2             (0, 11612)             12.52         10.28
                                         n=4             (0, 11612)             11.94         11.33
                                         n=8             (0, 11612)             12.82         10.93
                                         n=12            (0, 11612)             14.9          10.8
                                         n=16            (0, 11612)             15.34         10.49
                                         n=20            (0, 11612)             11.8          10.08    16.1

       Table 8: Values in Figures 6 and 19 before normalization. Each value is an average across 10 levels with 5 rollouts each.


                                                                 29
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


E    A DDITIONAL R ELATED W ORK
In addition to our related work section, we discuss other relevant papers where a retrieval bias has
been recognized as a useful component here [61, 57, 59, 23, 25, 39].
RAEA [61] performs behavior cloning in each new environment with access to a “policy memory
bank” and focuses on improving performance in a training task. In RAEA’s appendix, the authors
demonstrate very initial signs of generalization to new tasks only after training on a few demonstra-
tions from the new tasks. REGENT on the other hand pretrains a generalist policy that can generalize
without any finetuning to completely new environments with different observations, dynamics, and
rewards. Re-ViLM [57] trains a retrieval-augmented image captioning model, which while demon-
strating the usefulness of a retrieval bias beyond robotics and game-playing tasks, is not applicable to
our settings.
Expel [59] and RAP [23] build LLM agents for high-level planning on top of frozen LLMs. Although
off-the-shelf LLMs are not yet helpful with low-level fine-grained continuous control, these methods
could be key in high-level semantic text-based action spaces.
GLAs [25] and RADT [39] are recent in-context reinforcement learning (RL) methods. We briefly
discussed earlier in-context RL methods in our related work section. GLAs attempt to generalize to
new mujoco embodiments via in-context RL but only show minor improvements over random agents.
RADT emphasizes that they are unable to generalize via in-context RL to unseen procgen, metaworld,
or DMControl environments. REGENT, on the other hand, is an in-context imitation learning method
that generalizes to unseen metaworld, atari, and procgen environments via retrieval augmentation
(from a retrieval buffer of a few expert demonstrations) and in-context learning. REGENT also
struggles with generalization to new mujoco embodiments like GLAs.


                                                  30
