Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


C ONTEXT GNN: B EYOND
T WO -T OWER R ECOMMENDATION S YSTEMS
 Yiwen Yuan, Zecheng Zhang, Xinwei He, Akihiro Nitta,
 Weihua Hu, Manan Shah, Blaž Stojanovič, Shenyang Huang,
 Jan Eric Lenssen, Jure Leskovec, Matthias Fey
 Kumo.AI


                                             A BSTRACT
         Recommendation systems predominantly utilize two-tower architectures, which
         evaluate user-item rankings through the inner product of their respective embed-
         dings. However, one key limitation of two-tower models is that they learn a pair-
         agnostic representation of users and items. In contrast, pair-wise representations
         either scale poorly due to their quadratic complexity or are too restrictive on the
         candidate pairs to rank. To address these issues, we introduce Context-based
         Graph Neural Networks (C ONTEXT GNNs), a novel deep learning architecture
         for link prediction in recommendation systems. The method employs a pair-wise
         representation technique for familiar items situated within a user’s local subgraph,
         while leveraging two-tower representations to facilitate the recommendation of
         exploratory items. A final network then predicts how to fuse both pair-wise and
         two-tower recommendations into a single ranking of items. We demonstrate that
         C ONTEXT GNN is able to adapt to different data characteristics and outperforms
         existing methods, both traditional and GNN-based, on a diverse set of practical
         recommendation tasks, improving performance by 20% on average.


1   I NTRODUCTION
Recommendation systems have emerged as an important application domain for predictive machine
learning over the past decades (Webber, 2021; He et al., 2023; Li et al., 2024). Given a set of users
and a set of items (e.g., products available for purchase), recommendation systems aim to identify
optimal item recommendations for each user (e.g., products most likely to be purchased by the user).
Traditionally, this problem is modeled via different variants of a two-tower paradigm (Hu et al.,
2008; Koren et al., 2009), where one tower embeds users and the other tower embeds items, which
are then matched and ranked via an inner-product decoder. This scheme proves to be highly efficient
for scaling up recommendation systems during the inference phase, as it allows to pre-compute user
and item representations and to perform the final ranking via fast (approximate) maximum inner
product search (Johnson et al., 2019).
However, one key limitation of two-tower based architectures for recommendation is that they learn
a pair-agnostic representation for users and items. That is, the user representation is not aware of
the item under consideration, and similarly, the item representation is not aware of the user and
thus item representations are not capturing the uniqueness of user’s view on the items. As such,
neither of the representations on both ends capture knowledge about the pair-wise dependency they
are making a prediction for. For example, consider a user who restocks their cosmetic products
on a regular basis. In this scenario, the fine-grained context of user-cosmetic pairs is crucial, which
cannot be adequately captured by two independent user and item representations alone. Such lack of
knowledge has severe consequences on the quality of predictions, since, e.g., the model is unable to
distinguish between scenarios such as familiar purchases (i.e. users who repeatedly interact with the
similar set of items) vs. exploratory purchases (i.e. users who like to explore new items). While pair-
wise representations, which incorporate the knowledge about the pair they are making a prediction
for, are able to contextualize the prediction, one would need to generate pair-wise representations for
all possible user-item pairs, which is ineffable due to its quadratic complexity. Alternatively, one can
pre-filter the set of candidate pairs, e.g., via content-based filtering or collaborative filtering Ricci
et al. (2010); Campana & Delmastro (2017), but the model’s capabilities are then limited by the
recall of the candidate generation procedure.


                                                   1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Here, we develop Context-based Graph Neural Networks (C ONTEXT GNNs), a novel single-stage
Graph Neural Network (GNN)-based recommendation system that fuses pair-wise representations
and two-tower representations into a single unified architecture. C ONTEXT GNN is designed to
perform temporal recommendations (predict the next set of items a user will interact with) on a
heterogeneous temporal graph, and leverages the best of both worlds: The first model supports pair-
wise representations for all items within a user’s local interaction graph (Zhu et al., 2021). For
distant user-item pairs, i.e. user-item pairs that are not within the k-hop neighborhood of each other,
the pair-wise embeddings are supplemented by a global, two-tower-based GNN, which serves as an
effective fallback model. A final network then predicts a user-specific, personalized fusion score
that dictates how to merge both pair-wise and two-tower recommendations into a single ranking.
They key idea behind C ONTEXT GNN is to contextualize the prediction for the area of items for
which a user has rich past interactions. Here, pair-wise representations are able to capture fine-
grained patterns of past user-item interactions, such as repeat purchases and other prior actions
(e.g., clicks, tag-as-favorite, add-to-cart), or through collaborative signals (e.g., whether friends have
purchased the same item). The second component, a novel pair-agnostic two-tower model based on
shallow item embeddings, allows for modeling exploratory and serendipitous recommendations.
For these “distant” items, where no specific user-item context exists, pair-wise representations offer
minimal benefits, making the fallback to two-tower representations suitable. Importantly, the two-
tower model is designed in such a way that it allows for integration into pair-wise architectures
with little computational overhead. Finally, the model learns which users prefer familiar items over
exploratory purchases and adjusts the final ranking scores accordingly.
We deploy C ONTEXT GNNs in the context of relational deep learning (Fey et al., 2024) for rec-
ommendation within relational databases. Relational databases (Robinson et al., 2024) comprise
diverse sets of tables with rich multi-modal input features and rich multi-behavioral, temporal in-
teractions, making them the perfect setting for stress-testing our model. Furthermore, we examine
the challenges in modeling the complex patterns of human behavior. Our analysis and experimental
results underscore the need for a hybrid architecture, as a single model is not sufficient to address
the diversity of real-world datasets both within and across tasks effectively. We demonstrate that
C ONTEXT GNN is able to adapt to different data characteristics, while outperforming existing mod-
els on realistic and practical recommendation tasks. In particular, C ONTEXT GNN improves results
by 20% on average compared to the best pair-wise representation baseline, and by 344% on average
compared to the best two-tower representation baseline.


2    R ELATED W ORK

Recommendation systems are a long-standing research area in machine learning. The recommenda-
tion problem is often formulated as link prediction on a bipartite graph with two sets of nodes, one
containing the users and another containing the items. Between these two node sets, past interac-
tions are presented as links, and the goal is to predict which links are going to occur in the future.
Traditionally, it is approached by computing the inner product of user and item embeddings, e.g., via
matrix factorization (Koren et al., 2009) to discover and utilize similarity between users and items,
i.e. collaborative filtering (Hu et al., 2008; Mnih & Salakhutdinov, 2007).
Similar to many other areas, deep learning made an impact in recommendation systems, e.g., by
predicting scores with non-linear networks (H. & C., 2017; He et al., 2017), by utilizing graph
embedding techniques (Perozzi et al., 2014; Grover & Leskovec, 2016), or by sampling from dis-
tributions modeled by a variational autoencoder (Liang et al., 2018). Recently, the new field of
generative recommendation deserves mentioning, utilizing large language models to provide rec-
ommendation by text generation (Wu et al., 2023). Our work here relates to two lines of research:
Sequential recommendation systems and recommendations with GNNs.

Recommendation on Sequences. Recommendation has traditionally been modeled as a sequence
prediction problem. Early methods utilize Marcov chains (Rendle et al., 2010; He & McAuley,
2016), which have later been replaced by recurrent neural networks (Liu et al., 2018), temporal
attention (Kang & McAuley, 2018; Li et al., 2017) and transformer formulations (Sun et al., 2019;
Yang et al., 2022; Xia et al., 2022). They also have been combined with GNNs to additionally
capture collaborative signals (Ma et al., 2020).


                                                    2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Recommendation with GNNs. Various two-tower-based Graph Neural Networks (Hamilton
et al., 2017) have been developed for link prediction tasks, based on the idea of integrating the
paradigm of collaborative filtering via refining embeddings on the user-item interaction graph. Early
examples use GNN-based autoencoders (Kipf & Welling, 2016; Schlichtkrull et al., 2018) to obtain
prediction on graph links. Since GNNs propagate information locally (and thus cannot reason about
the position of nodes inside a graph), it has been shown that propagating shallow user and item
embeddings with deep GNNs is crucial to capture the full collaborative signal (Wang et al., 2019).
L IGHT GCN (He et al., 2020) and U LTRAGCN (Mao et al., 2021) further simplify message prop-
agation for embedding generation for improved performance on small-scale datasets. Another line
of work strengthens GNN-based recommender systems by adding self-supervision (Wu et al., 2021;
Yu et al., 2022; Cai et al., 2023), e.g., based on contrastive learning via graph augmentations. These
findings are orthogonal to our work, but still embrace a two-tower architecture under the hood.
The line of work that comes closest to C ONTEXT GNN is related to encoding identity- and position-
awareness into GNNs in order to relate user-item pairs (You et al., 2019; 2021). For example, local
subgraphs have been extended to encode positional information of user-item pairs (Zhang & Chen,
2018; Teru et al., 2020), but lack an efficient inference procedure. NBFN ET (Zhu et al., 2021)
introduces a path-based pair-wise representation model that constructs a subgraph centered around
the user node, while reading out the GNN’s representations at the item nodes. This method yields
item representations that are conditioned on the specific user, thereby incorporating pair-wise infor-
mation without incurring excessive computational cost. However, this method constrains candidates
to items within the user’s subgraph, which tremendously limits its effectiveness in scenarios in-
volving exploratory recommendations or cold-start items. Our local pair-wise representation model
builds upon this framework, extending it to fit into the heterogeneous, multi-behavioral, and tempo-
ral recommendation system context. Most importantly, we analyze and eliminate its main limitation
around locality by extending it with an effective fallback model.
While the vast majority of related work focuses on modeling recommendation systems on static
graphs, recently multiple benchmarks for temporal recommendation have appeared, such as the
       T EMPORAL G RAPH B ENCHMARK (Huang et al., 2023) and R EL B ENCH (Robinson et al.,
2024). In this work, we adapt the temporal formulation of a recommender systems task and exten-
sively evaluate C ONTEXT GNN in the practical setting of R EL B ENCH and show that our method
significantly outperforms previous approaches.

3   T EMPORAL R ECOMMENDATIONS AND W HERE TO F IND T HEM
We formulate the temporal recommendation problem on a heterogeneous graph snapshot
G (−∞,T ] = (V, E, ϕ, ψ) up to timestamp T , with node set V and edge set E ⊆ V × V, where
each node v ∈ V belongs to a node type ϕ(v) and each edge e ∈ E belongs to an edge type ψ(e). We
refer to L ⊂ V as the user set and R ⊂ V as the item set within our heterogeneous graph. The task
                                                (T,T +i]
is then to predict a set of ground-truth items Yv        ⊆ R, for which there occurred a link for the
user v ∈ L in the time interval (T, T + i] for a given interval size i. When making the prediction,
the model only has access to historical information up to timestamp T .
In the simplest case, G (−∞,T ] is given as a bipartite graph, with node set V = L ∪ R, and a single
edge type |{ψ(e) : e ∈ E}| = 1. However, the generalization to heterogeneous graphs allows to
incorporate other node types, but most importantly, different edge types of user behaviors (e.g., click,
tag-as-favorite, add-to-cart) which offer complementary signals for predicting the target behavior
(e.g., purchase) (Xia et al., 2022). Nodes and edges may be (partially) annotated with an initial
                              (0)
feature representation, e.g. hv ∈ Rd , v ∈ V, and with a timestamp indicating their appearance (or
disappearance). In the absence of timestamps, the given framework can be easily transformed into
a static link prediction problem, as commonly practiced in literature (Kipf & Welling, 2016; Wang
et al., 2019; He et al., 2020). However, this approach disregards critical information, such as the
recency of past activity. Note that the given framework also allows newly appearing users and items
over time. However, for simplicity of notation, we assume them to be in L and R at all times.

Locality Score. Developing machine learning solutions for recommendation systems is inherently
challenging due to the complex patterns of human behavior (He et al., 2023). Users vary significantly
in preferences; some are explorers who constantly seek new experiences, while others are repeaters


                                                   3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


who prefer familiarity. Such characteristics are especially noticeable across different datasets, e.g.,
it is more likely that a user repeats a previous purchase than that the user rates the same movie twice.
To understand these effects better, we introduce the locality score, which measures the fraction of
                                                                (−∞,T ]
ground-truth links that fall within the k-hop neighborhood Nk           (v) of the subgraph centered
around a user v ∈ L up to timestamp T :

                                                   (−∞,T ]                [T,T +i)
                                      1 X   Nk               (v) ∩ R ∩ Yv
                        (T,T +i]
                       sk        =        =                                          .               (1)
                                     |L|                     Yv
                                                               [T,T +i)
                                       v∈L


Intuitively, the locality score quantifies how many of its future ground-truth items are local to a user.
Depending on the subgraph depth k, the score reflects different interaction patterns. For a shallow
subgraph (k = 1), it captures whether the user repeats purchases or has previously interacted with
the item through actions like clicks or tagging as favorite. As the subgraph depth increases, the
score begins to incorporate collaborative filtering signals, such as whether friends have purchased
the ground-truth item in the past (k = 2), or whether the ground-truth item was previously purchased
by users that have a similar buying behavior as the user under consideration (k = 3). Note that in
practice, it is infeasible to go beyond depth k = 3 due to scalability concerns.
Table 1: The locality score for different subgraph We evaluate the locality score for varying k on
depths k ∈ {1, 3} on validation/test splits for all      R EL B ENCH (Robinson et al., 2024), a rela-
recommendation tasks in R EL B ENCH.                 tional deep learning (Fey et al., 2024) bench-
                                                     mark that spans a wide variety of real-world
   Dataset          Task        Split k = 1 k = 3    recommendation tasks with diverse character-
                                 val 0.002 0.181     istics (cf. Table 1). Interestingly, the locality
             user-item-purchase
                                 test 0.001 0.168    score does not exceed 0.5 on any dataset, indi-
  rel-amazon                     val   0.002 0.183   cating that the majority of ground-truth items
               user-item-rate
                                 test 0.002 0.170    are entirely exploratory and not covered by any
                                 val   0.002 0.185   path of length ≤ 3 in the graph. However,
              user-item-review
                                 test 0.001 0.175    for k = 1, we observe high locality scores
    rel-hm   user-item-purchase
                                 val   0.045 0.395   on rel-hm and rel-stack, suggesting that
                                 test 0.048 0.417    users tend to frequently repeat clothing pur-
             user-post-comment
                                 val 0.265 0.308     chases or comment multiple times on the same
  rel-stack
                                 test 0.256 0.298    post. Increasing the subgraph depth gener-
             post-post-related
                                 val   0.109 0.225   ally improves coverage as seen in datasets like
                                 test 0.141 0.280
                                                     rel-amazon. While users do not usually re-
                 condition-      val 0.000 0.241     purchase/rate/review the same item twice here,
  rel-trial
                 sponsor-run     test 0.000 0.242
                                                     they tend to purchase the same products that
                                 val 0.000 0.208
              site-sponsor-run
                                 test 0.000 0.229    “nearby” users bought. Overall, this observa-
                                                     tion suggests that while pair-wise representa-
                                                     tion architectures such as NBFN ET (Zhu et al.,
2021) are powerful, they often times fail to offer sufficient coverage within their candidate set, de-
creasing their effectiveness tremendously. This raises an interesting question of how we can leverage
the benefits of pair-wise representations, while supporting the modeling of exploratory recommen-
dations without the need for complex multi-stage approaches.

4   R ECOMMENDATION WITH C ONTEXT- BASED G RAPH N EURAL N ETWORKS

Next, we describe Context-based Graph Neural Networks (C ONTEXT GNNs), which consist of
two separate GNN architectures sitting behind the same GNN backbone. C ONTEXT GNN fuses
both pair-wise representations and two-tower representations into a single architecture, and is thus
naturally able to adapt to diverse dataset and task characteristics. The first model employs pair-
wise representations based on the item candidate set given within the local user-centric subgraph
(cf. Sec. 4.1). The second model introduces a novel two-tower architecture based on shallow item
representations, which is used to predict a ranking for all pairs of users and items outside the user’s
subgraph (cf. Sec. 4.2). Finally, a user-specific fusion score, produced by an MLP on the user GNN
representation, is added to the scores of the pair-wise representation model, which aligns the distinct


                                                   4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025



                                        based on user-specific item representations
                                                       = 0.4               = 0.1
                           ww2 h(2)


                                        Pair-wise
                                w2                                   (2)               (2)
              +ww2                                               hw1                 hw2
                       (2)                                                                              Final ranking
                      hv
                                                          ×                 ×      Fusion    1                2         3
+Indicatorθ                                                                         score
                                                                            MLPθ     0.2

                             ww1 h(2)
                                  w1                                                              0.6             0.5       0.3
                     +ww1


                                        Two-tower
      +Indicatorθ
                                                                   ×
                                                                           ww3
                                                                                             +

                                                                = 0.5
                             ww3
                                                    based on shallow item embeddings


Figure 1: Overview of Context-based Graph Neural Networks. C ONTEXT GNN utilizes a bidi-
                              (2)                                          (2)
rectional GNNθ to learn user hv and user-specific item representations hw within a user’s local
subgraph. Its message passing scheme is enhanced by additionally propagating shallow item em-
beddings ww and seed user I DENTICATORθ representations. Afterwards, item scores are produced
depending on whether an item situates within a user’s subgraph. A user-specific fusion score is
learned via an MLPθ to produce the final ranking by offsetting the contributions of local rankings.

scores of the two models and captures how exploratory a specific user is, thus given either more
or less weight to the respective models (cf. Sec. 4.3). We go over additional considerations and
extensions in Sec. 4.4. An overview of C ONTEXT GNN is visualized in Fig. 1.

4.1    PAIR - WISE R EPRESENTATIONS

Our local pair-wise representation model builds upon the framework proposed by Zhu et al. (2021),
extending it to fit into the heterogeneous, multi-behavioral, and temporal recommendation system
context. NBFN ET is a path-based method that generalizes the Bellman-Ford algorithm (Baras &
Theodorakopoulos, 2010). Rather than learning a pair-wise representation via two independent node
                   (k)       (k)
representations hv and hw (i.e. via two independent subgraphs), NBFN ET only utilizes the user-
specific subgraph, but readouts GNN item representations from it. As such, NBFN ET abbreviates
                                 (k)                                            (k)
the pair-wise representation h(v,w) via the user-specific item representations hw . Hence, it captures
both knowledge about the item w and the user v in its representation. In order to let the GNN differ-
entiate between the seed user and other users being sampled within the subgraph, a d-dimensional
I NDICATORθ representation is added to the seed node (You et al., 2021). Specifically, our pair-wise
representation model then looks as follows:
                                                         (−∞,T ]
       1. Sample a k-hop subgraph G̃ ← Gk                          [v] with node set Ṽ around user v ∈ L.
                                                                                       (0)       (0)
       2. Add an indicator representation to the user seed node: hv ← hv + I NDICATORθ .
       3. Read out both GNN user and item representations at layer k:
                                                                                       (k)
                                   h(k)   (k)
                                    v , {hw : w ∈ Ṽ ∩ R} ← GNN θ (G̃, H
                                                                         (0)
                                                                             ).
                                                                                   (pair)    (k)        (k)
       4. Compute the final ranking for all items w ∈ Ṽ ∩ R: y(v,w) ← hv · hw .

In contrast to NBFN ET, we readout both the user and item representations from the GNN in order
to produce the ranking of local items. This lets the model leverage the full k-hop user information,
as otherwise user representations are only computed in intermediate GNN layers based on limited
subgraph depths.
Further note that sampling a k-hop subgraph typically results in a directed computation graph to-
wards the seed node (Fey & Lenssen, 2019). However, to facilitate the extraction of item node
representations, the sampled subgraph must be transformed into a bidirectional graph prior to ap-
plying the GNN. This approach aligns with previous work that decouples the depth and scope of
GNNs (Zeng et al., 2021).


                                                                 5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


This approach proves particularly effective in the context of temporal, heterogeneous graphs, as the
GNN naturally learns to integrate multi-behavior signals originating from different edge types. For
instance, the pair-wise representation captures all past user-item interactions, such as the recency
of the last purchase or whether the item has been previously clicked or tagged. Despite its expres-
siveness, this method is also highly efficient, as only a single GNN pass over the user subgraph is
required to make predictions for the entire set of related items. Assuming bounded subgraph sizes,
training and inference over the full user set can be achieved in O(|L|) time, which is in stark contrast
to the O(|L| · |R|) complexity required by two-tower models. Moreover, as no shallow embeddings
are used, this approach naturally extends to newly appearing users and items over time. Nonetheless,
as discussed in Sec. 3, this method alone does not fully address the diverse requirements of modern
recommendation systems due to its limited set of potential candidates.

4.2   T WO -T OWER R EPRESENTATIONS

C ONTEXT GNN’s two-tower model ranks all user-item pairs outside the user’s subgraph, serving
as an effective fallback mechanism to supplement the pair-wise representations. While drawing
inspiration from related two-tower architectures (Wang et al., 2019; He et al., 2020), our novel two-
tower model enables an efficient integration with pair-wise architectures. The key innovation in our
two-tower model is the use of shallow item representations. Specifically, we do not deploy a GNN to
compute item representations; instead we entirely rely on a shallow embedding matrix W ∈ R|R|×d
to learn item representations. This design is inspired by multiple key observations:

       • Limited information gain from applying a GNN on the item side. Item connections are
         naturally very dense. In extreme cases, popular items may receive over 1M interactions
         (an item is connected to every user that has previously interacted with it). This leads to
         significant challenges and uncertainties in subgraph sampling, and easily exposes the GNN
         to oversquashing and oversmoothing issues.
       • Shallow embedding matrices are very effective. Shallow item embedding matrices can
         capture key signals such as popularity trends, seasonal patterns, demographic preferences
         and item similarity just as effectively as a GNN.
       • GNN item representations scale poorly during training. Incorporating both user and
         item GNN representations limits the model to only use a small number of negative sam-
         ples due to memory constraints. In contrast, shallow item embeddings support training
         against a much larger corpus of negative samples (≈ 10M), which is critical for improving
         model performance. This approach also eliminates the need for complex negative sampling
         strategies, which are often required when the number of negative samples is limited.

Importantly, we also inject the shallow item embeddings within the user’s GNN forward pass, such
that user representations can better align themselves to the corresponding item representations.
Hence, the GNN representation of users follows a similar spirit to models such as NGCF (Wang
et al., 2019) or L IGHT GCN (He et al., 2020), although we do not utilize shallow user embeddings
as the GNN itself is powerful enough to learn its own rich representation without them. As such,
our two-tower representation model can be summarized as follows:
                                            (−∞,T ]
      1. Sample a k-hop subgraph G̃ ← Gk              [v] with node set Ṽ around user v ∈ L.
                                                                             (0)      (0)
      2. Add the shallow embedding to all sampled items w ∈ Ṽ ∩ R: hw ← hw + ww .
                                                                 (k)         (k)
      3. Read out the GNN user representation at layer k: hv ← GNNθ (G̃, H (0) ).
                                                                   (tower)    (k)
      4. Compute the final ranking for all items w ∈ R \ Ṽ: y(v,w) ← hv · ww .

4.3   C ONTEXT- BASED G RAPH N EURAL N ETWORKS

Our final C ONTEXT GNN architecture fuses both pair-wise representations and two-tower represen-
tations into a single unified architecture. That is, for all items w ∈ Ṽ ∪ R inside the local user
                                    (pair)
subgraph, we leverage the scores y(v,w) obtained from the pair-wise representations, while we fall-
                                (tower)
back to the two-tower scores y(v,w) for all items w ∈ Ṽ \ R outside the sampled subgraph.


                                                   6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


The observation that user behaviors are diverse is the final element that makes C ONTEXT GNN work.
To accommodate such diversity across different users, C ONTEXT GNN learns a user-specific fusion
                                                      (k)
score predicted from the GNN’s user embeddings hv via an MLPθ . This personalized fusion score
aligns the distinct scores by learning which users prefer familiar items over exploratory purchases,
and adjusts the final ranking scores accordingly. With this, the final score is given by
                                  
                                  y (pair) + MLPθ h(k)   v     if w ∈ Ṽ ∪ R,
                                      (v,w)
                         y(v,w) =                                                                (2)
                                  y (tower)                    otherwise.
                                      (v,w)

In C ONTEXT GNN, both pair-wise representations and two-tower representations are derived from
the same GNN backbone. Since both models depend solely on the user subgraph, the user em-
           (k)
bedding hv can be extracted in a single GNN forward pass and leveraged for downstream uses
in both models. This streamlined approach makes C ONTEXT GNN computationally very efficient.
C ONTEXT GNN is then trained end-to-end, optimizing both types of item scores as well as the fu-
sion score altogether to maximize the predictive performance of future user-item interactions. In
practice, we utilize the cross entropy loss for optimization, although any other loss formulation is
applicable as well (Rendle et al., 2009). During inference, we obtain top scores from the two-tower
model via (approximate) maximum inner product search (Johnson et al., 2019), and merge them to
the pair-wise scores in a post-processing procedure.

4.4   E XTENSIONS

We go over additional considerations and extensions when applying C ONTEXT GNNs in practice.

Fitting into the Context of Relational Deep Learning. C ONTEXT GNNs nicely align with the
framework of relational deep learning (Fey et al., 2024), a blueprint for graph representation learning
on relational databases. Specifically, relational deep learning treats relational databases as a hetero-
geneous temporal graph, in which dimension and fact tables are linked through primary-foreign
key relationships. Then, temporal-aware subgraph sampling is employed to generate heterogeneous
                         (−∞,T ]
subgraph snapshots Gk            [v] up to timestamp T , which are used to predict future user-item in-
teractions. Relational databases (Robinson et al., 2024) comprise diverse set of tables with rich
multi-modal input features and rich multi-behavioral, temporal interactions, making them the per-
fect setting for stress-testing C ONTEXT GNNs.

Transductive vs. Inductive Modeling. Although the pair-wise representations in C ONTEXT GNN
are inductive by design, the usage of the shallow embedding matrix on the item side places it in
a transductive setting. This means that while C ONTEXT GNN can naturally accommodate newly
appearing users over time, it is unable to handle new items at prediction time since their shallow
embeddings remain uninitialized. To enable C ONTEXT GNN to operate in an inductive setting, we
propose to replace the shallow item embedding matrix with a deep neural network on top of its item
                (0)
input features hw . This approach allows C ONTEXT GNN to scale to tasks such as marketplace or
event recommendation, where handling of new items is essential.

Sampled Softmax Formulation. Since it is infeasible to train against the full item set R when
optimizing C ONTEXT GNNs, in practice, we rely on a sampled softmax formulation. This basically
converts the objective of C ONTEXT GNN into a classification problem with C sampled classes,
shared across the entire mini-batch. The utilized sampling procedure is based on a priority queue:
we ensure that (1) all ground-truth items and (2) the union of sampled subgraph items of a given
mini-batch are included in the set of classes. Then, we (3) fill up the remainder of items with
unexplored items outside all subgraphs of the mini-batch based on a uniform sampling procedure.
In practice, we have no issues to scale the number of classes C to ≈ 1M on commodity GPUs
(15GB of memory), giving C ONTEXT GNN rich signals to learn from.

5     E XPERIMENTAL E VALUATION
We perform experiments on six diverse datasets stemming from different domains, including ten
different recommendation tasks. We aim to answer the following research questions:


                                                   7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Q1 Which benefits does C ONTEXT GNN provide over each of its individual component?
Q2 How does C ONTEXT GNN perform against state-of-the-art recommendation system methods?
Q3 How does the locality score of Sec. 3 influence the model performance of C ONTEXT GNN?
Q4 How efficient and scalable is C ONTEXT GNN compared to the related work?

Our method1 is implemented in P Y T ORCH (Paszke et al., 2019) utilizing the P Y T ORCH G EO -
METRIC (Fey & Lenssen, 2019) and    P Y T ORCH F RAME (Hu et al., 2024) libraries.

5.1     R ELATIONAL D EEP L EARNING

Dataset Description. We utilize the recommendation tasks introduced in R EL B ENCH (Robin-
son et al., 2024), which consists of eight different realistic and temporal-aware recommendation
tasks. R EL B ENCH datasets contain rich relational structure, providing a challenging environment
for recommendation tasks. The task is to predict the top-k items given a user at a given seed time.
The metric we use is Mean Average Precision (MAP) @ k, where k is set per task (higher is better).

rel-amazon Predict the list of distinct items each user purchases (user-item-purchase),
      gives a 5-star (user-item-rate), or gives a detailed review (user-item-review).
rel-hm Predict the list of items each user will purchase (user-item-purchase).
rel-stack Predict the list of distinct posts a user will comment (user-post-comment), or
      to predict the list of posts that users will link a given post to (post-post-related).
rel-trial Predict whether  a     condition    will   have     which       sponsors
      (condition-sponsor-run), or whether a sponsor will have a trial in a facility
      (site-sponsor-run).

Experimental Protocols. We compare C ONTEXT GNN with the following baseline methods:

L IGHT GBM (Ke et al., 2017) concatenates both user and item features, and feeds them into a
    L IGHT GBM decision tree.
M ULTI VAE (Liang et al., 2018) extends variational autoencoders to collaborative filtering via a
    user-item interaction matrix for implicit feedback.
G RAPH SAGE (Hamilton et al., 2017) employs a heterogeneous GNN on both user and item side,
    and ranks the produced embeddings via an inner product decoder.
NGCF (Wang et al., 2019) extends G RAPH SAGE by propagating both shallow user and item em-
    beddings inside the GNN.
NBFN ET (Zhu et al., 2021) employs pair-wise GNN representations. This is the backbone of our
    pair-wise representation model in C ONTEXT GNN.
S HALLOW I TEM describes our two-tower model in C ONTEXT GNN, which ranks user GNN repre-
    sentations and shallow item embeddings via an inner product decoder.
Importantly, all GNN-based models utilize the same GNN backbone, which guarantees fair compar-
ison of training procedures that are agnostic to the underlying model implementation. Specifically,
we use a heterogeneous G RAPH SAGE variant as introduced in Robinson et al. (2024). The hyper-
parameters we tune for each task are: (1) the number of hidden units ∈ {32, 64, 128, 256, 512}, (2),
the batch size ∈ {256, 512, 1024}, and (3) the learning rate ∈ {0.001, 0.01}.

Discussion. The results are reported in Table 2. We answer Q1 by comparing C ONTEXT GNN
to its individual components NBFN ET and S HALLOW I TEM, and answer Q2 by relating C ON -
TEXT GNN’s performance to all reported baselines.

C ONTEXT GNN outperforms all competing baselines, often by very significant margins. Notably,
one can observe that the two-tower models M ULTI VAE, G RAPH SAGE and NGCF all fail to cap-
ture the pair-wise signals that both NBFN ET and C ONTEXT GNN are able to leverage. This shows
that two-tower representations are not powerful enough to capture the fine-grained pair-wise de-
pendencies that are required to solve these tasks with high precision. Among the two-tower GNN
   1
       GitHub: https://github.com/kumo-ai/ContextGNN


                                                 8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


        Table 2: Recommendation results (MAP, higher is better, in %) on            R EL B ENCH.

                          L IGHT M ULTI G RAPH                S HALLOW C ONTEXT
          Task                                   NGCF NBFN ET
                          GBM VAE         SAGE                   I TEM    GNN
                                        rel-amazon
   user-item-purchase        0.16  0.23     0.74   0.88  2.06        0.56   2.93
     user-item-rate          0.17  0.24     0.87   0.86  1.24        0.74   2.25
    user-item-review         0.09  0.10     0.47   0.55  1.57        0.40   1.63
                                           rel-hm
   user-item-purchase        0.38  0.28     0.80   0.75  2.81        0.40   2.93
                                         rel-stack
   user-post-comment         0.04  0.01     0.11   0.13 12.72        0.03  13.34
   post-post-related         2.00  0.78     0.07   0.13 10.83        0.82  11.18
                                         rel-trial
 condition-sponsor-run       4.82  2.47     2.89   3.88 11.36        0.85  11.65
    site-sponsor-run         8.40  6.17    10.70   6.54 19.06       10.66  28.02
      Average (↑)            2.01  1.29     2.08   1.72  7.71        1.81   9.23



models, there is no clear winner between G RAPH SAGE and NGCF, indicating that shallow (user)
embeddings do not significantly drive improvements (and may even hinder performance, especially
in tasks with inherent temporal dynamics). C ONTEXT GNN improves results by 344% on average
compared to the best two-tower baseline.
Among the baselines, NBFN ET performs the best across all tasks, while C ONTEXT GNN can con-
sistently improve upon these strong outcomes. On average, C ONTEXT GNN increases performance
by 20% compared to NBFN ET, underscoring the importance of incorporating “distant” items into
the ranking process - an aspect that NBFN ET overlooks by design.
Our own two-tower S HALLOW I TEM model performs comparably to other two-tower GNN base-
lines, despite only using shallow item information in order to improve the overall efficiency of the
model. This supports the hypothesis that a deep GNN on the item side is not particularly useful on
most tasks, as the shallow embeddings can capture most of the key signals on the item side just as
well as the GNN. However, there exists specific cases such as the condition-sponsor-run
task on the rel-trial dataset, where S HALLOW I TEM underperforms relative to G RAPH SAGE
and NGCF. On this task, deep GNNs on the item side play indeed a crucial role to improve results of
two-tower models, which is captured in C ONTEXT GNN through its pair-wise representation model.
The most noteworthy result is seen in the site-sponsor-run task on the rel-trial dataset.
Here, both pair-wise models and two-tower models achieve strong initial results. Combining these
two paradigms together via C ONTEXT GNN improves the final performance by ≈ 100%, indicat-
ing that each of the individual components of C ONTEXT GNN captures orthogonal signals. The
fusion of these paradigms yields a ranking model that excels in both local and distant item ranking,
achieving superior overall performance.
                                                                                         [T,T +i)
In order to answer Q3, we now analyze the relationship between the locality score sk               and the
performance of C ONTEXT GNN. We observe that the improvements of C ONTEXT GNN compared to
NBFN ET are notably higher on tasks with lower locality scores. This observation aligns intuitively,
as C ONTEXT GNN needs to rely more heavily on its two-tower component during optimization when
locality scores are lower. Specifically, in tasks with the lowest locality scores (e.g., 0.168, 0.170 and
0.229 on the user-item-purchase, user-item-rate and site-sponsor-run tasks
from the rel-amazon and rel-trial datasets), C ONTEXT GNN achieves substantial perfor-
mance gains of 42% to 80% compared to NBFN ET. Conversely, for tasks with higher locality
scores (e.g., 0.417, 0.298, and 0.280 on the user-item-purchase, user-post-comment,
and post-post-related tasks from the rel-hm and rel-stack datasets), the performance
improvements of C ONTEXT GNN over NBFN ET are more modest, ranging from 3% to 5%. These
findings underscore the significant impact of the locality score on the performance of NBFN ET,
whereas C ONTEXT GNN demonstrates robustness, achieving stellar performance improvements re-
gardless of task-specific characteristics.


                                                    9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


5.2   S TATIC L INK P REDICTION

While C ONTEXT GNN’s main focus is to excel on               Table 3: Results on Amazon-Book.
large-scale real-world use-cases which are temporal
and heterogeneous, it can also be used in a plug-and-    Model                Recall@20 NDCG@20
play fashion for any link prediction task. To verify,
                                                         NGCF (2019)             0.0337    0.0261
we evaluate C ONTEXT GNN on the static link pre-         L IGHT GCN (2020)       0.0410    0.0318
diction task of Amazon-Book (Wang et al., 2019),         U LTRAGCN (2021)        0.0681    0.0556
which is a small-scale dataset of 52,643 users and       L IGHT GCL (2023)       0.0585    0.0436
91,599 items, which does not come with input fea-        SimGCL (2022)           0.0478    0.0379
tures, only considers users with at least ten interac-   SGL (2021)              0.0468    0.0371
tions, and evaluates on 10% of randomly selected         C ONTEXT GNN            0.0451    0.0377
interactions independent of time, cf. Table 3. We can
see that C ONTEXT GNN is able to outperform both
NGCF and L IGHT GCN, while it is slightly underperforming compared to, e.g., U LTRAGCN or
L IGHT GCL. Given the relatively small size of this dataset, much of the progress in GNN-based rec-
ommendation systems has centered on two key directions: (1) simplifying GNN architectures, and
(2) incorporating self-supervised learning techniques. Exploring how C ONTEXT GNN can benefit
from a more lightweight GNN backbone or complementary learning signals presents an exciting
direction for future research.


5.3   T EMPORAL N EXT-I TEM P REDICTION

We use C ONTEXT GNN to perform                       Table 4: Results on IJCAI Contest.
temporal next-item recommendation on
the IJCAI Contest dataset (Xia et al.,   Model             HR@1 HR@5 NDCG@5 HR@10 NDCG@10
2022), which is a common dataset         D EEP FM (2017)     0.138 0.332    0.244 0.469 0.290
to evaluate sequential recommendation    B ERT 4R EC (2019) 0.141 0.356     0.261 0.467 0.297
models et al. (Sun et al., 2019; Xia     C HORUS (2020a)     0.140 0.345    0.247 0.457 0.283
                                         H Y R EC (2020b)    0.137 0.323    0.229 0.442 0.266
et al., 2020; 2022). As per evalu-       NMTR (2019)         0.141 0.360    0.254 0.481 0.304
ation protocol, we report HitRate@k      MATN (2020)         0.142 0.375    0.273 0.489 0.309
and NDCG@k over 99 sampled neg-          MBGCN (2020)        0.137 0.332    0.228 0.463 0.277
atives per entity.     Notably, C ON -   TGT (2022)          0.148 0.399    0.293 0.519 0.330
                                         C ONTEXT GNN        0.411 0.603    0.513 0.667 0.534
TEXT GNN excels at incorporating
multi-behavioral and temporal signal,
cf. Table 4. We observe that C ONTEXT GNN is able to out-perform all baselines on all metrics
on this task (e.g., 170% improvement on HitRate@1).


5.4   E FFICIENCY A NALYSIS

Our hybrid C ONTEXT GNN model is designed Table 5: Runtime [s] of 1,000 optimization steps.
in such a way to have minimal overhead com-
pared to its two components in isolation since       Model                       rel-hm rel-stack
the vast majority of the model parts are shared      G RAPH SAGE (1 negative)       275s       37s
between the two paradigms. To answer Q4, we          G RAPH SAGE (10 negatives)     293s       44s
report the runtime in seconds to reach 1,000 op-     G RAPH SAGE (100 negatives)   OOM       OOM
                                                     NFBN ET                         77s       21s
timization steps across different models, cf. Ta-    S HALLOW I TEM                  92s       22s
ble 5. Most importantly, since C ONTEXT GNN          C ONTEXT GNN                    94s       23s
only requires a single GNN forward pass, it is
faster compared to any two-tower GNN by a
very significant factor (i.e., a two-tower GNN such as G RAPH SAGE requires to run the GNN on
both positive and negative items). In particular, two-tower GNNs scale very poorly when increas-
ing the number of negative samples to train against. For training recommendation systems, a large
number of negative examples is important to allow learning of discriminative features. However, In
the simplest case (one negative pair per positive pair), a two-tower GNN needs to be executed three
times already. C ONTEXT GNN does not have this limitation and can consider up to 1M negatives
before running into GPU memory limitations.


                                                10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We thank the entire Kumo.AI team for their invaluable support in bringing C ONTEXT GNN into
production for over dozens of customers and for any dataset scale. Special thanks go to Amitabha
Roy, Myungwhan Kim and Federico Reyes Gómez for helpful discussions and feedback.

R EFERENCES
J. S. Baras and G. Theodorakopoulos. Path problems in networks. Synthesis Lectures on Communi-
   cation Networks, 3(1):1–77, 2010.
X. Cai, C. Huang, L. Xia, and X. Ren. LightGCL: Simple yet effective graph contrastive learning
  for recommendation. In ICLR, 2023.
M. G. Campana and F. Delmastro. Recommender systems for online and mobile social networks: A
 survey. Online Social Networks and Media, 3:75–97, 2017.
M. Fey and J. E. Lenssen. Fast graph representation learning with PyTorch Geometric. In ICLR
 Workshop on Representation Learning on Graphs and Manifolds, 2019.
M. Fey, W. Hu, K. Huang, J. E. Lenssen, R. Ranjan, J. Robinson, R. Ying, J. You, and J. Leskovec.
 Relational deep learning: Graph representation learning on relational databases. In ICML, 2024.
C Gao, X. He, D. Gan, X. Chen, F. Feng, Y. Li, T. S. Chua, and D. Jin. Neural multi-task recom-
  mendation from multi-behavior data. In ICDE, 2019.
A. Grover and J. Leskovec. node2vec: Scalable feature learning for networks. In SIGKDD, 2016.
H. Guo, R. Tang, Y. Ye, Z. Li, and X. He. DeepFM: A factorization-machine based neural network
  for CTR prediction, 2017.
Xiangnan H. and Tat-Seng C. Neural factorization machines for sparse predictive analytics. In
  SIGIR, 2017.
W. Hamilton, Z. Ying, and J. Leskovec. Inductive representation learning on large graphs. In NIPS,
  2017.
R. He and J. McAuley. Fusing similarity models with Markov chains for sparse sequential recom-
  mendation. In ICDM, 2016.
X. He, L. Liao, H. Zhang, L. Nie, X. Hu, and T. Chua. Neural collaborative filtering. In WWW,
  2017.
X. He, K. Deng, X. Wang, Y. Li, Y. Zhang, and M. Wang. LightGCN: Simplifying and powering
  graph convolution network for recommendation. In SIGIR, 2020.
Z. He, W. Liu, W. Guo, J. Qin, Y. Zhang, Y. Hu, and R. Tang. A survey on user behavior modeling
   in recommender systems. In IJCAI, 2023.
W. Hu, Y. Yuan, Z. Zhang, A. Nitta, K. Cao, V. Kocijan, J. Leskovec, and M. Fey. PyTorch Frame:
  A modular framework for multi-modal tabular learning. CoRR, abs/2404.00776, 2024.
Y. Hu, Y. Koren, and C. Volinsky. Collaborative filtering for implicit feedback datasets. In ICDM,
   2008.
S. Huang, F. Poursafaei, J. Danovitch, M. Fey, W. Hu, E. Rossi, J. Leskovec, M. Bronstein,
  G. Rabusseau, and R. Rabbany. Temporal graph benchmark for machine learning on temporal
  graphs. NeurIPS, 2023.
B. Jin, C. Gao, X. He, D. Jin, and Y. Li. Multi-behavior recommendation with graph convolutional
  networks. In SIGIR, 2020.
J. Johnson, M. Douze, and H. Jégou. Billion-scale similarity search with GPUs. IEEE Transactions
   on Big Data, 7(3):535–547, 2019.


                                               11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


W. Kang and J. McAuley. Self-attentive sequential recommendation. In ICDM, 2018.
G. Ke, Q. Meng, T. Finley, T. Wang, W. Chen, W. Ma, Q. Ye, and T. Liu. LightGBM: A highly
  efficient gradient boosting decision tree. In NIPS, 2017.
T. N. Kipf and M. Welling. Varitional graph auto-encoders. In NIPS Workshop on Bayesian Deep
   Learning, 2016.
Y. Koren, R. Bell, and C. Volinsky. Matrix factorization techniques for recommender systems.
  Computer, 42(8):30–37, 2009.
J. Li, P. Ren, Z. Chen, Z. Ren, T. Lian, and J. Ma. Neural attentive session-based recommendation.
   New York, NY, USA, 2017.
Y. Li, K. Liu, R. Satapathy, S. Wang, and E. Cambria. Recent developments in recommender
  systems: A survey. IEEE Computational Intelligence Magazine, 19:78–95, 2024.
D. Liang, R. G. Krishnan, M. D. Hoffman, and T. Jebara. Variational autoencoders for collaborative
  filtering. In WWW, 2018.
Q. Liu, Y. Zeng, R. Mokhosi, and H. Zhang. STAMP: Short-term attention/memory priority model
  for session-based recommendation. In SIGKDD, 2018.
C. Ma, L. Ma, Y. Zhang, J. Sun, X. Liu, and M. Coates. Memory augmented graph neural networks
  for sequential recommendation. In AAAI, 2020.
K. Mao, J. Zhu, X. Xiao, B. Lu, Z. Wang, and X. He. UltraGCN: Ultra simplification of graph
  convolutional networks for recommendation. In CIKM, 2021.
A. Mnih and R. R. Salakhutdinov. Probabilistic matrix factorization. In NIPS, 2007.
A. Paszke, S. Gross, F. Massa, A. Lerer, J. Bradbury, G. Chanan, T. Killeen, Z. Lin, N. Gimelshein,
  L. Antiga, A. Desmaison, A. Kopf, E. Yang, Z. DeVito, M. Raison, A. Tejani, S. Chilamkurthy,
  B. Steiner, L. Fang, J. Bai, and S. Chintala. PyTorch: An imperative style, high-performance deep
  learning library. In NeurIPS, 2019.
B. Perozzi, R. Al-Rfou, and S. Skiena. DeepWalk: Online learning of social representations. In
  SIGKDD, 2014.
S. Rendle, C. Freudenthaler, Z. Gantner, and L. Schmidt-Thieme. BPR: Bayesian personalized
   ranking from implicit feedback. In UAI, 2009.
S. Rendle, C. Freudenthaler, and L. Schmidt-Thieme. Factorizing personalized Markov chains for
   next-basket recommendation. In WWW, 2010.
F. Ricci, L. Rokach, and B. Shapira. Introduction to recommender systems handbook. In Recom-
   mender systems handbook. 2010.
J. Robinson, R. Ranjan, W. Hu, K. Huang, J. Han, A. Dobles, M. Fey, J. E. Lenssen, Y. Yuan,
   Z. Zhang, X. He, and J. Leskovec. RelBench: A benchmark for deep learning on relational
   databases. In NeurIPS, 2024.
M. Schlichtkrull, T. N. Kipf, P. Bloem, R. van den Berg, I. Titov, and M. Welling. Modeling
 relational data with graph convolutional networks. In The Semantic Web, 2018.
F. Sun, J. Liu, J. Wu, C. Pei, X. Lin, W. Ou, and P. Jiang. BERT4Rec: Sequential recommendation
   with bidirectional encoder representations from transformer. In CIKM, 2019.
K. K. Teru, E. G. Denis, and W. L. Hamilton. Inductive relation prediction by subgraph reasoning.
  In ICML, 2020.
C. Wang, M. Zhang, W. Ma, Y. Liu, and Sh. Ma. Make it a chorus: knowledge-and time-aware item
  modeling for sequential recommendation. In SIGIR, 2020a.


                                                12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


J. Wang, K. Ding, L. Hong, H. Lui, and J. Caverlee. Next-item recommendation with sequential
   hypergraphs. In SIGIR, 2020b.
X. Wang, X. He, M. Wang, F. Feng, and T. Chua. Neural graph collaborative filtering. In SIGIR,
  2019.
J. Webber. Powering real-time recommendations with graph database technology. Technical report,
   Neo4J, 2021.
J. Wu, X. Wang, F. Feng, X. He, L. Chen, J. Lian, and X. Xie. Self-supervised graph learning for
   recommendation. In SIGIR, 2021.
L. Wu, Z. Zheng, Z. Qiu, H. Wang, H. Gu, T. Shen, C. Qin, C. Zhu, H. Zhu, Q. Liu, H. Xiong, and
   E. Chen. A survey on large language models for recommendation. CoRR, abs/2305.19860, 2023.
L. Xia, C. Huang, Y. Xu, P. Dai, B. Zhang, and L. Bo. Multiplex behavioral relation learning for
  recommendation via memory augmented transformer network. In SIGIR, 2020.
L. Xia, C. Huang, Y. Xu, and J. Pei. Multi-behavior sequential recommendation with temporal graph
   transformer. In TKDE, 2022.
Y. Yang, C. Huang, L. Xia, Y. Liang, Y. Yu, and C. Li. Multi-behavior hypergraph-enhanced trans-
   former for sequential recommendation. In SIGKDD, 2022.
J. You, R. Ying, and J. Leskovec. Position-aware graph neural networks. In ICML, 2019.
J. You, J. M. Gomes-Selman, R. Ying, and J. Leskovec. Identity-aware graph neural networks. In
   AAAI, 2021.
J. Yu, H. Yin, X. Xia, T. Chen, L. Cui, and Q. V. H. Nguyen. Are graph augmentations necessary?
   simple graph contrastive learning for recommendation. In SIGIR, 2022.
H. Zeng, M. Zhang, Y. Xia, A. Srivastava, A. Malevich, R. Kannan, V. Prasanna, L. Jin, and R. Chen.
  Decoupling the depth and scope of graph neural networks. In NeurIPS, 2021.
M. Zhang and Y. Chen. Link prediction based on graph neural networks. In NIPS, 2018.
Z. Zhu, Z. Zhang, L. P. Xhonneux, and J. Tang. Neural Bellmann-Ford networks: A general graph
   neural network framework for link prediction. In NeurIPS, 2021.


                                                13
